UBAQUE, a head settlement of the district of 
the corresimiento of this name, in the new king- 
dom of Granada ; it was, during the Pagan- 
ism of the Indians, one of the most powerful 
principalities belonging to the caciques : at pre- 
sent it contains 200 inhabitants and as many 
Indians. In its church is venerated with parti- 
cular devotion an image of our Lady painted on 
canvass, and which after undergoing much injury 
from time, appeared all at once miraculously re- 
novated. By a rugged spot, called De Zaname, 
close to the valley in which this settlement stands, 
there is a stone with the impression of a human 
foot, which, by the tradition of the Indians, is on 
various authority that of the apostle St. Bartho- 
lomew. It is seven leagues from Santa Fe. 

UBARANA, Ensennada de, a bay on the 
coast of the province and captainship of Seara, 
in the kingdom of Brazil : it is between the 
rivers Lagaribe and Riobara. 

Ubarana, a point of land of this name, which 
is one of those that form the afore-mentioned 
bay. 

L BATE, a head settlement of the district of 
the corresimiento of that name, in the new king- 
dom of Granada. Its climate is cold, but not to 
excess, and produces in abundance the fruits pe- 
culiar to such a temperature ; especially wheat, 
potatoes, maize, apples and barley. In the 
church is worshipped a miraculous image of 
Christ on the cross, to the sanctuary of which 
the people are impelled by devotion to come 

VOL. v. 


from the other provinces. It contains more than 
10,000 inhabitants, and was one of the first set- 
tlements of the kingdom which was converted by 
the missionaries of the order of St. Francis, of 
whom it was for many years a doctrinal curacy. 
It is 29 miles n. n. w. of Santa Fe. 

UBATUBA, a town of the province and cap- 
tainship of San Vicente in Brazil; situated on 
the coast on a neck of land opposite the Isle of 
Puercos. 

Ubatuba, a lake of this name, in the same 
province and kingdom, by the coast, on the 
shores of which the Portuguese have constructed 
a fort. 

UBAY, a large and copious river of Peru. It 
takes its source from a lake which is formed by 
the river Parapiti, or Apere, in the country and 
territory of Isoso, and runs to the n. always in- 
clining to the n.n.w. more than 70 leagues. It 
crosses the country of the Chiquitos Indians and 
the province of Los Moxos in the kingdom of 
Quito, in which it enters much encreased by the 
waters it has received from that of Itenes, oppo- 
site the entrenchment of Santa Rosa. This river 
is also called Magdalena San Miguel, and for- 
merly Los Chiquitos. Its mouth is in lat. 11° 
57 / s. 

UBAZA, a large settlement, in the time of the 
Indians, of the province and corregimvento of Ve- 
lez in the new kingdom of Granada ; it was con- 
quered by Gonzalo Ximenez Quesada in 1537, 
but is at present entirely ruined. 


*2 


V C A 


U C H 


UBAZU, or Canqua, a river of the province 
and captainship of San Vicente in Brazil, which 
enters the sea opposite the island San Sebas- 
tian. 

UBEITA. See Obeita. 

UBERO, Point, on the coast of the province 
and government of Venezuela and new kingdom 
of Granada, opposite the island of Cura 9 oa, close 
to the point of Ilicacos. 

UBIA, a river of the province and govern- 
ment of San Juan de los Llanos in the new king- 
dom of Granda. It is formed by the junction of 
several streams, and enters the Guayavero. 

UBINAS, a settlement of the province and 
cort'egimiento of Moguehua in Peru ; situate on 
the opposite side of the cordillera , lying to the e. 
of the province, the same having on its skirts a 
great volcano, which is constantly vomiting fire, 
and also seen frequently in the month of October 
to emit black and boiling water. To the district 
of the settlement belongs a church, well furnished 
and of no mean erection, in a spot called Ichuna, 
where there is a mill for grinding silver metals 
extracted from a mine in that quarter, aud al- 
though the quantity procured be at present 
trifling, it was not always so, if we may judge 
from the sumptuous ornaments still belonging to 
the temple just mentioned. 

UBOCA, a river of the province and govern- 
ment of La Guayana, which enters the Apure. 

UBZAQUEN, or Usaquen, an ancient city, 
at the present day almost in a state of ruins, in 
the province of the Indian nation of the Mozcas, 
of the new kingdom of Granada. It was con- 
quered and subjected by the arms of Gonzalo 
Ximinez de Quesada in 1537. At present it 
forms a settlement of the corregimiento of the In- 
dians of Boza, is of a cold temperature, abound- 
ing and fertile in the productions of a similar cli- 
mate. It has a vice-parish in a neighbouring- 
hamlet, called La Calera. Its population is com- 
posed of 100 housekeepers, and some more In- 
dians. [It lies about 11 miles n.e. from Santa 
Fe.] 

[UCAH, Port, on the n. w. coast of N. Ame- 
rica, is situate on Washington’s Island, s. of 
Port Geyer, and n. of Port Sturgis. At its mouth 
are Needham’s Isles. The middle of the en- 
trance of this bay is in lat. 52° 25' n .] 

UCAEEO, a head settlement of the district of 
the alcaldta mayor of N ueva Espana. It contains 
4S0 families of Indians, including those dwelling- 
in the wards of its district, and in a convent of 
the religious of S. Augustin. It is 12 leagues to 
the n. u. of its capital. 


UCAYALE, a very abundant and navigable 
river, and one of the largest of those which enter 
the Maranon, or Amazonas, and, according to 
some, even wider than this at its mouth. It has 
its rise in a great lake, called Chinchaycocha, in 
the mountains of the province and corregimiento 
of Tarma in Peru, and only about 12 miles from 
the city of Tarma. It runs, under different 
names, first to s. then turns its course to e. and, 
after many windings, inclines to the «., forming 
many islands and lakes, in which are multitudes 
of alligators and tortoises. Amongst the nume- 
rous rivers which join it in its course, are the 
Paucartambo, Manua, Sarayacu, Cassavatay and 
Tapissi. According to modern observations it 
runs more than 200 leagues : in the woods on its 
borders dwell the nations of the Piros, Cuni- 
vos and Cocamas Indians, who had, for the most 
part, been reduced by the labours of the Jesuit 
missionaries of the province of Quito, but sud- 
denly rebelled, and put to death the father En- 
rique Ricter, with a clergyman called Vazquez, 
and retired to the mountains; and although it 
has been since attempted to bring them into a 
civilised state of life, first in the year 1695, and 
again in 1764, the effort was vain. The river 
Ucayale enters, as before observed, into the Ma- 
ranon, or Amazonas, by the s. side, [in lat. 4° 
25 / s.] 

UCCHIUMARCA, a settlement of the pro- 
vince and corregimiento of Lucanas in Peru ; an- 
nexed to the curacy of Saiza. 

UCCHUBAMBA, a settlement of the province 
and corregimiento of Xauja, in the same kingdom 
as the former ; annexed to the curacy of the set- 
tlement of Apata. 

Ucchubamba, another, in the province and 
corregimiento of Andahuailas, in the same king- 
dom ; annexed to the curacy of the settlement of 
Chincheros. 

UCCHUILLUAILLAS, a settlement of the 
province and corregimiento of Angaraes, in the 
same kingdom : annexed to the curacy of the 
settlement of Lircay. 

UCCHUSTAMBO, a settlement of the pro- 
vince and corregimiento of Lucanas, in the same 
kingdom ; annexed to the curacy of the settle- 
ment of Saiza. 

UCHAN, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Chichas and Tarija, in the same 
kinedom, and of the division and district of Lu- 
canas. 

UCHAYUCAPA, a settlement of the pro- 
vince and government of Canta in Peru; an- 
nexed to the curacy of the settlement of Pari. 


uco 


^UCHE, an Indian town of N. America, si- 
tuate on the Chata Uclie river. It is situated, 
according 1 to Bartram, on a vast plain, and is the 
largest, most compact, and best situated Indian 
town he ever saw. The habitations are large, 
and neatly built ; the walls of the houses are con- 
structed of a wooden frame, then lathed and plas- 
tered inside and out with a reddish well-tempered 
clay or mortar, which gives them the appearance 
of red brick walls; and the roofs are neatly co- 
vered with cypress bark, or shingles. The town 
appears populous and thriving, full of youth and 
young children ; and is supposed to contain 
about 1500 inhabitants. They are able to muster 
500 gun-men or warriors. Their national lan- 
guage is radically different from the Creek or 
Muscogulge tongue, and is called the Savanna 
orSavanuca tongue. It is said to be the same as, 
or a dialect of the Shawanese. Although in con- 
federacy w ith the Creeks, they do not mix with 
them ; and are of importance enough to excite 
the jealousy of the whole Muscogulge confede- 
racy, and are usually at variance, yet are wise 
enough to unite against a common enemy to sup- 
port the interest of the general Creek confede- 
racy/] 

UC’HIRE, a river of the province and govern- 
ment of Cumana, w hich enters the sea. 

UCHOS, a settlement of the province and cor- 
regimiento of Caxamarquilla in Peru, having a 
very good port in the river Maranon, whereby 
the commerce is facilitated between this province 
and that of Conchucos. 

UCHUMARCA, a settlement of the same pro- 
vince and kingdom as the former; annexed to 
the curacy of the settlement of Balzas, in the 
province of Chachapoyas. 

UCHUP1AMORIAS, San Joseph de, a set- 
tlement of the province and corregimiento of Apo- 
labamba in Peru, one of the missions that were 
held there by the religious of St. Francis. It 
lies betw een the cordillera of the Andes of Cu- 
choa and the river Beni, and lias the name of the 
Indian nation from w hom it is formed. 

CCITA, a small river of the province and 
government of Guayana, or Nueva Andalucia, 
which rises w. of Verrama, runs parallel to the 
same, and enters the Yentuavi. 

UCO, a settlement of the province and cor- 
regimiento of Conchucos in Peru, to the curacy of 
w hich belongs the valley of Araucay, in the s.zo. 
part ot the Maranon, where there are three 
estates, all belonging to the province of Huama- 
lies. [This settlement is situate nearly 60 miles 


U L S 3 

n. of w hat Fritz in 1707 called the source of the 
Maranon.] 

UCUBAMBA, or Ucupampa, which signifies 
in the Quechuan language, a deep llanura. It is 
here the name of a river, which rises in the pro- 
vince and corregimiento of Caxamarquilla, of the 
kingdom of Peru, passes through the province of 
Chachapoyas, and, united with the Taulia, en- 
ters the Maranon, between two lofty mountains 
called Remtema, opposite the settlement of To- 
mependa. It has also the name of Chachapoyas, 
and near its mouth that of lluabua, in lat. 5° 
30' s. 

UCUCHACAS, a settlement of the province 
and corregimiento of Condesuyos de Arequipa in 
Peru ; annexed to the curacy of the settlement 
of Choco. 

UCUNTAYA, a mountain of the province 
and corregimento of Carabaya in Peru, celebrated 
for a rich silver-mine, from which there was ex- 
tracted in the year 1713, a solid mass of that 
metal, which produced many thousands of dol- 
lars. 

[U GALACHI MIUTI, a Russian settlement 
on the n. w. coast of America. For a further de- 
scription of which, see Vol. iii. p. 222. of this 
work.] 

UGUNUCU, a settlement of the province 
and government of Popayan, in the new king- 
dom of Granada. 

UJIBO. See Ojiba. 

[ULIETEA, one of the Society Islands in the 
S. Pacific Ocean, is about seven or eight leagues 
from the island of Huaheine, at s. w. by w. 
There are nine uninhabited islands tie?, of it. The 
s. end lies in lat. 16° 55' s. and long. 151° 
20 ' w.l 

ULLAGAS, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Paria in Peru ; annexed to the 
curacy of the settlement of Coroma in the pro- 
vince ofPorco. 

ULLUN, a settlement of the kingdom of 
Chile; situate e. of the volcano of Simari, or 
Choapa. 

ULSTER, a county of the province and co- 
lony of New Y ork, in the United States of Ame- 
rica. [It contains all that part of the state of 
New Y r ork, bounded e. by the middle of Hud- 
son’s River, s. by the county of Orange, w. by the 
state of Pennsylvania and the w. branch of Dela- 
ware River, and n. by the county of Albany. In 
1790, it contained 29,397 inhabitants, including 
2,996 slaves. In 1796, there were 4,429 of the 
inhabitants qualified to be electors. It is divided 


4 


U M A 


UNA 


into 16 townships. Chief town, Kingston. A 
part of this county and that of Otsego, were 
erected into a separate county, January, 1797.] 

ULUA, San Juan de, an island of the N. 
Sea, on the coast of Nueva Espana, opposite 
Vera Cruz, and so close as to form a road which 
serves for a port to vessels which are accustomed 
to make themselves fast to some large blocks of 
brass which are opportunely placed here for that 
purpose. It has for its defence and security a 
large castle, furnished with more than 100 can- 
non ; and beyond this is another handsome bat- 
tery, which flanks and defends the two channels 
to the right and left, and which lie to the n. and 
to the s. e. In 1682, this island was taken by 
some pirates. It was discovered in 1518, by 
Don Juan de Grijalva. 

Ulua, a river of the province and govern- 
ment of Honduras. It is large and abundant, 
navigable for vessels of 200 tons, and on its shores 
are some small settlements of pacific Indians. It 
enters the sea in the Gulf of Honduras. 

ULU-MAYU, a settlement of the province 
and corregimiento of Tarma in Peru ; annexed to 
the curacy of the settlement of Carhuamaya, in 
which there is a fort, with a troop, to restrain the 
incursions of the infidel Chunchos Indians, who 
border the province on that side. 

[ULYSSES, one of the military townships in 
Onondago County, New' York; situate at the 
s. end of Cayuga Lake, having Hector on the w. 
and Dryden on the e. which last township is in- 
cluded within the jurisdiction of Ulysses, w'hich 
was incorporated in 1794. In 1796, 38 of the 
inhabitants were electors.] 

UMACHIRI, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Lampa in Peru. 

UMACHUCO, San Roque de, a settlement 
of the province and corregimiento of Condesuyos 
de Arequipa, in the same kingdom as the former; 
annexed to the curacy of the settlement of Ca- 
sarani. 

UMAGATA, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Arica, in the same kingdom; an- 
nexed to the curacy of the settlement of Copta. 

UMAGUA, or Omagua San Joaquin de, a 
settlement of the province and government of 
Mainas in the kingdom of Quito. 

UMAMARCA, a large lake of the province 
and corregimiento of Omasuyos in Peru, divided 
from that of Titicaca by the peninsula of Copa- 
cavana, leaving only a small strait. 

UMANATA, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Larecaxa, in the same kingdom 


as the former lake ; annexed to the curacy of the 
settlement of Italaque. 

UMAUANE, a settlement of the province and 
government of Guayana, or N ueva Andalucia ; 
situate in the country and territory of the Quiri- 
quiripas Indians. 

UMAYA, a large and abundant river of the 
province of Culiacan and kingdom of Nueva 
Vizcaya in N. America, which rises in the moun- 
tains of the sierra of Zopia, and disembogues it- 
self into the S. Sea, at the port of Navitoos. It 
abounds more in fish than any river in the king- 
dom, particulai’ly in robalos (a kind of trout), of 
which the fisheries are very considerable. On its 
shores near the sea, the salt is accustomed to ac- 
cumulate in such large heaps, as not to be af- 
fected or washed away by the violent showers. 
Further up its banks are various settlements of 
Mexican Indians, reduced to the faith by the re- 
ligious of St. Francis. 

[UMBAGOG, a large lake of New Hamp- 
shire, next in size to Lake Winipiseogee. It lies 
in Grafton County, and a small part of it in the 
district of Maine.] 

UMBRA, a small river of the province and 
corregimiento of Canta in Peru, which rises from 
the lake Purun, runs e. and enters the Pari. 

UMMEU, or Urameo, according to others, a 
settlement of the province and country of the 
Amazonas, or part of Guayana, belonging to the 
Portuguese; situate at the source of the river 
Tuhere. 

UMURANAS, a barbarous nation of Indians 
descended from the ancient Mainas, who live in 
woods between the river Chambira to the e. the 
Pastaza to the w. and the Maranon to the s. 
Many of them dwell at the source of the rivers 
Nucuray and Orito, or Lorito-yacu. They wan- 
der about through the woods, and maintain them- 
selves by the chase. 

UNA, a settlement of the province and cap- 
tainship of San Vicente in Brazil, on the coast 
between the bay of this name and the island of 
San Sebastian. 

[UNADILLA, a river of the state of New 
York, called also Tianaderba, runs s. and join- 
ing the main branch, forms Chenengo River.] 

[LTnadilla, a township of New York, Ot- 
sego County, on the n. side of the main branch of 
Chenengo River. It is about 1 10 miles s. w. of 
Albany ; and in 1796, 502 of its inhabitants were 
electors. In the same year the townships of 
Suffrage, Otsego, and Burternuts, were taken 
from this township, and incorporated.] 


U N C 

t UNAKA, Mountain. See Tennessee.] 
fNAMARCA, a settlement of the province 
and corregimiento of Andahuailas in Peru; an- 
nexed to the curacy of the settlement of Pam- 
pachiri. 

[UNA MI, a tribe of the Delaware Indians, 
considered to be the head of that nation.] 

UN ARE, a settlement of the province of Bar- 
celona and government of Cumana, in the new 
kingdom of Granada, one of the missions or re- 
ductions of Indians made by the observers of S. 
Francisco de Piritu. 

Unare, another, in the same province and 
kingdom; situate in the serrania , and being- a re- 
duction of the missions of the Arragonese Capu- 
chins. 

Unare, a large and abundant river of the 
same province aud kingdom, celebrated for the 
excellent cacao gathered in the estates on its 
banks. Some call it also Karinas : it rises in the 
mountains to the e. of Upar, runs n. n. e. in a ser- 
entine course, and collecting the waters of the 
luere, disembogues itself into the sea near its 
capital. On its banks are various settlements, 
consisting of reductions of the religious missiona- 
ries of Piritu. This river would be navigable 
for bilanders and packet boats, were it not for 
the bar at its entrance, which is in lat. 10° 4/ n. 

[According to Depons, the Unare divides the 
governments of Caracas and Cumana. It is na- 
vigable as far as the village of S. Antonio deCla- 
rinas, six leagues from the sea. Its course is 
about 40 leagues from n. to s.] 

Unare, a small river of the same province 
and kingdom, which runs n. and enters the sea in 
the coast ofParia. 

Unare, a small lake in the same province: 
situate on the sea-shore with the which it com- 
municates, and on the side of the river of its 
name. 

UNAVI, a small river of the same province 
and government as the former, which rises near 
that of Arebato, runs correspondently with it, 
and then unites itself with it. 

UNCAHUASI, a settlement of the province 
and corregimiento of Castro Virreyna in Peru; 
annexed to the curacy of the settlement of Jul- 
camarca, in the province of Angaraes. 

UNCUICIA, a lake of the province of Quito 
and kingdom of Granada, to the s. of the settle- 
ment called Norabre de Jesus, and distant a little 
more than half a mile from the same. It has a 
short and narrow gut through which it runs into 
tne Napo, and is full of islands, forming a laby- 
rinth of channels. In the same islands dwell 


uni r &gt; 

some barbarian Indians of the Yetes nation, in 
lat. l°27'30 // s. 

UNDAMEO, Santiago de, a head settle- 
ment of the district of the alcaldia mayor of Val- 
ladolid, in the province and bishopric cfMechoa- 
can ; situate in a high, stony, and desert plain, 
but on the n. side of which runs a crystal stream, 
with which the Indians irrigate some of their 
sowed land. Its population consists of 20 fami- 
lies of these, and six of Spaniards and Muslees. 
In its district are various estates, in which dwell 
14 other families of Spaniards, 11 of Mustees, and 
20 of Indians. It has a convent of the religious 
of St. Augustin. 

UNDA VI, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Carangas in Peru, and of the 
archbishopric of Charcas ; annexed to the curacy 
of the settlement of Chuquicota. 

UNE, a settlement of the corregimiento of 
Ubaque in the new kingdom of Granada. It is 
of a good temperature, and its situation is level 
and agreeable ; it yields in abundance the pro- 
ductions of a cold climate, and contains more 
than 100 housekeepers, and as many Indians. 
Eight leagues s. w. of Santa Fe. 

UNGUI-YACU, a river of the province and 
corregimiento of Luya and Chillaos in Peru, which 
rises in the sierra, runs w. and enters the Ca- 
li uapan a. 

UNGUIGIA, a river of the province and go- 
vernment of Mainas in the kingdom of Quito. 
It runs from whence the C’oya enters the Yebi- 
neto, and changes its name to enter the Putu- 
mayo. 

UNINI, a river of the province and country 
of the Amazonas, in the territory possessed by 
the Portuguese. It runs e. between the rivers 
Negro and Maranon, and enters the former. 

UNITED STATES. An independent re- 
public, formed by the union of the 13 English 
colonies of New Hampshire, Massachussetts, 
Rhode Island, Connecticut, New York, New 
Jersey, the three counties of Delaware, Pensyl- 
vania, Maryland, Virginia, the two Carolinas, 
and Georgia, separated from the dominion of 
the court of England, after a bloody war, w hich 
took place in 1707, and which arose from an act 
of parliament, imposing new duties upon glass, 
lead, colours, letter paper, and tea ; the which 
act the said Estates professed themselves inimi- 
cal to : accordingly, after five years altercation, 
England agreed to revoke part of the act, judg- 
ing that to comply fully with the desire of the 
United States, was inconsistent with its dignity. 
It accordingly, in 1773, commanded the duties to 


6 


UNITED 

be taken oft from tea ; but the American colo- 
nists resolving- not to submit to what thev con- 
sidered as a breach of their privileges, denied 
admittance to any tea that was brought from 
Europe, notwithstanding that this was an article 
amongst them in the greatest request and most 
common use. The example was set by the city 
of Boston, the capital of New England, which 
declared as enemies to their country all those 
who should sell this article, bestowing great 
thanks and eulogiums upon many merchants 
who refused to trade in it, and to others who 
disavowed the consignments of it actually made 
from their correspondents in England. The in- 
habitants publicly burnt what they had in their 
houses for private use, as likewise a quantity 
that was lying on board three ships lately ar- 
rived from London. The parliament taking of- 
fence at this resolution, declared the port of 
Boston to be in a state of blockade; and its com- 
merce, whether of an active or passive na- 
ture, to be prohibited from the year 1774. 
This, instead of calming the spirit of the Bos- 
tonians, irritated them still more ; they called 
it an inhuman, barbarous, and bloody act, and 
excited the whole of their citizens to defend 
their liberty against the tyranny of England. 
To such a pitch did the enthusiasm rise that 
nothing but exhortations were heard in the tem- 
ples or the streets, and a placard was printed of 
the following pithy and energetic tenor. u The 
severity of the British parliament against Boston 
ought to cause all the provinces of America to 
tremble ; since there now remains for them no 
choice between prisons, fire, and violent death, 
or the yoke of a mean and servile obedience. 
The epoch of a revolution has taken place ; 
which, in its vast importance, will, either by a 
happy or disgraceful termination, render us 
either a subject of infamy or admiration to pos- 
terity. The solution of the grand problem now 
before us, is simply this : the choice between 
liberty or slavery ; on this choice depends the 
future happiness or misery of three millions of 
men, and of their posterity. Rise then, Ame- 
ricans ; never was the region that you inhabit 
overcast with clouds like these : ye are branded 
with the name of rebels, because ye have dared 
not to be slaves. J ustify your pretensions by 
your valour, or seal the loss by your blood. 
Now is it no time to wail, when the hand of 
your oppressor is already forging your chains : 
silence were now a fault, and peace itself were 
infamy. The support of the Republic’s rights 
is the supreme law ; and he who shall deny to 


STATES. 

lend his utmost assistance in warding off the 
dangers which are thus thronging around the 
shrine of American independence, let him be 
ranked amongst the vilest of her slaves.” 

This impressive declamation, which was pub- 
lished in all the provinces, caused the inha- 
bitants to meet together, and to form a congress 
in Philadelphia, in September 1774. England, 
in the mean time, no less agitated by the de- 
bates and opinions of its parliament, after argu- 
ing, in many ways, upon the means best adapted 
to quiet the colonies, at last made choice of 
measures of force ; and, accordingly, sent Ge- 
neral Gage with some troops ; who having for- 
warded a detachment from Boston on the 18th 
April 1775, for the purpose of destroying and 
burning the stores of arms and ammunition, 
which the Americans had collected together in 
Concord, was completely routed by the latter; 
who, however, lost their commander Warren, 
to whom they afterwards paid singular honours 
as having been the first victim who died in the 
cause of their liberty. This calamity was fol- 
lowed by many others of an unorganized w ar ; 
until that Congress nominated George Wash- 
ington, as their general, a native of V irginia, a 
man already renowned for his valour and sin- 
gular abilities, exhibited on various occasions. 
Delighted at his election, he marched for Mas- 
sachussetts, and obliged the royalists to shut 
themselves up in Boston, where, being perse- 
cuted by their enemies, and oppressed by hun- 
ger, by miseries, and by sickness, they were 
obliged to embark to the number of 6.000, find- 
ing an asylum in Nova Scotia and Florida : 
some however remained in England. Carleton 
dislodged from Canada the commissaries, who 
had gone to use persuasions with the city of 
Quebec. Clinton and Parker were driven back 
upon the coasts, as was also general Gage, who 
was supported by Howe, and both backed by 
the brother of the latter, who had under his 
command a fine squadron : but the incompara- 
ble Washington, unwilling to venture his im- 
portant objects, and the fate of his country on 
the event of a battle, contented himself with 
harassing the English troops, who, in 1777, 
found themselves engaged with the Americans, 
and had made themselves masters of Philadel- 
phia. But, a short time after, an army of six 
thousand veterans were found to submit and 
render up their arms at Saratoga to some la- 
bourers and rustics, without any military expe- 
rience, commanded by the fortunate Gates : 
but these different events subjected the colonies, 


UNITED STATES. 


7 


in 1779 to the expence of £.188,670,525 (Algedo 
should have said dollars, though even then the 
amount would be excessive by about 50,000,000 
of dollars); at the same time all communication 
with Europe was prevented by the English squa- 
dron ; but, obstinate in their resolutions, the 
Americans exclaimed, “ The English name makes 
us odious to the whole world : let us solemnly 
abjure it. All men are our brothers, and we are 
the friends of all nations. Let then their ships 
enter our ports without fear of being insulted.” 
Many of different nations then flocked to Ame- 
rica, and, amongst the rest, numbers of French ; 
but the greater part were arrested in their pas- 
sage by Admiral Howe. At last, a treaty of 
alliance was formed between America and France 
in 1778, and this power acknowledged the Ame- 
ricans to be independent of England ; upon which 
the latter declared war both against the French 
and the Spaniards ; at last, however, finding that 
the expectation and hopes of reducing the colonies 
diminished daily, she came to the resolution of 
sending commissioners, who proposed many mat- 
ters of conciliation, but all short of an acknow- 
ledgment of independence. These propositions 
were treated with contempt, until that England 
was, at last, under the necessity of acknowledging 
and declaring America to be an independent 
country in the peace of Paris of 1783 ; and this 
example was followed by all the powers of Eu- 
rope, who acknowledged the title of the United 
States of America ; the which, being composed of 
the thirteen provinces aforesaid, we treat of more 
fully under their corresponding articles. 

[INDEX TO ADDITIONAL, INFORMATION CON- 
TAINED UNDER ARTICLE UNITED STATES. 

Boundaries. — Grand divisions and statistical parti- 
culars of each state. — Lakes and rivers. — Face 
of the country. — Mountains. — Soil and vegetable 
productions. — Natural history. — Population and 
territory. — Government and constitution. — Agri- 
culture and manufactures. — Finance . — Trade . — 
Military strength. — Religion. — History. — Ana- 
lysis of the Berlin and Milan decrees , and of the 
American seamen ; Non-importation anel em- 
bargo laws . — Notices of the campaign in 1812 
and 1813. — Table of post offices , S'C. — Post 
office regulations . — Tables of coins, exchange, See. 

Boundaries. — The actual extent of territory in 
these States is very difficult to be estimated. In 
1795 their boundaries were on the n. e. British 
America, or the provinces of Upper and Lower 


Canada and New Brunswick; on the s. e. the 
Atlantic Ocean ; on the s. the Floridas ; e. and w. 

■ — and on the w. the river Mississippi. 

Such are, with the increased extent to the to. 
occasioned by the acquisition of Louisiana, their 
boundaries at the present day. Their length, in 
1795, might be thus averaged at 1250, and their 
breadth at 1040 miles, and they laid between lat. 
30° and 49° n. ; long. 8° e. and 24° zo. from Phi- 
ladelphia, and long. 64° and 96° zo. from London. 

Their acquisitions which, since that period, 
have been merely to the zo. affect, in consequence, 
their extent only in length, though, as correctly 
speaking, in breadth, the direction being longi- 
tudinal. The exact surface thus added it is 
almost impossible to calculate, since the bounda- 
ries of Louisiana are constantly shifting. In 1788 
the number of square acres, included in these 
States, amounted to 283,800,000, of which about 
one million and a quarter were cultivated, and in 
1808 to 600,000,000, of which nearly two mil- 
lions and an half were cultivated. 

In the treaty of peace, concluded in 1783, their 
limits were more particularly defined in the words 
following : “ And that all disputes which might 
arise in future on the subject of the boundaries of 
the said United States may be prevented, it is 
hereby agreed and declared, that the following- 
are and shall be their boundaries, viz. From the 
n. zo. angle of Nova Scotia, viz. that angle which 
is formed by a line drawn due n. from the source 
of St. Croix River to the Highlands, along the 
said Highlands which divide those rivers that 
empty themselves into the river St. Lawrence, 
from those which fall into the Atlantic Ocean, to 
the north- westernmost head of Connecticut river; 
thence down along the middle of that river to 
lat. 45° n. ; from thence by a line due zo. on said 
lat. until it strikes the river Iroquois or Catara- 
qui ; thence along the middle of the said river 
into Lake Ontario ; through the middle of said 
lake, until it strikes the communication by w ater 
between that lake and Lake Erie ; thence along 
the middle of the said communication into Lake 
Erie, through the middle of the said lake, until it 
arrives at the water communication between that 
lake and Lake Huron ; thence through the middle 
of the said lake to the water communication be- 
tween that lake and Lake Superior ; thence 
through Lake Superior, n. of the Isles Royal and 
Phillipeaux, to the Long Lake ; thence through 
the middle of the said Long Lake, and the w ater 
communication between it and the Lake of 
the Woods, to the said Lake of the Woods :] 


8 


UNITED STATES. 


^thence through the said lake to the most n. w. 
point thereof, and from thence, on a due w. 
course, to the river Mississippi ; thence by a line 
to be drawn along the middle of the said River 
Mississippi, until it shall intersect the northern- 
most part of 7i. lat. 31°. 

“ South, by a line to be drawn due e. from the 
determination of the line last-mentioned, in lat. 
31° 77. of the equator, to the middle of the river 
Apalachichola, or Catahouche ; thence along the 
middle thereof to its junction with the Flint 
River; thence straight to the head of St. Marv’s 
River; and thence down along the middle of St. 
Mary’s River to the Atlantic Ocean. 

“ East, by a line to be drawn along the middle 
of the river St. Croix, from its mouth, in the Bay 
of Fundy, to its source, and from its source di- 
rectly n. to the aforesaid Highlands, which divide 
the rivers that fall into the Atlantic Ocean from 
those which fall into the river St. Lawrence ; com- 
prehending all islands within twenty leagues of 
any part of the shores of the United States, and 
lying between lines to be drawn due e. from the 
points where the aforesaid boundaries between 
Nova Scotia on the one part, and East Florida 
on the other, shall respectively touch the Bay of 
Fundy and the Atlantic Ocean, excepting such 
islands as now are, or heretofore have been, with- 
in the limits of the said province of Nova Scotia.” 

The territory of the United States, according 
to Mr. Hutchins, contained in 1790, by computa- 
tion, a million of square miles, in which are 

640,000,000 acres 
Deduct for w ater 51,000,000 


e j- 589,000,000 


Acres of land in the 
United States 
That part of the United States comprehended 
between the w. boundary line of Pennsylvania, 
on the e. ; the boundary line between Great Bri- 
tain and the United States, extending from the 
river St. Croix to the ti. w. extremity of the Lake 
of the Woods, on the n. ; the river Mississippi to 
the mouth of the Ohio, on the w . ; and the river 
Ohio on the s. to the afore-mentioned bounds of 
Pennsylvania, contained, by computation, about 
411,000 square miles, in which are 

263,040,000 acres 
Deduct for water 43,040,000 


To be disposed of by 
order of Congress, 
w ? hen purchased of 
the Indians . . . 


2 . 20 , 000,000 


The whole of this immense extent of unappro- 
priated w. territory, containing, as above stated, 
220,000,000 of acres, and several large tracts s. 
of the Ohio, (ceded by N. Carolina, S. Carolina, 
and Georgia, with certain reservations for the 
Indians and other purposes), have been, by the 
cession of some of the original Thirteen States, 
and by the treaty of peace, transferred to the 
federal government, and are pledged as a fund 
for sinking the debt of the United States. Of 
this territory the Indians now possess a very large 
proportion. Mr. Jefferson, in his report to con- 
gress, Nov. 8, 1791, describes the boundary line 
between the States and the Indians, as follows : 
“ Beginning at the mouth of the Cayahoga (which 
falls into the southernmost part of Lake Erie) 
and running up the river to the portage, between 
that and the Tuscaroro (or N. E.) branch of the 
Muskingum ; then dow n the said branch to the 
forks, at the crossing place above Fort Lawrence; 
then w. towards the portage of the Great Miami 
to the main branch of that river; then dowm the 
Miami to the fork of that river, next below the 
old fort, which was taken by the French in 1752; 
thence due w. to the river De la Panse (a branch 
of the Wabash) and dow n that river to the ’Wa- 
bash.” So far the line was precisely determined, 
and cleared of the claims of the Indians as far 
back as the year 1790. The tract comprehend- 
ing the w hole country w ithin the above described 
line, the Wabash, the Ohio, and the w. limits of 
Pennsylvania, contains about 55,000 square miles. 
With regard to the territory on the w. side of the 
Wabash, the title of the Indians to the lower 
country, between that river and the Illinois, was 
supposed to have been formerly extinguished by 
the French, while in their possession. 

Estimate of the number of acres of water, n. a7id w. 
of the river Ohio , within the territory of the 
United States. 


In Lake Superior 

Lake of the W oods 

Lake Rain, &amp;c 

Red Lake 

Lake Michigan 

Bay Puan 

Lake Huron 

Lake St. Clair 

Lake Erie, w. part 

Sundry small lakes and rivers, as ) 
included in the year 1790 . ) 


Acres. 

21,952,780 

1,133,800 

165,200 

551.000 
10,368,000 

1,216,000 

5,009,920 

89,500 

2,252,S00 

301.000 


43,040,000] 


UNITED STATES. 


9 


f Estimate of the number o f Aeres of Water within 
the Thirteen United States. 

In the Lakes, &amp;c. as before men- 
tioned 43,040,000 

In Lake Erie, w. of 
the line extended from 
the n. w. corner of 
Pennsylvania, due n. 
to the boundary be- 
tween the British ter- 
ritory and the United 

States 410,000 

In Lake Ontario . 2,300,000 
Lake Champlain 500,000 
Chesapeak Bay . 1,700,000 
Albemarle Bay . 330,000 

Delaware Bay . 630,000 

All the rivers within 
the 13 States, includ- 
ing the Ohio, as in the 
year 1790 . . . . 2,000,000 

7,960,000 


"Maryland 
Virginia 
Kentucky 
•i N. Carolina 
S. Carolina 
Georgia 
^Tennessee 
"Orleans 
Mississippi 
Indiana 
&lt; Columbia 
Louisiana 
Illinois 
Michigan 

In the following account of each of these states, 
it must be observed, that the mineral and vege- 
table productions, manufactures, and exports, are 
far more numerous than what are mentioned ; the 
limits of each table allowing a notice only of the 
chief productions and staple commodities of the 
country. A more specific account may be found 
in their separate articles. 


Southern States. 


Territorial 

Governments. 


51,000,000 

To which add for rivers, &amp;c. in 
States subsequently embraced 

in the Union 2,000,000 

/ 

Total acres of water at the present 

day 73,000,000 


Grand Divisions and statistical Particulars of each 
State. 

The American republic consists of four grand 
divisions, denominated the northern , middle , and 
southern states, and the territorial governments ; 
the latter being so denominated as having been 
organized since the establishment of the original 
states, but now forming integral parts of the 
whole. 


The names of the separate states of the federal 
republic are classed as follows : 


New England, 
or 

Northern States. 


Middle States. 


VOL. v. 


"Vermont 
New Hampshire 
District of Maine, belong 
•{ ing to Massachusetts 
Massachusetts 
Rhode Island 
^Connecticut 
f New York 
j New Jersey 
Pennsylvania 
| Delaware 
(.Ohio 


Statistical Particulars of each Stale in the Ame- 
rican Union. 

New England, or Northern States. 

Vermont. 

Length and breadth ; 158 by 70 miles. 

Face of the country ; hilly and mountainous. 

Divisions; 12 counties, 19 towns. 

Principal rivers ; White, Black, La Moelle, 
Onion. 

Mountains; Killington, Mansfield, Camel’s 
Rump. 

Mineral productions ; iron-ore, lead, pipe-clay, 
marble. 

Vegetable productions; wheat, rye, corn, flax, 
apples. 

Manufactures; iron, hollow ware, pot-ashes, 
paper. 

Exports; pot-aslies, provisions, horses, grain, 
lumber. 

Chief towns; Bennington, Burlington, Wind- 
sor. 

Population of the State in 1810; 217,913. 

Religion; Congregationalists, Baptists, Me- 
thodists. 

New Hampshire. 

Length and breadth ; 168 by 90 miles. 

Face of the country; mountainous. 

Divisions; five counties, 214 towns and loca- 
tions.] 

c 


10 UNITED 

[Principal rivers; Connecticut, Merrimack, Pis- 
cataqua. 

Mountains; White, Monadnock, Moosehillock. 

Mineral productions ; copper, iron, black lead, 
alum. 

Vegetable productions; wheat, corn, hemp, 
apples, pears. 

Manufactures; iron, hats, snuff, chocolate, 
duck. 

Exports ; lumber, oil, flax-seed, live stock, pot- 
ashes. 

Chief towns ; Portsmouth, Concord, Exeter, 
Amherst. 

Population of the state in 1810; 214,414. 

Religion ; Congregationalists, Presbyterians, 
Baptists. 

Maine. 

Length and breadth ; 200 by 120 miles. 

Face of the country ; highlands and plains. 

Divisions; six counties, 50 towns. 

Principal rivers ; Penobscot, Kennebeck, An- 
droscoggin. 

Mountains ; high lands. 

Mineral productions ; mountain and bog ore, 
copperas, sulphur. 

V egatable productions ; hops, wheat, oats, 
spruce, fir, rockweed. 

Manufactures ; clothing, and other necessaries 
of life. 

Exports; lumber, salt provisions, pot-ash. 

Chief towns; Portland, York, Wiscassett. 

Population of the State in 1810; 228,705. 

Religion ; Congregationalists, Baptists, Me- 
thodists. 

Massachusetts . 

Length and breadth ; 170 by 94 miles. 

Face of the country ; mountains and plains. 

Divisions; 12 counties, 279 towns. 

Principal rivers ; Connecticut, Taunton, Mer- 
rimack. 

Mountains; Wachuset, Mount Tom, Saddle- 
back. 

Mineral productions; copper, iron, black lead, 
pyrites, asbestos. 

Vegetable productions; wheat, rye, hemp, flax, 
apples, peaches, &amp;c. 

Manufactures ; duck, paper, cards, cordage, 
ships, spirits, glass. 

Exports ; lumber, fish, oil, provisions, live 
stock, cordage, &amp;c. 

Chief towns; Boston, Springfield, Worcester, 
Plymouth. 

Population of the state in 1810; 472,040. 

Religion ; Congregationalists, Presbyterians, 
Baptists, Quakers. 


STATES. 

Rhode Island. 

Length and breadth; 47 by 37 miles. 

Face of the country; hills and plains. 

Divisions ; five counties, 30 towns. 

Principal rivers; Providence Taunton, Paw- 
tucket. 

Mountains ; Mount Hope, Misery, Whestone. 

Mineral productions ; iron, copper, lime, 
marble. 

Vegetable pxoductions; grass, corn, rye, fruits 
in plenty. 

Manufactures ; cotton, linen, and tow cloth, 
spirits. 

Expoi'ts ; cattle, lumber, fish, provisions, flax 
seed. 

Chief towns ; Newport, Providence, Kingston. 

Population of the state in 1810; 76,931. 

Religion ; Baptists, Ameidcans, Moi'avians, 
Jews. 

Connecticut. 

Length and breadth ; 100 by 72 miles. 

Face of the countiy ; mountains, hills, and 
valleys. 

Divisions; eight counties, 100 towns. 

Principal l'ivers ; Connecticut, Housatonie, 
Thames. 

Mountains ; Long, Great Craig, Hemlock. 

Minex-al productions ; iron, lead, copper, talcs, 
spetter. 

Vegetable productions ; India corn, oats, rye, 
buckwheat, fruits, hemp. 

Manufactures ; cotton, glass, gunpowdei', hol- 
low ware. 

Exports ; cattle, lurnbei - , provisions, hay. 

Chief towns ; Hai'tfoi'd, Newhaven, New Lon- 
don. 

Population of the state in 1810; 261,942. 

Religion ; Congregationalists, Episcopalians, 
Baptists. 

Middle States. 

New York. 

Length and breadth ; 350 by 300 miles. 

Face of the country; low and flat towaids the 
sea, hilly in the interior. 

Divisions ; 30 counties, 292 towns. 

Principal rivers ; Hudson, Mohawk, Seneca, 
Genessee. 

Mountains ; Kattskill, and part of the Allegany 
range. 

Mineral productions ; lead, iron, and coal- 
mines, spar, magnez. 

V egetable productions ; wheat, hemp, aspen, 
cedar, fruits.] 


UNITED 

[Manufactures ; loaf sugar, glass, cutlery, iron, 
paper, furniture. 

Exports ; every article of domestic and foreign 
produce. 

Chief towns ; New York, Albany, Hudson, 
Fishkill. 

Population of the state in 1810 ; 959,220. 

Relig ion ; Episcopalians, Presbyterians, Qua- 
kers, Jews. 

New Jersey. 

Length and breadth ; 160 by 52 miles. 

Face of the country ; flat, low, and marshy. 

Divisions ; 13 counties, 94 towns. 

Principal rivers ; Hackensack, Raritan, and 
Passaick. 

Mountains; Neversink and Centre Hills. 

Mineral productions ; iron and coal mines, 
copper, lead. 

Vegetable productions ; apples, pears, peaches, 
corn, barley, pines, firs. 

Manufactures ; iron, flour, nails, leather. 

Exports; iron castings, hollow ware, nails, 
flour. 

Chief towns ; Trenton, Burlington, Bruns- 
wick. 

Population of the state in 1810 ; 245,562. 

Religion : Presbyterians, Armenians, Baptists. 

Pennsylvania. 

Length and breadth ; 288 by 156 miles. 

Face of the country ; low and flat towards the 
sea, hilly in the interior. 

Divisions ; 35 counties, 523 towns. 

Principal rivers; Delaware, Susquehannah, Al- 
legany. 

Mountains; Kittatinny, Tuscarora, Great War- 
rior. 

Mineral productions ; iron, copper, coal mines. 

Vegetable productions ; wheat, oats, flax, rye, 
fruits. 

Manufactures ; iron, cabinet work, Glauber 
salts, muskets. 

Exports ; flour, and other domestic and foreign 
produce. 

Chief towns; Philadelphia, Carlisle, Pittsburg. 

Population of the state in 1810; 810,163. 

Reli gion ; Presbyterians, Quakers, Jews, Mo- 
ravians. 

Delaware. 

Length and breadth ; 92 by 24 miles. 

Face of the country ; low, swampy, and level. 

Divisions ; three counties, 24 towns. 

Mountains ; no mountains of any note. 

Mineral productions ; bog iron-ore, white 
clay, &amp;c. 


STATES. ii 

Vegetable productions ; wheat, rye, oats, corn, 
flax, hemp, buckwheat. 

Manufactures ; flour, paper, snuff*, cotton. 

Exports ; wheat, flour, lumber, snuff. 

Chief towns ; Wilmington, Dover, Lewis. 

Population of the state in 1810 ; 72,674. 

Religion; Presbyterians, Quakers, Episcopa- 
lians. 

Ohio. 

Length and breadth ; 220 by 200 miles. 

Face of the country ; hills and plains. 

Divisions ; counties and towns. 

Principal rivers; Muskingum, Scioto, Great 
Miami. 

Mountains ; hilly, but not mountainous. 

Mineral productions ; iron ore, lead, coal, free- 
stone, white clay. 

Vegetable productions; wheat, hemp, flax, 
corn, grapes, &amp;c. 

Manufactures ; flour, clothing, and other ne- 
cessaries. 

Exports ; flour, corn, wheat, provisions. 

Chief towns ; Chillicothe, Cincinnatus, Ma- 
rietta. 

Population of the state in 1810 ; 230,760. 

Religion ; Presbyterians, Baptists, Armenians. 

Southern States. 

Maryland. 

Length and breadth ; 170 by 105 miles. 

Face of the country ; hills and plains. 

Divisions; 19 counties and towns. 

Principal rivers ; Chesapeake, Potowmack, 
Patapsco. 

Mountains ; blue ridge in the w. part of the 
state. 

Mineral productions ; iron ore and coal mines. 

Vegetable productions; wheat, tobacco, hemp, 
flax, fruit. 

Manufactures ; iron, hollow ware, flour, to- 
bacco. 

Exports ; pork, flour, tobacco, hemp, fruit, 
iron. 

Chief towns; Baltimore, Annapolis, George- 
town. 

Population of the state in 1810 ; 380,546. 

Religion ; Roman Catholics, Lutherans, Qua- 
kers, &amp;c. 

Virginia. 

Length and breadth ; 448 by 224 miles. 

Face of the country ; flat and low towards the 
coast, mountainous behind. 

Divisions ; 122 towns and counties.] 
c 2 


STATES. 


12 UNITED 

[Principal rivers ; Potowmack, Rappahannock, 
James. 

Mountains ; Blue Ridge, Laurel, Allegany. 

Mineral productions ; lead, copper, iron, coal, 
black lead, marble. 

Vegetable productions; tobacco, cotton, wheat, 
hemp, corn. 

Manufactures ; lead and iron works, copper, 
some cloth. 

Exports ; tobacco is the chief article of export. 

Chief towns; Richmond, Norfolk, Peters- 
burgh. 

Population of the state in 1810; 965,079. 

Religion; Presbyterians, Episcopalians, Me- 
thodists. 

Kentucky. 

Length and breadth ; 350 by 130 miles. 

Face of the country ; hills and plains. 

Divisions ; 42 counties and towns. 

Principal rivers ; Ohio, Licking, Kentucky, 
Green. 

Mountains ; none of any particular note. 

Mineral productions ; saltpetre, iron, lead, 
limestone. 

V egetable productions ; corn, hemp, wheat, 
coffee, pawpaw trees, &amp;c. 

Manufactures ; flour, gunpowder, cordage, 
iron, ships, whiskey. 

Exports ; provisions, &amp;c. conveyed down the 
Ohio to New Orleans. 

Chief towns; Frankfort, Lexington, Louis- 
ville. 

Population of the state in 1810; 406,511. 

Religion ; Presbyterians, Congregationalists, 
Baptists. 

North Carolina. 

Length and breadth ; 370 by 162 miles. 

Face of the country ; flat towards the coast, 
mountainous in the back country. 

Divisions ; three districts, 60 counties. 

Principal rivers; Roanoke, Pamlico, Neuse. 

Mountains ; Apalachian, Allegany, Tryon. 

Mineral productions ; iron, coal; gold has re- 
cently been found. 

Vegetable productions; wheat, cotton, hemp, 
corn, rice, tobacco. 

Manufactures; paper, pitch, tar, oil, iron. 

Exports ; lumber, naval stores, tobacco, wheat, 
corn. 

Chief towns ; Raleigh, Newbern, Edenton. 

Population of the state in 1810 ; 563,526. 

Religion; Congregationalists, Baptists, Men- 
nonists. 

South Carolina. 

Length and breadth; 267 by 190 miles. 


Face of the country ; generally flat, low, and 
sandy. 

Divisions ; nine districts, 20 parishes, 23 coun- 
ties. 

Principal rivers ; Edisto, Santee, Pedee. 

Mountains ; Apalachia, Tyx-on, Hogback, at 
the extremity of the state. 

Mineral productions ; gold, lead, silver, cop- 
per, carnelion. 

Vegetable productions; pines, oak, hickory, 
cotton, rice, indigo, corn. 

Manufactures ; pitch, tar, &amp;c. iron, cotton, 
and woollen clothing. 

Exports ; cotton and rice are the staple com- 
modities. 

Chief towns ; Charleston, Columbia, Camden. 

Population of the state in 1810 ; 414,935. 

Religion; Presbyterians, Episcopalians, Bap- 
tists. 

Georgia. 

Length and breadth ; 500 by 250 miles. 

Face of the country; level and flat upwards of 
120 miles from the coast. 

Divisions; 24 counties, 129 towns and districts. 

Principal rivers; Savannah, Apalachicola, Al- 
tamaha. 

Mountains ; a part of the Apalachian and Al- 
legany ridge. 

Mineral productions ; silver, lead, copper, &amp;c. 

Vegetable productions; pine, cedar, palmetto, 
oak, cotton, rice, indigo. 

Manufactures ; pitch, tar, &amp;c. leather, cotton, 
and woollen clothing. 

Exports ; rice, cotton, tobacco, indigo, naval 
stores. 

Chief towns ; Savannah, Augusta, Louisville, 
St. Mary’s. 

Population of the state in 1810; 252,433. 

Religion; Presbyterians, Methodists, Jews, 
Baptists. 

Tenessee ( West and East). 

Length and breadth; 420 by 90 miles. 

Face of the country ; mountains and plains. 

Divisions ; three districts, 18 counties. 

Principal rivers ; Tennessee, Cumberland, 
H olsten. 

Mountains; Cumberland, Clinch, and Bald 
Mountains. 

Mineral productions ; saltpetre, iron, ochre, 
copperas, &amp;c. 

V egetable productions ; cotton, tobacco, coffee, 
hemp, corn, indigo. 

Manufactures ; flour, cotton, and woollen 
cloths, iron, &amp;c.] 


UNITED 

[Exports; domestic produce, furs, ginseng 1 , 
cattle. 

Chief towns; Knoxville, Nashville, Jones- 
borough. 

Population of the state in 1810 ; 261,727. 
Religion; Presbyterians, Baptists, Tunkers, 
Methodists. 


Territorial Governments. 

Orleans. 

Length and breadth ; uncertain. 

Face of the country ; open and fertile. 
Divisions : counties and towns. 

Principal rivers; Mississippi and Ohio. 
Mountains ; none of consequence. 

Mineral productions; saltpetre, salt springs, 
lead, iron, copper. 

Vegetable productions; indigo, cotton, rice, 
beans. 

Manufactures ; cotton mills, sugar baking. 
Exports ; sugar, cotton, indigo, lead, lumber, 
tobacco. 

Chief town ; 

Population of the state in 1810 ; 76,566. 
Religion ; in an unsettled state. 

Mississippi. 

Length and breadth ; 380 by 250 miles. 

Face of the country; mountains and plains. 
Divisions ; three counties and towns. 

Principal rivers; Mississippi, Yazoo, Tom- 
bigby. 

Mountains ; Allegany range. 

Mineral productions ; gold, silver, lead, cop- 
per, precious stones. 

Vegetable productions; most of the tropical 
fruits, rice, cotton, indigo. 

Manufactures ; flour, provisions, and domestic 
necessaries. 

Exports ; flour, provisions, furs, rice, cotton, 
indigo. 

Chief town; Natchez. 

Population of the state in 1810 ; 40,352. 
Religion ; in a fluctuating state. 

Indiana. 

Length and breadth ; 345 by 300 miles. 

Face of the country ; hills and plains. 

Divisions ; counties and towns. 

Principal rivers; Wabash, Kaskaskia, Illinois. 
Mountains ; Illinois and Wabash Hills. 

Mineral productions ; silver, lead, iron, coal, 
marble, salt. 


STATES. 13 

Vegetable productions ; wheat, corn, rye, hemp, 
flax, mustard, apple trees. 

Manufactures ; flour, clothing, and domestic 
necessaries. 

Exports ; wheat, flour, corn, salt provisions. 

Chief towns : Vincennes, Kaskaskia, Clarkes- 
ville. 

Population of the state in 1810 ; 24,520. 

Religion ; Armenians, Mennonists, Methodists. 

Columbia. 

Length and breadth ; uncertain. 

Face of the country; nearly the same as Vir- 
ginia. 

Divisions ; towns and counties. 

Principal river ; Patowmack. 

Mountains ; Blue Ridge. 

Mineral productions ; iron-ore and copper. 

Vegetable productions ; tobacco, cotton, wheat, 
hemp. 

Manufactures ; iron wares. 

Exports ; tobacco. 

Chief town ; Georgetown. 

Population of the state in 1810; 24,023. 

Religion ; various persuasions. 

Louisiana. 

Length and breadth ; 1,400 by 1,110 miles. 

Face of the country ; level and flat, with vast 
prairies , or meadows. 

Divisions ; towns, villages, and parishes. 

Principal rivers ; Mississippi, Missouri, Mo- 
bile. 

Mountains ; none of any consequence. 

Mineral productions ; saltpetre, salt springs, 
lead, iron, copper. 

Vegetable productions; oak, pine, cedars, 
fruits, sugar, cotton, furs. 

Manufactures ; cotton mills, sugar-baking, 
Negro clothing. 

Exports : sugar, cotton, indigo, lead, lumber, 
tobacco. 

Chief town ; New Orleans. 

Population of the state in 1810; 20,845. 

Religion ; Roman Catholic, Presbyterians, 
Methodists, Jews. 

Illinois. 

Length and breadth; uncertain. 

Face of the country ; woody, hilly, and marshy. 

Divisions ; towns and counties. 

Principal rivers ; Meame and St. Joseph. 

Mountains ; 

Mineral productions ; coals. 

Vegetable productions; wheat, fruit, tobacco, 
medicinal plants.] 


UNITED STATES. 


14 

[Manufactures ; 

Exports ; 

Chief town ; Cahokia. 

Population of the state in 1810; 12,282. 

Religion ; formerly Catholics, now mostly sa- 
vages. 

Michigan. 

Length and breadth ; 240 by 130 miles. 

Face of the country ; hills and plains. 

Divisions ; counties and towns. 

Principal rivers; Mariamne, Grand, Huron. 

Mountains ; hilly land, which runs n. and s. 

Mineral productions ; lead, coal mines, salt- 
springs. 

Vegetable productions; corn, wheat, hemp, 
grasses, hickory. 

Manufactures; flour, clothing, and articles of 
domestic use. 

Exports ; corn, flour, salt provisions. 

Chief town ; Detroit. 

Population of the state in 1810; 4,762. 

Religion ; Congregationalists, Moravians, Ar- 
menians. 

Lakes and j Rivers. — There is nothing in 
other parts of the globe, which resembles the 
prodigious chain of lakes in this part of the 
world. They may properly be termed inland 
seas of fresh water : and even those of the se- 
cond or third class in magnitude are of larger 
circuit than the greatest lake in the eastern con- 
tinent. Some of the most n. lakes belong- 
ing to the United States, have never been 
surveyed, or even visited by the white people ; 
of course we have no description of them which 
can be relied on as accurate. Others have been 
partially surveyed, and their relative situation 
determined. The best account of them which 
we have been able to procure, will be seen under 
their respective articles. The largest rivers that 
border upon or pass through the United States, 
are Mississippi, Ohio, and Tennesse, on the w. 
side of the Alleghany Mountains ; and the Ala- 
tamaha, Savannah, Santee, Cape Fear, Roanoke, 
James, Patowmac, Susquehannah, Delaware, Hud- 
son, Connecticut, Merrimack, Piscataqua, An- 
droscoggin, Kennebeck, and Penobscot, whose 
general courses are from n. w. and n. to s. e. and 
s. and which empty into the Atlantic Ocean. The 
names of the most remarkable lakes are, Supe- 
rior, Michigan, Huron, Erie, Ontario, Cham- 
plaine, George, Memphremagog, Winipiscogee, 
and Umbagog. The most remarkable swamps 
are Ouaquaphenogaw, or Eknanfanoka, nearly 
300 miles in circumference, in the State of Georgia ; 


the two Dismals in North Carolina, of immense 
extent, each containing a large lake in its centre ; 
and Buffaloe Swamp, in the n. w. parts of Penn- 
sylvania. For a description of which we must 
also refer to their respective articles. 

Face of the country . — The tract of country 
belonging to the United States is happily va- 
riegated with plains and mountains, hills and 
vallies. Some parts are rocky, particularly New 
England, the n. part of New York and New 
Jersey, and a broad space, including the several 
ridges of the long range of mountains which run 
s. w. through Pennsylvania, Virginia, North 
Carolina, and part of Georgia, dividing the 
waters which flow into the Atlantic from those 
which fall into the Mississppi. In the parts e. 
of the Allegany mountains, in the Southern 
States, the country for several 100 miles in length, 
and 60 or 70, and sometimes more, in breadth, is 
level and entirely free from stone. It has been 
a question agitated by the curious, whether the 
extensive tract of low flat country, which fronts 
the several states s. of New York, and extends 
back to the hills, has remained in its present 
form and situation ever since the flood : or w he- 
ther it has been made by the particles of earth 
which have been washed down from the adjacent 
mountains, and by the accumulation of soil from 
the decay of vegetable substances ; or by earth 
washed out of the bay of Mexico by the Gulf 
Stream, and lodged on the coast ; or by the re- 
cess of the ocean, occasioned by a change in 
some other parts of the earth. Several pheno- 
mena deserve consideration in forming an opi- 
nion on this question. 

1. It is a fact, well known to every person of 
observation who has lived in, or travelled through, 
the Southern States, that marine shells and other 
substances which are peculiar to the sea shore, are 
almost invariably found by digging 18 or 20 feet 
below the suriace of the earth. In sinking a Avell 
many miles from the sea, was found, at the depth of 
20 feet, every appearance of a salt marsh, that 
is, marsh grass, marsh mud, and brackish water. 
In all this flat country, until you come to the 
hilly land, wherever you dig a w ell, you find 
the water, at a certain depth, fresh and tolerable 
good ; but if you exceed that depth tw'o or 
three feet, you come to a saltish or brackish 
water that is scarcely drinkable, and the earth 
dug up resembles, in appearance and smell, that 
w'hich is dug up on the edges of the salt 
marshes. 

2. On and near the margin of the rivers are 
frequently found sand hills, which appear to havej 


UNITED STATES. 


15 


[been drifted into ridges by the force of water. 
At the bottom of some of the banks in the rivers, 
15 or 20 feet below the surface of the earth, are 
washed out from the solid ground, logs, branches, 
and leaves of trees ; and the whole bank, from 
bottom to top, appears streaked with layers of 
logs, leaves, and sand. These appearances are 
seen far up the rivers, from 80 to an 100 miles 
from the sea, where, when the rivers are low, the 
banks are from 15 to 20 feet high. As you pro- 
ceed down the rivers towards the sea, the banks 
decrease in height, but still are formed of layers 
of sand, leaves, and logs, some of which are en- 
tirely sound, and appear to have been suddenly 
covered to a considerable depth. 

3. It has been observed, that the rivers in 
the Southern States frequently vary their chan- 
nels ; that the swamps and low grounds are con- 
stantly filling up, and that the land, in many 
places, annually infringes upon the ocean. It isan 
authenticated fact, that no longer ago than 1771, 
at Cape Lookout, on the coast of North Carolina, 
in about lat. 34° 50 / , there was an excellent har- 
bour, capacious enough to receive 100 sail of 
shipping at a time, in a good depth of water : it 
is now entirely filled up, and is solid ground. 
Instances of this kind are frequent along the 
coast. 

It is observable, likewise, that there is a gra- 
dual descent of about 800 feet, by measurement, 
from the foot of the mountains to the sea board. 
This descent continues, as is demonstrated by 
soundings, far into the sea. 

4. It is worthy of observation, that the soil 
on the banks of the rivers is proportionably 
coarse or fine according to its distance from the 
mountains. When you first leave the mountains, 
and for a considerable distance, it is observable, 
that the soil is coarse, with a large mixture of 
sand and shining heavy particles. As you pro- 
ceed toward the sea, the soil is less coarse, and 
so on ; in proportion as you advance, the soil is 
finer and finer, until finally is deposited a soil so 
fine, that it consolidates into perfect clay ; but a 
clay of a peculiar quality, for a great part of it 
has intermixed with it reddish streaks and veins, 
like a species of ochre, brought probably from 
the Red Lands which lie up towards the moun- 
tains. This clay, when dug up and exposed to 
the weather, will dissolve into a fine mould, 
without the least mixture of sand or any gritty 
substance whatever. Now we know that run- 
ning waters, when turbid, will deposit, first, the 
coarsest and heaviest particles, mediately, those 
of the several intermediate degrees of fineness, 


and ultimately, those which are the most light 
and subtle ; and such in fact is the general qua- 
lity of the soil on the banks of the southern 
rivers. 

5. It is a well known fact, that on the banks 
of Savannah river, about 90 miles from the sea 
in a direct line, and 150 or 200, as the river 
runs, there is a very remarkable collection of 
oyster shells of an uncommon size. They run in 
a n. e. and s. w. direction, nearly parallel to the 
sea coast, in three distinct ridges, which together 
occupy a space of seven miles in breadth. The 
ridges commence at Savannah river, and have 
been traced as far s. as the n. branches of the 
Alatamaha river. They are found in such quan- 
tities, as that the indigo planters carry them 
away in large boat loads, for the purpose of 
making lime water, to be used in the manufac- 
ture of indigo. There are thousands and thou- 
sands of tons still remaining. The question is, 
how came they here ? It cannot be supposed that 
they were carried by land. Neither is it pro- 
bable that they were conveyed in canoes, or 
boats, to such a distance from the place where 
oysters are now found. The uncivilized natives, 
agreeably to their roving manner of living, 
would rather have removed to the sea shore, 
than have been at such immense labour in pro- 
curing oysters. Besides, the difficulties of con- 
veying them would have been insurmountable. 
They would not only have had a strong current 
in the river against them, an obstacle which 
would not have been easily overcome by the In- 
dians, who have ever had a great aversion to 
labour; but could they have surmounted this 
difficulty, oysters conveyed such a distance, either 
by land or water, in so warm a climate, would 
have spoiled on the passage, and have become 
useless. The circumstance of these shells being- 
found in such quantities, at so great a distance 
from the sea, can be rationally accounted for in 
no other way, than by supposing that the sea 
shore was formerly near this bed of shells, and 
that the ocean has since, by the operation of cer- 
tain causes not yet fully investigated, receded. 
These phenomena, it is presumed, will authorize 
this conclusion, that a great part of the fiat coun- 
try which spreads e. of the Allegany mountains, 
had, in some past period, a superincumbent sea; 
or rather, that the constant accretion of soil from 
the various causes before hinted at, has forced it 
to retire. 

Mountains . — The tract of the country e. of 
Hudson’s river, comprehending part of the State 
of New York, the four New England States,] 


16 UNITED 

[and Vermont, is rough, hilly, and in some parts 
mountainous. These mountains are more parti- 
cularly described under New England. In all 
parts of the world, and particularly on this w. con- 
tinent, it is observable, that as you depart from 
the ocean, or from a river, the land gradually 
rises ; and the height of land, in common, is 
about equally distant from the water on either 
side. The Andes, in South America, form the 
height of land between the Atlantic and Pacific 
oceans. The high lands between the district of 
Maine and the province of Lower Canada, di- 
vide the rivers which fall into the St. Lawrence, 
n. and into the Atlantic, s. The Green Moun- 
tains, in Vermont, divide the waters which flow 
e. into Connecticut river from those which fall 
w. into Lake Champlain, Lake George, and 

Hudson’s river. . . 

Between the Atlantic, the Mississippi, and the 
lakes, runs a long range of mountains, made up 
of a oreat number of ridges. These mountains 
extend n. e. and s. w. nearly parallel to the sea 
coast, about 900 miles in length, and from 60 to 
150 and 200 miles in breadth. Mr. Evans ob- 
serves, with respect to that part of these mountains 
which he travelled over, viz. in the back part of 
Pennsylvania, that scarcely one acre in ten is 
capable of culture. This, however, is not the 
case in all parts of this range. Numerous tracts 
of fine arable and grazing land intervene be- 
tween the ridges. The different ridges which 
compose this immense range of mountains, have 
different names in different States. 

As you advance from the Atlantic^ the first 
ridge in Pennsylvania, Virginia, and North Ca- 
rolina, is the Blue Ridge, or South Mountain, 
which is from ISO to 200 miles from the sea. 
Between this and the North Mountain spreads 
a large fertile vale; next lies the Allegany 
ridge; next beyond this is the Long Ridge, 
called the Laurel Mountains, in a spur of which, 
about lat. 36°, is a spring of water 50 feet 
deep, very cold, and, it is said, as blue as in- 
digo. From these several ridges proceed in- 
numerable nameless brandies or spurs. The 
Kittatinny mountain runs through the n. parts 
of New Jersey and Pennsylvania. All these 
ridges, except the Allegany, are separated by 
rivers, which appear to have forced their pas- 
sages through solid rocks. 

The principal ridge is the Allegany, which has 
been descriptively called the Back-bone of the 
United States. The general name for these 
mountains, taken collectively, seems not yet to 
have been determined. Mr. Evans calls them the 


STATES. 

Endless Mountains : others have called them the 
Appalachian Mountains, from a tribe of Indians 
who live on a river which proceeds from this 
mountain, called the Appalachicola. But the 
most common name is the Allegany Mountains, 
so called, either from the principal ridge of the 
range, or from their running nearly parallel to 
the Allegany or Ohio river; which, from its 
head waters, till it empties into the Mississippi, 
is known and called by the name of Allegany 
river, by the Seneca and other tribes of the six 
nations, who once inhabited it. These moun- 
tains are not confusedly scattered and broken, 
rising here and there into high peaks, overtop- 
ping each other, but stretch along in uniform 
ridges, scarcely half a mile high. They spread 
as you proceed s. and some of them terminate 
in high perpendicular bluffs. Others gradually 
subside into a level country, giving rise to the 
rivers which run s. into the Gulf of Mexico. 

They afford many curious phenomena, from 
which naturalists have deduced many theories 
of the earth. Some of them have been whimsi- 
cal enough. Mr. Evans supposes that the most 
obvious of theories which have been formed of 
the earth is, that it was originally made of the 
ruins of another. “ Bones and shells which 
escaped the fate of softer animal substances, we 
find mixed with the old materials, and elegantly 
preserved in the loose stones and rocky bases of 
the highest of these hills.” With deference, 
however, to Mr. Evans’s opinion, these appear- 
ances have been much more rationally accounted 
for by supposing the reality of the flood, of 
which Moses has given us an account. Mr. 
Evans thinks this too great a miracle to obtain 
belief. But whether is it a greater miracle for 
the Creator to alter a globe of earth by a de- 
luge, when made, or to create one new from the 
ruins of another? The former certainly isnotless 
credible than the latter. These mountains,” says 
our author, “ existed in their present elevated 
height before the deluge, but not so bare of soil 
as now.” How Mr. Evans came to be so cir- 
cumstantially acquainted with these pretended 
facts, is difficult to determine, unless we sup- 
pose him to have been an Antediluvian, and to 
have surveyed them accurately before the con- 
vulsions of the deluge ; and until we can be 
fully assured of this, we must be excused if not 
assenting to his opinion, and in adhering to the 
old philosophy of Moses and his advocates. We 
have every reason to believe that the primitive 
state of the earth was totally metamorphosed by 
the first convulsion of nature at the time of the J 


UNITED STATES. 


17 


[deluge ; that the fountains of the great deep 
were indeed broken up, and that the various 
strata of the earth were dissevered, and thrown 
into every possible degree of confusion and dis- 
order. lienee those vast piles of mountains 
which lift their craggy cliffs to the clouds, were 
probablv thrown together from the floating ruins 
of the earth : and this conjecture is remarkably 
confirmed by the vast number of fossils and 
other marine exuviae which are found imbeded 
on the tops of mountains, in the interior parts 
of continents remote from the sea, in all parts 
of the world hitherto explored. The various 
circumstances attending these marine bodies leave 
us to conclude, that they were actually gene- 
rated, lived, and died in the very beds wherein 
they were found, and therefore these beds must 
have originally been at the bottom of the ocean, 
though now in many instances elevated several 
miles above its surface. Hence it appears that 
mountains and continents were not primary pro- 
ductions of nature, but of a very distant period of 
time from the creation of the world ; a time 
long enough for the strata to have acquired 
their greatest degree of cohesion and hardness ; 
and for the testaceous matter of marine shells 
to become changed to a stony substance ; for in 
the fissures of the limestone and other strata, 
fragments of the same shell have been frequently 
found adhering to each side of the cleft, in the very 
state in which they were originally broken ; so 
that if the several parts were brought together, 
they would apparently tally with each other 
exactly. A very considerable time therefore 
must have elapsed between the chaotic state of 
the earth and the deluge, which agrees with the 
account of Moses, who makes it a little upwards 
of 1,600 years. These observations are in- 
tended to shew, in one instance out of many 
others, the agreement between revelation and rea- 
son, between the account which Moses gives us 
of the creation and deluge, and the present ap- 
pearances of nature. Those who wish to have 
this agreement more fully and satisfactorily 
stated, are referred to a very learned and inge- 
nious “ Inquiry into the original state and for- 
mation of the earth,” by John Whitehurst, 
F.R.S. to whom we are indebted for some of 
the foregoing observations. 

Soil and Vegetable Productions. 

In the United States are to be found every 
species of soil that the earth affords. In one 
part of them or another, they produce all the 
various kinds of fruits, grain, pulse, and hortu- 


line plants and roots, which are found in Europe, 
and have been thence transplanted to America. 
Besides these, a great variety of native vege- 
able productions. 

The natural history of the A merican States, 
particularly of New England, is yet in its in- 
fancy. Several ingenious foreigners, skilled in 
botany, have visited the Southern and some of 
the Middle States, and Canada, and these States 
have also had ingenious botanists of their own, 
who have made considerable progress in describing 
the productions of those parts of America which 
they have visited; but New England seems not 
to have engaged the attention either of foreign 
or American botanists. There was never an 
attempt to describe botanically, the vegetable 
productions of the Eastern States, till the Rev. 
Dr. Cutler, of Ipswich, turned his attention to 
the subject. The result of his first inquiries 
was published in the first volume of the “ Me- 
moirs of the American Academy of Arts and 
Sciences.” To his liberal and generous commu- 
nications, we are principally indebted for our 
'account of the vegetable productions of the 
Eastern and Middle States. 

N. B. The following catalogues are all incom- 
plete, and designed only to give general ideas. 
They contain, however, more correct information 
concerning the Natural History of New England, 
than has yet been published. A specific descrip- 
tion of the principal grains, fruits, trees, insects, 
birds, animals, &amp;c. will be found under their 
proper heads in the Appendix to this work. 


NATURAL HISTORY. 

Grain cultivated in the Eastern and Middle 
States. 

Indian corn ( Zeamays ) a native grain of North 
America. The varieties of this grain, occasioned 
by a difference in soil, cultivation, and climate, 
are almost endless. Winter and summer rye 
(secale cere ale, hybernum et verum ,) the only 
species cultivated by the farmers. The winter 
rye succeeds best in ground newly cleared, but 
summer rye is frequently sown in old towns, 
where the land has been long under cultivation. 
The winter and summer rye are the same spe- 
cies, forming two varieties ; but the winter and 
summer wheat are two distinct species. Several 
species of barley are cultivated, the most com- 
mon is the six ranked ( Hordeum hexastichon ,) 
and the two ranked ( Hordeum distichon.) The 
wheat principally cultivated are the winter and] 

D 


18 


UNITED STATES. 


[summer (Trietium hybernum et cesfivum.) — Oats 
( Arena sativa.) — Buck-wheat ( Polygonum fa- 
gopirum.) 

In the Southern States, as far n. as Virginia, 
where the lands are suitable, besides the grain 
already mentioned, they cultivate rice. This 
grain was brought into Carolina first by Sir Na- 
thaniel Johnson, in 1688; and afterwards more 
and of a different kind, probably a variety, was 
imported by a ship from Madagascar, in 1696 ; 
till which time it was not much cultivated. It 
succeeds well also on the Ohio river, where it is 
planted both on the high and low grounds, and in 
the same fields with Indian corn and other grain. 
A gentleman who had planted it several years 
in his garden, informed Dr. Cutler that it yielded 
at the rate of 80 bushels an acre. At Marietta, 
it has answered the most sanguine expectations 
of the inhabitants, producing equal to any other 
grain, without being at any time overflowed with 
water. The Doctor himself saw it growing in a 
very flourishing state, on high land, but it had 
not, at the season he saw it, began to bloom. It 
was said not to be of the same species of Caro- 
lina rice. It is probably the wild rice, which 
we are informed grows in plenty, in some of the 
interior parts of N. America, and is the most 
valuable of all the spontaneous productions of 
the country. In Pennsylvania grows a sort 
of grain called, by the Ciermans, Spelts, which 
resembles wheat ; and is a very valuable grain. 

Cultivated Grasses in the Eastern and Middle 
States. 

All the grasses, cultivated in the Middle and 
New England States, are found growing indi- 
genous. It is not improbable, however, that 
some of them may be naturalized exotics. The 
following are the principal grasses sown in our 
cultivated ground, or in any way propagated 
for seed and hay. 

Herd’s Grass or Fox Tail, ( Alopecurus pra- 
tensis ,) this is reckoned the best grass we have, 
is a native, and supposed to be peculiar to this 
country. Blue Grass ( Alopecurus genieulatus.) 
— Many species of Bent ( Agrostis ,) particularly 
the Rhode Island Bent ( Agrostus intcrrupta .) — 
The small and great English Grass ( Poa tri- 
vialis et pratensis.) — Wire Grass ( Poacompressa. ) 

■ — Fowl Meadow Grass ( Poa aviaria , spiculis sub- 
bifloris.)— Red and white clover (Trifolium pra- 
tense et repens.) 

The grasses of Virginia, according to Mr. Jef- 
ferson, are Lucerne, St. Foin, Burnet, Timothy, 


Ray, and Orchard grass, red, white, aud yellow 
clover; Greenswerd, Blue grass and Crab grass. 
South of Virginia very little attention is paid to 
the cultivation of grasses. The winters are so 
mild, that the cattle find a tolerable supply of 
food in the woods. 

Native Grasses in New England. 

Besides the cultivated grasses, the States of 
New England abound with a great variety which 
are found growing in their native soils and 
situations, many of which have not been de- 
scribed by any botanical writers. The small ex- 
periments which have been made, sufficiently 
evince that several of them make excellent hay. 
They might be greatly improved by cultivation, 
and are highly worthy the attention of our 
farmers. Those which are found most common 
are the following ; viz. 

The vernal grass ( Anthoxantbum odoratum.) — 
Timothy, or bulbus Cat’s-tail grass ( Phleum 
pratense.) — Several species of Panic grass (Pa- 
(nicum — Several species of Bent ( Agrostis ) — 
Hair grass (Aira aquatica) — Numerous species 
of Poa. — Quaking Grass, ( Briza ) several spe- 
cies — Cock’s-foot Grass ( Dactylis glomerata ) — 
Millet (Milium effusum) — Fescue Grass (Fes- 
tuco) many species — Oat Grass (Avena spicata ) 
— Reed Grass ( Arundo ) several species. — Brome 
Grass (Bromus squarrosus ) — Lime Grass (Ely- 
mus hystrix ) — Barley Grass f Hordeum pratense ) 
— Dog’s or couch Grass (Triticum repens.) — 
Many species of Rush Grass (Juncus.) — Nu- 
merous species of Car ex, in fresh and salt 
marshy ground. Several species of Beard Grass 
( Andropogon ) — Soft Grass ( Holcus lanatus et 
odoratus.) Besides these, there are many va- 
luable grasses, which, at present, are non-de- 
scripts. 

Wild Fruits in New England. 

Black Currant ( Ribes nigrum) — Gooseberry 
( Ribes glossularia) — Prickly Gooseberry ( Ribes 
cynosbati ) — Two species of Grapes — the Black 
Grape ( Vitis labrusca,) and Fox Grape { Vitis 
vulpina.) Of these two species we have many 
varieties, differing only in size, colour, and 
taste. An excellent wine, and in large quan- 
tities, has lately been made by the French peo- 
ple, at their new settlement on the Ohio river, 
from the native grapes, without any kind of cul- 
tivation. They collected the grapes promis- 
cuously from all the varieties growing in that 
country. By separating them, wines of different, 
and no doubt some of them, of a much better] 


UNITED STATES. 


19 


[quality, might have been made. The native 
grape is propagated with great ease ; its growth 
is luxuriant, overspreading the highest trees in 
the forests, and by proper attention would afford 
an ample supply of wines, in the northern as well 
as southern States. The principal difficulty 
seems to be the want of a proper knowledge of 
the process in making wine, and preparing it for 
use. Barberry Bush ( Berberis vulgaris ) — Whor- 
tleberry (Vaccinium ligustrinum) — Blueberry 
(Vaccinium corymbosum) — White Whortleberry 
(Vaccinium album) — Indian Gooseberry (Vacci- 
nium frondosum ) — Long-leaved Whortleberry 
( Vaccinium stamineum) — Craneberry ( Vaccinium 
oxycouos) — Yellow Plum ( Prunus americana ) — 
Beach Plum ( Prunus maratima) — Large Black 
Cherry ( Prunus nigra) — Purple Cherry (Prunus 
virginiana) — Wild Red Cherry ( Prunus rubra) 
— Dwarf or Choak Cherry ( Prunus canadensis ) — 
Mountain Cherry (Prunus montana) — Service- 
Tree ( Mespilus canadensis) — Brambleberry ( Ru- 
bus occidentalis) — Sawteat Blackberry, or Bum- 
blekites ( Rubus fruticosus ) — Briar Blackberry 
( Rubus moluccanus ) — Dewberry ( Rubus hispi- j 
dus) — Common Raspberry (Rubus idceus) — 
Smooth-stalked Raspberry (Rubus canadensis) — 
Superb Raspberry (Rubus odoratus) — Straw- 
berry ( Fragaria vesca.) The native strawberry 
is much improved by cultivation, and produces 
a larger and better-flavoured fruit than the 
exotic. — Mulberry ( Morus nigra.) 

For information on this article, respecting the 
Southern States, the reader may consult what 
Catesby, Clayton, Jefferson, and Bartram have 
written upon it. 

Nut Fruit. 

White Oak (Quercus alba) — Red Oak ( Quer- 
cus rubra) and several other species with smaller 
fruit. — Black Walnut (Juglans nigra) — White 
Walnut, Butternut, or Oilnut ( Juglans cathar- 
tica) — White or Round Nut Hiccory (Juglans 
alba) — Shag- bark Hiccory (Juglans cineria) — 
Chesnut (Fagus castanea) — Chinquipin, or Dwarf 
Chesnut (Fagus pumila) — Beech Nut (Fagus 
sylvatica) — Hazle Nut (Corylus avallana) — Gil- 
bert ( Corylus cornuta.) 

We may here mention the Paccan, or Illinois 
Nut (Juglans alba , foliolis lanceolatis, acuminatis, 
serratis , tomentosis , fructu minore , ovato , compressor 
vix insculpto , dulci , putamine, tenerrimo. Jeffer- 
son.) This nut is about the size of a large, long 
acorn, and of an oval form, the shell is easily 
cracked, and the kernel shaped like that of a wal- 
nut. The trees which bear this fruit grow, na- 


turally, on the Mississippi and its branches, lat. 
s. 40° n. They grow well when planted in the 
Southern Atlantic States. 

Medicinal Plants in New England. 

Among the native and uncultivated plants of 
New England, the following have been employed 
for medicinal purposes. Water Horehound 
( Lycopus virginiea ) — Blue Flag ( Iris virginica ) 
— Skunk Cabbage (Arum Americanum. Catesb. 
and Dracontium fcetidum. Linn.) — Partridge- 
berry ( Mitchella repens ) — Great and Marsh 
Plaintain ( Plantago major et maratima) — Witch 
Hazel ( Hamamelis virginica)— Hound’s Tongue 
( Cynoglossum officinale ) — Comfrey ( Symphytum 
officin.) — Bear’s-ear Sanicle (Cortusa gmelini) 
— Appleperu ( Datura strammonium ) — Bitter- 
sweet ( Solanum dulca-mare) — Tivertwig, or Ame- 
rican Mazerion (Celastrus scandens ) — Elm (Ul- 
mus americana ) — Great Laserwort and Wild An- 
gelica ( Laserpitium tribolum , et latifolium ) — An- 
gelica, or American Masterwort ( Angelica lucida ) 
— Water Elder ( Viburnum opulus ) — Elder ( Sam- 
bucus nigra ) — Chickweed ( Alsina media ) — Petti- 
morrel, or Life of Man ( Arabia racemosa ) — Sar- 
saparilla ( Aralia nudicaulis ? ) — Marsh Rosemary 
(Statice limonium ) — Sundew ( Drosera rotundifo- 
lia) — Solomon’s Seal (Convallaria stellata ?) — 
Adder’s Tongue (Convallaria bifolia ) — Unicorn 
( Aletris farinosa ) — Sweet Flag ( Acorus calamus ) 
— Several species of Dock (Rumex ) — Bistort 
(Polygonum bistorta ) — Spice Wood, or Fever- 
bush (Laurus benzoin ) — Sassafras ( Laurus sassa- 
fras ) — Consumption Root ( Pyrola rotundifolia ) 
— Rheumatism Weed (Pyrola minor ) — Mouse 
Ear ( Cerastium viscosum ) — Gargit, or Skoke 
(Phytolacca decandria ) — Wild Hyssop ( Ly thrum 
hysopis ) — 'Agrimony (Agrimonia cupatoria) — 
Common Avens, or Herb Bennet ( Geum Virg.) 
— Water Avens, or Throat Root ( Geum rivale ) — 
Blood Root, or Puccoon ( Sanguinario canadensis ) 
— Celandine ( Chelidonium majus ) — Yellow Water 
Lily ( Nymphoea lutea ) — Pond Lily ( Nymphcea 
alba ) — Golden Thread, or Mouth Root (Nigel- 
la? ) — Liverwort ( Anemone hepatica ) — Crowsfoot 
( Ranunculus Pennsylv . ) — Germander ( Teucrum 
Virg .) — Catmint, or Catnip ( Nepeta cataria ) — 
Head Betony ( Betonica officinalis ) — Horsemint, 
Spearmint, Watermint, and Penniroyal ( Mentha 
spicata , viridis , aquatica , et pulegium) — Ground 
Ivy, or Gill go over the ground (Glecoma hede- 
racea ) — Hedge Nettle ( Stachys sylvatica ) — Hore- 
hound (Marrubium vulgare ) — Motherwort (Leo- 
norus cardiaca ) — Wild Marjorum ( Origanum vul- 
gare ) — Wild Lavendar (Trichostemaf ) — Wood] 
o 2 


20 


UNITED 


S T A T E S. 


[ Betony ( Pidicularis canadensis) — Shepherd’s 
Purse, or Pouch (Thlapspi bursa pastoris ) — Water 
Cresses ( Sisymbrium nasturtium ) — Cranesbill 
(Geranium macrorhizum ) — Marsh Mallow ( Al- 
thaea officin .) — Mallow (Mahon rotundifolia ) — 
Succory (Crepis barbata) — Burdock (Actium 
lappa )— Devil's Bit ( Serratula amara ) — The root 
resembles the European Devil’s Bit ( Scabivsa 
succisa) from which circumstance the English 
name has probably been applied to this plant. — 
Tansey ( Tanacetum vulgar c ) — Wormwood (Ar- 
temisia absinthiani ) — Life Everlasting ( Gnaplia- 
lium odoratissimum ? ) — Coltsfoot (Tussilago far- 
fara ) — Golden Rod ( Soli da go canad.) — Elecam- 
pane ( Inula helenium ) — Mayweed ( Anthemis 
cotula ) — Yarrow (Achillea millefolia ) — American 
Pride ( Lobelia cardinalis) Three other species of 
Lobelia ( Lobelia dortmanna, kalmii , et sphilitica ) 
— Dragon Root (Arum Virg .) — Stinging Nettle 
(Urtica urens ) — White Walnut, Butter Nut, or 
Oil Nut (Juglans cathartica) — Swamp Willow 
(Satix cinerea ?) — Sweet Gale (Myrica gale ) — 
White Hellebore, or Pokeroot ( Veratrum album) 
— Moonwort (Osmunda lunaria ) — Female Fern 
( Pteris caudata ) — Hearts Tongue (Asplenium 
scolopendrium ) — Spleen wort (Asplenium sa/icifo- 
lium ) — Black Maidenhair ( Asplenium adiantum.) 
To the above we may add, Arsmart ( Polygonum 
Sagitatum. Linn.) 

Among a great variety of other medicinal plants 
in the southern and middle States are Pink Root, an 
excellent vermifuge — Senna (Cassia ligustrina) 
Clivers, or Goose-grass (Galium spurium) — 
Palma Christi ( Ricinus ) from which the castor 
oil is expressed— Several species of Mallow — 
Indian Physic (Spiraea trifoliata) — Euphorbial 
Ipecacuanha; — Pleurisy Root (Asclepias decum - 
bens ) — Virginia Snake Root ( Aristolochta serpen- 
taria ) — Black Snake Root (Actcea racemosa ) — 
Seneca Rattlesnake Root (Poly gala Senega ) — 
Valerian (Valeriana locusta radiata) — Ginseng 
(Panax quinquefolium ) — Angelica (Angelica syl- 
mstris ) — Cassava (Jatropha urens.) 

Flowering Trees and Shrubs in the United 
States. 

Globe Flower ( Cephalanthus occidentalis ) — 
Pigeonberry (Cissus sicyoides ) — Virginian Dog- 
wood ( Cornus florida ) — Conel ( Cornus canaden- 
sis ) — Red-(lowered Honeysuckle (Azalea nudi- 
flora ) — White American Honeysuckle (Azalea 
viscosa ) — American Tea (Ceanothus americanus) 
— Cherry Honeysuckle ( Lonicera diervilla) — 
Virginia Scarlet Honeysuckle (Lonicera virgi- 
niana ) — Dwarf Cherry Honeysuckle (Lonicera 


canadensis ) — Evergreen Spindle Tree ( Euony - 
mus sempervirens ) — Virginian Itea ( Itea virgin 
nica) — Stag’s-horn Sumach (Rhus typhinum ) — 
Black Haw ( Viburnum prunifolium) — Black- 
berried Elder (Sambucus nigra) — Red-berried 
Elder ( Sambucus canadensis) — Scarlet-flowered 
Horse Chesnut ( JEseulus pavia) — Judas Tree 
(Cercis canadensis ) — Great Laurel ( Kalmia lati- 
folia ) — Dwarf Laurel (Kalmia augustifolia ) — 
Thyme-leaved Marsh Cistus (Ledum thymifo- 
lium ) — American Senna ( Rhodora canadensis ) — 
Rose Bay Tree ( Rhododendrum maximum) — 
White Pepper Bush ( Andromeda arbor ea) — Red- 
bud Andromeda (Andromeda racemosa ) — Bog 
Evergreen (Andromeda calyculata) — Carolina 
Red-bud (Andromeda nitida ) — Carolina Iron- 
wood Tree (Andromeda plumata) — Carolinian 
Syrianga ( Philadelphus inodorus) — Sorbus Tree 
( Sorbus aucuparia ) — Mountain Ash (Sorbus ame- 
ricana) — Service Tree (Mespilus canadensis ) — 
Medlar Tree (Mespilus nivea) — Sweet-scented 
Crab-apple Tree ( Pyrus coronaria) — Meadow 
Sweet (Spiraea salicifoiia ) — Queen of the Mea- 
dows (Spiraea tomentosa ) — Canadian Spira?a 
(Spiraea hypericifolia ) — Wild Rose (Rosa Caro- 
lina ) — Pennsylvanian Swamp Rose (Rosa pa/us- 
tris ) — Superb Raspberry (Rubus odoratus) — 
Carolian Fothergilla ( Fothergilla gardeni) — Tu- 
lip Tree ( Liriodendrum tulipifera ) — Evergreen 
Tulip Tree (Magnolia grandiflora) — Climbing- 
Trumpet Flower ( Bignonia radicans ) — Virginian 
Stewartia (Stewartia malacodendron ) — Franklin 
Tree ( Franklinia alatamaha ) — Locust Tree ( Ro- 
ll inia pseud acacia) — Rose-flowered Locust Tree 
( Robinia rosea ) — Swamp Willow ( Salix cineria ? ) 
— Red-flowered Maple (Acer rubrum.) 

Forest Trees. 

Were we possessed of accurate materials for 
the purpose, it would far exceed the limits of a 
work embracing such a variety of subjects, to give 
a complete catalogue of the trees of this country. 
From the foregoing catalogues the reader must 
necessarily conclude that they are very numerous. 
And it ought to be observed, that almost all of 
them, for some purpose or other, have been used 
as timber. Some of the most useful species of 
trees, however, must not be omitted, and are the 
following: Elm (U/mus americana) of this tree 
there is but one species, of which there are two 
varieties, the white and the red. — W ild Cherry; 
many species, highly valued for cabinet work. — 
Locust ( Robinia pseudo-acacia) of quick growth, 
good for fuel, and excellent for posts to set in the 
ground, and trunnels for ships.— B ircii ; several^ 


UNITED STATES. 


21 


[species, 1. White ( Betula alba) 2. Black (Betula 
nigra) 3. Red or Yellow ( Betula lenta ) — Oak ; 
several species, 1. Black ( Quercm niger ) 2. Red 
(Quercus rubra ) three varieties. 3 .White ( Quer- 
cus alba ) 4. Shrub, or Ground Oak ( Quercus 
pumila) 5. Chesnut Oak (Quercus prinus ) 6. 
Li ve Oak (Quercus sempervirens — Quercus Vir- 
giniana, Millar.) 7. Black Jack Oak (Quercus 
aquatica, Clayton.) The two last are peculiar to 
the southern States. — Chesnut ( Fagus castanea) 
chiefly used for fencing. — Beach ( Fagus sylva- 
tica) three varieties. — Pine (Pinus) seven spe- 
cies, 1. White t Pinus strobus) the prince of the 
American forests, in size, age, and majesty of 
appearance. It is found in the greatest abun- 
dance in Maine, New Hampshire, and Vermont 
— excellent for masts, bowsprits, and yards for 
ships. — 2. Yellow (Pinus pineaj its plank and 
boards are used for the floors of houses and the 
decks of ships. — 3. Black, or Pitch Pine ( Pinus 
tceda ) when burnt in kilns it makes the best of 
charcoal ; its knots and roots being full of the 
terebinthine oil, when kindled, afford a brighter 
light than candles; its soot is collected and used for 
lampblack. It grows sparingly in New England 
and the middle States, but in the greatest plenty 
in the southern States, between the sea-coast and 
the mountains. From it they make tar in large 
quantities. — 4. The Larch (Pinus larix) Its tur- 
pentine is said to be the same with the Burgundy 
pitch. Besides these, naturalists reckon the Fir 
(Pinus balsamea) — Spruce ( Pinus canadensis) — 
Hemlock f Pinus obits) — Arbor Vit,e (Thuya 
occidentals ) the same as ivhat is called White 
Cedar. — Juniper, or Red Cedar ( Juniperus 
virginica) It produces the Juniper-berry. — 
White Cedar, of the southern States ( Cupressus 
thyoides) different from the white cedar of the 
northern States. — Cypress (Cupressus disticha) 
Found only in the southern States; used for 
shingles and other purposes ; grows in swamps 
very large. — White Willow (Salix alba) the 
bark of its root is an excellent substitute for the 
Peruvian bark. — Ash ( Fraxinus americana) two 
species, Black, or Swamp Ash, and W r hite Ash. — 
Maple, three species ; 1. White ( Acer negundo ) 
much used in cabinet work — 2. Red (Acer ru- 
brumj — 3. Black Rock, or Sugar Maple (Acer 
saccharinum) Its sap has a saccharine quality; 
and, when refined and hardened by boiling and 
baking, makes a well-tasted anil wholesome 
sugar, the manufacture of which has greatly in- 
creased in the eastern and middle States, within 
a few years past. 

j here is in the United States an infinitude of 


trees of less note, and many, probably, equally 
noticeable with those enumerated, for a catalogue 
and descriptions of which we must refer the rea- 
der to Catesby’s Natural History — Dr. Clayton’s 
Flora Virginica — Mr. Jefferson’s Notes on Vir- 
ginia — Mr. Bartram’s Travels through N. and 
S. Carolina, &amp;c. — Dr. Cutler’s Paper in the Me- 
moirs of the American Academy — and Dr. Belk- 
nap’s History of New Hampshire, Vol. III. 

Exotic Fruits. 

Of these, apples are the most common in the 
United States. They grow in the greatest plenty 
and variety in the eastern and middle States ; and 
the cyder, which is expressed from them, affords 
the most common and wholesome liquor that is 
drank by the inhabitants. The Crab Apple 
( Pyrus coronaria ) though not an exotic, on ac- 
count of its being a genuine but distinct species 
of the apple, oug-ht to be mentioned in this con- 
nection. It grows in all parts of N. America, 
which have been explored, from the Atlantic as 
far w. as the Mississippi. Its blossoms are re- 
markably fragrant ; its fruit small, possessing, 
perhaps, of all vegetables, the keenest acid. The 
cyder made of this fruit is admired by connois- 
seurs : it makes excellent vinegar. The Euro- 
pean Crab Apple is very different from ours. 
The other exotic fruits are pears, peaches, 
quinces, mulberries, plums, cherries, currants, 
barberries, of all which, except quinces and bar- 
berries, we have many species and varieties. 
These, with a few apricots and nectarines, flou- 
rish in the eastern States, and are in perfection 
in the middle States. 

The exotic fruits of the southern States, besides 
those already mentioned, are figs, oranges, and 
lemons. 

Pulse and Hortuline Plants and Roots. 

Besides those transplanted from Europe to 
America, of which we have all the various kinds 
that Europe produces, the following are natives 
of this country, Potatoes ( Solanum tuberosum) — • 
Ground Nuts, a sort of potatoe, probably a spe- 
cies, highly relished by some people — Tobacco 
( Nicotiana) — Pumpkins ( Cucurbita pepo ) — Cym- 
lings (Cucurbita verrucosa) — Squashes (Cucur- 
bita melopepo) — Cantelope melons, beans, peas, 
hops. Probably others. 

Animals. 

The territory of the United States contains 
about one-fourth of the quadrupeds of the known 
world. Some of them are common to N. Ame-1 


22 


UNITED 


S T AXES. 


[rica, and to the European and Asiatic parts of the 
Eastern Continent ; others are peculiar to the 
country of which we treat. All those that are 
common to both continents, are found in the n. 
parts of them. Comparing individuals of the 
same species, inhabiting the different continents, 
some are perfectly similar ; between others, there 
is some difference in size, colour, or other cir- 
cumstances ; in some few instances the European 
animal is larger than the American ; in others, 
the reverse is true. A similar variety, arising 
from the temperature of the climate, quantity of 
food furnished in the parts they inhabit, degree 
of safety, &amp;c. takes place between individuals of 
the same species, in different parts of this conti- 
nent. Animals in America which have been 
hunted for their flesh or fur, such as the moose, 
deer, beaver, &amp;c. have become less in size since 
the arrival of the Europeans. 

But our information on this subject is not suf- 
ficient to authorize many observations. It is 
very probable that some of the quadrupeds are 
utterly unknown ; others are known only by 
common report, from hunters and others, and 
therefore could not be scientifically described ; 
and, with respect to many others, the multiplying 
and misapplying names has produced great un- 
certainty and confusion. 

The Rev. Dr. Cutler has given us the following 
catalogue of animals, with their Linnaean names 


annexed : 

Seal - - - 



Phoca vitulina. 

Wolf - - 

- 

- 

Canis lupus. 

Red Fox - 

- 

- 

Canis alopex? 

Grey Fox - 

- 

- 

Canis. 

WildCat - 

- 

- 

Felis lynx. 

Skunk - - 

- 

- 

Viverra putorius. 

Otter - - 

- 

- 

Mustella lutra ? 

Martin - - 

- 

- 

Mustela. 

Weasel - - 

- 

- 

Mustela martes? 

Ermine - - 

- 

- 

Mustela erminea. 

Bear - - 

- 

- 

Ursus arctos. 

Racoon 

- 

- 

Ursus lotor. 

Wolverine 

- 

- 

Ursus luscus. 

Wood Chuck 

- 

- 

(Ursi vel mustelag species.) 

Mole - - 

- 

- 

Tolpa europea. 

Shrew Mouse 

- 

- 

Sorex cristatus. 

Ground ditto 

- 

- 

Sorex murinus. 

Field ditto - 

- 

- 

Sorex araneus. 

Porcupine - 

- 

- 

Hystrix dorsata. 

Hare - - 

- 

- 

Lepus timidus? 

Rabbit - - 

- 

- 

Lepus cuniculus. 

Beaver - - 

- 

- 

Castor fiber. 

Musquash - 

- 

- 

Castor zibethecus. 

Mink - - 

- 

- 



Black Rat - 
Black Squirrel 
Grey ditto - - - 
Red ditto - - - 
Striped ditto - - 
Flying ditto - - 
Moose - - - - 
Deer - - - - 


Mus 

Sciurus niger. 
Sciurus cinereus. 
Sciurus flavus. 
Sciurus striatus. 
Sciurus volans. 
Cervus tarandus. 
Cervus dama. 


Mamillary biped 

Bat ----- Vespertilio murinus. 


The following is a catalogue of the quadruped 
animals within the United States. A description 
of them will be found, under their proper heads, 
in the Appendix to this Dictionary. Those to 
which an asterism * is prefixed, are fur animals ; 
whose skins are sometimes dressed in allum, with 
the hair on, and worn in dress, or whose fur or 
soft hair is used for various manufactural pur- 
poses. 


Mammouth 

* 

Striped Squirrel 

Hippotamus 

* 

Bear 

* Bison 

* 

Wolverene 

* Moose 

* 

Wolf 

* Margay 

* 

Fox 

* Kincajou 

* 

Flying Squirrel 

* Weasel 


Bat 

* Ermine 

* 

Field Mouse 

* Martin 

* 

Wood Rat 

* Mink 

* 

Shrew Mouse 

* Otter 

* 

Purple Mole 

* Fisher 

* 

Black Mole 

* Skrunk 

* 

Water Rat 

* Caribou 

* 

Beaver 

* Red Deer 

* 

Catamount 

* Fallow Deer 


Cougar 

* Roe 

* 

Mountain Cat 

* Opossum 

* 

Lynx 

* Woodchuck 

* 

Musquash 

Urchin 

* 

Morse 

* Hare 

* 

Seal 

* Racoon 


Maniti 

* Fox Squirrel 


Sapajou 

* Grey Squirrel 


Sagoin 

* Red Squirrel 




Birds. 

Several catalogues of the birds in the Southern 
and Middle States have been published by diG 
ferent authors; and one of those in New Hamp- 
shire, by Dr. Belknap ; but no general catalogue 
of the birds in the American States has yet ap- 
peared. The following Catalogue, which claims 
to be the most full and complete of any yet pub-] 


UNITED STATES. 


23 


[lished, though far from perfection, has been care- 
fully selected from Bartram's Travels , Jefferson's 
Notes on Virginia, Belknap's History of New 
Hampshire , and a Manuscript furnished by Dr. 
Cutler. Bartram's Catalogue, as far as it ex- 
tends, appears to be the most accurate and com- 
plete, and his mode of arrangement the most na- 
tural and intelligible : We have therefore adopted 
it, and inserted his notes and references. 

The birds to whose names in this Catalogue, 
these marks (* + J || f) are prefixed, are land 
birds, which, according to Bartram, are seen in 
Pennsylvania, Maryland, Virginia, N. and S. 
Carolina, Georgia and Florida, from the sea- 
coast w. to the Appalachian Mountains, viz. 

(*) These arrive in Pennsylvania in the spring, 
from the s., and after building their nests and 
rearing their young, return s. in autumn. 

(t) These arrive in Pennsylvania in autumn, 
from the n. where some of them continue during 

Popular Names. 

The Owl. 

f Great White Owl 

5 Great Horned Owl - - - - - - - 

+ Great Horned White Owl 

§ Horned Owl - 

fl Whooting Owl - - -- -- -- - 

+ Sharp Winged or Speckled Owl - - - -"I 

f Little Screech Owl - 

$ Barn Owl ----------- 

The Vulture. 

|| Turkey Buzzard - 

jj White Tailed Vulture - 

|| Black V ulture, or Carrion Crow - - - - 

Eagle and Hawk. 

I Great Grey Eagle ------- 

5 Bald Eagle ---------- 

* Fishing Eagle - - -- -- -- - 

? Great Eagle Hawk 

f Hen Hawk - - 

f Chicken Hawk - - -- -- -- - 

* Pigeon Hawk - -- -- -- -- - 

f Black Hawk _ 

* Marsh Hawk 

* Sparrow Hawk, or least Hawk - - - - 

§ Brown Eagle ---------- 

§ Large Brown Hawk 

§ Pigeon Hawk - - - -- -- -- 

% Fish Hawk 

S Bird Hawk - - -- 


the winter, others continue their journey as far 
s. as Florida. They return n. in the spring, pro- 
bably to breed and rear their young. 

(j:) These arrive in the spring, in Carolina and 
Florida, from the 5. ; breed and rear their young, 
and return again to the s. at the approach of 
winter. These never migrate so far n. as Penn- 
sylvania. 

(||) These are natives of Carolina, Georgia, 
and Florida ; where they breed and continue the 
year round. 

(f) These breed and continue the year round 
in Pennsylvania. 

IS) These are found in New England. 

** Kite hawks are characterised by having 
long sharp-pointed wings ; being of swift flight : 
sailing without flapping their wings ; having long 
light bodies, and feeding out of their claws on 
the wing. 


Bartram's Designation. 
Strix. 

Strix arcticus, corpore toto niveo. 

Strix pythaules, corpore ruso. 

Strix maximus, corpore niveo. 

Strix bubo ? Peck. 

Strix acclamator, corpore griseo. 

Strix perigrinator, corpore versicolore. 
Strix aluco. Cutler. Belknap. 

Strix asio, corpore ferruginio. 

Strix passeri. Cutler. Belknap. 

V ultur. 

V ultur aura. 

V ultur sacra. 

V ultur atratus. 

Falco. 

Falco regal is. 

Falco leucocephalus. 

Falco piscatorius. 

Falco Aquilinus, cauda ferruginio. 

Falco gallinarius. 

Falco pularius. 

Falco columbarius. 

Falco niger. 

Falco ranivorus. 

Falco sparvenius. 

Falco fulvus. Belknap. 

Falco hudsonius ? Belknap. 

Falco subbuteo. Peck. 

Falco haliaetus. Peck. 

Lanius Canadensis. Belknap. Cutler.] 


24 


UNITED STATES. 


[II 

II 


* 


f 


* 


* 

-* 

* 

5 

f 

f 

? 

§ 

§ 

II 

f 

+ 

* 

* 

* 

* 

■&amp; 

* 

* 

* 

* 

* 

* 

* 

* 

II 

t 

* 

t 


Popular Names. 

Kite Hawk.** 

Forked Tail Hawk, or Kite 

Sharped Winged Hawk, of a pale, sky-blue ? 

colour, the tip of the wings black - - - j 

Sharp Winged Hawk, of a dark or dusky J 
blue colour - - - -- -- -- j 

Parrot of Carolina, or Parrakeet - - - 


Bartram’s Designation. 
Milvus. 

Falco furcatus. 

Falco glaucus. 

Falco subceruleus. 

Psitticus Caroliniensis. 


The Crow kind. 

The Raven - 

Great Sea-side Crow, or Rook 
Common Crow ------ 

Royston Crow - - - - - - 

Blue Jay - -- -- -- - 

Little Jay of Florida - - - - 

Purple Jackdaw, or Crow Blackbird 
Lesser Purple Jackdaw - - - 

Cuckow of Carolina - - - - 

Whet Saw - ------- 


Corvus. 

Corvus carnivorus. 

Corvus maritimus. 

Corvus frugivorus. 

Corvus cornix. Cutler. 

Corvus cristatus, pica glandaria. 

Corvus Floridanus, pica glandaria minor. 
Gracula quiscula. 

'Gracula purpurea. 

Cuculus Caroliniensis. 

Cuculus — Carver. 


Woodpeckers. 

Greatest Crested Woodpecker, having ai 

white back - - - I 

Great Red Crested, Black Woodpecker 
Read Headed Woodpecker - - 

Gold Winged Woodpecker 

Red Bellied Woodpecker - 

Least Spotted Woodpecker - - 

Hairy, Speckled and Crested Woodpecker 

Yellow Bellied Woodpecker 

Swallow Woodpecker ------- 

Speckled Woodpecker 

N uthatch - -- -- -- -- -- 

Small Nuthatch --------- 

Little Brown variegated Creeper - - - 

Pine Creeper - -- -- -- -- - 

Blue and White, pied Creeper - - - - 

Great Crested King Fisher - - - 

H u turning Bird - - -- -- -- - 

Little Grey Butcher Bird of Pennsylvania - 
Little Black Capped Butcher ----- 

King Bird - -- -- -- -- -- 

Pewit, or Black Cap Fly Catcher - - - 

Great Crested Yellow Bellied Fly Catcher 
Lesser Pewit, or Brown and Greenish Fly ■ 
Catcher - -- -- -- - - - - j 

Little Olive-coloured Fly Catcher - - - 

Little Domestic Fly Catcher, or Green Wren 
Red-eyed Fly Catcher ------- 

Turtle Dove of Carolina - - - - - - 

Ground Dove - - ------- 

Wild Pigeon - -- -- -- -- - 

Great Meadow Lark - - 

Sky Lark - ---------- 


Picus. 

Picus principalis. 

Picus pileatus. 

Picus erythrocephalus. 

Picus auratus. 

Picus Carolinus. 

Picus pubescens. 

Picus villosus. 

Picus varius. 

Picus hirundinaceus. Cutler. 
Picus maculosus. Cutler. 

Sitta capite nigro. Catesby. 

Sitta capite fusco. Catesby. 
Certhia rufa. 

Certhia pinus. 

Certhia picta. 

Alcedo alcyon. 

Trochylus colubris. 

Lanius griseus. 

Lanius garrulus. 

Lanius tyrannus. 

Muscicapa nunciola. 

Muscicapa cristata. 

Muscicapa rapax. 

Muscicapa subviridis. 

Muscicapa cantacrix. 

Muscicapa sylvicola. 

Columba Caroliniensis. 

Columba passerina. 

Columba migratoria. 

Alauda rnagna. 

Alauda campestris, gutture flavo.] 


* -+ 


UNITED 


STATES. 


25 


Popular Names. 

[ + Little Brown Lark -------- 

Red-winged Starling — Marsh Black Bird, or | 
Red-winged Black Bird ------ j 

f Robin Red Breast. Field Fare - - - - 

* Fox-coloured Thrush - - 

* Mocking Bird ---------- 

* Wood Thrush - - -- -- - - - 

* Least Golden Crown Thrush - - - - - 

§ Cross Bill - -- -- -- -- -- 

§ Cherry Bird - - 

* Baltimore Bird, or Hang Nest - - - - 

* Goldfinch, or Icterus Minor - - - - - 

* Sand Hill Red Bird of Carolina - - - - 

* Summer Red Bird - ------- 

* Yellow-breasted Chat - - - - - - - 

* Cat Bird, or Chicken Bird ------ -^ 

f Crown Bird, or Cedar Bird - - - 


Bartram s Designation. 

Alauda migratoria, corpore toto ferruginio. 

Sturnus niger alis superne rubentibus. Catesby. 

T Urdus migratorius. 

Turdus rufus. 

Turdus polyglottos. 

Turdus melodes. 

Turdus minimus, vertice aurio. 

Loxia curvi rostra ? Belknap. 

Ampelis garrulus. Cutler. 

Oriolus Baltimore. 

Oriolus spurius. 

Merula flammula. 

Merula Marilandica. 

Garrulus australis. 

Lucar lividus, apice nigra. 

Muscicapa vertice nigro. Catesby. 

Ampelis garrulus. 


Granivorous Tribes. 

_ Tir i i m i f Meleagris Americanus. 

Hi ur ey - - - ^ Gallopavo sylvestris. Catesby. 

1 P I^En*lM“^ 1 ™“’- 0r - P - rtr i d * e °!} Tetrao tjmpanus. 

1 M Sf e ° Cl !’ 0, ; Grous Ptorlni S_ a "-_ j Tetrao lagopus. 

f Quail, or Partridge - -- -- -- - Tetrao minor, s. coturnix. 

f Red Bird — Virginia Nightingale. - - Loxia cardinalis. 

t Cross Beak - - -- -- -- -- Loxia rostro forsicato. 

* Blue Cross Beak - -- -- -- -- Loxia caerulea. 

* Rice Bird — Boblincoln ------- Emberiza oryzivora. 

| Blue or Slate-coloured Rice Bird - - - - Emberiza livida. 

* Pied Rice Bird - - -- -- -- - Emberiza varia. 

| Painted Finch, or Nonpareil ----- Linaria ciris. 

§ Red Linnet - - -- -- -- -- Tanagra rubra. 

* Blue Linnet - -- -- -- -- - Linaria cyanea. 

f Goldfinch. Yellow Bird {Cutler.) or Let- f Carduelus Americanus. 

tuce Bird - - -- -- -- - - t Fringilla tristis. Linn, 

t Lesser Goldfinch - - - - -- -- Carduelus pinus. 

+ Least Finch - - -- -- -- -- Carduelus pusilus. 

* rp i d* j t» i^\ t. f Fringilla erythrophthalma. 

* 1 owhe Bird, Pewee, Cheeweeh - - - -in ® • • f- , • r . . , 

’ ’ l Passer nigns oculis rubns. Catesby. 

t Purple Finch - -- -- -- -- - Fringilla purpurea. 

§ Spring Bird - -- -- -- -- -- Fringilla. Cutler, 

t Hemp Bird - -- -- -- -- -- Fringilla canabina. 

§ Winter Sparrow - -- -- -- -- Fringilla grisea. Cutler, 

t Red, Fox-coloured, Ground or Hedge Spar- ? p- -ii a rufa 

+ Large, Brown, White-throated Sparrow - Fringilla fusca. 

* Little House Sparrow, or Chipping Bird - Passer domesticus. 

* Reed Sparrow - -- -- -- -- Passer palustris. 

* Little Field Sparrow - ------ Passer agrestis. 

Snow Bird - -- -- -- -- -- Passer nivalis. 

May Bird Calandra pratensis.] 

VOL. v. E 


•26 


UNITED STATES. 


Popular Names. 

[* Red-winged Starling, or Corn Thief - - 

* Cowpen Bird ---------- 

* Blue Bird - -- -- 

* Water Wagtail - ------- 

* House Wren - --------- 

f * Marsh Wren - - ------- 

* Great Wren of Carolina ; body dark brown, 

throat and breast pale clay colour 
^ Grape Bird - - -------- 

'* Little Bluish Grey Wren - - - - - - 

* Golden Crown Wren ------- 

+ Ruby Crown Wren ( Edwards ) - - - - 

* Olive-coloured, Yellow-throated Wren - - 

* Red Start - -- -- -- -- -- 

* Yellow-hooded Titmouse ------ 

* Bluish Grey-crested Titmouse - - - - 

1! Black Cap Titmouse - ------ 

* Summer Yellow Bird - - - - - - - 

* Yellow Rump - -- -- -- -- - 

§ Tom Teet - -- -- -- -- -- 

* Various coloured Little Finch Creeper - - 

■ Little Chocolate-breast Titmouse - - - 

* Yellow Red Poll - -- -- -- -- 

* Green Black-throated Fly Catcher - - - 

Golden-winged Fly Catcher - - - 

* Blue-winged Yellow Bird ------ 

* Yellow-throated Creeper ------ 

* House Swallow, or Chimney Swallow - - 

'* Great Purple Martin - ------ 

1 Bank Martin, or Swallow ------ 

^ White-bellied Martin - ------ 

§ Barn Swallow ---------- 

± Great Bat, or Chuckwills Widow, or Goat 

Sucker - - -- -- -- -- - 

Whip-poor-will - -- -- -- -- 

* Night Hawk - -- -- - - -- - 


Bartram's Designation. 

Sturnus predatorius. 

{ Sturnus stercorarius. 

Passer fuscus. Catesby. 

Motacilla sialis. 

Rubicula Americana caerulea. Catesby 
Motacilla fluviatilis. 

Motacilla domestica (regulus rufus). 

Motacilla palustris (regulus minor.) 

Motacilla Caroliniana (regulus magnus.) 

Motacilla icterocephala. Cutler. 

Regulus griseus. 

Regulus cristatus. 

Regulus cristatus, Alter vertice rubini coloris. 
Regulus peregrinus, gutture flavo. 

Ruticilla Americana. 

Luscinia, s. philomela Americana. 

Parus cristatus. 

Parus Europeus. 

Parus luteus. 

Parus cedrus, uropygio flavo. 

Parus atricapillus. Cutler. 

Parus varius. 

Parus peregrinus. 

Parus aureus, vertice rubro. 

Parus viridis, gutture nigro. 

Parus alis aureis. 

Parus aureus alis caeruleis. 

Parus griccus gutture Iuteo. 

Hirundo pelasgia, cauda aculeata. 

Hirundo purpurea. 

Hirundo riparia, vertice purpurea. 

Hirundo. — 

Hirundo subis. Cutler. 

Caprimulgus lucifugus. 

r Caprimulgus minor Americanus. Catesby. 

\ Caprimulgus Europeus. Cutler. 

Caprimulgus Americanus. Cutler. 


Amphibious or Aquatic Birds, or such as obtain their food from and reside in the water. 


The Crane. 

| Great Whooping Crane ------ 

i Great Savanna Crane ------ 

The Heron. 

? Great Bluish Grey-crested Heron - - 

* Great White River Heron - - - - ■ 

§ Crane - - - -- -- -- -- 

* Little White Heron ------- 

^ Stork - -- -- -- -- -- - 

t Little-created Purple, or Blue Heron 


Grus. 

Grus clamator, vertice papilloso corpore niveo, 
remigibus nigris. 

Grus pratensis, corpore cinereo, vertice papilloso. 
Ardea. 

Ardea Herodias. 

Ardea immaculata. 

Ardea Canadensis. Cutler. 

Ardea alba minor. 

Ardea ciconia. Cutler. 

Ardea purpurea eristata.] 


UNITED STATES. 


27 


Popular Names. 

I“* Grey, White-crested, Heron - 
J Speckled -crested Heron, or Crab Catcher - 

* Marsh Bittern, or Indian Hen - ' * ' { 

* Quaw Bird, or Frog Catcher - - 

£ Little Brownish spotted Bittern - - 1 

£ Crested Blue Bittern, called Poor Job - - 

* Green Bittern. Poke. Skouk. - 

* Lesser Green Bittern ------ 

* Least Brown and Striped Bittern - - 

* Spoon Bill; seen as far n. as the river Ala-/ 

tamaha - -- -- -- -- --l 

The Wood Pelican. 

Z Wood Pelican ---------- 

i White Curlew ---------- 

i Dusky and White Curlew - - - - - - 

j| Crying Bird, beautifully speckled - - - - 

jj Ganet, perhaps little different from the Ibis 

|| White Godwit - - - 

? Great red-breasted Godwit - - - - - 

f The greater Godwit - -- -- -- - 

f Red Shark, or Pool Stripe ------ 

IT Great Sea-coast Curlew ------ 

* Lesser Field Curlew ------- 

f Sea-side lesser Curlew ------- 

* Great Red Woodcock - - - - - - - 

Wood Snipe- - -- -- 

* Meadow Snipe - -------- 

* Red coot-footed Tring ------- 

* White-throated, Coot-footed Tring - - - 

* Black Cap, Coot-footed Tring - - - - 

f Spotted Tring. Rock bird - - - - - 

f Little Pond Snipe - ------ 

f Little Brown Pool Snipe ------ 

f Little Trings of the sea-shore Sand birds, 

Ox Eye ------------ 

$ Humility - - -- -- -- -- - 

* Turnstone, or Dotrill - ------ 

f Wild Swan - - - - - 

+ Canadian Goose - -- -- -- -- 

f Blue-winged Goose -------- 

t Laughing Goose --------- 

+ White Brant Goose - -- -- -- - 
t Great party-coloured Brant, or Grey Goose, 

+ Great Wild Duck. Duck and Mallard - - 1 

+ Great Black Duck - ------- 

+ Bull Neck, or Buffalo Head Quindar - - 
+ Blue Bill - - -- -- -- -- - 

t Black White-faced Duck - - - - - _ 

^ Wood Duck - - -- -- -- -- 

t Sprig-tail Duck --------- 


Bart ram's Designal ion . 

Ardea varra cristata. 

Ardea maculata cristata. 

Ardea migitans. 

Ardea stellaris Americana. Catesby. 

Ardea clamator, corpore subceruleo. 

Ardea subfusca stillata. 

Ardea violacca. 

Ardea virescens. 

Ardea virescens minor. 

Ardea parva. 

Patalea ajaja. 

Tantalus. 

Tantalus loculator. 

Tantalus alber. 

Tantalus fuscus. 

Tantalus pictus, (Ephouskyka. Indian.) 
Tantalus Ichthyophagus. 

Numenius, alba varia. 

Numenius pectore ruso. 

Numenius Americana. 

Numenius fluvialis. 

Numenius magnus rufus. 

Numenius minor campestris. 

Numenius cinereus. 

Scolapax Americana rufa. 

Scolapax fedoa. Cutler. 

Scolapax minor arvensis. 

Tringa rufa. 

Tringa cinerea, gutture albo. 

Tringa vertice nigro. 

Tringa maculata. 

Tringa griseus. 

Tringa fusca. 

Tringa parva. 

Tringa fulicaria ? Cutler. 

Tringa interpres ? Cutler. 

Morinella Americana. 

Cygnus ferus. 

Anser Canadensis. 

Anser aleis ca;ruleis. 

Anser fuscus maculatus 

Anser branta, corpore albo, remigibus nigris. 
Anser branta, grisea maculata. 

Anas fera torquata major, caput et collum viridii 
splendentis, dorsum griseo fuscum, pectore ru- 
fescente, speculum violacrum. 

Anas nigra maxima. 

Acas bucepala. 

Anas subcerulea. 

Anas leucocephala. 

Anas arborea. 

Anas caudacuta.] 


2 a 


UNITED STATES. 


[+ 

+ 


Popular Names . Bartram's Designation. 

Little Brown and White Duck - - - Anas rustica. 

Various coloured Duck, his breast and neck 7 * .... , , 

as though ornamented with chains of beads ) nas P rmci P a 1S &gt; macu a a. 

Little Black and White Duck, called Butter! . 

Bach - - _ _ j Anas minor picta. 

Sea Duck ----------- Anas mollissima. Cutler. 

Sea Pigeon - - -- -- -- -- - Anas histrionica ? Cutler. 

Old Wife J ^ nas H? emali ?- P« k - 

I Anas strepera ? Cutler. 

Blue-winged Shoveller ------- Anas Americanus lato rostro. Catesby. 

Dipper - - -- -- -- -- -- Anas albeola. Cutler. 

Teal. Querquidulae. 

Summer Duck - - - -- -- -- Anas sponsa. 

Blue-winged Teal - -- -- -- - Anas discors. 

Least Green-winged Teal - - - Anas migatoria. 

Whistling Duck - -- -- -- -- Anas fistulosa. 

Great Fishing Duck - - ----- Mergus major pectore rufo. 

Round-crested Duck - - ----- Mergus cucultatus. 

Eel Crow - -- -- -- -- -- Colymbus migratorius. 

Great Black Cormorant of Florida, having a C n , , . . 

ill Colymbus u loridcimis. 

red beak - - J 

Snake Bird of Florida ------- Colymbus colubrinus, cauda elongata. 

Great Black and White Pied Diver, or Loon Colymbus musicus. 

Large Spotted Loon, or Great Speckled 7 Colymbus Glacialis. Peck. 

Diver - ----------j Colymbus arcticus. 

Little-eared Brown Dobchick ----- Colymbus auritus et cornutus. 

Little-crested Brown Dobchick - - - Colymbus minor fuscus. 

Dobchick, or Notail ------- Colymbus podiceps. Peck. 

Cream-coloured Sheldrake ------ Mergus merganser ? Cutler. 

Red-bellied Sheldrake - ------ Mergus serrator ? Cutler. 

Pyed Sheldrake - - -- -- -- - Mergus castor ? Cutler. 

Penguin - -- -- -- -- -- - Alea impennis. Cutler. 

Water Hen - -- -- -- -- -- Aleaarctica? Cutler. 

Murr - ----------- Alea torda. Peck. 

Petteril - -- -- -- -- -- - Procellaria pelagica. Peck. 

Tropic Bird - - - -- -- -- - Phaeton aetherius. 

Great White Gull - - -- -- -- Larus alber. 

Great Grey Gull - -- -- -- -- Larus griseus. 

Little White River Gull ------ Larus alba minor. 

Mackarel Gull - - - -- -- -- Larus ridibundus. Cutler. 

Fishing Gull - -- -- -- -- - Sterna minuta. Cutler. 

Sea Swallow, or Noddy - ----- Sterna stolida. 

Sea Sucker - - - -- -- -- - Petromyzon marinus. Peck. 

Pintado Bird - - - - - -- -- Petrella pintado. 

Thornback - - - Raja fullonica ? Peck. 

Shear Water, or Razor Bill ----- Rynchops niger. 

Frigate, or Man of War Bird - - - - Pelicanus aquilus. 

Booby - - Pelicanus sula. 

Shag - - - Pelicanus graculus. Cutler. 

Pelican of the Mississippi, whose pouch holds ■» p e p canus 

two or three quarts - -J 

American Sea Pelican - Onocratalus Americanus. 1 


Popular Names . 

The Plover Kind. 

[* Kildee, or Chattering- Plover - - - - 

* Great Spotted Plover - 

* Little Sea-side Ring-neck Plover - - - 

* Will Willet, or Oyster Catcher - - - - 

|| Great Blue, or Slate-coloured Coot - - - 

§ White-head Coot - ------- 

§ Brown Coot - --------- 

* Soree. Brown Rail. Widgeon - - - - 

J Little dark Blue Water Rail ----- 

* Greater Brown Rail - - - - - - - 

|| Blue or Slate-coloured Water Rail of Florida 

^ Peep -------- 

* Flamingo ; seen about the point of Florida ; ) 

rarely as far n. as St. Augustine - - - j 

Besides these, the following have not been de- 
scribed or classed, unless, under different names, 
they are contained in the above catalogue. 
Sheldrach, or Canvas Back Mow Bird 

Ball Coot Blue Peter 

Water Witch Water Wagtail 

Water Pheasant Wakon Bird. 

The birds of America, says Catesby, generally 
exceed those of Europe in the beauty of their 
plumage, but are much inferior to them in the 
melody of their notes. 

The middle States, including Virginia, appear 
to be the climates, in N. America, where the 
greatest number and variety of birds of passage 
celebrate their nuptials and rear their offspring, 
with which they annually return to more 5 . re- 
gions. Most of the birds here are birds of pas- 
sage from the s. The eagle, the pheasant, grous, 
and partridge of Pennsylvania, several species of 
woodpeckers, the crow, blue jay, robin, marsh 
wren, several species of sparrows or snow birds, 
and the swallow, are perhaps nearly all the land 
birds that continue the year round to the n. of 
Virginia. 

v ery few tribes of birds build or rear their 
young in the s. or maritime parts of Virginia, in 
Carolina, Georgia, and Florida ; yet all those 
numerous tribes, particularly of the soft-billed 
kind, which breed in Pennsylvania, pass, in the 
spring season, through these regions in a few 
weeks time, making but very short stages by the 
way ; and again, but few of them winter there on 
their return s. 

It is not known how far to the s. they continue 
their rout, during their absence from the northern 
and middle States. 


Bar tram's Designation. 

Charadrius. 

Charadrius vociferus. 

Charadrius maeulatus. 

Charadrius minor. 

Hematopus ostrealegus. 

Fulica Floridana. 

Anas spectabilis. Cutler. 

Anas fusca. Cutler. 

Rallus Virginianus. 

Rallus aquaticus minor. 

Rallus rufus. 

Ralius major subceruleus. 

Rallus Carolinus. Cutler. 

Phcenicopterus ruber. 

Amphibious Reptiles. 

Among these are the Mud Tortoise, or Turtle 
(Testudo denticulata) — Speckled Land Tortoise 
(Testudo Carolina.) — Great Soft-shelled Tortoise 
of Florida ( Testudo naso eylindracea elongato , 
truncato. Bartram.) When full grown it weighs 
from SO to 40 pounds, extremely fat and delicious 
food. — Great Land Tortoise, called Gopher, its 
upper shell is about 18 inches long, and from 10 
to 12 broad : found s. of Savanna River. 

Two species of fresh water tortoises inhabit 
the tide water rivers in the Southern States, one 
is large, weighing from 10 to 12 pounds ; the back 
shell nearly of an oval form ; the other species 
small ; but both are esteemed delicious food. 

Of the frog kind ( Rancea) are many species. 
The Toad ( liana huso ?) several species, the red, 
brown, and black. The former are the largest ; 
the latter the smallest. — Pond Frog ( liana ocel- 
lata) — Green Fountain Frog ( liana esculanta ) — 
Tree Frog (Rana muculata) — Bull Frog (Rana 
boans.) Besides these are the dusky brown- 
spotted frog of Carolina, eight or nine inches 
long from the nose to the extremity of the toes ; 
their voice resembles the grunting of a swine. 
The bell frog, so called because their voice is 
fancied to be exactly like that of a loud cow bell. 
A beautiful green frog, whose noise is like the 
barking of little dogs, or the yelping of puppies. 
A less green frog, whose notes resemble those of 
young chickens. Little grey-speckled frog, 
Avhich makes a noise like the striking of two 
pebbles together under the surface of the water. 
There is yet an extremely diminutive species of 
frogs, called by some Savannah Crickets, whose 
notes are not unlike the chattering of young birds] 


30 


UNITED STATES. 


[or crickets. They are found in great multitudes 
after plentiful rains. Of lizards also there are 
many species. See article Lacert;e, in the 
General Appendix to this Dictionary. 

Amphibious Serpents. 

The characters by which amphibious serpents 

Rattle Snake 

Yellow Rattle Snake --------i 

Small Rattle Snake j 

Bastard Rattle Snake - -j 

Moccasin Snake ---------- i 

Grey-spotted Moccasin Snake of Carolina - - J 

Water Viper, with a sharp thorn tail - - - 

Black Viper - - - - 

Brown Viper - -- -- -- -- -- 
White-bodied, Brown-eyed Snake - - - - 
Black Snake, with linear rings ----- 

A Snake with 152 scutae and 135 scutellae - - 
Bluish-green Snake, with a stretched-out tri- ) 
angular snout, or Hognose Snake - - - 1 

Copper-bellied Snake - -- -- -- - 

Black Snake - -- -- -- -- -- 
White-neck Black Snake ------- 

Small Brown Adder - -- -- -- - 

House Adder - -- -- -- -- - 

Water Adder - ---------- 

Brown Snake - -- -- -- -- -- 

Little Brown-bead Snake ------- 

Coach-whip Snake - -- -- -- -- 

Corn Snake ----------- 

Green Snake - -- -- -- -- -- 

Wampum Snake ---------- 

Ribbon Snake - -- -- -- -- 

Pine, Horn, or Bull Snake, with a horny spear ( 
in his tail - -- -- -- -- -i 

Joint Snake ---------- 

Garter Snake ----------- 

Striped Snake ---------- 

Chicken Snake - -- -- -- -- - 

Glass Snake - -- -- -- -- -- 

Brownish-spotted Snake ------- 

Yellowish-white Snake -------- 

Hissing Snake - -- -- -- -- - 

Ring Snake - -- -- -- -- -- 

Two-headed Snake - -- -- -- -- 


are distinguished are these, the belly is furnished 
with scuta, and the tail has both scuta and scales. 
Of these reptiles, the following are found in the 
United States : they are specifically described in 
the Appendix to this Dictionary. See article 
Coeuber. 


Crotalus horridus. 
Crotali species. 

Coluber. — 

Coluber punctatus. 
Coluber prester. 
Coluber luridus. 
Coluber atropos. 
Coluber leberis. 
Coluber dispas. 

Coluber mycterizans. 

Coluber erythrogaster. 
Coluber constrictor. 
Coluber. — 

Coluber striatulus. 
Coluber punctatis. 
Coluber. — 

Coluber sipedon. 
Coluber annulatus. 
Coluber flagellum. 
Coluber fulvius. 
Coluber asstivus. 
Coluber fasciatus. 


Anguis eryx ? 
Anguis maculata ? 
Anguis ventralis. 
Anguis reticulata. 
Anguis lumbricalis 


Fishes. 


Fishes form the fourth class of animals in the 
Linnaean system. Mr. Pennant, in his British 
Zoology, distributes fish into three divisions, 
comprehending six orders. His divisions are, 


into Cetaceous, Cartilaginous, and Bony. The 
arrangement of the following catalogue of fishes 
is nearly agreeable with Mr. Pennant’s judicious 
divisions :] 


.31 


UNITED STATES. 

[Cetaceous Fish. Stickleback Sucker 

The Whale (Bal^na. See Appendix.) Conger Eel Cat Fish 

Dolphin Porpesse Grampus Skipjack Minow 

Beluga. (See Appendix.) Pout Week Fish 

Horse Mackarel King Fish 

Cartilaginous Fish. Blue Mackarel Sole 

Lamprey Pipe Fish Speckled Mackarel Mummychog 

Skate Golden Bream, or Sun Salmon White Fish 

Shark Fish Salmon Trout Tide Black Fish 

Dog-fish Red-bellied Bream Trout Rock Black Fish 

Sturgeon Silver, orWhite Bream Smelt Blue Fish (Begallo) 

Brown-spotted Gar Yellow Bream Pike, or Pickerel Sheep’s Head 

Fish Black, or Blue Bream. Atherine Red Drum 

Lump Fish Mullet Black Drum 

Herring Branded Drum 

Bony Fish. Carp Sheep’s-head Drum 

Eel Hollybut Pond Fish Mossbonker 

Snake Fish Dab Toad Fish Shadine 

Haddock Red Perch Roach Porsie 

Cod White Perch Shad Dace 

Frost Fish Yellow Perch Hardhead Anchovy 

Pollock Sea Perch Alewife Flying Fish. 

Small Pollock Whiting Bret 

Hake Sea Bass The amphibious lobster is found in the small 

Sculpion Striped Bass brooks and swamps in the back parts of N. Ca~ 

Plaice Shiner rolina. In its head is found the eye-stone. 

Flounder Chub 

Insects. 

The following catalogues of insects and vermes, descriptions, are taken from Dr. Belknap’s His- 
except some small additions and the annexed tory of New Hampshire, vol. iii. p. 180 — 183. 

Horned Beetle - -- -- -- -- - Scarabasus simson. 

Carolina Beetle - -- -- -- -- - Scarabasus Carolinus. 

Dunghill Beetle - -- -- -- -- - Scarabaeus stercorarius. 

Apple Beetle - -- -- -- -- -- Scarabaeus horticola ? 

Golden Beetle - -- -- -- -- - Scarabaeus lanigerus. — Several new species, and 

others that have not been arranged. 

Stag Beetle ----------- Lucanus cervus. 

Fluted Beetle ----------- Lucanus interruptus. 

Dermestes lardarius. 

Dermestes typographus. 

Water Flea - -- -- -- -- -- Gyrinus natator. 

Fetid Beetle - -- -- -- -- -- Silpha vespillo. 

Lady Fly ------------ Coccinella 2 — pustulata. — Several species. 

Chi’ysomela. — Many species. 

Wheat Fly - - - 

Weevil - -- -- -- -- -- - Bruchus pisi. 

Snouted Weevil - -- -- -- -- - Curculio quercus. — Many species. 

Goat Chaffer ---------- - Cerambyx coriarius. — Many species. 

1 # 1/ 1 

firefly ------------ Lampyris lucida. — Several species. 

Skipper - -- -- -- -- -- - Elater oculatus. — Many species. 

Glow-worm - -- -- -- -- -- Cicindela Carolina. — One or two other species. 

Cantharides - -- -- -- -- -- Buprestris mariana. — Two or three other species. 

Water Beetle - Dytiscus piceus.] 


32 


UNITED STATES. 


[Black Beetle - 
Blossom Eater 


Cockroach - - 

Grasshopper - - 

Cricket - - 
Locust - - - - 

Mole Cricket - - 

Froghopper - - 

Balm Cricket - - 

Large and Small 
Water Fly - - - 
Boat Fly - - - 

Bug - 

Louse, on cabbages 
Louse, on leaves of trees and plants - - - 

Bug, on plants and trees ------- 

Butterfly ------------ 

Night Flutterer ---------- 

Owl Moth - -- -- -- -- -- - 
Moth, or Miller ---------- 

Apple Moth, or Canker-worm - - - - - 

Dragon Fly - -- -- -- - 

Adder Fly -------- 

Oak-apple Fly ------- 

Saw Fly - -- -- -- -- 
Wasp - -- -- -- -- - 

Hornet ---------- 

Bumble Bee - -- -- -- - 

Wild Bee --------- 

Ant ----------- 

Black Fly - --------- 

Brown Fly -------- 

Horse Fly -------- 

Mosquito, or Musketoe - - - - 

Stinging Fly - -- -- -- - 

Snow Flea ------ - _ 

Father Long Legs ------ 

Spider - -- -- -- -- - 

Crab - -- -- -- -- - 

Lobster - -- -- -- -- 

Shrimp - -- -- -- -- 

Hermit Crab -------- 

Slender Crab - -- -- -- - 

King Crab, or Horse Shoe - - - 

Cray Fish - -- -- - - -- 

Amphibious Lobster - - - - - 





Dytiscus marginalis. 

Dytiscus striatus. — Several other species. 
Carabus Americanus. — Numerous species. 
Meloe nigra. 

Staphylinus maxillosus. 

Forsicula.— Two species. 

Blatta Americana, (non indigenus.) 

Grillus. — Numerous species. 

Grillus gryllotalpa. 

Cicada. — Many species. 


Notanecta. — Several species. 


Apms orassicae. 

Aphis. — N uraerous species. 

Chermes. — Many species. 

Paoilio I ^ unierous species, and sevei 
P ’ 1 descripts. 

Sphinx. 

Many new species. 

Pakena. — Numerous species. 

Phalaena wauaria ? 

Libellula. — Several species. 


Hemerobius pectinicornis. — Several species. 
Cynips. — Several species. 

Tenthredo betulae. 


Yespa. — Many species. 


Aspis. — Several species. 

Formica. — Several species. 

Musca.— Numerous species 

Tabanus. — Several species. 
Culex pipiens. 

Conops calcitrans. 

Podura nivalis. 

Phalangium. — Several species. 
Aranea. — Many species. 


Cancer. — Many species. 


Monoculus polyphemus. 
Monoculus piscinus. 


Monoculus pulex. 
Monoculus quadricornis.J 


non 


UNITED STATES 


33 


Vermes. 

Holothuria phantaphus. 

Sepia media. 

Sepia loligo. 

Medusa pilearis. 

Asterias. — Three or four species. 
Echinus. — Several species. 

Lepas anatifera. 

Mya arenaria. 

Solen ensis. 

Solen radiatis. 

Ostrea . 

Mytilus edulis. 

Nerita littoralis ? 

*■ Patella fusca. 

Sabella granulata. 

Anemone marina (locomotiva.) 


[Sea Clam ------ 

Squid ------ 

Sea Lungs - - - - 

Star Fish, or Finger Fish 
Sea Egg - 

Barnacle - - - 

Hog Clam - - - - 

Razor-shell Clam - - 
Long-shell Clam - - 

Oyster ------ 

Muscle ------ 

Cockle ------ 

Limpets - - - - - 

Sand-shell Clam - - - 

Sea Anemone - - - - 

The Wheat Fly, commonly, but improperly, 
called the Hessian Fly, which has, of late years, 
proved so destructive to the wheat in various 
parts of the United States, has generally been 
supposed to have been imported from Europe. 
This opinion, however, seems not to be well 
founded. Count Ginnanni, of Ravenna, in a late 
learned Treatise on the Diseases of Wheat in its 
rowing State between Seed Time and Harvest, 
as given an account of more than 50 different 
insects that infest the Italian wheat, and yet the 
wheat fly found here is not delineated nor de- 
scribed. There is reason, therefore, to doubt its 
existence in the s. of Europe. Sir Joseph Banks 
said it did not exist in England ; nor could he 
collect any account of it in Germany. This de- 
structive insect is probably a non-descript, and 
peculiar to the United States. It is said to have 
no deleterious effect on the yellow-bearded wheat 
of that country. 

The Ink or Cuttle Fish is a curiosity. It is 
furnished with a cyst of black liquor, which is a 
tolerable substitute for ink. This it emits, when 
pursued by its enemies. The moment this liquor 
is emitted, the water becomes like a thick black 
cloud in the eyes of its pursuer, and it improves 
this opportunity to make its escape. This cyst 
of liquor appears designed by Providence solely 
for the purpose of personal defence, and is cer- 
tainly a most apt and curious contrivance. The 
whalemen call those fish Squids, and say that 
they are eaten in abundance by some species of 
whales. 

Population and Territory. — It is well known 
that, about a century ago, the country which 
now composes the United States of America, 
VOL. v. 


contained but a few thousand civilized inha- 
bitants ; and that now, the same country contains 
upwards of seven millions. 

But the causes of this vast increase of num- 
bers seem not to be equally well understood. It 
is believed that many persons still suppose the 
population of America to be chiefly indebted for 
its growth to emigrations from other countries ; 
and that it must become stationary when they 
cease to take place. Some facts and calculations 
will be here set down, to ascertain the ratio of 
the natural increase of the inhabitants of Ame- 
rica, and to shew that the great progress of 
wealth and population in that country is chiefly 
derived from internal causes, and of course less 
liable to interruption from without. 

The highest estimate that is recollected of the 
number of inhabitants removing to America in 
any one year, supposes the number to be 10,000 
(Cooper’s Inform.) If the same number had re- 
moved every year since the first settlement of 
the country, it would make the whole up to 1790 
about 1,600,000. But it is to be remarked that 
this estimate was made for a period when emi- 
grations were unusually numerous; that during 
the many years of war which have taken place &amp; 
they have been very few ; and that in former 
years, when the number of emigrants was com- 
plained of as an evil, it was not reckoned so 

high. (Douglas’s Summary, vol. ii. p. 326.) We 
may therefore suppose, that 5,000 persons per 
annum is a liberal allowance for the average 
number of persons removing to America since 
its first settlement. This, in the year 1790, 
would amount to 800,000 persons. 

At the end of 1790, and beginning of 1791,] 

F 


84 


UNITED STATES. 


[there were enumerated in the General Census, 
the number of 3,993,412 inhabitants. As some 
places were not enumerated at all, and from 
others no return was made, there can be little 
doubt but the actual number then was something 
more than 4,000,000. Supposing them to have 
increased, so as to double their numbers once 
in 20 years ; then, in the several preceding pe- 
riods of 20 years, since the year 1630, the num- 
bers would stand thus : 


At the end of 1790 - 

- 4,000,000 

1770 - 

- 2,000,000 

1750 - 

- 1,000,000 

1730 - 

500,000 

1710 - 

250 000 

1690 - 

125,000 

1670 - 

62,500 

1650 - 

31,250 

1630 - 

15,625 

as this last date reaches 

back to the infancy 


of the first settlements in N. America, it can 
hardly be supposed that they contained so many 
as 15,000 inhabitants. It follows, therefore, that 
they must have doubled their numbers oftener 
than once in 20 years ; that is, that they must 
have increased faster than 5 per cent, com- 
pounding the increase with the principal at the 
end of every 20 years. 

To determine how far this ratio of increase is 
justified by other facts, a comparison of the num- 
ber of inhabitants has been drawn from authen- 
tic resources for the following periods, according 
to which the total number appeared to have been 
in the year 

1750 - - 1,179,259 
1774 - - 2,141,307 
1782 - - 2,389,300 
1790 - - 4,000,000 
From this it will be seen, that 
taking the difference between 
the number of 1790 - 
and the number of 1782 - - - 


Which is - - - - 

And deducting from this, for 
emigrants, viz. 10,000, 
emigrants, per annum, 
for nine years - - - - 90,000 

Increase of ditto, at 5 per 
cent, for four years and a 
half 20,050 


There has been a natural increase in 
nine years, of - -- -- -- 


4,000,000 

2,389,300 


1,610,700 


110 250 


1,500,450 


Which, calculated upon the number of inhabi- 
tants returned in 1782, gives the astonishing na- 
tural increase of nearly seven per cent, per 
ann. 

From these statements compared with each 
other, it also appears that in the year 1790, the 
actual increase of inhabitants in theUnited States, 
beyond the number ever imported, must have been 
3,200,000, or after the most liberal allowances, 
at least three millions. That the whole rate of 
increase upon the numbers at any given period 
has been more than five per cent. ; and deduct- 
ing for emigrations, that it has been equal to 
about five per cent, for any 20 years successively, 
or three and a half per cent, compound increase 
for any period that had then yet elapsed. 

But it may be expected, that no inference as 
to the future population of America can be de- 
rived from these facts, because as the country 
becomes more thickly settled, the increase will 
be slower. We have an opportunity of exa- 
mining what weight the objection possesses. 

The Eastern States are the most thickly inha- 
bited. The greater part of the emigrations from 
them, have been either to other States in New 
England, or to the State of New York. 

In 1750, New England and New York to- 
gether contained - - 444,000 

1790, Ditto ------ - 1,348,942 

Having more than trebled their numbers in 
40 years, and increased, during all that period, 
at the rate of more than five per cent, upon their 
original number ; and in the compound ratio of 
nearly three per cent. And as many more per- 
sons have emigrated from these States than have 
come into them from abroad, all this, and some- 
thing more, was their natural increase. 

, In 1750, Massachusetts contained 32 persons, 
and in 

1790, about 60 persons to each square mile. 

1750, Connecticut contained 20 persons, 
and in 

1790, about 50 persons to the square mile. 

1750, Rhode Island contained about 23, 
and in 

1790, about 52 inhabitants per square mile ; 
so that besides the numerous emigrants these 
States have sent forth, they have more than 
doubled their numbers in 40 years, and nearly 
trebled them since they contained 20 persons to 
each square mile. 

Mr. Jefferson has taken some pains to prove 
that the inhabitants of Virginia double their 
numbers once in 27 years and a quarter. He 
also proves, by an ingenious calculation, that] 


UNITED STATES. 


35 


[In 1782, the numbers in Virginia were 567,614 
1790, the same country (part of 
which made the State of 
Kentucky) contained - - 821,287 

Giving an increase of 4-^, or very nearly five 
per cent, and doubling their numbers, not in 27 
years and a quarter, as Mr. Jefferson endea- 
voured to prove, but in less than 21 years. 

Virginia (exclusive of Kentucky) added about 
180,000 to its numbers, between 1782 and 1790, 
the period when the numerous emigrations to 
Kentucky caused so great a drain upon its po- 
pulation. 

In 1780, the number of militia, w. of Blue 
Ridge, in Virginia, was 11,440, 
which, multiplied by four, 
gives for the number of 
inhabitants ----- 45,760 

In 1790, the same county contained 151,235 

Those counties having more than trebled their 
numbers in ten years. 

It is to be observed that these facts (and many 
more of a similar tendency might be adduced) 


f 2 


are drawn from the former and least prosperous 
state of America, and from periods which were 
either absolutely those of public calamity, or, at 
best, were not those of national prosperity ; yet, 
it is apprehended, they sufficiently prove that 
the inhabitants of the United States had, up to 
the year 1796, increased at least as fast as at the 
compound ratio of three and a half per cent. ; 
and this independently of any effect from the re- 
moval thither of foreigners. They must have 
contained, at this period, 8,000,000 of people to 
have equalled the average of New England, and 
55, 000,000 to have equalled the rate of popula- 
tion in Massachusetts and Connecticut. 

There are as yet no symptoms of this ratio 
of increase being very materially diminished. 
The population, by the Census of 1810, amounted 
to 7,238,421, being not quite double of the Cen- 
sus of 1790. The quota returned at each period 
by the individual States, will afford matter of 
curious investigation to the more speculative 
enquirer, we therefore subjoin] 


The CENSUS 


36 


UNITED STATES. 


[The CENSUS of the UNITED STATES of N. AMERICA for the Years 1790 and 1810; 
distinguishing the Population of each State , and the Increase experienced bu each within the 
Period of 20 Years . 


States. 


Virginia - - 
New York - 
Pennsylvania 
Massachusetts 
Maine - - 
N. Carolina - 
S. Carolina - 
Kentucky 
Maryland 
Connecticut - 
Tenesse, West 
, East 


: S 


Southern, Midland, 
Northern States, &amp; 
Territorial Govern- 
ments. 


Georgia - - - - - 

New Jersey - - - - 

Ohio ------ 

Vermont - - - - 

New Hampshire - - 
Rhode Island - - - 
Delaware - 


Territorial Governments. 

Orleans -------- 

Mississippi ------ 

Indiana -------- 

Columbia ------ 

Louisiana ------- 

Illinois ------- 

Michigan ------ 


T otal - 


24 


- S. 

- M. 

- M. 

- N. 

- S. 

- S. 

- s. 

- s. 

- N. 


S. 

M. 

M. 

N. 
N. 
N. 
M. 


- T. 

- T. 

- T. 

- T. 

- T. 

- T. 

- T. 


1790. 


747,610 

340,120 

434,373 

378,787 

96,540 

393,751 

249,073 

73,677 

319,728 

237,946 

77,200 

82,548 

184,139 

29,165 

85,539 

141,885 

68,825 

59,094 


1810. 


4,000,000* 


965,079 
959,220 
810,163 
472,040 
228,705 
563,526 
414,935 
406,511 
380,546 
261,942 
160,360 I 
101,367/ 
252,433 
245,562 
230,760 
217,913 
214,414 
76,931 
72,674 


76,556 

40,352 

24,520 

24,023 

20,845 

12,282 

4,762 


Increase in 20 
Years. 


7,238,421 


217,469 

619,100 

375,790 

93,253 

132,165 

169,775 

165,862 

332,834 

60,818 

23,996 

184,527 

169,885 

61,423 

201,595 

132,374 

72,529 

8,106 

13,580 


203,340 


3,238,421 


* Of whom about 700,000 were slaves. It should be observed, that the Importation of Africans ceased by law on the 1st of 

January, 1808. 


In the year 1796 some very ingenious calcula- 
tions were made, purporting to show that the 
whole territory of the United States, taken at an 
average of 1000 miles square, would be peopled 
about the year 1834, and that the population 
would then amount to 18,406,150 souls. It was 
also argued that the population of 1796 would, 
upon the data of its doubling once in 20 years, if 
applied to the settlement of new lands then re- 
maining unoccupied to the amount of 431, 662, 336 
acres, at the rate of 20 persons to each square 
mile, or 32 acres each person, occupy the lands 
of the United States in the above-mentioned year 
1834, and that the value of every acre would 


gradually increase from one dollar to 14 dollars, 
or three guineas sterling, up to the period when 
the full settlement would take place. 

The only objection to these calculations is that 
the increase of population, during the last 20 
years, up to 1810, has not kept pace with that of 
earlier periods, and that the data on which they 
were founded were consequently incorrect. The 
period therefore, in which the whole of these 
States will be settled, must be considerably later 
than what has been proposed. Illustrative of 
those calculations were drawn up the following 
tables, which are forthwith presented to the rea- 
der’s inspection.] 


UNITED STATES. 


37 


TABLE I. 

\ Shewing the Number of Inhabitants in 1796, the Acres of Land then remaining unoccupied , the 
average Increase of Inhabitants, and the gradual and final Occupation of Lands. 


Years. 

Number, of in- 
habitants. 

Acres of land 
occupied by the 
increase. 

Acres of land 
remaining un- 
occupied. 

1796 

1 Year’s increase 

1797 

10 do. 

1807 

10 do. 

1817 

10 do, 

1827 

7 do. 

about 1834. 

4,916,802 

5,088,890 

5,506,816 

66,863,712 

94,317,856 

133,044,704 

131,929,248 

431,662,336 

426,155,520 

7,178,381 

359,291,808 

10,125,814 

264,973,952 

14,283,461 

131,929,248 

18,406,150 

000,000,000 


The following calculation is founded upon 
these principles, viz. 

1st. It is supposed that the inhabitants of the 
United States increase in the compound ratio of 
3| per cent. 

2d. It appears that at the end of the year 1796, 
the number of inhabitants in the United States, 
was about 4,916,802. 

3d. It appears that the quantity of vacant 
lands in the United States was in that year about 
431)662,336 acres. 


4th, Of consequence, there were then in the 
United States, 1,139 persons to each 100,000 
acres of new lands. 

3th, It is supposed that new lands, on an 
average, were worth one dollar per acre; and 
that lands inhabited at the rate of 20 persons to 
the square mile, were worth 14 dollars, or three 
guineas per acre. The following therefore, is] 


it. 


TABLES IL 


38 


UNITED STATES. 


TABLE II. 

[Shewing the increasing Value of any 100,000 Acres (taken equal to the Average ) upon the Principle 
that the Increase of 1,139 Persons might be applied to the Settlement of them , and that as much land 
as they settled at the rate of SO Persons to the square Mile , was worth 14 Dollars per Acre. 


Year. 

Number of 
inhabitants. 

Lands Ann. occu- 
pied by the in- 
crease of inhabi- 
tants. 

Value of 100,000 
Acres each year. 

Value per 
Acre. 

The same in Sterling. 

End of 1796 
Increase 

1139 

40 

Acres. 

1280 

Dollars. 

100,000 

16,640 

Dols. 

1 

Crs. 

00 

1 . 

0 

S. 

4 

d. 

6 

j 1797 

Increase 

1179 

41 

1312 

116,640 

17,056 

1 

16 

0 

5 

2* 

1798 

Increase 

1220 

42 

1344 

133,696 

17,472 

1 

33 

0 

5 

HI 

1799 

Increase 

1262 

44 

1408 

151,168 

18,304 

1 

51 

0 

6 

9} 

1800 

Increase 

1306 

46 

1472 

169,472 
1 9,136 

1 

69 

0 

7 

H 

1801 

Increase 

1352 

47 

1504 

188,608 

19,552 

1 

88 

0 

8 

51 | 

1802 

Increase 

1399 

49 

1568 

208,160 

20,384 

2 

08 

0 

9 

H 

1803 

Increase 

1448 

51 

1631 

228,544 

21,216 

2 

28 

0 

10 

3 

1804 

Increase 

1499 

52 

1664 

249,760 

21,632 

2 

49 

0 

11 

Si 

1805 

Increase 

1551 

54 

1728 

271,392 

22,464 

2 

71 

0 

12 

si 

1806 

Increase 

1605 

56 

1792 

293,856 

23,296 

2 

93 

0 

13 

Si 

1807 

1808 

1809 

1810 
1815 
1820 
1825 
1830 
1834 

1661 

1719 

1779 

1841 

2186 

2596 

3083 

3661 

4255 

1856 

1920 

1984 

11,040 

13,120 

15,584 

18,784 

19,008 

317,152 

341,280 

366,240 

392,030 

535,550 

706,110 

908,702 

1,152,894 

1,400,000 

3 

3 

3 

3 

5 

7 

9 

11 

14 

17 

41 

66 

92 

35 

06 

08 

52 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

1 

2 

2 

3 

14 

15 

16 
17 

4 

11 

0 

12 

3 

3 i 

4 
5f 
7f 
0 
9 
81 

10 

0] 


/■ 


UNITED STATES. 


39 


[It was not intended by this statement to con- 
vey the idea that the rise in the value of any 
particular tract of land would be in the exact 
proportion here mentioned. In many important 
instances in America it has been greater, in others 
perhaps less. 

But it was intended to shew, that the increase 
in the value of American lands was, in its nature, 
like that of compound interest ; and that as- 
suming the ratio of 3} per cent, for the increase 
of inhabitants, the general rise in the value of 
property resulting therefrom, was very far above 
the profit of capital in any of the ordinary ways 
of employing it. 

The lowest price at which Congress at that pe- 
riod offered lands for sale was at two dollars per 
acre. The great increase of capital in America, 
together with the investments which Europeans 
have made in lands, have since considerably raised 
their value. Indeed, the disposal of territory an- 
nually constitutes a most important branch of the 
American revenue ; as may be seen under article 
Finance. 

Government . — Until the 4th of July, 1776, the 
present United States were British colonies. On 
that memorable day, the representatives of the 
United States of America, in Congress assembled, 
made a solemn declaration, in which they as- 
signed their reasons for withdrawing their al- 
legiance from the King of Great Britain. Ap- 
pealing to the Supreme Judge of the world for 
the rectitude of their intentions, they did, in the 
name and by the authority of the good people of 
the colonies, solemnly publish and declare, that 
these United Colonies were, and of right ought 
to be, Free and Independent States; that they 
were absolved from all allegiance to the British 
crown, and that all political connection between 
them and Great Britain was, and ought to be, 
totally dissolved ; and that as Free and Inde- 
pendent States, they had full power to levy war, 
conclude peace, contract alliances, establish com- 
merce, and do all other acts and things which 
Independant States may of right do. For the 
support of this declaration, with a firm reliance 
on the protection of divine Providence, the dele- 
gates then in Congress, 55 in number, mutually 
pledged to each other their lives, their fortunes, 
and their sacred honour. 

At the same time they published articles of 
Confederation and Perpetual Union between the 
States, in which they took the style of “ The 
United States of America,” and agreed, that 
each State should retain its sovereignty, free- 


dom, and independence, and every power, juris- 
diction, and right, not expressly delegated to 
Congress by the Confederation. By these arti- 
ticles, the Thirteen United States severally en- 
tered into a firm league of friendship with each 
other for their common defence, the security of 
their liberties, and their mutual and general wel- 
fare, and bound themselves to assist each other 
against all force offered to, or attacks that might 
be made upon all, or any of them, on account of 
religion, sovereignty, commerce, or any other 
pretence whatever. But for the more convenient 
management of the general interests of the 
United States, it was determined, that Delegates 
should be annually appointed, in such manner as 
the Legislature of each State should direct, to 
meet in Congress the first Monday in November 
of every year, with a power reserved to each 
State to recal its Delegates, or any of them, at 
any time within the year, and to send others in 
their stead for the remainder of the year. No 
State was to be represented in Congress by less 
than two, or more than seven members : and no 
person could be a delegate for more than three 
years, in any term of six years, nor was any 
person, being a delegate, capable of holding any 
office under the United States, for which he, or 
any other for his benefit, should receive any 
salary, fees, or emolument of any kind. In de- 
termining questions in Congress, each State was 
to have one vote. Every State was bound to 
abide by the determinations of Congress in all 
questions which were submitted to them by the 
Confederation. The articles of Confederation 
were to be invariably observed by every State, 
and the Union to be perpetual : nor was any al- 
teration at any time hereafter to be made in any 
of the articles, unless such alterations be agreed 
to in Congress, and be afterwards confirmed by 
the legislatures of every State. The articles of 
Confederation were ratified by Congress, July 
9th, 1778. 

These articles of Confederation being found 
inadequate to the purposes of a federal govern- 
ment, for reasons hereafter mentioned, delegates 
were chosen in each of the United States, to 
meet and fix upon the necessary amendments. 
They accordingly met in convention at Phila- 
delphia, in the summer of 1787, and agreed to 
propose the constitution for the consideration of 
their constituents, which will presently be re- 
corded. 

The expense of all the several departments of 
the General Representative Government of the 
United States of America was, upon its first] 


40 


UNITED STATES. 


[formation, 294,558 dollars, which, at 45 . 6rf. per 
dollar, is £66,275. lls. sterling, and was thus 
apportioned. 

Expense of the Executive Department. 

The office of the Presidency, at which 

the President received nothing £. 5. 

for himself ------ 5,625 0 

Vice President 1,125 0 

Chief Justice 900 0 

Five Associate Justices - - - 3,937 10 

Nineteen Judges of Districts and At- 
torney General ----- 6,873 15 

Legislative Department. 

Members of Congress, at six dollars 
(£1 . 7s. per day) their Secretaries, 

Clerks, Chaplains, Messengers, 
Doorkeepers, &amp;c. ----- 25,515 0 


Treasury Department. 
Secretary, Assistant, Comptroller, 
Auditor, Treasurer, Register and 
Loan Office Keeper, in each State, 
together with all the necessary 


Clerks, Office Keepers, &amp;c. - - 12,825 0 

Department of State , including Fo- 
reign Affairs. 

Secretary, Clerks, &amp;c. &amp;c. - - - - 1,406 5 

Department of War. 

Secretary, Clerks, Paymasters, Com- 
missioners, &amp;c. 1,462 10 

Commissioners for settling old Ac- 
counts. 

The whole Board, Clerks, &amp;c. - - 2,598 15 

Incidental and contingent Expenses. 

For Fire-wood, Stationary, Print- 
ing, &amp;c. ... - 4,006 16 


Total - - £66,275 11 

Besides the above, the Congress were (shortly 
after) obliged to keep 6,000 militia in pay, in 
addition to a regiment of foot and a battalion of 
artillery, which it always kept, and that in- 
creased the expenses of the War Department to 
390,000 dollars, or £ 87,795 sterling. This ex- 
pense was chiefly on account of the wars with 
the Indians. 

The salaries of the principal officers, as well 
as the nature of appointments, have experienced 


a considerable increase since the first establish- 
ment, as will appear by the following list. 


. . Dollars. 

The President receives per annum - 25,000 
Vice President ------- - 10’000 

Secretary of State ------- 5,000 

Secretary of the Treasury - - - - 5,000 

Secretary of the War Department - - 4,500 
Secretary of the Navy ----- 4,500 

Comptroller of the Treasury - - - 3,500 

Treasurer 3,000 

Attorney General ------- 3,000 

Auditor of the Treasury - - - - 3,000 

Postmaster General ------ 3,000 

Register of the Treasury - - - - 2.400 

Accountant of the War Department - 2,000 
Ditto of the Navy Department - - 2,000 

Assistant Postmaster General - - - 1,700 


Total - - 77,600 


The present expenses of government are pro- 
bably much less, in proportion to wealth and 
numbers, than those of any nation in Europe. 
They amount nevertheless to six millions of dol- 
lars, though the two or three last years of war 
have swelled that, which is considered the cur- 
rent amount, in a ratio far exceeding even the 
immense increase between the years 1776 and 
1812. — See Statement of the Revenue and Ex- 
penditure of the United States. Finance. 

Constitution. — We, the People of the United 
States, in order to form a more perfect union, 
establish justice, insure domestic tranquillity, 
provide for common defence, promote the general 
welfare, and secure the blessings of liberty to our- 
selves and our posterity, do ordain and establish 
this constitution for the United States of America. 

Article I. — Sect. 1. All legislative powers 
herein granted shall be vested in a Congress of 
the United States, which shall consist of a Senate 
and House of Representatives. 

Sect. 2. The House of Representatives shall 
be composed of members chosen every second 
year by the people of the several States, and 
the electors in each State shall have the qualifi- 
cations requisite for electors of the most nu- 
merous branch of the State legislature. 

No person shall be a representative who shall 
not have attained to the age of 25 years ; and 
been seven years a citizen of the United States, 
and who shall not, when elected, be an inhabit- 
ant of that State in which he shall be chosen. 

Representatives and direct taxes shall be ap- 
portioned among the several States which may] 


UNITED STATES. 


41 


[be included within this Union, according to their 
respective numbers, which shall be determined 
by adding to the whole number of free persons, 
including those bound to service for a term of 
years, and excluding Indians not taxed, three- 
fifths of all other persons. The actual enume- 
ration shall be made within three years after the 
first meeting of the Congress of the United 
States, and within every subsequent term of 
ten years, in such manner as they shall by law 
direct. The number of representatives shall not 
exceed one for every 30,000 ; but each State 
shall have at least one representative ; and, until 
such enumeration shall be made, the State of 
New Hampshire shall be entitled to choose 
three ; Massachusetts, eight ; Rhode Island and 
Providence Plantations, one ; Connecticut, five ; 
New York, six ; New Jersey, four ; Pennsylva- 
nia, eight ; Delaware, one ; Maryland, six ; Vir- 
ginia, ten ; North Carolina, five; South Caro- 
lina, five ; and Georgia, three. 

When vacancies happen in the representation 
from any State, the executive authority thereof 
shall issue writs of election to fill such va- 
cancies. 

The House of Representatives shall choose 
their Speaker, and other officers ; and shall have 
the sole power of impeachment. 

Sect. 3. The Senate of the United States shall 
be composed of two senators from each State, 
chosen by the legislature thereof, for six years ; 
and each senator shall have one vote. 

Immediately after they shall be assembled, in 
consequence of the first election, they shall be 
divided as equally as may be into three classes. 
The seats of the senators of the first class shall 
be vacated at the expiration of the second year ; 
of the second class at the expiration of the 
fourth year ; and of the third class at the expi- 
ration of the sixth year, so that one-third may 
be chosen every second year ; and if vacancies 
happen by resignation, or otherwise, during the 
recess of the legislature of any State, the exe- 
cutive thereof may make temporary appoint- 
ments until the next meeting of the legislature, 
which shall then fill such vacancies. 

No person shall be a senator who shall not 
have attained to the age of 30 years, and been 
nine years a citizen of the United States, and who 
shall not, when elected, be an inhabitant of that 
State for which he shall be chosen. 

The Vice President of the United States shall 
be President of the Senate, but shall have no 
vote, unless they be equally divided. 

The Senate shall choose their other officers, 
VOL. v. 


and also a President pro tempore in the absence 
of the Vice President, or when he shall exercise 
the office of President of the United States. 

The Senate shall have the sole power to try 
all impeachments. When sitting for that pur- 
pose, they shall be on oath or affirmation. When 
the President of the United States is tried, the 
chief justice shall preside : and no person shall 
be convicted without the concurrence of two- 
thirds of the members present. 

Judgment in cases of impeachment shall not 
extend further than to removal from office, and 
disqualification to hold and enjoy any office of 
honour, trust, or profit, under the United States; 
but the party convicted shall nevertheless be 
liable and subject to indictment, trial, judgment, 
and punishment, according to law. 

Sect. 4. The times, places, and manner of hold- 
ing elections for senators and representatives, 
shall be prescribed in each State by the legisla- 
ture thereof; but the Congress may at any time 
by law make or alter such regulations, except as 
to the places of choosing senators. 

The Congress shall assemble at least once in 
every year, and such meeting shall be on the 
first Monday in December, unless they shall by 
law appoint a different day. 

Sect. 5. Each house shall be the judge of the 
elections, returns, and qualifications of its own 
members, and a majority of each shall constitute 
a quorum to do busines ; but a smaller number 
may adjourn from day to day, and may be au- 
thorized to compel the attendance of absent 
members, in such a manner, and under such pe- 
nalties, as each house may provide. 

Each house may determine the rules of its 
proceedings, punish its members for disorderly 
behaviour ; and, with the concurrence of two- 
thirds, expel a member. 

Each house shall keep a journal of its pro- 
ceedings, and from time to time publish the 
same, excepting such parts as may in their judg- 
ment require secrecy ; and the yeas and nays of 
the members of either house on any question 
shall, at the desire of one-fifth of those present, 
be entered on the journal. 

Neither house, during the session of Con- 
gress, shall, without the consent of the other, 
adjourn for more than three days, nor to any 
other place than that in which the tw r o houses 
shall be sitting. 

Sect. 6. The Senators and Representatives 
shall receive a compensation for their services, 
to be ascertained by law, and paid out of the 
treasury of the United States. They shall, in] 

G 


42 


UNITED STATES. 


; all cases, except treason, felony, and breach of 
the peace, be privileged from arrest during their 
attendance at the session of their respective 
houses, and in going to and returning from the 
same ; and for any speech or debate in either 
house, they shall not be questioned in any other 
place. 

No senator or representative shall, during the 
time for which he was elected, be appointed to 
any civil office under the authority of the United 
States, which shall have been created, or the 
emoluments whereof shall have been increased 
during such time ; and no person holding any 
office under the United States shall be a mem- 
ber of either house during his continuance in 
office. 

Sect. 7. All bills for raising revenue shall ori- 
ginate in the House of Representatives : but the 
Senate may propose or concur with amendments, 
as on other bills. 

Every bill which shall have passed the House 
of Representatives and the Senate, shall, before 
it becomes a law, be presented to the President 
of the United States ; if he approve, he shall 
sign it ; but if not, he shall return it, with his 
objections, to that house in which it shall have 
originated, who shall enter the objections at 
large on their journal, and proceed to re-consider 
it. If, after such re-consideration, two-thirds of 
that house shall agree to pass the bill, it shall 
be sent, together with the objections, to the other 
house, by which it shall likewise be re-consider- 
ed, and if approved by two-thirds of that house, 
it shall become a law. But in all such cases 
the votes of both houses shall be determined by 
yeas and nays, and the names of the persons 
voting for and against the bill shall be entered 
on the journal of each house respectively. If 
any bill shall not be returned by the President 
within 10 days, (Sundays excepted) after it shall 
have been presented to him, the same shall be a 
law, in like manner as if he had signed it, 
unless the Congress, by their adjournment, pre- 
vent its return, in which case it shall not be a 
law. 

Every order, resolution, or vote, to which the 
concurrence of the Senate and House of Repre- 
sentatives may be necessary (except on a ques- 
tion of adjournment) shall be presented to the 
President of the United States ; and before the 
same shall take effect, shall be approved by him ; 
or, being disapproved by him, shall be re-passed 
by two-thirds of the Senate and House of Re- 
presentatives, according to the rules and limi- 
tations prescribed in the case of a bill. 


Sect. 8. The Congress shall have power 

To lay and collect taxes, duties, imposts, and 
excises ; to pay the debts and provide for the 
common defence and general welfare of the 
United States; but all duties, imposts, and ex- 
cises, shall be uniform throughout the United 
States : 

To borrow money on the credit of the United 
States : 

To regulate commerce with foreign nations, 
and among the several States, and with the 
Indian tribes ; 

To establish an uniform rule of naturalization, 
and uniform laws on the subject of bankruptcies 
throughout the United States : 

To coin money, regulate the value thereof, 
and of foreign coin, and fix the standard of 
weights and measures : 

To provide for the punishment of counter- 
feiting the securities and current coin of the 
United States : 

To establish post offices and post roads : 

To promote the progress of science and useful 
arts, by securing for limited times, to authors 
and inventors, the exclusive right to their respec- 
tive writings and discoveries : 

To constitute tribunals inferior to the supreme 
court : 

To define and punish piracies and felonies 
committed on the high seas, and offences against 
the law of nations : 

To declare war, grant letters of marque and 
reprisal, and make rules concerning captures on 
land and water : 

To raise and support armies, but no appro- 

{ iriation of money to that use shall be for a 
onger term than two years : 

To provide and maintain a navy : 

To make rules for the government and regu- 
lation of the land and naval forces : 

To provide for calling forth the militia to exe- 
cute the laws of the union, suppress insurrec- 
tions, and repel invasions : 

To provide for organizing, arming, and disci- 
plining the militia, and for governing such part 
of them as may be employed in the service of 
the United States, reserving to the States re- 
spectively the appointment of the officers, and 
the authority of training the militia according 
to the discipline prescribed by Congress : 

To exercise exclusive legislation in all cases 
whatsoever, over such district (not exceeding 10 
miles square) as may by cession of particular 
States, and the acceptance of Congress, become 
the seat of government of the United States Q 


UNITED STATES. 


43 


[and to exercise like authority over all places 
purchased by the consent of the legislature of 
the State in which the same shall be, for the 
erection of forts, magazines, arsenals, dock yards, 
and other needful buildings : — And 

To make all laws which shall be necessary 
and proper for carrying into execution the fore- 
going powers, and all other powers vested by 
this constitution in the government of the 
United States, or in any department or officer 
thereof. 

Sect. 9. The migration or importation of such 
persons as any of the States now existing shall 
think proper to admit, shall not be prohibited by 
the Congress prior to the year 1808, but a tax or 
duty may be imposed on such importation, not 
exceeding 10 dollars for each person. 

The privilege of the writ of habeas corpus 
shall not be suspended, unless when in cases of 
rebellion or invasion the public safety may re- 
quire it. 

No bill of attainder, or ex post facto law, shall 
be passed. 

No capitation, or other direct tax, shall be 
laid, unless in proportion to the census or enu- 
meration hereinbefore directed to be taken. 

No tax or duty shall be laid on articles ex- 
ported from any State. No preference shall be 
given by any regulation of commerce or revenue 
to the ports of one State over those of another: 
nor shall vessels bound to or from one State, be 
obliged to enter, clear, or pay duties in another. 

No money shall be drawn from the treasury, 
but in consequence of appropriations made by 
law ; and a regular statement and account of 
the receipts and expenditures of all public money 
shall be published from time to time. 

No title of nobility shall be granted by the 
United States. And no person holding any 
office of profit or trust under them, shall, with- 
out the consent of Congress, accept of any 
present, emolument, office, or title of any kind 
whatever, from any king, prince, or foreign 
state. 

Sect. 10. No State shall enter into any treaty, 
alliance, or confederation ; grant letters of 
marque and reprisal ; coin money ; emit bills of 
credit ; make any thing but gold and silver coin 
a tender in payment of debts ; pass any bill of 
attainder, ex post facto law, or law impairing the 
obligation of contracts, or grant any title of 
nobility. 

No State shall, without the consent of the 
Con gress, lay any imposts or duties on imports 
or exports, except what may be absolutely ne- 


cessary for executing its inspection laws ; and 
the net produce of all duties and imposts, laid 
by any State on imports or exports, shall be for 
the use of the Treasury of the United States; 
and all such laws shall be subject to the revision 
and controul of the Congress. No State shall, 
without the consent of Congress, lay any duty 
of tonnage, keep troops, or ships of war, in time 
of peace, enter into any agreement or compact 
with another State, or with a foreign power, or 
engage in war, unless actually invaded, or in 
such imminent danger as will not admit of 
delay. 

Art. II. — Sect. 1. The executive power shall 
be vested in a President of the United States of 
America. He shall hold his office during the 
term of four years, and, together with the Vice 
President, chosen for the same term, be elected 
as follows : 

Each State shall appoint, in such manner as 
the legislature thereof may direct, a number of 
electors, equal to the whole number of senators 
and representatives to which the State may be 
intitled in the Congress : but no senator or re- 
presentative, or person holding an office of trust 
or profit under the United States, shall be ap- 
pointed an elector. 

The electors shall meet in their respective 
States, and vote by ballot for two persons, of 
whom one at least shall not be an inhabitant of 
the same State with themselves. And they shall 
make a list of all the persons voted for, and of 
the number of votes for each ; which list they 
shall sign and certify, and transmit, sealed, to 
the seat of the government of the United States, 
directed to the President of the Senate. The 
President of the Senate shall, in the presence of 
the Senate and House of Representatives, open 
all the certificates, and the votes shall then be 
counted. The person having the greatest num- 
ber of votes shall be the President, if such num- 
ber be a majority of the whole number of 
electors appointed ; and if there be more than 
one who have such majority, and have an equal 
number of votes, then the House of Represen- 
tatives shall immediately choose by ballot one 
of them for President ; and if no person have a 
majority, then from the five highest on the list, 
the said House shall in like manner choose the 
President. But in choosing the President, the 
votes shall be taken by States, the representa- 
tions from each State having one vote ; a quorum 
for this purpose shall consist of a member or 
members from two-thirds of the States, and a 
majority of all the States shall be necessary tol 
G 2 


44 


UNITED 

[a choice. In every case, after the choice of the 
President, the person having the greatest num- 
ber of votes of the electors shall be the Vice 
President. But if there should remain two or 
more who have equal votes, the Senate shall 
choose from them by ballot the Vice President. 

The Congress may determine the time of 
choosing the electors, and the day on which they 
shall give their votes ; which day shall be the 
same throughout the United States. 

No persoik, except a natural-born citizen, or a 
citizen of the United States at the time of the 
adoption of this constitution, shall be eligible to 
the office of President ; neither shall any person 
be eligible to that office who shall not have 
attained to the age of 35 years, and been 14 years 
a resident within the United States. 

In case of the removal of the President from 
office, or of his death, resignation, or inability 
to discharge the powers and duties of the said 
office, the same shall devolve on the Vice Presi- 
dent, and the Congress may by law provide for 
the case of removal, death, resignation, or in- 
ability, both of the President and Vice Presi- 
dent, declaring what officer shall then act as 
President, and such officer shall act accordingly, 
until the disability be removed, or a President 
shall be elected. 

The President shall, at stated times, receive 
for his services a compensation, which shall 
neither be increased or diminished during the 
period for which he shall have been elected, and 
he shall not receive within that period any other 
emolument from the United States, or any of 
them. 

Before he enters on the execution of his 
office, he shall take the following oath or affir- 
mation : 

4 I do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will 
faithfully execute the office of President of 
the United States, and will, to the best of 
my ability, preserve, protect, and defend the 
constitution of the United States.’ 

Sect. 2. The President shall be commander in 
chief of the army and navy of the United States, 
and of the militia of the several States, when 
called into the actual service of the United 
States ; he may require the opinion, in writing, 
of the principal officer in each of the executive 
departments, upon any subject relating to the 
duties of their respective offices, and he shall 
have power to grant reprieves and pardons for 
offences against the United States, except in 
cases of impeachment. 

He shall have power, by and with the advice 


STATES. 

and consent of the Senate, to make treaties, pro- 
vided two-thirds of the senators present concur; 
and he shall nominate, and by and with the 
advice and consent of the Senate, shall appoint 
ambassadors, other public ministers, and con- 
suls, judges of the supreme court, and all other 
officers of the United States, whose appoint- 
ments are not herein otherwise provided for, 
and which shall be established by law. But the 
Congress may by law vest the appointment of 
such inferior officers, as they think proper, in the 
President alone, in the courts of law, or in the 
heads of departments. 

The President shall have power to fill up all 
vacancies that may happen during the recess of 
the Senate, by granting commissions, which shall 
expire at the end of their next session. 

Sect. 3 . He shall from time to time give to 
the Congress information of the state of the 
union, and recommend to their consideration 
such measures as he shall judge necessary and 
expedient ; he may, on extraordinary occasions, 
convene both houses, or either of them ; and in 
case of disagreement between them, with respect 
to the time of adjournment, he may adjourn 
them to such time as he shall think proper ; he 
shall receive ambassadors, and other public mi- 
nisters ; he shall take care that the laws be 
faithfully executed, and shall commission all 
the officers of the United States. 

Sect. 4. The President, Vice President, and 
all civil officers of the United States, shall be 
removed from office on impeachment for, and 
conviction of, treason, bribery, or other high 
crimes and misdemeanors. 

Art. III.— Sect. 1. The judicial power of the 
United States shall be vested in one supreme 
court, and in such inferior courts as the Con- 
gress may from time to time ordain and esta- 
blish. The judges, both of the supi^me and 
inferior courts, shall hold their offices during 
good behaviour, and shall, at stated times, re- 
ceive for their services a compensation, which 
shall not be diminished during their continuance 
in office. 

Sect. 2. The judicial power shall extend to all 
cases, in law and equity, arising under this con- 
stitution, the laws of the United States, and 
treaties made, or which shall be made, under 
their authority ; to all cases affecting ambassa- 
dors, other public ministers, and consuls ; to all 
cases of admiralty and maritime jurisdiction ; to 
controversies to which the United States shall 
be a party ; to controversies between two or 
more States, between a State and citizens of] 


UNITED STATES, 


45 


[another State, between citizens of different 
States, between citizens of the same State claim- 
ing- lands under grants of different States, and 
between a State, or the citizens thereof, and 
foreign States, citizens, or subjects. 

In all cases affecting ambassadors, other public 
ministers, and consuls, and those in which a 
State shall be party, the supreme court shall 
have original jurisdiction. In all the other cases 
before mentioned, the supreme court shall have 
appellate jurisdiction, both as to law and fact, 
with such exceptions, and under such regulations, 
as the Congress shall make. 

The trial of all crimes, except in cases of im- 
peachment, shall be by jury; and such trial 
shall be held in the State where the said crime 
shall have been committed ; but when not com- 
mitted within any State, the trial shall be at 
such place or places as the Congress may by 
law have directed. 

Sect. 3. Treason against the United States 
shall consist only in levying war against them, 
or in adhering to their enemies, giving them aid 
and comfort. No person shall be convicted of 
treason unless on the testimony of two witnesses 
to the same overt act, or on confession in open 
court. 

The Congress shall have power to declare the 
punishment of treason, but no attainder of trea- 
son shall work corruption of blood, or for- 
feiture, except during the life of the person at- 
tainted. 

Art. IV. — Sect. 1. Full faith and credit shall 
be given in each State to the public acts, re- 
cords, and judicial proceedings of every other 
State. And the Congress may, by general laws, 
presci’ibe the manner in which such acts, re- 
cords, and proceedings, shall be proved, and the 
effect thereof. 

Sect. 2. The citizens of each State shall be 
entitled to all privileges and immunities of ci- 
tizens in the several States. 

A person charged in any State with treason, 
felony, or other crime, who shall flee from jus- 
tice, and be found in another State, shall, on 
demand of the executive authority of the State 
from which he fled, be delivered up, to be removed 
to the State having jurisdiction of the crime. 

No person held to service or labour in one 
State, under the laws thereof, escaping into 
another, shall, in consequence of any law or 
regulation therein, be discharged from such ser- 
vice or labour, but shall be delivered up on 
claim of the party to whom such service or 
labour may be due. 


Sect. 3. New States may be admitted by the 
Congress into this union, but no new State shall 
be formed or erected within the jurisdiction of 
any other State ; nor any State be formed by the 
junction of two or more States, or parts of 
States, without the consent of the legislatures 
of the States concerned as well as of the Con- 
gress. 

The Congress shall have power to dispose of 
and make all needful rules and regulations re- 
specting the territory or other property belong- 
ing to the United States ; and nothing in this 
constitution shall be so construed as to prejudice 
any claims of the United States, or of any par- 
ticular State. 

Sect. 4. The United States shall guarantee to 
every State in this union a republican form of 
government, and shall protect each of them 
against invasion; and on application of the legis- 
lature, or of the executive (when the legislature 
cannot be convened) against domestic violence. 

Art. V. — The Con gress, whenever two -thirds 
of both houses shall deem it necessary, shall 
propose amendments to this constitution, or, on 
the application of the legislatures of two-thirds 
of the several States, shall call a convention for 
proposing amendments, which, in either case, 
shall be valid to all intents and purposes, as part 
of this constitution, when ratified by the legis- 
latures of three-fourths of the several States, 
or by conventions in three-fourths thereof, as 
the one or the other mode of ratification may be 
proposed by the Congress : provided, that no 
amendment which may be made prior to the 
year 1808, shall in any manner affect the first 
and fourth clauses in the ninth section of the 
first article ; and that no State, without its con- 
sent, shall be deprived of its equal suffrage in 
the Senate. 

Art. YI. — All debts contracted, and engage- 
ments entered into before the adoption of this 
constitution, shall be as valid against the United 
States under this constitution, as under the con- 
federation. 

This constitution, and the laws of the United 
States, which shall be made in pursuance there- 
of ; and all treaties made, or which shall be 
made, under the authority of the United States, 
shall be the supreme law of the land ; and the 
judges in every State shall be bound thereby, 
any thing in the constitution or laws of any State 
to the contrary notwithstanding. 

The Senators and Representatives before men- 
tioned, and the Members of the sev ra, ate 
Legislatures, and all Executive and Judicial] 


46 


UNITED STATES. 


[Officers, both of the United States and of the 
several States, shall be bound by oath or affir- 
mation to support this constitution ; but no reli- 
gious test shall ever be required as a qualifi- 
cation to any office or public trust under the 
United States. 

Art. VII. — The ratification of the conventions 
of nine States shall be sufficient for the esta- 
blishment of this constitution between the States 
so ratifying the same. 

Done in Convention, by the unanimous consent 
of the States present, the 17th day of Septem- 
ber, in the year of our Lord 1787, and of 
the Independence of the United States of 
America the 12th. In witness whereof, we 
have hereunto subscribed our names. 

George Washington, President. 
Signed also by all the Delegates which 
were present from Twelve States. 
Attest. William Jackson, Secretary. 

In Convention, Monday, September 17, 1787. 

Present, 

The States of New Hampshire, Massachu- 
setts, Connecticut, Mr. Hamilton from 
New York, New Jersey, Pennsylvania, 
Delaware, Maryland, Virginia, North Ca- 
rolina, South Carolina, and Georgia. 

Resolved, That the preceding constitution be 
laid before the United States in Congress as- 
sembled, and that it is the opinion of this Con- 
vention, that it should afterwards be submitted 
to a Convention of Delegates, chosen in each 
State by the people thereof, under the recom- 
mendation of its legislature, for their assent and 
ratification ; and that each Convention assenting 
to, and ratifying the same, should give notice 
thereof to the United States in Congress as- 
sembled. 

Resolved, That it is the opinion of this Con- 
vention, that as soon as the Conventions of Nine 
States shall have ratified this constitution, the 
United States in Congress assembled should fix 
a day on which electors should be appointed by 
the States which shall have ratified the same, and 
a day on which the electors should assemble to 
vote for the President, and the time and place 
for commencing proceedings under this consti- 
tution. That after such publication, the electors 
should be appointed, and the senators and repre- 
sentatives elected ; that the electors should meet 
on the day fixed for the election of the Presi- 
dent, and should transmit their votes certified, 
signed, sealed, and directed, as the constitution 
requires, to the Secretary of the United States, 


in Congress assembled; that the Senators and 
Representatives should convene at the time 
and place assigned ; that the Senators should 
appoint a President of the Senate, for the sole 
purpose of receiving, opening, and counting the 
votes for President ; and, that after he shall be 
chosen, the Congress, together with the Presi- 
dent, should, without delay, proceed to execute 
this consitution. 

By the unanimous order of the Convention, 

George Washington, President. 
William Jackson, Secretary. 

In Convention, September 17, 1787. 
sir, 

We have now the honour to submit to the con- 
sideration of the United States in Congress as- 
sembled, that constitution which has appeared to 
us the most adviseable. 

The friends of our country have long seen and 
desired, that the power of making war, peace, 
and treaties, that of levying money and regulating 
commerce, and the correspondent executive and 
judicial authorities, should be fully and effec- 
tually vested in the general government of the 
union ; but the impropriety of delegating such 
extensive trust to one body of men is evident. 
Hence results the necessity of a different organi- 
zation. 

It is obviously impracticable, in the federal 
government of these States, to secure all rights 
of independent sovereignty to each, and yet pro- 
vide for the interest and safety of all. Indivi- 
duals entering into society must give up a share 
of liberty to preserve the rest. The magnitude 
of the sacrifice must depend as well on situation 
and circumstance, as on the object to be attained. 
It is at all times difficult to draw with precision 
the line between those rights which must be sur- 
rendered, and those which may be reserved ; and 
on the present occasion this difficulty was in- 
creased by a difference among the several States 
as to their situation, extent, habits, and particu- 
lar interests. 

In all our deliberations on this subject we kept 
steadily in our view, that which appears to us the 
greatest interest of every true American, the con- 
solidation of our union, in which is involved our 
prosperity, felicity, safety, perhaps our national 
existence. This important consideration, se- 
riously and deeply impressed on our minds, led 
each state in the convention to be less rigid on 
points of inferior magnitude than might have 
been otherwise expected ; and thus the constitu- 
tion, which we now present, is the result of a] 


47 


UNITED 

[spirit of amity, and of that mutual deference and 
concession which the peculiarity of our political 
situation rendered indispensable. 

That it will meet the full and entire approba- 
tion of every State is not perhaps to be expected : 
but each will doubtless consider, that had her in- 
terests been alone consulted, the consequences 
might have been particularly disagreeable or in- 
jurious to others ; that it is liable to as few ex- 
ceptions as could reasonably have been expected, 
we hope and believe : that it may promote the 
lasting welfare of that country so dear to us all, 
and secure her freedom and happiness, is our most 
ardent wish. 

With great respect w'e have the honour to be, 
Sir, your Excellency’s most obedient and humble 
servants, George Washington, President. 

By unanimous order of the Convention. 

His Excellency the President of the Congress. 

The conventions of a number of the States 
having, at the time of their adopting the 
constitution, expressed a desire, in order 
to prevent misconstruction or abuse of its 
powers, that further declaratory and re- 
strictive clauses should be added; and, as 
extending the ground of public confidence 
in the government, will best ensure the 
beneficent ends of its institution. 

Resolved by the Senate and House of Repre- 
sentatives of the United States of America in 
Congress assembled, two-thirds of both houses 
concurring, That the following articles be pro- 
posed to the legislatures of the several States, as 
amendments to the constitution of the United 
States, all or any of which articles, when ratified 
by three-fourths of the said legislatures, to be 
valid to all intents and purposes, as part of the 
said constitution : viz. 

Articles in addition to, and amendment of, 
the constitution of the United States of 
America, proposed by Congress, and rati- 
fied by the legislatures of the several 
States, pursuant to the fifth article of the 
original constitution. 

Art. I. — After the first enumeration required 
by the first article of the constitution, there shall 
be one representative for every 30,000, until the 
number shall amount to 100, after which the pro- 
portion shall be so regulated by Congress, that 
there shall be not less than 100 representatives, 
nor less than one representative for every 40,000 
persons, until the number of representatives shall 
amount to 200, after which the proportion shall 


STATES. 

be so regulated by Congress, that there shall not 
be less than 200 representatives, nor more than 
one representative for every 50,000 persons. 

Art. II. — No law varying the compensation for 
the services of the senators and representatives 
shall take effect, until an election of representa- 
tives shall have intervened. 

Art. III. — Congress shall make no law respect- 
ing an establishment of religion, or prohibiting 
the free exercise thereof; or abridging the free- 
dom of speech, or of the press ; or the right of 
people peaceably to assemble, and to petition the 
government for a redress of grievances. 

Art. IV. — A well-regulated militia being ne- 
cessary to the security of a free state, the right 
of the people to keep and bear arms shall not be 
infringed. 

Art. Y. — No soldier shall in time of peace be 
quartered in any house without the consent of 
the owner, nor in time of war but in a manner to 
be prescribed by law. 

Art. VI. — The right of the people to be secure 
in their persons, houses, papers, and effects, 
against unreasonable searches and seizures, shall 
not be violated, and no warrants shall issue, but 
upon probable cause, supported by oath or affir- 
mation, and particularly describing the place to 
be searched, and the persons or things to be 
seized. 

Art. VII. — No person shall be held to answer 
for a capital, or otherwise infamous crime, unless 
on a presentment or indictment of a grand jury, 
except in cases arising in the land or naval forces, 
or in the militia when in actual service, in time 
of war or public danger ; nor shall any person 
be subject for the same offence to be twice put in 
jeopardy of life or limb ; nor shall be compelled 
in any criminal case to be a witness against him- 
self, nor be deprived of life, liberty, or property, 
without due process of law ; nor shall private 
property be taken for public use without just 
compensation. 

Art. VIII. — In all criminal prosecutions the 
accused shall enjoy the right to a speedy and 
public trial, by an impartial jury of the State and 
district wherein the crime shall have been com- 
mitted, which district shall have been previously 
ascertained by law, and to be informed of the 
nature and cause of the accusation ; to be con- 
fronted with the witnesses against him ; to have 
compulsory process for obtaining witnesses in 
his favour, and to have the assistance of counsel 
for his defence. 

Art. IX. — In suits at common law, where the 
value in controversy shall exceed 20 dollars, the] 


48 


UNITED STATES. 


[right of trial by jury shall be preserved, and no 
fact, tried by a jury, shall be otherwise re-exa- 
mined in any court of the United States, than 
according to the rules of the common law. 

Art. X. — Excessive bail shall not be required, 
nor excessive fines imposed, nor cruel and un- 
usual punishments inflicted. 

Art. XI. — The enumeration in the constitution 
of certain rights shall not be construed to deny 
or disparage others retained by the people. 

Art. XII. — The powers not delegated to the 
United States by the constitution, nor prohibited 
by it to the States, are reserved to the States re- 
spectively, or to the people. 

The following States have ratified all the fore- 
going articles of amendment to the constitution 
of the United States, viz. Maryland, N. Carolina, 
S. Carolina, New York, Virginia, and Vermont. 
New Hampshire, New Jersey, and Pennsylvania 
reject the second article ; and Delaware rejects 
the first article. No official returns to our know- 
ledge have been made from the other States. 

Society of the Cincinnati . — This society was 
instituted immediately on the close of the war in 
178 3. At their first general meeting at Phila- 
delphia, in May 1784, they altered and amended 
the original institution, and reduced it to its 
present form. They denominated themselves 
“ The Society of the Cincinnati,” from the high 
veneration they possessed for the character of 
that illustrious Roman, Lucius Quintius Cincin- 
natus. 

The persons who constitute this society, are 
all the commissioned and brevet officers of the 
army and navy of the United States who served 
three years, and who left the service with repu- 
tation ; all officers who were in actual service at 
the conclusion of the war ; all the principal staff 
officers of the continental army ; and the officers 
who have been deranged by the several resolu- 
tions of Congress upon the different reforms of 
the army. 

There were also admitted into this society all 
the ministers of his most Christian Majesty to the 
United States ; all the generals and colonels of 
regiments and legions of the land forces ; all 
the admirals and captains of the navy, ranking as 
colonels, who had co-operated w ith the armies of 
the United States in their exertions for liberty ; 
and such other persons as had been admitted by 
the respective State meetings. 

The motives which originally induced the 
officers of the American army to form themselves 
into a society of friends, are summed up in their 
circular letter. “ Having,” say they, “ lived in 


the strictest habits of amity through the various 
stages of a war, unparalleled in many of its cir- 
cumstances ; having seen the objects for which 
we have contended happily attained, in the mo- 
ment of triumph and separation, when we were 
about to act the last pleasing, melancholy scene 
in our military drama — pleasing, because we were 
to leave our country possessed of independence 
and peace — melancholy, because we were to part, 
perhaps never to meet again ; while every breast 
was penetrated with feelings which can be more 
easily conceived than described ; while every 
little act of tenderness recurred fresh to the re- 
collection, it was impossible not to wish our 
friendships should be continued ; it was ex- 
tremely natural to desire they might be perpetu- 
ated by our posterity to the remotest ages. With 
these impressions, and with such sentiments, we 
candidly confess we signed the institution. — We 
know our motives were irreproachable.” 

The society have an order, viz. a Bald Eagle 
of gold, bearing on its bi-east the emblems de- 
scribed as follows : — 

The principal figure is Cincinnatus ; three 
senators presenting him with a sword and other 
military ensigns : on a field in the back ground, 
his wife standing at the door of their cottage ; 
near it a plough and other instruments of hus- 
bandry. Round the whole, omnia reliquit servare 
rempublicam. On the reverse, the sun rising, a 
city with open gates, and vessels entering the 
port ; Fame crowning Cincinnatus with a wreath, 
inscribed, virtutis prcemium. Below, hands join- 
ing, supporting a heart ; with the motto, esto 
perpetua. Round the whole, societas Cincinnato- 
rum , instituta, A. D. 1783. 

Agriculture and Manufactures . — The three im- 
portant objects of attention in the United States 
are agriculture, commerce, and manufactures. 
The richness of the soil, which amply rewards 
the industrious husbandman ; the temperature 
of the climate, which admits of steady labour ; 
the cheapness of land, whicli tempts the foreigner 
from his native home, has always led the inhabi- 
tants to fix on agriculture as the great leading 
interest of this country. This furnishes outward 
cargoes not only for all their own ships, but for 
those also which foreign nations send to their 
ports, or, in other words, it pays for all their 
importations ; it supplies a great part of the 
clothing of the inhabitants, and food for them 
and their cattle. 

The number of people employed in agriculture, 
is at least three parts in four of the inhabitants 
of the United States ; some say more. It follows] 


UNITED STATES. 


49 


[of course that they form the body of the militia, 
who are the bulwark of the nation. The value 
of their property, occupied by agriculture, is 
many times greater than the property employed 
in every other way. The settlement of waste 
lands, the sub-division of farms, and the nume- 
rous improvements in husbandry, annually in- 
crease the pre-eminence of the agricultural inte- 
rest. The resources derived from it, are at all 
times certain and indispensably necessary : be- 
sides, the rural life promotes health by its active 
nature; and morality, by keeping people from 
the luxuries and vices of the populous towns. 
In short, agriculture may be considered as the 
spring of commerce, and the parent of the manu- 
factures of these States. 

Manufactures . — The subject of manufactures 
is one, in a high degree, interesting to the inhabi- 
tants of the United States, but is too copious to 
be treated at large in a work of this kind. We 
shall confine what we have to say, in this place, 
to a few general observations on the manufac- 
tures of these States, and to an enumeration of 
such articles as have been already manufactured. 
Mr. Hamilton, Secretary of the Treasury in the 
United States, in his “ Report on the Subject of 
Manufactures,” and the writer (supposed to be 
Mr. Coxe, Assistant to the Secretary of the Trea- 
sury) of “ A brief Examination of Lord Sheffield’s 
Observations on the Commerce of the United 
States,” in two supplementary notes on American 
manufactures, have given the fullest and most ac- 
curate information on this subject. To them the 
reader is referred, if he wishes for a more parti- 
cular account of the manufactures than is here 
given. — They lire the principal authorities for 
what follows. 

The value of labour-saving machines has, in 
some degree, been known and experienced here ; 
and by their general adoption in their most im- 
proved state, to the cotton, flaxen, hempen, me- 
tal, and part of the woollen and silken branches ; 
but by no means yet to such a degree as to be 
independent of British and other foreign manu- 
factures. As to advantageous situations for the 
erection of mills, and for the establishment of 
manufactures in general, no country has more, 
and few so many as the United States : it is also 
far from being deficient in ingenious mechanics, 
who are capable not only of erecting machines 
already invented, and making improvements upon 
them, but also of inventing new machines of the 
most complicated and useful kind. 

The establishment of manufactures has natu- 
VOL. y. 


rally increased the inducements which this coun- 
try, in its present state, holds out to foreigners 
to come to it and become citizens. The oppres- 
sion that is experienced by the people in some 
parts of Europe, and the distresses that multi- 
tudes are brought into by the disturbed state of 
so many kingdoms, have excited a disposition in 
many of their valuable citizens, to emigrate to a 
country where they may enjoy freedom and peace. 
The effect of multiplying the opportunities of 
employment to those who emigrate, by manufac- 
tural establishments, to a still greater degree, 
would probably be an increase of the number and 
extent of valuable acquisitions to the population, 
arts, and industry of the country ; but a very 
material objection has been made to the pursuit 
of manufactures in the United States, which is 
the impracticability of success, arising from scar- 
city of hands, dearness of labour, and want of 
capital. The last of these circumstances, want 
of capital, has perhaps little foundation. With 
regard to the scarcity of hands, the fact is appli- 
cable to, at least, certain parts of the United 
States. There are, on the other hand, large 
districts, which may be considered as pretty fully 
peopled ; and which, notwithstanding a continual 
drain for distant settlements, are thickly inter- 
spersed with flourishing and increasing towns. — 
Connecticut and Massachusetts contained as far 
back as the census of 1790, on an average, as 
many as 55 inhabitants to every square mile; 
and the county of Essex, in Massachusetts, ave- 
raged 135 inhabitants to every square mile. 
This latter district has already reached the point 
at which the complaint of scarcity of hands 
ceases ; and the above-mentioned states at large 
are not far remote from, and are approaching 
fast towards it : and having, perhaps, fewer at- 
tractions to agriculture than some other more s . 
and temperate parts of the union, they exhibit 
a proportionably stronger propensity to the pur- 
suit of manufactures, which is exemplified in the 
maturity which some branches have already at- 
tained in these districts. 

But there are circumstances that materially 
diminish every where the effect of a scarcity of 
hands. These circumstances are the great use 
which may be made of women and children — the 
vast extension given, by late improvements, to 
the employment of machines, which, substituting 
the agency of fire and water, has prodigiously 
lessened the necessity for manual labour ; and 
lastly, the attraction of foreign emigrants. In all 
the populous towns there is already a large pro-] 

H 


50 


UNITED STATES. 


[portion of ingenious and valuable workmen in 
different arts and trades, who, by coming hither 
from Europe, have improved their own condi- 
tion, and added to the industry and wealth of 
the United States. It is a natural inference, 
from the experience already had, that as soon 
as the United States shall present the counte- 
nance of a serious prosecution of manufactures ; 
as soon as foreign artists shall be made sensible, 
that the state of things here affords a moral cer- 
tainty of employment and encouragement, com- 
petent numbers of European workmen will trans- 
plant themselves, so as effectually to ensure the 
success of the design. These circumstances suf- 
ficiently obviate the objection which arises from 
a scarcity of hands. 

But, to all the arguments which are brought 
to evince the impracticability of success, in manu- 
facturing establishments in the United States, it 
would be a sufficient answer, to refer to the ex- 
perience of what has been already done. It can- 
not be denied that several important branches 
have grown up and flourished, with a rapidity 
which surprises ; affording an encouraging as- 
surance of success in future attempts. Of these 
the following are the most considerable, viz. — 
Of Skins ; tanned and tawed leathers, dressed 
skins, shoes, boots, and slippers, harness, and 
saddlery of all kinds, portmanteaus, and trunks, 
leather breeches, gloves, muffs, and tippets, 
parchment and glue. Of Iron ; bar and sheet- 
iron, steel, nail rods and nails, implements of 
husbandry, stoves, pots and other household uten- 
sils, the steel and iron work of carriages and for 
ship-building, anchors, scale beams and weights, 
and various tools of artificers, arms of different 
kinds. Of Wood; ships, cabinet wares, and tur- 
nery, wool and cotton cards, and other machinery 
for manufactures and husbandry, mathematical 
instruments, coopers wares of every kind. Of 
Flax and Hemp ; cables, sail-cloth, cordage, 
twine and packthread. Of Clay ; bricks and 
coarse tiles, and potters wares. Ardent spirits 
and malt liquors. Writing and printing paper, 
sheathing and wrapping paper, pasteboards, ful- 
lers or press papers, and paper hangings. Hats 
of fur and wool, and mixtures of both. Womens 
stuff and silk shoes. Refined sugars. Choco- 
late. Oil of animals and seeds, soap, spermaceti 
and tallow candles. Copper and brass wares, 
particularly utensils for distillers, sugar-refiners 
and brewers, hand irons and other articles for 
household use. Clocks, philosophical apparatus. 
Tin wares of almost all kinds for ordinary use. 


Carriages of all kinds. Snuff, chewing and smok- 
ing tobacco. Starch and hair powder. Lamp- 
black and other painters colours. Gunpowder. 

Besides the manufacture of these articles, 
which are carried on as regular trades, and have 
attained to a considerable degree of maturity, 
there is a vast scene of household manufactur- 
ing, which contributes very largely to the supply 
of the community. These domestic manufactures 
are prosecuted as well in the Southern, as in the 
Middle and Northern States; great quantities of 
coarse cloths, coatings, serges and flannels, linsey 
woolseys, hosiery of wool, cotton and thread, 
coarse fustians, jeans and muslins, checked and 
striped cotton and linen goods, bedticks, cover- 
lets, and counterpanes, tow linens, coarse shirt- 
ings, sheetings, towelling and table linen, and 
various mixtures of wool and cotton, and of cot- 
ton and flax, are made in the household way, 
and in many instances, to an extent not only suf- 
ficient for the supply of the families in which they 
are made, but for sale, and even in some cases 
for exportation. It is computed in a number of 
districts, that two-thirds, three-fourths, four- 
fifths, and in some places even a greater propor- 
tion of all the clothing of the inhabitants is made 
by themselves. 

The above enumeration does not comprehend 
all the articles that are manufactured as regular 
trades. The following articles, though manu- 
factured in a less extensive degree, and some of 
them in less perfection, ought to be added. — 
Gold, silver, pewter, lead, glass and stone wares 
of many kinds, books in various languages, print- 
ing types and presses, bells, combs, buttons, corn 
fans, ploughs and all other implements of hus- 
bandry. Some of these are still in their infancy, 
as are others not enumerated, but which are at- 
tended with favourable appearances. There are 
other articles also of very great importance, 
which, though strictly speaking, manufactures, 
are omitted, as being immediately connected with 
husbandry ; such are flour and meal of all kinds, 
pot and pearl ashes, pitch, tar, turpentine, maple 
sugar, wine, and the like. 

The manufacture of maple sugar, though it has 
for many years been carried on, in the small way, 
in the Eastern States, has but very lately become 
an object of public attention. The Eastern and 
Middle States furnish a sufficient number of ma- 
ple trees to supply the United States with the 
article of sugar ; and, it is asserted, of a quality 
u equal, in the opinion of competent judges, to 
the best sugars imported from the West India j 


UNITED 

[islands.” It has been also said, u that four ac- 
tive and industrious men, well provided with 
materials and conveniences proper for carrying- 
on the business, might make, in a common sea- 
son, which lasts from four to six weeks, 4000 ibs. 
of sugar, that is lOOOlbs. to each man.” Not- 
withstanding this the export of sugar from the 
West Indies has been always increasing. No 
less than 18,000,000 lbs. of West India sugars 
were annually imported into and consumed in the 
United States as far back as the year 1790, and 
the quantity has been increasing with the en- 
larged demand of a growing population. 

Finance . — The revenue of the United States is 
raised from duties on the tonnage of vessels en- 
tered in the United States, and on imported 
goods, wares, and merchandise, and from an ex- 
cise on various articles of consumption. The 
amount of the duties arising on the tonnage of 
vessels, for the year commencing October 1, 
1790, and ending September SO, 1791, amounted 
to 145, S47 dollars. The duties arising on goods, 
wares, and merchandise, for the same year, 
amounted to 3,006,722 dollars. The whole 
amount of the revenue from the excise at that 
period was 1,200,000 dollars. 

The revenue is appropriated to the purposes 
of supporting the civil and military establish- 
ments, to the payment of the interest, and the 
diminution of the principal of the public debt. 

In the year following, October 1, 1789, the ex- 
penses and revenue of government were as fol- 
lows : — 

Expenses. 

Dols. Cts. 

Civil List 299,276 53 

Additional expense - 50,756 7 

War Department ----- 390,199 54 

Total 740,232 14 

Revenue. 

Dols. Cts. 

Duties on Imports ... 1,903,790 48 

Duties on Tonnage - - - 165,465 93 


Total 2,069,175 47 
6 

From a report of the secretary of the treasury, 
of January 23, 1792, it appears that the whole 
amount of the domestic debt of the United States, 
principal and interest, which had been subscribed 
to the loan proposed concerning that debt, by the 
act intituled, “ An act making provision for the 


STATES. 51 

debt of the United States,” was 31,797,481 dol- 
lars, 22 cents. 

which, pursuant to the terms of Dols. Cts. 
that act, had been converted 
into stock, bearing an imme- 
diate interest of 6 per cent. - 14,177,450 43 
Stock bearing the like interest 
from Jan. 1, 1801, - 7,088,727 79 

Stock bearing an immediate in- 
terest of 3 per cent. - - - 10,531,303 0 

Making together 31,797,481 22 

Of which there stood to the credit of the trus- 
tees of the sinking fund, in consequence of pur- 
chases of the public debt made under their di- 
rection, the sum of 1,131,364 dollars, 76 cents. 

The unsubscribed residue of the said debt 
amounted to 10,616,604 dollars, 65 cents. 

The debts of the respective states collectively 
were estimated to amount to 25,403,362 dollars, 
of which, 21,500,000 had been assumed, and 
17,072,334^^ subscribed, agreeably to act of 
Congress of August 4, 1790. 

The amount of a debt due to certain foreign 
officers, who served the United States during the 
late war, with arrears of interest, was 220,646 
dollars, 81 cents. 

The w hole amount of the foreign debt of the 
United States at the above period was about 
12,000,000 dollars; of which about 6,900,000 
were due to France, and the rest to Holland. 
The executive had been empowered to make an 
additional loan in Holland, sufficient to pay the 
debt to France; and measures for that purpose 
were afterwards carried into effect with regard 
to Holland. 

The act, making provision for the debt of the 
United States, appropriated the proceeds of the 
w. lands as a fund for the discharge of the public 
debt. And the act, making provision for the re- 
duction of the public debt, appropriated all the 
surplus of the duties on imports and tonnage, to 
the end of the year 1790, to the purpose of pur- 
chasing the debt at the market price ; and au- 
thorised the President to borrow the further sum 
of 2,000,000 of dollars for the same object. — 
These measures were meant by the legislature, 
as early and as fast as possible, to provide for 
the extinguishment of the existing debt. 

In the year 1790, the average proportion of 
his earnings which each citizen of the United 
States paid for the support of the civil, military, 
and naval establishments, and for the discharge ] 

ii 2 


52 


UNITED 

[of the interest of the public debts of his country, 
was about l£ dollars; equal to two days labour 
nearly ; that is, 5,000,000 of dollars to 4,000,000 
of people. In Great Britain, France, Holland, 
Spain, Portugal, Germany, &amp;c. the taxes for 
these objects, on an average, amounted to about 
6| dollars to each person. 

From the best data that could be collected, the 
taxes in the United States, for county, town and 
parish purposes ; for the support of schools, the 

} &gt;oor, roads, &amp;c. appeared to be considerably 
ess than in the countries of Europe ; and per- 
haps the objects of them, except in roads, was 
attained in a more perfect degree. Great preci- 
sion is not to be expected in these calculations ; 
but we have sufficient documents to prove that 
these assertions are not far from the truth. The 
proportion in the United States is well ascer- 
tained ; and with equal accuracy in France, by 
Mr. Neckar; and in England, Holland, Spain, 
and other kingdoms in Europe, by him, Zimmer- 
man, and other writers on the subject. 

For the objects of the late war and civil go- 
vernment, in the United States, nearly 12,000,000 
of dollars were annually raised, for nine years 
successively, apportioned on the number of in- 
habitants at that period, which amounted to a 
little short of four dollars to each person. This 
was raised principally by direct taxes. Perhaps 
a contribution of six dollars a person would not 
have been so severely felt, had a part of it been 
raised by impost and excise. 

The public debt in 1793, was perhaps smaller 
to the existing wealth and population of the 
United States than the public debt of any other 
civilised nation. They had in fact, (including 
the operations of the individual States) sunk a 
much greater proportion of their public debt in 
the previous 10 years, than any nation in the 
world. The government had never since its or- 
ganization obtained considerable loans at the 
rate of 6 per cent, a year, except from the bank 
of the United States; and these, on a capital of 
10,000,000, never amounted to 7,000,000 in the 
whole. In proportion to the amount wanted for 
the service of the year, and to the increase of 
stock of the public debt at market, the terms 
have naturally become less favourable; notwith- 
standing the commissioners of the sinking fund 
are bound by existing laws to apply the residue 
of the annual appropriation of 8,000,000 a year 
to the purchase of stock. Before we proceed fur- 
ther it will be convenient to introduce a brief ac- 
count of the origin of the bank. 


STATES. 

This bank was incorporated by act of Con- 
gress, February 25, 1791, by the name and style 
of “ The President, Directors, and Company of 
the Bank of the United States.” The amount of 
the capital stock was 10,000,000 dollars, one- 
fourth of which was in gold and silver ; the other 
three-fourths, in that part of the public debt of 
the United States, which, at the time of pay- 
ment, bore an accruing interest of 6 per cent, 
per annum. Two millions of this capital stock 
of 10,000,000 was subscribed by the President, 
in behalf of the United States. The stockholders 
were to continue a corporate body by the act, 
until March 4, 1811 ; and were capable, in law, 
of holding property to an amount not exceeding, 
in the whole, 15,000,000 dollars, including the 
aforesaid 10,000,000 dollars, capital stock. The 
corporation were not allowed at any time to 
owe, whether by bond, bill or note, or other 
contract, more than 10,000,000 dollars, over and 
above the monies then actually deposited in the 
bank for safe keeping, unless the contracting of 
any greater debt should have been previously 
authorised by a law of the United States. The 
corporation was not at liberty to receive more 
than 6 per cent, per annum for or upon its loans 
or discounts ; nor to purchase any public debt 
whatever, or to deal or trade, directly or indi- 
rectly, in any thing except bills of exchange, 
gold or silver bullion, or in the sale of goods 
really and truly pledged for money lent, and not 
redeemed in due time, or of goods which should 
be the produce of its bonds ; but they might sell 
any part of the public debt of which its stock should 
be composed. Loans, not exceeding 100,000 
dollars, might be made to the LTnited States, and 
to particular States, of a sum not exceeding 
50,000 dollars. 

Officers for the purposes of discount and de- 
posit only, might be established within the 
United States, upon the same terms, and in 
the same manner, as should be practised at 
the Bank. Four of these offices, called Branch 
Banks, were almost immediately established, viz. 
at Philadelphia, Boston, New York, Baltimore, 
and Charleston, Alexandria, &amp;c. when they di- 
vided a profit of to 8| per cent, in quarterly 
payments. The faith of the United States was 
pledged that no other bank should be established 
by any future law of the United States, during 
the continuance of the above corporation. The 
great benefits of this bank, as it respects public 
credit and commerce, have been invariably ex- 
perienced.] 


UNITED 

[The several funded capitals, together with the 
prices of stocks in January of the present year 
1814, were as follows : — 

3 per cent. - - - 56 h 

Old 6 per cent. - - 102 j 1 

New 6 per cent. - 105 the whole nominal. 

Louisiana 6 per cent. 105 { 

Bank shares - - 108 ■' 

Reverting to the subject of the national debt, 
as it affects the more immediate time, we find 
that the payments on account of the principal of 
the public debt, from October 1, 1810, to De- 
cember SI, 1811, exceeded 6,400,000 dollars. 
With the exception of the annual reimbursement 
of the 6 per cent, and deferred stocks, there re- 
mained at the end of the year 1811 no other por- 
tion of the public debt reimbursable at the will 
of the United States than the residue of con- 
verted stock, amounting to 565,000 dollars, and 
which was to be paid in the year 1812. There 
being nothing afterwards left, on which the laws, 
passed subsequently to the year 1801, for the re- 
demption of the debt could operate, a general 
view of the result and effect of those laws may be 
here usefully presented. 

Dollars. 

Exclusive of near 3,000,000 of un- 
funded debt since reimbursed, as 
detailed in the report of April 18, 

1808, the public debt of the United 
States amounted on April 1, 1801, 

to 79,926,999 

The whole amount of principal ex- 
tinguished during the period of 10 
years and nine months, commenc- 
ing on April 1, 1801, and ending 
December 31, 1811, was - 46,022,819 


Leaving the amount of the old debt 

unredeemed on January 1, 1812, - 33,904,180 
And to which adding the Louisiana 
6 per cent, stock, being a new debt 
contracted subsequent to April 1, 


1801. 11,250,000 


Made the whole amount of public 

debt on January 1, 1812, - - - 45,154,180 


The annual interest on the public 
debt due on April 1, 1801, amount- 
ed to 4,180,463 

The annual interest of the public 
debt extinguished between April 1, 

1801, and January 1,1812, amount- 
ed to 2.632,982 


STATE S. 53 

Leaving for the amount of annual in- 
terest on the old debt unredeemed 
on January 1, 1812, - - - - 1,547,481 

The annual interest on the Louisiana 

stock was 675,000 


Making the annual interest on the 

whole debt due on January 1, 1812, 2,222,481 
Which subtracted from the annual 
interest on the debt due on April 1, 


1801, - -------- 4,180,463 


Left for the difference between the 
amount of interest respectively pay- 
able at those two dates - - - - 1,957,982 


The disposable national revenue, or that por- 
tion which alone was applicable to defray the 
annual national expenses, consisted only of the 
surplus of the gross amount of revenue collected 
beyond the amount necessary for paying the in- 
terest on the public debt. A diminution of that 
interest was with respect to the ability of defray- 
ing the other annual expenses, a positive increase 
of revenue to the same amount. With an equal 
amount of gross revenue, the revenue applicable 
to defray the national expenses was thus, by the 
effect of the reduction of the debt, 2,600,000 
dollars greater than on April 1, 1801. Or, view- 
ing the subject in another light, the laws for 
the reduction of the debt had, in 10 years and 
nine months, enabled the United States to pay 
in full the purchase-money of Louisiana, and in- 
creased their revenue near 2,000,000 of dollars. 

If the amount of annual payments on account 
of both the principal and interest of the public 
debt, during the eight years ending 1811, be con- 
trasted with the payments thereafter necessary 
for the same purpose, the difference will be still 
more striking. Eight millions of dollars had 
been annually paid on that account during these 
eight years. The whole amount payable after 
the year 1812, including the annual reimburse- 
ment on the 6 per cent, and deferred stocks, was 
3,792,382 dollars, making an annual difference 
of more than 4,200,000 dollars, which were then 
to be liberated from that appropriation. And 
this annual payment of about 3,800,000 dollars, 
would have been sufficient, with some small va- 
riations, to ha ve discharged in 10 years the whole 
of the residue of the existing debt, with the ex- 
ception of the 3 per cent, stock, the annual inte- 
rest on which amounted only to 485,000 dollars. 

The redemption of principle had been thus 
far effected without the aid of any internal] 


UNITED STATES. 


5 1 


[taxes, either direct or indirect, without any ad- 
dition during- the last seven years to the rate of 
duties on importations, which, on the contrary, 
had been impaired by the repeal of that on salt, 
and notwithstanding the great diminution of com- 
merce during- the last four years. It thus ap- 
peared that the ordinary revenue was capable of 
discharging in 10 years of peace, a debt of 
42,000,000 of dollars, which should seem con- 
siderably to lessen the weight of the objections to 
which that revenue, depending almost solely on 


commerce, is liable. 


The net revenue arising 
on merchandise 
which accrued 


1809, amounted 


during 


Dollars. 


6,527,168 


- 12,513,490 


16,868,000 


from duties 
and tonnage, 
the year 

to - 

The net revenue arising from the 
same sources, which accrued dur- 
ing the year 1810, amounted to 
The same revenue for the year 1811, 
amounted to------ - 7,902,560 

The same revenue for the year 1812, 

(including about 5,500,000 from 
duties on importations from Great 
Britain), amounted to - - - - 13, 142,009 

The same revenue for the year 1813, 
amounted to about - 
The sales of public lands n. of the 
river Ohio, on the average of the 
two years ending 1811 amounted, 
after deducting the expenses and 
charges on that fund, to the annual 
sum of-------- - 600,000 

The sales in the Mississippi territory, being, in 
the first instance, appropriated to the payment of 
1,250,000 dollars to the state of Georgia, left in 
the end of the year 1811, a deficiency to be pro- 
vided for of 2,600,000, but this was proposed to be 
provided for by an addition of 50 per cent, to the 
existing amount of duties (together with a con- 
tinuance of the temporary duties theretofore de- 
signated by the name of 1 Mediterranean Fund.’ 

• — This mode was thought preferable for the time 
to any internal tax. With respect to the sales of 
public lands, besides affording a supplementary 
fund for the ultimate redemption of the public 
debt, they were anticipated as being calculated 
to supply, without any diminution of revenue, a 
bounty to soldiers enlisting in the regular ser- 
vice, and to facilitate the terms of loans. 


The same amount of revenue was judged to be 
necessary, and, with the aid of loans, would, it 
was believed, be sufficient in case of war, as in 
time of peace. The same increase of duties 
would therefore be equally necessary in that 
event. Should any deficiency arise, it was to be 
supplied by a farther increase of duties, by a re- 
storation of that on salt, and by a proper selec- 
tion of moderate external taxes. To raise a 
fixed revenue. of only 9,000,000 of dollars, was 
thought so much within the compass of the na- 
tional resources, it would only require the legis- 
lature to effect the object. 

With regard to the loaning system, the United 
States have thought it much more eligible to pay 
at once the difference, either by a premium in 
lands, or by allowing a higher rate of interest, 
than to increase the amount of stock created, or 
to attempt any operation which might injuriously 
affect the circulating medium of the country. 
Thus, supposing 40,000,000 of dollars borrowed 
at 8 instead of 6 per cent, it was urged that the 
only difference would consist in the additional 
payment of 800,000 dollars a year, until the 
principal was reimbursed. 

In short, with a view to the ensuing years, 
and considering the aspect of public affairs pre- 
sented by the executive in this year, 1811, and 
the measures of expense which he recommended, 
it was attempted to shew, — 

“ 1. That a fixed revenue of about 9,000,000 
dollars was necessary and sufficient, both under 
the existing situation of the United States, and 
in the event of their assuming a different atti- 
tude. 

“ 2. That an addition to the rate or duties on 
importation is at present sufficient for that pur- 
pose, although in the course of events it may re- 
quire some aid from other sources of revenue. 

u 3. That a just reliance may be put on ob- 
taining loans to a considerable amount, for de- 
fraying the expenses which may be incurred be- 
yond the amount of revenue above stated. 

“ 4. That the peace revenue of the United 
States will be sufficient, w ithout any extraordi- 
nary exertions, to discharge in a few years the 
debt which may be thus necessarily incurred.” 
The best corollary to these propositions will 
be a statement of the actual receipts and dis- 
bursements of these states, for 1811 and the two 
following years.] 


UNITED STATES. 

[. INCOME of the UNITED STATES for three years , ending September 30, 1813. 


55 


1811. 

1812. 

1813. 

Dollars. Cts 

Dollars. Cts. 

Dollars. Cts. 

Customs, sales of lands, ar- 
rears, repayments, and all 
other branches of revenue, 



amounting together to - 13,541,446 37 

10,934,946 90 

CO 

O'* 

0 

GO 

&lt;0 

*0 

CO 

1 

1 
t 
1 
1 


Loan of 11,000,000 

Loan of 1 1,000,000 

Temporary loan of Decern- 

by act of March 

by act of March 

ber 31, 1810 - - - - 2,750,000 0 

14, 1812 - - 5,847,212 50 

14, 1812 - - 4,637,487 50 

Do. 16,000,000 by 
act of Feb.S,lS13 14,488 125 
Treasury notes un- 
der the acts of 
June 30, 1812, 
and February 25, 

1813 - - - 5,151 300 

Other Loans, Aug. 

2, 1813, &amp;c.&amp;c. 19,320,811 70 

Total receipts 16,291,446 37 

16,782,159 40 

37,545,954 93 

Balance in the treasury, on 


October 1, 1810 - - - 3,459,029 72 

On October 1,1 81 1 3,947,818 36 

OnOctoberl,l812 2,361,652 69 

Aggregate revenue 19,750,476 9 

20,729,977 76 

39,907,60; 62 

EXPENDITURE of the UNITED STATES for three years , 

ending September 30, 1813. 

1811. 

1812. 

1813. 

Dollars. Cts. 

Dollars. Cts. 

Dollars. Cts. 

Civil department, including- 
miscellaneous expenses, and 


those incident to the inter- 



course with foreign nations l,36o,S58 9 8 

1,823,069 35 


Army fortifications. 


arras, and arsen- 
als ... . 2,129,000 

Navy department 2, 1 3d, 000 
Indian ditto - 142,725 


4,407,725 0 

Payments for interest on the 
public debt - - - - 2,225,800 93 


Total current expenses 7,994,384 91 
Reimbursement of the tempo- 
rary loan, in March and 
September 1811, - - - 2,730,000 0 
Payments on account of the 
principal of the public debt 5,053,272 82 


Total expenditure 15,802,657 73 
Balance in the treasury, Sep- 
tember 30, 1811 - - - 3,947,818 36 


19,750,476 9 


7,770,300 0 - 18,484,750 49 

3,107,501 54 [ - 6,420,707 20 

230,975 0 - (Included with “ army ”) 

11,108,776 54 


2,498,013 19 


15,429,859 8 


2,938,405 99 


18,368,325 7 
2,361,652 69 


20,729,977 76 


24,905,457 69 
3,120,379 8 


29,731,753 12 


3,197,102 7 


- 32,928,855 19 

- 6,978,75 2 43 


39,907,007 62] 


56 


UNITED STATES. 


[By an act of August 2, 1813, a loan of 7, 500, 000 
dollars was authorized, and the manner in which 
that loan was obtained was as follows. The 
terms were 88 dollars 25 cents in money, for 
100 dollars stock, bearing an interest of 6 per 
cent, which was equivalent to a premium of 13 
dollars 31^ cents, on each 100, in money, loaned 
to the United States. Of this sum of 7,500,000 
dollars, about 3,850,000 dollars were paid into 
the treasury during the year 1813, and the re- 
mainder was payable in the months of January 
and February, 1814. 

For the year 1814, the expenditures, as autho- 
rized by law, were estimated as follow : 

Dollars. 

1. Civil, diplomatic and 

miscellaneous expenses ... 1,780,000 

2. Public debt, viz. — In- 
terest on the debt exist- 
ing previous to the war 2,100,000 

Ditto on the debt con- 
tracted since the war, 
including treasury notes 
and loan for the year 
1814 2,950,000 


5,050,000 

Reimbursement of princi- 
pal, including the old six 
and deferred stocks, tem- 
porary loans, and trea- 
sury notes ----- 7,150,000 


12,200,000 


13,980,000 

3. Military establishment, estimated 

by the secretary at war for a full 
complement, (including rangers, 
sea-fencibles, and troops of all de- 
scriptions) of 63,422 officers and 
men, and including ordinance, for- 
tifications, and the Indian depart- 
ment, and the permanent appro- 
priations for Indian treaties, and 
equipping the militia - - - - 24,550,000 

4. Navy, estimated for 13,787 officers, 
seamen, and boys, and for 1,869 
marines, and includingthe service of 
two 74 gun ships for four months, 
and three additional frigates for six 
months of the year 1814, and the 
expenses of the flotillas on the 

coast and on the lakes - - - - 6,900,000 


Amounting altogether to - - - - 45,650,000 


The ways and means already provided by law 

were as follow : — 

1. Customs and sales of public lands. 

The net revenue accruing from the 
customs during the year 1811, 
amounted, as above stated, to 

13,142,000 dollars. Of this sum 
about 4,300,000 was produced by 
the additional duties imposed by 
the act of July 1, 1811. The du- 
ties which accrued during the year 

1813, were estimated at 7,000,000 
dollars. The custom-house bonds 
outstanding on January 1, 1814, 
after making all the allowance for 
insolvencies and bad debts, were 
estimated at 5,500,000 dollars ; and 
it was believed, that 6,000,000 
might be estimated for the receipt 
of the customs during the year 

1814. The sales of public lands, 

during the year ending September 
30, 1813, had amounted to 256,345 
acres, and the payments by pur- 
chasers to 706,000 dollars. It was, 
therefore, estimated that 600,000 
dollars would be received into the 
treasury from this source, during 
the year 1814. The sum, there- 
fore, estimated as receivable from 
customs and lands, was - - - 

2. Internal revenues and direct tax. 

From the credits allowed by law on 
some of the internal duties (the na- 
ture of these is explained below) and 
from the delays incident to assess- 
ment and collection of the direct 
tax, it was not believed that more 
ought to be expected to come into 
the treasury during the year 1814, 

than the sum of - 3,500,000 

3. Balance of the loan of 7,500,00, 

already contracted for - - - - 3,650,000 

4. Balance of treasury notes already 

authorized - -- -- -- - 1,070,000 

5. Of the balance of cash 
in the treasury on De- 
cember31, 1813, amount- 
ing to about - - - - 4,680,000 

There would be required 
to satisfy appropriations 
made prior to that day, 
and then undrawn, at 
least ------ 3,500,000] 


6,600,000 


UNITED STATES. 


Dollars. 

["And leaving applicable to the service 
of the year 1814 ------ 1,180,000 

16,000,000 

So that there remained to be provided 
by loans, the sum of - - - - - 29,350,000 

45,350,000 

Although the interest paid upon treasury notes 
was considerably less than that paid for the 
monies obtained by the United States on funded 
stock, yet the certainty of their reimbursement at 
the end of one year, and the facilities they afforded 
for remittances and other commercial operations, 
had obtained for them a currency which left little 
reason to doubt that they might be expended 
considerably beyond the sum of 5,000,000 of dol- 
lars, hitherto authorized to be annually issued. 
It would, perhaps, be eligible to leave to the exe- 
cutive,;^ was done last year, a discretion as to the 
amount to be borrowed upon stock or upon 
treasury notes, that one or the other might be 
resorted to, within prescribed limits, as should be 
found most advantageous to the United States. 

The amount, as intimated to have been reim- 
bursed of the principal of the public debt during 
the year ending on the 30th of September last, 
including treasury notes and temporary loans, 
appeared to have been 8,201,358 dollars. As the 
payments on account of the loan of 16,000,000 
had not then been completed, and the stock had, 
consequently, not then been issued, therefore, it 
was not practicable to state with precision the 
amount added to the public debt during that 
year : but, after deducting the above-mentioned 
reimbursement of 8,200,000, this addition cannot 
fall short of 22,500,000 dollars. 

The plan of finance proposed at the commence- 
ment of the war, was to make the revenue, 
during each year of its continuance, equal to the 
expenses of the peace establishment, and of the 
interest of the old debt then existing, and on the 
loans which the war might render necessary, and 
to defray the extraordinary expenses of the war 
out of the proceeds of loans to be obtained for 
that purpose. 

The expenses of the peace establishment, as 
it existed previous to the armaments of 1812, 
made in contemplation of war, but including the 
eight regiments added to the military establish- 
ment in the year 1808, and the augmentation of 
the navy in actual service, authorized in 1809, 
amounted, after deducting some casual expences 
VOL. v. 


57 

Dollars. 

of militia, and other inci- 
dental items, to about - - 7,000,000 

The interest on the public 
debt, payable during the 
year 1814, would be, on 
the old debt, or that exist- 
ing prior to the present 
war ------ 2,100,000 

On the debt contracted 
since the commencement 
of the war, including 
treasury notes, and al- 
lowing 560,000 dollars 
for interest on the loan, 
which must be made dur- 
ing the year 1814, a sum 
as small as can be esti- 
mated for that object - - 2,950,000 

5,050,000 

Making ------ 12,050,000 

The actual receipts into the treasury 
from the revenues, as established 
in 1813, including the internal re- 
venues and direct tax, were not 
estimated for the year 1814, at 

more than 10,100,000 

Viz.: 

From customs and public 

lands ------ 6,600,000 

Internal revenues and 
direct tax - - - - 3,500,000 


10,100,000 

If to this sum be added that part of 
the balance in the treasury on the 
31st of December 1813, which has 
been estimated above, to be appli- 
cable to the expenses of the year 
1814; and which, upon the princi- 
ples above stated, may be consi- 
dered as a surplus of revenue be- 
yond the expenses of the peace 
establisment, and of the interest 
on the public debt for the year 

1813, and therefore applicable to 
the same expenses for the year 

1814, which sum is estimated at - 1,180,000 


And making together - - - - - 11,280,000 

There still remain to be provided 

new revenues capable of producing 770,000 


i 


12,050,000] 


58 


UNITED STATES. 


[But as the internal revenues and direct tax, 
when in full operation would produce, in the year 
1815, probably 1,200,000 dollars more than was 
estimated to be received from them in the year 
1814, it would rest with Congress to decide, 
whether it was necessary that new and addi- 
tional revenues should now be established. To 
what extent the existing embargo might reduce 
the receipts into the treasury from the customs, 
during the year 1814, it was difficult to estimate, 
as the operations of the war had reduced the 
receipts from the customs nearly one-half from 
that which was received during the year pre- 
ceding the war. The former embargo reduced 
the revenue from the customs nearly one-half 
the amount of that which was received dur- 
ing the year preceding its full operation. In 
this case, however, the transition was from the 
full receipt of a peace revenue, to the entire 
suspension of exportation and of foreign com- 
merce in American bottoms. It was not, there- 
fore, to be presumed, that the existing embargo 
would cause a reduction of the war revenue in 
the proportion of the peace revenue. More- 
over it was argued, that the effect of an act pro- 
hibiting the importation of certain articles ne- 
cessarily increased the demand, and enhanced 
the value of those which might be lawfully im- 
ported, and that the high price they would bear 
would produce extraordinary importations, and 
in part compensate for the prohibition to export 
any thing in return. 

To the amount of the defalcation of the re- 
venue caused by the embargo, whatever it might 
be, was to be added the difference between the 
amount of the interest, payable in the year 1814, 
on the loan of that year, and the whole amount 
of the interests on the said loan, payable in the 
year 1815, as well as that part of the interest 
which might be payable in the year 1815, on the 
loan of that year. The sum of these items 
would be required for the year 1815, in addition 
to the revenues previously established, except 

430.000 dollars, being the difference between 
the estimated increase in the receipt of the in- 
ternal revenues and direct taxes, and this 

770.000 remaining to be provided for in the fore- 
going estimate. 

With these considerations it was submitted, 
whether it might not be expedient and prudent 
to provide new revenues capable of producing 
either the whole or such part of the 770,000 dol- 
lars unprovided for, as might appear necessary 
to fulfil the public engagements, and secure to 


the financial operations of the government, the 
confidence, stability, and success, which it anti- 
cipated from the country. 

Internal or direct taxes. — Something yet 
remains to be said of the nature of the internal 
or direct taxes. A clearer view of them cannot 
be given than by the following extract from a 
letter from the secretary of the treasury to the 
chairman of ways and means, January 10, 1812. 

‘ Before I proceed (says this perspicuous do- 
cument) to answer the inquiry of the committee 
respecting a selection of the internal taxes now 
necessary, permit me to observe, that it was 
stated in the annual report of December 10, 
1808, that “ no internal taxes, either direct or 
indirect, were contemplated, even in the case of 
hostilities carried against the two great bel- 
ligerent powers.” An assertion which renders 
it necessary to show that the prospects then held 
out was not deceptive, and why it has not been 
realized. 

i The balance in the treasury amounted at that 
time to near 14 millions of dollars. But aware that 
that surplus would, in a short time, be expended, 
and having stated that the revenue was daily 
decreasing, it was in the same report proposed, 
u that all the existing duties should be doubled 
on importations subsequent to the 1st day of 
January, 1809.” As the net revenue accrued 
from customs during the three years, 1809, 1810, 
and 1811, has, without any increase of duties, 
exceeded dollars 26,000,000, it follows that if the 
measure then submitted had been adopted, we 
should, after making a large deduction for any 
supposed diminution of consumption, arising 
from the proposed increase, have had at this 
time about 20 millions of dollars on hand, a 
sum greater than the net amount of the proposed 
internal taxes for four years. 

( In proportion as the ability to borrow is di- 
minished, the necessity of resorting to taxation 
is increased. It is, therefore, also proper to 
observe, at that time the subject of the renewal 
of the charter of the bank of the United States 
had been referred by the Senate to the secretary 
of the treasury, nor had any symptom appeared 
from which its absolute dissolution without any 
substitute could have then been anticipated. The 
renewal in some shape, and on a more extensive 
scale, was confidently relied on : and, accord- 
ingly, in the report made during the same session 
to the Senate, the propriety of increasing the 
capital of the bank to dollars 30,000,000 was 
submitted, with the condition that that institution"] 


UNITED STATES. 


59 


[should, if required, be obliged to lend one-half 
of its capital to the United States. The amount 
thus loaned might, without any inconvenience, 
have been increased to 20 millions. And with 
dollars 20,000,000 in hand, and loans being se- 
cured for 20,000,000 more, without any increase 
of the stock of the public debt at market, in- 
ternal taxation would have been unnecessary 
for at least four years of war, nor any other re- 
sources been wanted than an additional annual 
loan of five millions ; a sum sufficiently moderate 
to be obtained from individuals, and on favour- 
able terms. 

4 These observations are made only in re- 
ference to the finances and resources of the 
general government. Considerations of a dif- 
ferent nature have on both these subjects pro- 
duced a different result, which makes a resort 
to internal taxes now necessary, and will render 
loans more difficult to obtain, and their terms 
less favourable. But the resources of the coun- 
try remain the same ; and if promptly and ear- 
nestly brought into action, will be found amply 
sufficient to meet the present emergency. With 
respect to internal taxes, the whole amount 
to be raised is so moderate, when compared 
either with the population and wealth of the 
United States, or with the burthens laid on 
European nations by their governments, that no 
doubt exists of the ability or will of the people 
to pay without any real inconvenience, and with 
cheerfulness, the proposed war taxes. For it is 
still hoped, that the ordinary peace revenue of 
the United States will be sufficient to reimburse, 
within a reasonable period, the loans obtained 
during the war, and that neither a perpetual 
and increasing public debt, nor a permanent 
system of ever progressing taxation, shall be 
entailed on the nation. These evils cannot, 
however, be otherwise avoided than by the 
speedy organization of a certain revenue. De- 
lays in that respect, and a reliance on indefinite 
loans to defray the war expenditure, the ordi- 
nary expenses of government, the interest on the 
loans themselves, would be equally unsafe and 
ruinous ; would, in a short time, injure public 
credit, impair the national resources, and ulti- 
mately render much heavier and perpetual taxes 
absolutely necessary. 

4 Of the gross amount of dollars, 5,000,000, 
to be now provided according to the pi’eceding 
estimates, by internal taxation, it is respectfully 
proposed, that 3,000,000 should be raised by 
direct tax, and 2,000,000 by indirect taxes. 

‘ The sum of 3,000,000 will not, considering 


the increase of population, be a much greater 
direct tax, than that of 2,000,000 voted in the 
year 1798. To this permit me to add another 
view of the subject. 

4 The direct taxes laid by the several States, 
during the last years of the revolutionary war, 
were generally more heavy than could be paid 
with convenience. But during the years 1785 
to 1789 an annual direct tax of more than dol- 
lars 200,000 [dollars 205,189] was raised in 
Pennsylvania, which was not oppressive, and 
was paid with great punctuality. The increase 
of population of that State, between the years 
1787 and 1812, is in the ratio of about 4 to 9. 
A tax of dollars 450,000, payable in the year 
1813, is not higher in proportion to the popu- 
lation alone, and without regard even to the 
still greater increase of wealth and of circulating 
medium, than a tax of dollars 200,000 was in 
the year 1787. But the quota of Pennsylvania, 
on a tax of dollars 3,000,000, will, counting 
Orleans a state, hardly exceed dollars 365,000. 
The proposed tax will, therefore, so far as re- 
lates to Pennsylvania, be near 20 per cent, 
lighter, in proportion to the respective popula- 
tion, than that paid during theyears 1785 to 1789. 

4 The rule of apportionment, prescribed by 
the constitution, operates with perhaps as much 
equality as is practicable, in relation to States 
not materially differing in wealth and situation. 
It may, therefore, be inferred, that a direct tax, 
which is not greater than Pennsylvania can pay 
with facility, will not press heavily upon any 
other of the Atlantic States. It is only in re- 
ference to the Western States, that the constitu- 
tional rule of apportionment, according to the re- 
spective number of inhabitants in each State, 
may be supposed to be unequal. Being at a 
greater distance from a market, and having, on 
account of the recent date of their settlements 
less accumulated capital, it is certainly true, that 
they cannot, in proportion to their population, 
pay as much, or with the same facility, as the 
Atlantic States. Two considerations will, how- 
ever, much diminish the weight, if they do not 
altogether obviate that objection. 

4 1. Of the articles actually consumed in the 
Western States, there are two of general con- 
sumption, on which duties are laid, or proposed 
to be laid, and on which, being articles produced 
in those States, they will pay nothing or less 
than the Atlantic States. On salt, they will pay 
nothing, as the whole quantity consumed there is 
of domestic origin ; and this observation affords 
an argument in favour of the restoration of the" 

i 2 


UNITED STATES. 


DO 


[duty on that article, since it'will tend to equalize 
the operation of the direct tax. A considerable 
part of the sugar those States consume, nearly 
7,000,000 of pounds, is also the produce of the 
maple, and pays no duty. And in time of war, 
it is probable that the residue of their consump- 
tion will, in a great degree, consist of New 
Orleans sugar, also duty-free. 

‘ 2. A considerable portion of the direct taxes 
in those States, is laid on lands owned by per- 
sons residing in other States, and will not fall 
on the inhabitants. It appears by a late official 
statement, that more than two-thirds of the 
land-tax of the State of Ohio, are raised on 
lands owned by non-residents. The portion of 
the quota of that State, on the United States’ 
direct tax, which will be payable by its inha- 
bitants, will, for that reason alone, be reduced 
to one-third part of the nominal amount of such 
quota. And although the proportion may not be 
the same in the other Western States, it is well 
known, that a similar result, though not perhaps 
to the same extent, will take place in all. 

‘ From every view which has been taken of 
the subject, it satisfactorily appears, that the 
proposed amount of 3,000 is moderate, and can- 
not be productive of any real inconvenience, 
provided that the objects on which the tax shall 
be assessed, be properly selected. 

‘ A direct tax may be assessed either on the 
whole amount of the property or income of the 
people, or on certain specific objects selected for 
that purpose. The first mode may, on abstract 
principles, be considered as most correct ; and a 
tax laid, in case of selection, on the same arti- 
cles in all the States, as was done in the direct 
tax of 1790, is recommended by its uniformity, 
and supported by respectable authority. It is 
nevertheless believed, that the systems of taxa- 
tion respectively adopted by the several States, 
matured, modified, and improved, as they have 
been by long experience, will generally be found 
to be best adapted to the local situation and 
circumstances of each State ; and they are cer- 
tainly most congenial with the feelings and ha- 
bits of the people. It is, therefore, proposed, 
that the direct tax should be laid and assessed in 
each State, upon the same objects of taxation 
on which the direct taxes levied under the autho- 
rity of the State are laid and assessed. 

4 The attempt made under the former direct 
tax of the United States to equalize the tax by 
authorizing a board of commissioners, in each 
State, to correct the valuations made by the 
local assessors, was attended with considerable 


expense, and productive of great delay. Ill 
order to obviate this inconvenience, it is pro- 
posed that the quota assigned to each State, 
according to the rule prescribed by the consti- 
tution, should be apportioned by law amongst 
the several counties, towns, or other subdivisions 
of each State, adopting in each State, where a 
State tax is now levied, the apportionment of 
the State tax, whether that be an absolute quota 
fixed by a previous State law on the county or 
town, or whether it be only the amount which 
shall appear to have been last laid on such county 
by the operation of the general State laws im- 
posing a direct tax ; making the apportionment 
in the State where no State tax is now levied, 
according to the best information and materials 
which can be obtained ; and authorizing the 
States respectively to alter the apportionment 
thus made by law, at any time previous to the 
day fixed by law for assessing the United States 
tax on individuals. The whole process of assess- 
ment will thereby be reduced to that of assess- 
ing the quota of each county, town, or other 
subdivision on the lands and inhabitants of such 
subdivision. It will be as simple, and may be 
effected as promptly, and with as little expense, 
as the assessment of a county tax : and, the ob- 
jects of taxation being the same, it may be still 
more facilitated by authorizing an adoption of 
the State assessment on individuals, whenever it 
can be obtained from the proper authority. 

‘ With respect to indirect taxes it does not 
appear necessary to resort to any other than 
those which had been formerly levied by the 
United States. As they were in operation dur- 
ing several years, their defects, and the modifi- 
cations and improvements of which they are 
susceptible, are better understood than new taxes 
could be. With some alterations, they may pro- 
duce the amount now wanted ; and it does not 
appear that any other equally productive could 
be substituted with any real advantage. The 
gross amount of those taxes in the year 1801, 
was nearly one million of dollars. They would, 
according to the increase of population, and 
without any augmentation in their rate, yield 
now near i ,400,000 dollars. An average in- 
crease of about 50 per cent, in the rate would 
produce the intended gross amount of two mil- 
lions. But it is believed, that that increase 
ought not to be the same in all those taxes, and 
that some are susceptible of greater augmenta- 
tion or extension than others. 

‘ 1. Duties on domestic spirits distilled . — There 
is not any more eligible object of taxation than] 


UNITED STATES. 


61 


[ardent spirits ; but the mode of taxation is liable 
to strong - objections, particularly with respect 
to persons who are not professional manufac- 
turers, and who only occasionally distil the pro- 
duce of their farms. It is, therefore, proposed, 
that the duties on the quantity of spirits distilled, 
should be levied only on spirits distilled from 
foreign materials, at the rate of ten cents per 
gallon distilled ; and on other distillers employ- 
ing stills, the aggregate of which shall contain 
more than 400 gallons, at the rate of three cents 
per gallon distilled ; and that, instead of a duty 
on the spirits, or of licenses in proportion to the 
time employed, other distillers should only pay 
an annual tax of five dollars for each still solely 
employed in the distillation of fruit, and of 15 
dollars for each still otherwise employed. This 
tax may also, without reference to time, be made 
to vary according to the size of the stills. At 
those rates, this class of duties is estimated topro- 
duce at most 400,000 dollars ; and it is intended 
in that case, that another duty should be levied 
on the same article, in the shape of licenses to 
retailers. By the adoption of that mode the ex- 
penses of collection will be considerably dimi- 
nished, penalties for not entering stills will be 
unnecessary, and they will be confined, with re- 
spect to country stills, to the case of clandestine 
distilling without paying the tax. 

4 2. Duties on refined sugar. — A duty double 
of that heretofore laid, viz. at the rate of four 
cents per pound, is estimated to produce 200,000 
dollars. The drawback both of that duty, and 
of that on the importation of the raw material, 
to be allowed. 

‘ 3. Licenses to retailers. — These are believed 
to be susceptible of considerable and very proper 
augmentation and extension. The following rates 
are estimated to produce 700,000 dollars : 

Dollars. 

For a license to x - etail wines - - - - 20 
Ditto - - ditto - spirits generally - - 20 
Ditto - - ditto - domestic spirits only 15 

Ditto - - ditto - any other species of 

foreign merchandise 10 
4 Tavern keepers, licensed under the autho- 
thority of any State, and not living in any city, 
town, village, or within five miles thereof, to be 
excepted. Every other person who sells wines, 
foreign spirits, or foreign merchandize, other- 
wise than in the vessel or package of importation ; 
or in the case of dry goods, otherwise than by 
the piece ; and every person who sells domestic 
spirits in less quantity than 30 gallons, to be con- 
sidered as a retailer. 


{ IV. Duties on sales at auction. — These, con- 
fined to the sales of articles of foreign produce 
or manufacture, and at the same rate as hereto- 
fore, may produce about 50, 00^ dollars. 

‘ V. Duties on carriages for the conveyance of 
persons. — Those duties, adding at the rate of 50 
per cent, on the duties formerly raised, are esti- 
mated to produce 150,000 dollars. 

‘ VI. Stamp duties. — An association of ideas, 
which connects those duties with the attempt of 
Great Britain to tax America, and which might, 
with equal propriety, attach odium to the duty 
on the importation of tea, has rendered their 
name in some degree unpopular. The extension 
of post roads, and the facility of distribution, 
have, however, removed the most substantial 
objection to which they were liable. They do 
not appear to be more inconvenient than any 
other internal tax, and the expenses of collec- 
tion are less than on any other, being only a 
commission on the sale and the cost of paper 
and stamping. At the same rate as heretofore, 
witli the exception of bank notes, on which an 
increase appears proper (with an option to the 
banks to pay l-20th part of their dividends in 
lieu thereof) they are estimated to produce 
500,000 dollars. 

RECAPITULATION. 

Dollars. 

Direct tax, gross amount - - - - 3,000,000 
Duties on spirits, and li- 
censes to distillers, gross 
amount ------ 400,000 

Refined sugar, gross amount 200,000 

Retail licenses, ditto - - 700,000 

Sales at auction, ditto - - 50,000 

Duties on carriages, ditto - 150,000 

Stamp Duties, ditto - - - 500,000 

— 2,000,000 

Total gross amount - 5,000,000 

Deduct expenses of assessment, and 
collection and losses, estimated at 15 
per cent. - - 750,000 

Net amount estimated for 1814 - - 4 ,250,000 

But are not estimated to yield in 1813, 

more than -------- 3,600,000 

‘ Most of the internal taxes have been estimated 
at their maximum ; but it is hoped that any de- 
falcation from the estimated amount, will be com- 
pensated by a diminution in the expenses of col- 
lection, which have also been computed at ths 
highest rate.] 


62 


UNITED 

[‘ For the superintendence of those taxes, both 
direct and indirect, it appears indispensable that 
the office of commissioner of the revenue should 
be re-established. For their collection, the for- 
mer offices of supervisor and inspector, are be- 
lieved to have been unnecessary and injurious 
links in the system, and that the expense will be 
diminished, and the collection and accountability 
better secured, by the division of the states into 
convenient collection districts, and by the ap- 
pointment of a collector to each district, who will 
pay into the treasury, and be immediately ac- 
countable to that department in the same manner 
as the collectors of customs. This arrangement, 
the greater amount to be collected, and the sim- 
plification in the objects and mode of taxation, 
will, it is hoped, reduce in a short time the ex- 
penses of collection of the indirect taxes to 7\ 
instead of 13 per cent, which they formerly cost, 
when brought to their highest degree of improve- 
ment. In estimating the charges on the direct 
tax of 15 per cent., 5 per cent, have been allowed 
for the assessment, 5 per cent, for the collection, 
and 5 per cent, for losses. This last item is 
principally on account of losses on unseated 
lands, and on some remote districts of country, 
and is not susceptible of much reduction. That 
for assessment may be lessened in those States 
where the objects of taxation do not require an 
annual valuation, or where the state or county 
assessment may be used. The expense of col- 
lection proper may be also, in some degree, les- 
sened in cities and populous districts, and by 
uniting it with that of the internal taxes. It is, 
however, necessary that the compensation of the 
collectors be sufficient to command the services 
of men properly qualified, and in every inspect 
worthy of tbe trust. 

6 In performing the ungracious task of pointing- 
out new objects of taxation, those have been sub- 
mitted which appeared sufficiently productive 
and least oppressive. The objections to which 
each, including the increase of duties on impor- 
tations, is liable, have not been stated : not be- 
cause I was insensible of them, but because no 
substitute of any importance was perceived, which 
was not still more objectionable. Every tax 
being, in some degree, an evil, is therefore liable 
to some objection ; and every one taken singly 
may, for that reason, be easily combated. But, 
if the necessity of an additional revenue be ad- 
mitted, the objections afford no argument why 
the tax proposed should be rejected, unless an- 
other less inconvenient be substituted. The ne- 
cessity of such an addition to the revenue has, in 
the course of this letter, been strongly urged, 


STATES. 

because it was strongly felt. But with respect 
to the taxes proposed, the selection is submitted 
with diffidence ; and it will be highly gratifying 
that some more eligible may be devised. 

‘The last inquiry of the committee relates chiefly 
to the terms on which loans, amounting to at least 
10,000,000 of dollars per ann. maybe obtained, and 
to the plan proper to be adopted for their reimburse- 
ment— of this subject we have already treated.’ 

Trade . — The vast extent of sea-coast, which 
spreads before these States, the number of excel- 
lent harbours and sea-port towns, the numerous 
creeks and immense bays which indent the coast, 
and the rivers, lakes, and canals which peninsu- 
late the whole country, added to its agricultural 
advantages and improvements, give this part of 
the world superior advantages for trade. This, 
together with the imports, exports, shipping, 
manufactures, and fisheries, may properly be 
considered as forming one general interest ; but 
they have been considered as constituting the 
more peculiar and important objects of the New 
England States. 

The consumption of fish, oil, whalebone, and 
other articles obtained through the fisheries, in 
the towns and counties that are convenient for 
navigation, has become much greater than is ge- 
nerally supposed. It was computed that no less 
than 5000 barrels ofmackarel, salmon, and pickled 
cod-fish were vended, annually, in the city of Phi- 
ladelphia, as far back as 1792 : add to them the 
dried fish, oil, spermaceti, candles, whalebone, 
&amp;c. and it will be found that a little fleet of sloops 
and schooners must have been employed in the 
business. 

The demand for the fore-mentioned articles is 
proportionably great in the other parts of the 
union, (especially in Boston and the large com- 
mercial towns that lie along the coast n. e., 
which enter largely into the fishing trade), and 
the vessels employed in transporting them are 
proportionably numerous. 

The quantity of fur exported from the n. parts 
of America to Great Britain, amounted yearly 
to about £.41,000 sterling, estimated from the 
freight during the years 1768, 1769, and 1770. 
The exports of buck-skins amounted to upwards 
of £.33,000. The sales of fur, (which take place 
in London every spring), produced, in 1782, 
£.4,700. It was a little increased in 1783, and 
in 1784 it exceeded £.245,000. All this fur was 
paid for by English manufacturers ; and a fourth 
part of it was worked in England, where its 
worth was doubled. Great Britain has however 
of late years been chiefly indebted to Canada for 
supply of these articles ; for the total value of] 


UNITED STATES. 


03 


[the furs and peltry exported from that colony, 
amounted, on an average of three years, ending 

1805, to JP.263,088. 13s. 8c?. Exclusive of this, 
a large quantity of furs of all descriptions are 
annually sent from Canada, by way of St. John’s, 
into the United States ; not merely for supply- 
ing the demands of that country, but for export- 
ing to China, for which market the finest furs and 
prime peltries are in request. The amount of 
these articles, sold to the Americans in the year 

1806, Mr. Gray states at £-62, 009. 15s. 2d. 
The reason of the furs being sent by this chan- 
nel, rather than through the London market, is 
the difficulty of getting home the produce ob- 
tained for the furs in China by the East India 
company’s ships, together with the various re- 
strictions laid by the Directors, and the heavy 
duty payable on the exportation. 

The advantages for trade which nature has so 


Which was the amount (official value) of the 
profit derived by Great Britain during the time 
that those colonies were under her controul. It 
will presently appear that this, however consi- 
derable, bore no proportion to the benefit she 
has derived from them, in a commercial point of 
view, since the declaration of their independence. 

The war which brought about the separation 
of these States from Great Britain, threw com- 
mercial affairs into great confusion. The powers 
of the old confederation were unequal to the 
complete execution of any measures, calculated 
effectually to recover them from their deranged 


liberally given these States, have never, till since 
the establishment of the present government, 
been properly improved. Before the revolution, 
Great Britain claimed an exclusive right to the 
trade of her American colonies. This right, 
which she inflexibly maintained, enabled her to 
fix her own price, as well on the articles which 
she purchased from them, as upon those of her 
own manufactures exported for their consump- 
tion. The carrying trade, too, was preserved 
almost exclusively in her own hands, which af- 
forded a temptation to the carriers, that was often 
too powerful to be withstood, to exact exorbitant 
commissions and freights. That Great Britain 
enriched herself prodigiously by this exclusive 
trade with her colonies, is reasonable to suppose, 
and will appear most clearly by the following 
document, made up from unquestionable autho- 
rities. 


situation. Through want of power in the old 
Congress to collect a revenue for the discharge of 
the foreign and domestic debt, the credit was de- 
stroyed, and trade of consequence greatly em- 
barrassed. Each State, in her desultory regula- 
tions of trade, regarded her own interest, while 
that of the union was neglected. And so differ- 
ent were the interests of the several States, that 
their laws respecting trade often clashed with 
each other, and were productive of unhappy con- 
sequences. The large commercial States had it 
in their power to oppress their neighbours ; and 
in some instances, this power was directly or in-] 


Total Amount of Imports into , and Exports from , Great Britain ( exclusive of Scotland) and the British 
Colonies , now the United States, Jrom 1697 to 1776 inclusive, up to the Declaration of their Inde- 
pendence, being a Period of 80 hears , distinguishing each State. 



Imports. 

Exports. 

Imports Excess. 

Exports Excess. 

New England - 
New York - - - - 
Pennsylvania - 
Virginia and Maryland 
Georgia - 

Carolina - - - - 

4,918,847 I 8| 
2,383,059 17 5] 
1,403,229 14 7] 
30,353,411 2 9f 
806,652 4 5 
12,741,079 8 61 

19,268,756 8 111 
12,317,032 10 10] 
10,445,873 9 4 
21,258,127 15 10 
917,389 17 0 
9,056,332 4 5] 

9,095,28 3 6 11] 
3,684,747 4 1 

14,349,909 7 2\ 
9,933,972 13 5] 
9,042,643 14 8] 

110,737 12 7 

52,606,279 9 61 

73,263,512 6 5] 

12,780,930 11 0] 

33,437,263 7 11] 
12,780,030 11 0] 

20,657,232 16 10] 


Exports exceed the Imports - £. 


64 


UNITED 

[directly exercised. These impolitic and unjusti- 
fiable regulations, formed on the impression of 
the moment, and proceeding from no uniform or 
permanent principles, excited unhappy jealousies 
between the clashing States, and occasioned fre- 
quent stagnations in their trade, and, in some 
instances, a secresy in their commercial policy. 
But the measures which have since been adopted 
by Congress, under an efficient government, soon 
put a new and more promising face upon public 
affairs. Invested with the adequate powers, 
Congress formed a system of commercial regula- 
tions, with a view of enabling the country to 
meet the opposers of its trade upon their own 
ground p a system which has certainly placed its 


STATES. 

commerce on a respectable, uniform, and intelli- 
gible footing, adapted to promote the general in- 
terests of the union, with the smallest injury to 
the individual States. 

The balance of trade, in favour of Great Bri- 
tain during 80 years, up to the period of the in- 
dependence of these States, was, we have already 
seen, somewhat more, on an average, than a 
quarter of a million annually. The balance she 
obtained in her favour, during the six years im- 
mediately succeeding, was upwards? of £.360,000 
annually, being an increase of £.110,000, com- 
pared with the annual average of the period up 
to 1776, as will appear by the following Tables, 
showing 


The official Value of Imports and Exports from Great Britain and the British Colonies in N. America , 
now the United States , between the Years 1777 and 1782 (six Years ) during the Disturbances ; dis- 
tinguishing each Colony or State. 



Imports. 

Exports. 

Imports Excess. 

Exports Excess. 

New England - 
New York - 
Pennsylvania - - - 

Virginia and Maryland 
Georgia - 

Carolina - - - - - 

3,139 5 0 
65,611 6 8 

679 17 2 
58 7 11 
10,169 0 3 
116,299 2 10 

1,619,278 0 10 
7,537 6 7 
106,372 2 10 

637,530 14 8 

5,159 5 0 
58 7 11 

1,553,666 14 2 
6,857 9 5 

96,203 2 7 
521,231 11 10 

197,976 19 10 

2,370,718 4 11 

5,217 12 11 

2,177,958 18 0 
5,217 12 11 


Exports exceed Imports 2,172,740 5 1 


Annual average Excess of Exports £ 362,123 6 8 


But, although the balance of trade for any six 
years preceding the Revolution, on the average 
of the whole period of 80, amounted to a quarter 
of a million, it is evident that the trade of the 


six years immediately preceding, was infinitely 
greater even than that of the six years during the 
disturbances, or more than double, as will thus 
appear.] 


[ Table 


UNITE D S T A T E S. 


65 


[ Table of Imports and Exports between Great Britain and the Colonies of N. America ( now the United 
States ) for Six Years, ending 1776, distinguishing the Imports and Exports of each Colony , and the 
Balances in favour of Great Britain. 


Places. 

Imports. 

Exports. 

Imparts Excess. 

Exports Excess. 

New England- 

- - 1771 

150,381 

17 

2 

1,420,119 

1 

] 

_ 


_ 

1,269,737 

3 

11 


• 1772 

126,265 

7 

6 

824,830 

8 

9 

- 

- 

- 

698,565 

1 

o 

O 


1773 

124,624 

19 

6 

527,055 

15 

10 

- 

- 

- 

402,430 

16 

4 


1774 to 1776 

229,599 

2 

6 

689,151 

15 

11 

- - - 

- 

- 

459,552 

13 

5 

New York - - 

- - 1771 

95,875 

8 

11 

653,621 

7 

6 




557,745 

18 

7 


1772 

82,707 

8 

6 

343,970 

19 

9 

- 

- 

- 

261,263 

11 

3 


1773 

76,246 

12 

0 

289,214 

19 

7 




212,968 

7 

7 


1774 to 1776 

269,345 

5 

7 

439,165 

14 

7 

- - - 

- 

- 

169,820 

9 

0 

Pennsylvania - 

- - 1771 

31,615 

19 

9 

728,744 

19 

10 

... 



697,129 

0 

1 

1772 

29,133 

12 

3 

507,909 

14 

0 

- 

- 

- 

478,776 

1 

9 


1773 

36,652 

8 

9 

426,448 

17 

3 

- 

- 

- 

389,796 

8 

6 


1774 to 1776 

246,995 

9 

7 

627,383 

11 

3 

. . . 

- 

- 

380,388 

1 

8 

Virginia and Maryland 1771 

577,848 

16 

6 

920,326 

3 

8 

- 

- 

- 

342,477 

7 

2 


1772 

528,404 

10 

6 

793,910 

13 

2 




265,506 

2 

8 


1773 

589,803 

14 

5 

328.904 

15 

8 

260,898 

18 

9 




1774 to 1776 

1,443,613 

12 

8 

530,659 

16 

9 

912,953 

15 

11 




Georgia - - 

- - 1771 

63.810 

10 

9 

70,493 

19 

3 

- - - 


_ 

6,683 

8 

6 

1772 

66,083 

18 

9 

92,406 

4 

4 

- 

- 

- 

26,322 

5 

7 


1773 

85,391 

1 

8 

62,932 

19 

8 

22,458 

2 

0 





1774 to 1776 

103,694 

3 

0 

171,296 

6 

0 

- - - 

- 

- 

67,602 

3 

0 

Carolina - - 

- - 1771 

420,311 

14 

8 

409,169 

9 

4 

ll,14!g 

5 

4 





1772 

425,923 

1 

1 

449,610 

2 

2 

- 

_ 

- 

23,687 

1 

1 


1773 

456,513 

8 

4 

344,859 

9 

1 

111,653 

19 

3 




1774 to 1776 

1,025,520 

11 

0 

384,362 

7 

5 

641,158 

3 

7 






7,286,362 

15 

4 

12,036,549 

11 

10 

1,960,265 

4 

10 

6,710,452 

1 

4 










1,960,265 

4 

10 























£ 

4,750,186 

16 

6 





Annual average 

Excess of Exports 

791,697 

16 

1 


Annual average Excess during the six years 

of Disturbances 

362,123 

6 

8 


Annual average loss by the six years of Disturbances 

£ 429,574 

9 

5 


If then such were the advantages of a few 
years of insecurity and restricted trade, it is not 
to be wondered at that immediately upon the 
signing the treaty of 1783, the amount of benefit 
from the intercourse that Great Britain carried 
VOL. v. 


on with her former colonies, began rapidly to in- 
crease in a manner to exceed the expectation of 
the most sanguine. The balance in favour of 
England for the six years, from 1783 to 1788, 
was upwards of 7,000,000, being an increase] 

K 


(j(j 


UNITED 


S T A T E S. 


[of 1,000,000 on the former period of six years, 
ending 1776. 

In the next six years ending 1794, it reached 
to upwards of 15,000,000. 

In the next six years ending 1800, it reached 
to nearly 24,000,000. 

In the next six years ending 1806, it reached 
to upwards of 28,000,000, which is the highest 
pitch it ever attained. It will be here satisfac- 
tory to add, 


The annual Amount of Imports into , and Exports 
from , Great Britain and the United States , from 
1783, the Year of the acknowledgement of their 
Independence , to the Year 1813, distinguishing 
the Excess of Exports of each Year. 


Years. 

Imports- 

Exports. 

Exports Excess. 

1783 

314,058 

1,436,228 

1,122,170 

1784 

701,189 

3,359,864 

2,658,675 

1785 

775,890 

2,078,743 

1,302,853 

1786 

743,643 

1, 431,254 

687,611 

1787 

780,445 

1,794,214 

1,013,769 

1788 

883,618 

1,709,928 

826,310 

1789 

893,305 

2,336,407 

1,443,102 

1790 

1,043,388 

3,258,237 

2,214,849 

1791 

1,011,366 

4,014,416 

3,003,050 

1792 

954,141 

4,075,002 

3,120,861 

1793 

827,923 

3,334,852 

2,506,929 

1794 

590,847 

3,746,830 

3,155,983 

1795 

1,295,237 

5,041,810 

3,746,573 

1796 

1,997,374 

5,735,218 

3,737,844 

1797 

1,074,635 

4,691,620 

3,616,985 

1798 

1,627.710 

5,206,603 

3,578,893 

1799 

1,635,380 

6,593,713 

4,958,333 

1800 

2,089,652 

6,384,202 

4,294,550 

1801 

2,706,518 

7,517,531 

4,811,013 

1802 

1,923,504 

5,319,491 

3,395,987 

1803 

1,914,098 

5,272,812 

3,358,714 

1804 

1,651,467 

6,398,426 

4,746,959 

1805 

1,766,556 

7,146,765 

5,380,209 

1806 

1,999,884 

8,613,124 

6,613,240 

1807 

2,847,522 

7,921,120 

5,073,598 

1808 

836,342 

3,99 2,060 

3, 155,718 

1809 

2,205,331 

5,187,615 

2,982,284 

1810 

2,614,405 

7,813,317 

5,198,912 

1811 

2,309,415 

1,431,829 


1812 

1,294,152 

4,135,592 

2,841,440 

1813* 




* The documents of this 

ear were destroyed at the late 

fire at the Cn-tom House. 



June 20, 1314. 

W. IllVING. 


We now proceed to olfer a more specific ac- 
count of the trade of these States, in order to 
give our readers an idea not merely of their 
general importance, as applying to the amount 
of their individual imports and exports, but to 
shew of what the same may consist, and the coun- 
tries with which the intercourse is carried on. 


Dollars. Cents. 


The duties arising on goods, 
wares, and merchandize im- 
ported into the United States, 
commencing Oct. 1, 1790, and 
ending Sept. 30, 1791, amount- 
ed to -------- 

The duties on the tonnage of 
vessels that entered these 
States, during the same period, 
amounted to 

Tons 95ths. Tons 9-3lhs. Dels. Cents, 

American 504,0(31 ?6 ) 30,824 721 
, 37,075 63 {forejgn _ 2 3,_ 013 83 \ livi22 75 2 


3 , 


006,722 85-A- 


145,347 75 


Total Dollars - 3,152,070 60^ 


The Value of the Exports for the Year , ending 
Sept. 30, 1791, with their destination , was as 
follows. 

Dels. Cts. 


To the dominions of Russia - - 3,570 

To the dominions of Sweden - - 21,866 2 

To the dominions of Denmark - 277,273 53 

To the dominions of the United 

Netherlands ------ 1,634,825 6 

To the dominions of Great Britain 7,953,418 21 
To the Imperial ports of the Aus- 
trian Netherlands and Germany 362,010 21 


To Hamburgh, Bremen, and other 


Hanse Towns - - - - - 64,259 25 

To the dominions of France - - 4,298,762 26 
To the dominions of Spain - - 1,301,286 95 

To the dominions of Portugal - 1,039,696 47 
To the Italian Ports - - - - 31,726 90 

To Morocco 3,660 50 

To the East Indies, generally - 318,628 46 

To Africa, generally - - - - 168,477 92 

To the West Indies, generally - 59,434 36 

To the N. W. Coast of America - 3,380 

To Europe and the West Indies 

for a market ------ 29,274 5 


Total Dollars - 17,571,551 45] 


UNITED STATES. 


67 


[Amount of Exports for the 
Year , ending Sept. 30, 
1792. 

Dots. 

New Hampsh. 181,407 
Massachusets - 2,889,922 
Rhode Island 698,084 
Connecticut - 1,237,473 
New York - - 2,528,085 
New Jersey - 23,524 

Pennsylvania - 3,820,646 
Delaware - - 133,978 

Maryland - - 2,550,258 
Virginia - - 3,549,499 
N. Carolina - 503,294 

S. Carolina - 2,430,425 
Georgia - - 458,973 


21,005,568 


Amount of Exports 
for the Year , ending 
Sept. 30, 1793. 

Dots. 

198,197 

3,676,412 

616,416 

770,239 

2,934.369 

54^176 

6,958,736 

71,242 

3,687,119 

2,984,317 

363,307 

3,195,874 

501,383 


26,011,787 


Value and Destination of Exports for the Year , 


ending Sept. 30, 1793. 

Russia - - - 5,769 

Sweden - -- -- -- -- 310,427 

Denmark - -- -- -- - 870,508 

Holland - -- -- -- -- 3,169,536 

Great Britain ------- 8,431,239 

Imperial Ports ------- 1,013,347 

Hanse Towns ------- 792,537 

France - - - - 7,050,498 

Spain 2,237,950 

Portugal - -- -- -- -- 997,590 

Italian Ports - 220,688 

Morocco - -- -- -- -- 2,094 

East Indies - -- -- -- - 253,131 

Africa ---------- 251,343 

West Indies -------- 399,559 

N. W. Coast of America - - - 1,58 6 

Uncertain 3,986 


26,011,788 

Thus the exports of the United States had in- 
creased, in the. three years, ending Sept. 1793, 
from 17,500,000 to 26,000,000 of dollars. 

The above exports consisted, in a great degree, 
of the most necessary food of man and of working 
animals, and of raw materials applicable to ma- 
nufactures of the most general utility and con- 
sumption. 

The exports were, at this period, five or nearly 
six times the amount of the national taxes and 
duties. The amount of the outward freight of 
the ships and vessels of the United States, was 


about equal to all their national taxes and duties. 
The inward freight was considerable. The 
earnings of the fishing vessels, in lieu of freight, 
were also considerable. The coasting freights 
were greater in value than both the last. All 
ships and vessels departed from the United States, 
fully laden, excepting a part of the East India 
traders. The quantity of tonnage, employed in 
the coasting trade was very considerable, as was 
also that employed in the cod and whale fisheries. 
The imports of the United States were less in 
value than the exports, deducting the outward 
freights of their own ships, (which were returned 
in goods,) the net sales of their ships to foreigners, 
and the property imported by migrators from 
foreign countries. 

The very great proportion of the imports, 
which consisted of manufactures, (and from raw 
materials which America could produce,) afforded 
constant and inviting opportunities to lessen the 
balance against the United States, in their trade 
with foreign countries, held out a certain home 
market to skilful and industrious manufacturers 
in America, and gave promises to the landholder 
and fanner of a very increasing demand for his 
produce, in which he could not be deceived, and 
to which the steady price of their produce, during 
the existence of embargoes, has borne testimony. 

The imports had not, however, been hitherto 
swelled in proportion to the increase of popula- 
tion and wealth. The reason was, the constant 
introduction of new branches of manufacture, and 
the great extension of the old branches. 

The imports had almost ceased to exhibit cer- 
tain articles of naval and military supply, and 
others of the greatest utility and consumption. 
They consisted in a small degree of necessaries, 
in a great degree of articles of comfortable ac- 
commodations, and in some degree of luxuries; 
but the exports consisted chiefly of prime neces- 
saries, with some articles of mere comfort and 
utility, and some of luxury. The following will 
be found to be the quantities of some of the prin- 
cipal articles of exportation from the United 
States, during the year, ending September, 1792. 

3,145,255 Bushels of grain and pulse (princi- 
pally wheat, Indian corn, rye, 
beans, and peas.) 

44,752 Horses, horned cattle, mules, hogs, 
and sheep. 

1,469,723 Barrels of flour, meal, biscuit, and 
rice, reducing casks of various 
sizes, to the proportion of flour 
barrels.] 


68 


UNITED STATE S. 


[146,909 Barrels of tar, pitch, turpentine, and 
rosin. 

116,803 Barrels of beef, pork, mutton, sau- 
sages, oysters, tripe, &amp;c. reducing 
casks of various sizes, to the pro- 
portion of beef and pork barrels. 

231,776 Barrels of dried and pickled fish, re- 
ducing them to barrels of the same 
size. 

948,115 Gallons of spirits, distilled in the 
United States. 

7,823 Tons, 12 cwt. and 141b. of pot-ashes 
and pearl-ashes. 

112,428 Hogsheads of tobacco. 

60,646,861 Feet of boards, plank, and scantling. 

19,394 Tons of timber. 

18,374 Pieces of timber. 

1,080 Cedar and oak ship knees. 

71,693,863 Shingles. 

31,760,702 Staves and hoops. 

191 Frames of houses. 

73,318 Oars, rafters for oars, and handspikes. 

48,860 Shook or knock-down casks. 

52,381 Hogsheads of flax seed. 

The exports of the year of which the above are 
a part, amounted to 21,000,000 of dollars— but 
the exports of the next following year, (ending 
Sept. 30, 1793), amounted to 5,000,000 more, 
being, as we have seen above, 26,000,000 of dol- 
lars. Provisions and raw materials had greatly 
increased. Of flour alone there were shipped 
1,103,000 of casks. 

1 he imports began now generally to be 
brought directly (and not circuitously) from the 
countries which produced or manufactured them. 
— China, India proper, the isles of Bourbon and 
Mauritius, Good Hope, the S. settlements of 
America and the W. Indies, the Wine Islands, 
the countries on the Mediterranean and Baltic 
Seas, Great Britain and Ireland, France, the 
Netherlands and Germany, Spain and Portugal. 
Less than half the ships and vessels belong- 
ing to the United States, were sufficient to trans- 
port all the commodities they consumed or im- 
ported. 

Their citizens might be lawfully concerned in 
any branch of foreign trade, except the slave 
trade, whether carried on from the United States, 
or from any other country. 

Their commerce was diversified and prosper- 
ous, and consisted in importing for their own 
consumption, and with regard to their export, in 
the coasting and inland trades, and the Indian 
trade. There was no branch of commerce, fo- 


reign or domestic, in which every district, city, 
port, and individual was not equally entitled to 
be interested. 

The lawful interest of money was 6 per cent, 
per annum in most of the States : in a few it was 
7 per cent ; in one it was 5 per cent. 

The commanders and other officers of American 
ships were deemed skilful and judicious; from 
which cause, combined with the goodness of their 
ships and of their equipment, insurances upon 
their vessels were generally made in Europe, 
upon the most favourable terms, compared with 
the corresponding risks on board of the vessels 
of other nations ; and this opinion has not ceased, 
with other causes, to operate in their favour to 
the present day. 

The separate American States had (with one 
small exception) abolished the slave trade, and 
they had also, in some instances, abolished negro 
slavery ; in others they had adopted efficacious 
measures for its certain, but gradual abolition. 
The importation of slaves was discontinued, and 
could never be renewed, so as to interrupt the 
repose of Africa, or endanger the tranquillity of 
the United States. The steady use of effica- 
cious alternatives was preferred to the imme- 
diate-application of more strong remedies, in a 
case of so much momentary and intrinsic impor- 
tance. 

The clothes, books, household furniture, and 
the tools or implements of their trade or profes- 
sion, brought by emigrators to America, were 
exempted from the import duty, and they might 
begin their commerce, manufactures, trades, or 
agriculture on the day of their arrival, upon the 
same footing as a native citizen. There was no 
greater nor other tax upon foreigners, or their 
property in the United States, than upon native 
citizens. All foreign jurisdiction, in ecclesiasti- 
cal matters, was inconsistent with the existing 
laws and constitutions. 

The poor taxes were very small, owing to the 
facility w ith which every man and woman, and 
every child who was old enough to do the light- 
est work, could procure a comfortable subsistance. 
The industrious poor, if frugal and sober, often 
placed themselves, in a few years, above want. 

Horses and cattle and other useful beasts, im- 
ported for breeding, were exempted by law from 
the import duty. 

All the Sands in the United States were free 
from tythes. The medium annual land rents of 
Europe were greater per acre than the medium 
purchase was in the United States ; including, in 
the estimate, the value of the old improved farms] 


UNITED 

fin America, and the great mass of unimproved 
lands. 

The productions and manufactures of military 
supplies and articles, enabled these States to 
derive from their own resources ships of war, 
gunpowder, cannon and musket balls, shells and 
bombs, cannon and carriages, rifles and cutlasses, 
grapnals, iron, lead, cartouch boxes, sword belts, 
cartridge paper, saddles, bridles, and holsters, 
soldiers’ and sailors’ hats, buckles, shoes and 
boots, leathern breeches, naval stores, sheathing- 
paper, malt and spirituous liquors, manufactured 
tobacco, soap, candles, lard, butter, beef, pork, 


STATES. 09 

bacon, hams, peas, biscuit, and flour, and other 
ax-ticles for the land or marine service. 

Such, in a commercial view, were the United 
States in 1793, and such were the grounds upon 
which their rapidly increasing prosperity had 
stood. 

The following Tables will show that, in the 
course of 13 years, their Exports to Great Bri- 
tain alone became more than equal to those they 
had made to all parts in 1793, since the Total 
Expox’ts wex-e then 26,011,787 dollax-s, and in 
1807, to Great Britain, 36,739,181 dollars, or 
£■6, 531 , 410 stexding. 


IMPORTS and EXPORTS between GREAT BRITAIN and the UNITED STATES of 
AMERICA , (including Louisiana) for Three Years , ending January 5, 1808, distinguishing each 
Year , and the principal Articles of such Imports and Exports ; and also foreign Merchandize from 
British Produce and Manufactures. 


Real Value of Imports from the United States of America. 


Annotto - 

Ashes, Pearl, and Pot - 
Cochineal -------- 

Coffee ---------- 

Corn, Grain, and Meal - - - - 
Hides - -- -- -- -- 

Indigo - -- -- -- -- 

Pitch and Tar - ------ 

Seeds ; viz. Flax and Linseed - - 

Skins and Furs - ------ 

Sugar --------- 

Tobacco --------- 

Turpentine -------- 

Wood; viz. Deals and Fir Timber 

Mahogany - - - - 

• Masts - - - - - 

Staves - - - - - 

Wool ; viz. Cotton - - - - - 
Other articles ------- 


Total Imports 


£■ 


1805. 

1806. 

1807. 

£■ 

£■ 

£• 

6,290 

71,353 

64,402 

102,952 

13 8,498 

144,326 

720 

77,817 

9,104 

18,259 

25,904 

66,636 

151,322 

422,429 

922,308 

15,985 

12,406 

18,590 

12,756 

47,297 

69,909 

48,511 

34,378 

40,266 

1,652 

11,590 

7,050 

68,691 

65,062 

26,116 

13,866 

51,173 

13,030 

313,487 

417,946 

447,883 

1 18,308 

100,822 

77,638 

36,164 

64,758 

131 , 741 

30,378 

29,432 

81,482 

5,519 

10,121 

5.355 

106,681 

100,203 

146,734 

2,927,818 

2,566,729 

4,115,136 

97,444 

73,825 

143,704 

4,076,803 

4,360,743 

6,531,410] 


/ 


70 


UNITED STATES. 


[Real Value of Exports from England to the United States of America. 



1805. 

1806. 

1807. 


£ 

£ 

£■ 

Brass and Copper Manufactures - - - 

90,342 

82,142 

168,004 

Cotton Goods - -- -- -- -- 

3,267,843 

4,645,739 

4,609,211 

Glass and Earthenware ------ 

165,563 

175,526 

162,542 

Haberdashery - -- -- -- -- 

245,433 

313,764 

310,862 

Hats - -- -- -- -- -- - 

98,904 

99,260 

64,620 

Iron and Steel - -- -- -- -- 

739,049 

684,678 

773,188 

Lead ------------ 

72,003 

44,619 

31,166 

Linens ----------- 

319,950 

289,044 

306,821 

Salt - -- -- -- -- -- - 

60,830 

84,689 

81,574 

Silk Manufactures -------- 

465,442 

425,165 

417,418 

Tin and Pewter - -- -- -- - 

56,550 

79,189 

75,875 

Woollens - -- -- -- -- - 

4,621,827 

4,866,178 

4,239,118 

Other articles - -- -- -- -- 

815,732 

599,495 

606,114 

British Produce and Manufactures - 

11,019,468 

12,389,488 

11,846,513 

Foreign Merchandize ----- 

427,471 

476,063 

251,429 

Total Exports - - - 

11,446,939 

12,865,551 

12,097,942 




36,410,432 


(Balance in favour of England, by the two foregoing Tables, £.21,441,476.) 


Real Value of Exports from England to all Parts of America and the W. Indies (exclusive of the 

United States.) 


Years, 


ended 10th October, 1806 - 

1807 - 

1808 - 


British 

Manufactures. 

Foreign 

Merchandise. 

£■ 

£ 

7,275,911 

696,495 

8,635,860 

650,761 

12,041,320 

817,775 

27,953,091 

2,165,031 


Total. 


7,972,406 

9,286,621 

12,859,095 


Excess of Exports to the United States - - - 


30,118,122 

6,292,310 


Thus, upon an average of three years, ending 
1807, the real value of British manufactures and 
foreign merchandise, exported to America and 
the W. Indies, exceeded that to all other parts 
by upwards of 6,000,000. 

But if these States had thus benefited Great 


Britain, up to this period, by their intercourse, 
their own improvement was not less striking. 
In the course of five years, from the time of their 
independence, their political economy might be 
said to be firmly established upon its own basis ; 
we shall therefore present our readers with a] 


UNITED STATES. 


71 


[ Genera l Statistical View of the United States, for a Period of 20 Years, from 1788 to 1808. 
Collected chiefly from Official Documents. 


Enumeration. 

Number and 
Value in IT 88. 

Number and 
Value in 1808. 

Increase in 20 
Years. 

Number of States in the Union - - - 

13 

21 

8 

Square acres - -- -- -- -- 

283,800,000 

600,000,000 

316.200,000 

Acres of land in cultivation - - - - - 

1,210,500 

2,390,400 

1,179,000 
4 dollars 

Average price of land, per acre - - 

Population. — Whites and free people of 

2 dollars 

6 dollars 

colour ------ 

2,500,000 

5,430,000 

2,930,000 

Slaves ------- 

700,000 

3,200,000 

1,070,000 

370,000 

Total population - -- -- -- - 

6,500,000 

3,300,000 

Effective militia - -- -- -- - 

450,000 

930,000 

480,000 

Regular army - -- -- -- -- 

_ 2,000 
flO frigates, 4 
&lt;81 sloops&amp;&gt; 
(gunboats. 5 

2,000 

Naval force - -- -- -- -- - 


91 vessels 

Dwelling-houses - -- -- -- - 

640,000 

1,225,000 

585,000 

Horses - -- -- -- -- -- 

600,000 

1 , 200,000 

600,000 

Horned cattle - -- -- -- -- 

1 , 200,000 

2,950,000 

1,750,000 

Post offices - -- -- -- -- - 

400 

1,848 

1,448 

Revenues of general ditto ----- 

12 , 000 /. 

68,850/. 

56,850/. 

Expenses of ditto - -- -- -- - 

11 , 000 /. 

58,500 /. 

47,500/. 

Newspapers - -- -- -- -- 

80 

350 

270 

The post extends in miles 

5,000 

33,000 

28,000 

Tonnage of merchant vessels - 

250,000 

1,207,000 
22 , 000 , 0 00 /. 

957,000 

Value of imports in sterling - 

2,475,000/. 

19,525,000/. 

Exports f Domestic produce - 

in Sterling Money. i^p n _S oods _ ; ; 

2,025,000/. 

10,957,408/. 

8.932,408/. 

225,000/. 

2,250,000/. 

13,419,800/. 

24,377,208/. 

13,194,800/. 

22,127,208/. 

2 , 200 , 000 /. 

Annual revenue - -- -- -- - 

1,800,000/. 

4,000,000/. 

Specie in circulation ------- 

2,250,000/. 

3,800,000/. 

1,550,000 /. 
^ Decrease 1 
\ 1,261,300/ } 

National debt - -- -- -- -- 

16,500,000/. 

15,238,700/. 


The commerce of these States, previous to the 
late embargo, was most flourishing, notwithstand- 
ing the depredations said to have been com- 
mitted upon it by the belligerent powers of 
Europe, as will appear from the following official 
documents, laid before the house of representa- 
tives on February 29, 1808, by Albert Gallatin, 
secretary of the treasury. 

Exports of the United States, from October 1, 
1806, to October 1 , 1807. 

Dollars. 

The goods, wares, and merchandize 
of domestic growth, or manufac- 
ture ---------- 48,699,592 


Dollars. 

The goods, wares, and merchandize 

of foreign growth or manufacture 59,643,558 


Total 108,343,150 

Recapitulation of the above. 

The foreign goods are classed as follows : 

1st. Articles free of duty by law - - 2,080,114 
2nd. Do. liable to duty, and on re-ex- 
portation entitled to drawback - 48,205,943 
3rd. Do. liable to duty, but no draw- 
back on re-exportation - - - - 9,357,501 


59,643,558] 


72 


UNITED STATES. 


j~N. B. The duties collected on the third class 
are derived directly from the carrying trade, and 
amount to 1,393,877 dollars. 

The articles of domestic growth or manufacture 
are arranged as follows : 


Dollars. 

1st. Produce of the sea - - - - 2,804,000 

2nd. Do. of the forest ----- 5,476,000 
3rd. Do. of agriculture - - - - 37,832,000 

4th. Do. of manufactures - - - - 2,409,000 

5th. Do. uncertain ------ 1,79,000 


48,700,000 


The following is a statement of the duties paid 
upon imports into the principal sea-port towns of 
the United States, calculated upon an average of 


~ .7 7 

Towns. 

States. 

Dollars. 

New York, 
Philadelphia, 

New York 

12,862,020 

Pennsylvania 

7,777,965 

Boston, 

Massachusetts 

6,408,400 

Baltimore, 

Maryland 

3,861,963 

Charleston, 

South Carolina 

3,031,639 

Norfolk, 

Virginia 

1,761,673 

Salem, 

Massachusetts 

1,034,498 

Savannah, 

Georgia 

914,039 

Providence, 

Rhode Island 

781,556 

Portland, 

Maine 

545,265 

Newhaven, 

Connecticut 

510,687 

Wilmington, 

North Carolina 

319,110 

39,808,765 


Annual average 

9,952,191 


Mr. Key, in his very able and masterly speech 
against the continuance of the embargo, stated, 
that of the exports of domestic produce of the 
United States, in 1807, amounting to 48,699,592 
dollars, only 9,762,204 were exported to Euro- 
pean ports under the control of France, which 
had been since interdicted by the British orders 
in council ; and that there consequently remained 
a surplus of 31,937,388 dollars of American pro- 
duce, which might yet have been exported, if the 
embargo had not taken place. But if any thing 
further were wanting to prove, that war and em- 
bargo are not conducive to the commercial inte- 
rest of these States, the great decrease of the 
exports in 181 1 would amply testify the assertion. 

By the following official statement of goods, 
wares and merchandise, exported from the United 
States, during one year, prior to October 1, 181 1, 


it will be seen that the total exports did not ex- 
ceed 61,316,833 dollars, being a deficit of the ex- 
ports of 1807, to the amount of 47,026,307 dollars. 

Dollars. 

The goods, wares and merchandise, of 
domestic growth or manufacture, 
included in this statement, are esti- 
mated at - -- -- -- - 45,294,043 
And those of foreign growth or manu- 
facture, at------- - 16,022,790 


61,316,833 

The articles of domestic growth or manufacture 
may be arranged under the following heads* viz. 


Produce of the sea 1,413,000 

Produce of the forest 5,286,000 

Produce of agriculture - - - - 35,556,000 

Manufactures ------- 2,376,000 

Uncertain 663,000 


45,294,000 

And they were exported to the following coun- 


tries, viz. 

To the dominions of Russia, Prus- 
sia, Sweden and Denmark - - 3,055,833 

Great Britain 20,308,211 

Spain and Por- 
tugal -. - 18,266,466 

France and Italy 1,194,275 

To all other countries, or not dis- 
tinguished ------- 2,469,258 


45,294,043 

The goods, wares and merchandise of foreign 
growth or manufactures, were exported to the 
following countries, viz. 


To the dominions of Russia, Prus- 
sia, Sweden and Denmark - - 5,340,117 

■ Great Britain 1,573,344 

Spain and Por- 
tugal - - - - 5,772,572 

— France and Italy 1,712,537 

To all other countries, or not dis- 
tinguished ------- 1,624,220 


16,022,790 

We now proceed more specifically to notice 
the relations between these States and Great 
Britain and her colonies. 

About £.800,000 or £.1,000,000 of Birming- 
ham manufactures are sent, upon the average, to 
America, in years of open intercourse ; but the] 


UNITE D STATE S. 


73 


[erection of steel furnaces, by the Americans, and 
the circumstance of their procuring- their iron from 
Sweden, has lately tended to diminish this export 
on the part of Great Britain. The export of 
Birmingham to America, previous to February, 
1811, was to the value of £.800,000; but, for 
some time before, was very casual : the exports 
of the same articles to other parts, about the 
same period, did not exceed £.300,000 annually. 
The progress ofN. American manufactures with- 


in the last three or four years has been great, 
but not so alarming as generally imagined. The 
circumstance of numerous advertisements having 
been recently seen in the New York papers, for 
hands to engage in business peculiar to Main hes- 
ter and Birmingham, is best answered by the 
great increase, upon the whole, of British exports 
to America, and the W. Indies in general. This 
will appear most plainly by the following docu- 
ment. 


Return to an Order of the House of Commons, February 7, 1812 ,for an Account of the Total Value &lt; 
EXPO RTS from Great Britain to all Parts of America and the West Indies ; distinguishin 
British Produce and Manufactures from Foreign and Colonial Produce , and distinguishing the 
United States from other Parts of America, for Four Years, ending 1810. 


Official Value of Exports, to 

The United States. 

Other Parts of America and the "West 
Iudies. 

All Parts of America and the West 
Indies. 

Years 

British Pro- 
duce and Ma- 
nufactures. 

Foreign 
and Colo 
mal Pro 
duce. 

Total. 

British Pro- 
duce and Ma 
nufactures. 

foreign and 
Colonial 
Produce. 

Total. 

British Pro- 
luce and Ma- 
nufactures. 

Foreign an&lt; 
Colonial 
Produce. 

Total. 

1807 

1808 

1809 

1810 

7,743,229 

3,933,533 

5,025,245 

7,601,648 

177,891 

58,527 

162,370 

211,669 

7,921,120 

3,992,060 

5,187,615 

7,813,317 

6,226,746 

10,725,268 

12,647,689 

10,991,343 

739,523 

1,158,200 

1,457,225 

1,613,426 

6,966,269 

11,883,468 

14,104,914 

12,604,769 

13,969 975 
14,658,801 
17,672,934 
18,592,991 

917,414 

1,216,727 

1,619,595 

1,825,095 

14,887,389 

15.875.528 

19.292.529 
20,418,086 

Real Value of Exports, to 

The United States. 

Other Parts of America and the West 
Indies. 

All Parts of America and the West 
Indies. 

Years, 

British Pro- 
duce and Ma- 
nufactures. 

Foreign 
and Colo- 
nial Pro 
duce. 

Total. 

British Pro- 
duce and Ma 
nufactures. 

Foreign and 
Colonial 
Produce. 

Total, 

British Pro- 
duce and Ma- 
nufactures. 

Foreign and 
Colonial 
Produce. 

Total. 

1807 

1808 

1809 

1810 

11,846,513 

5,241,739 

7,258,500 

10,920,752 

251,429 

61,127 

202,268 

296,933 

12,097,942 

5,202,866 

7,460,768 

11,217,685 

10,439,423 

16,591,873 

18,014,219 

15,640,166 

914,373 11,353,796 
1,581,185 18,173,056 
1,819,47719,833,696 
2,043,541 17,683,707 

22,28 5,936 
21,833,610 
25,272,719 
26,560,918 

1,165,802 

1,642.312 

2,021,745 

2,340,474 

23,451,738 

23,475,922 

27,294.464 

28,901,392 


Custom House, London, 

February 18, 1812. 

From which it appears, that although there was 
a considerable falling off in the exports to the 
United States in 1808 and 1809, the deficiency was 
YOL. v. 


William Irving, 
Inspector of Imports and Exports. 

more than accounted for by an increased trade to 
other parts of America, and, what in many regards 
could not be less beneficial to the British colonies.] 

L 




74 


UNITED S T A T E S. 


[It was asserted by the merchants examined by 
the committee on the orders in council, that 
when trade was open to the United States it was 
steady, and could be regularly calculated upon ; 
it was regularly increasing up to 1808. Twenty 
years ago Americans were behind hand in pay- 
ments, but had been progressively improving. 
In 1807, there was no difficulty in getting pay- 
ment for shipments. In 1809 and 1810, pay- 
ments were better than ever, and money was fre- 
quently advanced to save the discount. In 1811, 
nothing was done but a few shipments, considered 
a high speculation. During the embargo in 1808, 
there were considerable shipments to Canada, for 
smuggling into the United States ; the same was 
attempted in 1812, but with unfortunate results. 

Before the interruption of trade, about one fifth 
'of exports to America was re-exported to S. 
America and the E. Indies ; but the decline of 
these re-exports had naturally kept pace with 
that of the original exports from England. 

On the other hand, however, the rising pros- 
perity of the British colonies in N. America in 
1808, was justly attributable, in a great measure, 
to the restrictions on trade in other parts of the 
world, in Europe in particular. The non-inter- 
course had also the effect of throwing a vast num- 
her of people of the United States into those 
colonies, particularly into Canada. By its influ- 
ence the outports of Great Britain were, perhaps, 
more particularly benefited than those of Lon- 
don. Thus Liverpool, as well as Glasgow, sup- 
plied Canada with the necessaries they formerly 
procured from the United .States. Such was the 
substance of the evidence delivered on the ques- 
tion of the repeal of the Orders in Council. 

The W. Indies, during the embargo, were sup- 
plied from Canada, by means of an entrepot 
established at Bermuda ; and for the security of 
such intercourse, six or ■ seven convoys were 
established, proceeding as far as Halifax. 

We shall presently see, that the British ton- 
nage employed between the American colonies 
and the W. Indies, has increased at least in equal 
rates, to the falling off of the shipping of the 
United States, during the period of an embargo ; 
but a short review of the naval power of the 
latter might here be desirable. 

The United States have, doubtless, contributed 
much to the support of the navy of Great Britain, 
by the employment they have given to her ships. 
From August 1789, to August 1790, no less than 
230,000 tons of British vessels cleared from the&amp;e 
States ; which much exceeds the quantity of ves- 
sels they employed the same year in the Russian 


trade. The whole Baltic trade of Great Britain, 
with all the countries of the various powers that 
lie within the Sound, important as it was to her, 
did not even, at that early period, fill more. 
Their trade with Holland, France, Spain, and 
Portugal, did not altogether employ as many 
vessels. Their whole fisheries, American colonial 
trade, and W. India trade, did not employ and 
load more. The tonnage of the whole of the 
American vessels was, of course, proportionally 
small ; the whole number of these vessels that 
arrived in American ports in the same year, 
from all the countries and places subject to the 
British crown, amounted tc no more than 43,580 
tons. 

The ship-building of these States was greater 
in 1792 than in any former year. In 1788, the 
tonnage of merchant vessels amounted to 250,000 
tons, and to 1,207,000, giving an increase of 
1357,000 tons, in 18138, exclusive of the tonnage of 
91 vessels, constituting the naval force established 
subsequently to the former period. 

The tonnage, according to the report of the 
secretary of the treasury, December 12, 1811, 
amounted to 984,269 tons, being an average 
annual decrease of the tonnage of 1808, of up- 
wards of 74,000 tons, or of 222,731 tons for the 
three years intervening. 

The net amount of revenue arising from duties, 



In 1806 ----- 16,015,317 

1807 ----- 16,492,889 

1808 ----- 7,176,985 

1809 ----- 7,138,676 

1810 12,756,831 

The amount of tonnage of vessels entered in- 
wards for three quarters, ending October 1806, 

was - -- -- - 70,264 

Do. three quarters, ending October 1813 1,985 

Loss of tonnage 68,279 

The number of sloops, schooners, and other- 
vessels laid up and dismantled in the American 
harbours, on September 17, 1813, amounted to 
640, including about 16 brigs. 

The yessels of war are calculated, by the offi- 
cial report of May 1814, at 33 vessels for the 
ocean (including three seventy-fours, likely soon 
to be launched), carrying 947 guns, and 32 ves- 
sels for the lakes, carrying 265 guns, besides 263 
gun-boats ; amongst which it is not improbable 
that some of the" above mercantile vessels have 
been adopted. 

The fall of revenue from 16,000,000 to 7 ,000,000] 


UNITED STATES. 


75 


[in the years 1808 and 1809, as in the preceding 
statement, are attributable to the derangements 
of commerce, caused by the embargo ; particu- 
larly as we find that in 1810, it rose again to 
nearly 13,000,000, notwithstanding the continu- 
ance of some restrictions and embarrassments in 
the way of importations 

The following was the increase of vessels in the 
trade of Quebec, which cleared from that port 
and from Montreal, in the under-mentioned 



Ships. 

Tons. 

1808 - - 

- - 334 

70,000 

1809 - - 

- - 434 

87,000 

1810 - - 

- - 661 

140,000 

1811 - - 

- - 552 

116,000 


It is evident from the above statements, that 
the British N. Americans were undoubtedly be- 
nefitted by the Orders in Council ; this will 
appear more clearly, when, it is shewn, as by the 
subsequent tarif, how the tonnage between Eng- 
land and Quebec supported a steady rise in 
prices, whilst the mercantile shipping of the 
Americans lay useless and unemployed. 


Tonnage between England and Quebec. 


£. s. d. £. s. d. 

1806 ----- from 4 15 0 to 5 5 0 

1807 ----- from 5 0 0 to 5 15 0 

1808 ----- from 7 0 0 to 7 10 0 

1809 ----- from 8 0 0 to 8 10 0 

1810 - - - - - from 7 0 0 to 9 0 0 

1811 ----- from 8 0 0 to 9 0 0 


It should thus appear, that whatever con- 
tributed to decrease the carrying trade of the 
United States, operated as a premium to British 
navigation : the latter has however been con- 
stantly and regularly encroached upon, in a 
ratio more than equal to the increasing tonnage 
of American shipping, in their intercourse with 
Great Britain; or, in other words, the ship- 
ments between the two countries have been 
progressively on the decline since January 1801, 
though England has, at the same time, amply 
compensated for the loss, by her naval com- 
munication with all other parts. This will be 
manifest by the following table, being] 


h 2 


An Account 


7(j 


U NITED STATE S. 



; o&gt; ^ co 

I rH w 

r oC go' f O irT 

; ,-a rf iO &lt;0 


,_i ^ © &lt;o s* 

r O q-j O O rH 
0&gt; f&gt; CO CO CO 


s 


C N- O 

.spS g 

£ o' -o' 
o o 
fa ^ 


•O IPs 
d.S a 
J^a, 

£ ^ c 
®-g.SP 

j&gt;»\3 OJ 

75 *S- o 
= £Q^ 

o g 
cd |«H 

c 


"-4- 

o 


£ 


a 

s 


0) 

H 


a 

o 


H 


Total unemployed 37,663 

Custom House, London, William Irving, To E. Willoughby, 

February 18, 1812. Inspector General of Imports and Exports. Reg. General. 

N. B. The above Table was made out from sundry documents, furnished to Parliament by the two authorities here quoted.] 


UNITED 


STATES. 


77 


[Military Strength . — Standing armies are deem- 
ed inconsistent with a republican government ; 
the military strength of the United States consists 
therefore in its militia. As far back as the year 
1790, the number was very considerable. the 
present efficient force is about 100,000, including 
regulars. Such an army, as to numbers, is ex- 
tremely formidable, especially upon any attempt 
of a power to overrun these States ; but it is by no 
means capable of coping on any thing like equal 
terms, with the well disciplined troops of Europe. 
At the beginning of the present year, 1814, it 
seemed to be the intention of the American go- 
vernment to carry the war into Canada, with the 
greatest possible vigour, and the bounty had risen, 
on this occasion, as high as £.30 a man. As 
30,000 of Wellington’s victorious troops are now 
(June 1814) on their passage to America, the 
bounty is probably much higher. 

Religion. — The constitution of the United 
States provides against the making of any law 
respecting an establishment of religion, or pro- 
hibiting the free exercise of it ; and in the con- 
stitutions of the respective States, religious liberty 
is a fundamental principle. On this important 
point, this government is distinguished from 
almost every other. The people, as being at 
liberty to choose their own religion, are naturally 
much divided in their election. The bulk of 
them would denominate themselves Christians ; 
a small proportion of them are J ews : some plead 
the sufficiency of natural religion, and reject 
revelation as unnecessary and fabulous ; and 
many have yet their religion to choose. 

The following denominations of Christians are 
more or less numerous in the United States, viz. 
Congregationalists, Presbyterians, Dutch Re- 
formed Church, Episcopalians, Baptists, Quakers 
or Friends, Methodists, Roman Catholics, Ger- 
man Lutherans, German Calvinists or Presby- 
terians, Moravians, Tunkers, Mennonists, Uni- 
versalists, and Shakers. 

Of these the Congregationalists are the most 
numerous. In New England alone, besides those 
which are scattered through the Middle and 
Southern States, there were not less, in the year 
1790, than 1000 congregations of this denomina- 


tion, viz. 

In New Hampshire ----- 200 

Massachusetts ------ 440 

Rhode Island ------ 13 

Connecticut - -- -- -197 
Vermont (say) ----- 150 


Total 1000 


Which, according to the relative increase of po- 
pulation, would now amount to just double that 
number. 

It is difficult to say what is the present eccle- 
siastical constitution of the Congregational 
churches. Formerly their ecclesiastical proceed- 
ings were regulated, in Massachusetts, by the 
Cambridge Platform of church discipline, esta- 
blished by the synod, in 1648 ; and in Connecti- 
cut, by the Saybrook Platform of discipline ; 
but since the revolution, less regard has been 
paid to these constitutions, and in many instances 
they are wholly disused. Congregationalits are 
pretty generally agreed in this opinion, that 
“ Every church or particular congregation of 
visible saints, in gospel order, being furnished 
with a pastor or bishop, and walking together in 
truth and peace, has received from the Lord 
Jesus full power and authority, ecclesiastical 
within itself, regularly to administer all the ordi- 
nances of Christ, and is not under any other 
ecclesiastical jurisdiction whatsoever.” Their 
churches, with some exceptions, disclaim the 
word Independent, as applicable to them, and 
claim a sisterly relation to each other. 

From the answer of the elders, and other mes- 
sengers of the churches, assembled at Boston, in 
the year 1662, to the questions proposed to them 
by order of the general court, it appears that the 
churches, at that period, professed to hold com- 
munion with each other in the following acts, 
viz. 

1. u In hearty care and prayer for one another. 
■ — 2. I 11 affording relief, by communicating of 
their gifts in temporal or spiritual "•'~ssities. — 
3. In maintaining unity and peace, oy giving 
account one to another of their public actions, 
when it is properly desired ; to strengthen one 
another in their regular administrations ; in par- 
ticular by a concurrent testimony against persons 
justly censured. — 4. To seek and accept help 
from, and afford help to each other, in case of 
divisions and contentions, whereby the peace of 
any church is disturbed ; in matters of more than 
ordinary importance, as the ordination, installa- 
tion, removal, and deposition of pastors or 
bishops ; in doubtful and difficult questions and 
controversies, doctrinal or practical, that may 
arise ; and for the rectifying of mal-administra- 
tion, and healing of errors and scandals that are 
not healed among themselves. — 5. In taking no- 
tice, with a spirit of love and faithfulness, of the 
troubles and difficulties, errors and scandals of 
another church, and in administering help (when 
the case manifestly calls for it) though they] 


78 


UNITED STATES. 


[should so neglect their own good and duty, as 
not to seek it. — 6. In admonishing one another, 
when there is cause for it ; and after a due course 
of means, patiently to withdraw from a church, or 
peccant party therein, obstinately persisting in 
error or scandal.” 

A consociation of churches was, at the period 
mentioned, considered as necessary to a commu- 
nion of churches, (the former being but an agree- 
ment to maintain the latter) and therefore a duty. 
The consociation of churches they defined to be, 
u Their mutual and solemn agreement to exer- 
cise communion in such acts as aforesaid (meaning 
the acts of communion above recited) amongst 
themselves, with special reference to those 
churches which, by Providence, are planted in a 
convenient vicinity, though with liberty reserved 
without offence, to make use of others, as the 
nature of the case, or the advantage of the oppor- 
tunity may lead thereunto.” 

The ministers of the Congregational order 
are pretty generally associated for the purposes 
of licensing candidates for the ministry, and 
friendly intercourse and improvement ; but there 
are few Congregational churches that are con- 
sociated on the above principles ; and the practice 
has very generally gone into disuse, and with it 
the communion of churches in most of the acts 
before recited. In Connecticut and the w. parts 
of Massachusetts, the churches have deviated less 
from their original constitution. The degeneracy 
of the Congregational churches from that order, 
fellowship, and harmony, in discipline, doctrines, 
and friendly advice and assistance in ecclesiastical 
matters, which formerly subsisted between them, 
is considered matter of deep regret to many, not 
to say to most people of that denomination. 

Congregationalists are divided in opinion re- 
specting the doctrines of the gospel, and the 
proper subjects of its ordinances. The body of 
them are Calvinists ; a respectable proportion 
are what may be denominated Hopkensian Cal- 
vinists ; besides these, some are Arminians, some 
Arians, a few Socinians, and a number have 
adopted Dr. Chauncy’s scheme of the final salva- 
tion of all men ; but for a digested summary of 
the peculiar sentiments of each of these sects, 
the reader is referred to H. Adams’s View of 
Religions. 

Next to the Congregationalists, Presbyterians 
are the most numerous denomination of Chris- 
tians in the United States. They have a consti- 
tution by which they regulate all their ecclesias- 
cal proceedings, and a confession of faith, which 
all church officers and church members are re- 


quired to subscribe. Hence they have preserved 
a singular uniformity in their religious sentiments, 
and have conducted their ecclesiastical affairs 
with a great degree of order and harmony. 

The body of the presbyterians inhabit the 
Middle and Southern States, and are united under 
the same constitution. By this constitution, the 
Presbyterians who were governed by it, in 1790, 
were divided into five Synods and 17 Presbyte- 
ries ; viz. Synod of New York, five presbyteries, 
94 congregations, 61 settled ministers. —2. Synod 
of Philadelphia, five presbyteries, 92 congrega- 
tions, 60 settled ministers, besides the ministers 
and congregations belonging to Baltimore pres- 
bytery. — 3. Synod of Virginia, four presbyteries, 
70 congregations, 40 settled ministers, exclusive 
of the congregations and ministers of Transyl- 
vania presbytery. — 4. Synod of the Carolinas, 
three presbyteries, 82 congregations, 42 settled 
ministers, the ministers and congregations in 
Abington presbytery not included. If we sup- 
pose the number of congregations in the presby- 
teries which made no returns to their synods, to 
be 100, and the number of settled ministers in the 
same to be 40, the whole number of Presbyterian 
congregations in this connection would be 438, 
which were supplied by 223 settled ministers, 
and between 70 and 80 candidates, besides a 
number of ordained ministers who had no par- 
ticular charges. With relation to the census of 
1810, the above numbers will be about double. 
Each of the synods meet annually; besides 
which they have a joint meeting, by their com- 
missioners, once a year, in General Assembly at 
Philadelphia. 

The Presbyterian churches are governed by 
congregational, presbyterial, and synodical as- 
semblies : these assemblies possess no civil juris- 
diction. Their power is wholly moral or spiritual, 
and that only ministerial or declarative. They 
possess the right of requiring obedience to the 
laws of Christ, and of excluding the disobedient 
from the privileges of the church ; and the powers 
requisite for obtaining evidence and inflicting 
censure ; but the highest punishment, to which 
their authority extends, is to exclude the contu- 
macious and impenitent from the congregation of 
believers. 

The church session, which is the congrega- 
tional assembly of judicatory, consists of the 
minister or ministers and elders of a particular 
congregation. This body is invested with the 
spiritual government of the congregation ; and 
have power to inquire into the knowledge and 
Christian conduct of all its members ; to call] 


UNITED STATES. 


70 


[before them offenders and witnesses, of their own 
denomination ; to admonish, suspend, or exclude 
from the sacraments, such as deserve these cen- 
sures ; to concert measures for promoting- the 
spiritual interests of the congregation, and to 
appoint delegates to the higher judicatories of the 
church. 

A presbytery consists of all the ministers, and 
one ruling elder from each congregation, within 
a certain district. Three ministers and three 
elders, constitutionally convened, are competent 
to do business. This body have cognizance of 
all things that regard the welfare of the particular 
churches within their bounds, which are not cog- 
nizable by the session. Also, they have a power 
of receiving and issuing appeals from the sessions 
— of examining and licensing candidates for the 
ministry ; of ordaining, settling, removing, or 
judging ministers ; of resolving questions of doc- 
trine or discipline ; of condemning erroneous 
opinions, that injure the purity or peace of the 
church; of visiting particular churches, to inquire 
into their state, and redress the evils that may 
have arisen in them ; of uniting or dividing con- 
gregations, at the request of the people, and 
whatever else appertains to the spiritual concerns 
of the churches under their care. 

A synod is a convention of several presbyteries. 
The synod have power to admit and judge of 
appeals, regularly brought up from the presby- 
teries ; to give their judgment on all references 
made to them of an ecclesiastical kind ; to cor- 
rect and regulate the proceedings of presbyteries ; 
to take effectual care that presbyteries observe 
the constitution of the church, &amp;c. 

The highest judicatory of the Presbyterian 
church is styled, the General Assembly of the 
Presbyterian Church in the United States of 
America. This grand assembly is to consist of 
an equal delegation of bishops and elders from 
each presbytery within their jurisdiction, by the 
title of commissioners to the general assembly. 
Fourteen commissioners make a quorum. The 
general assembly constitute the bond of union, 
peace, correspondence, and mutual confidence 
among all their churches ; and have power to re- 
ceive and issue all appeals and references which 
may regularly be brought before them from in- 
ferior judicatories; to regulate and correct the 
proceedings of the synods, &amp;c. To the general 
assembly also belongs the power of consulting, 
reasoning, and judging in controversies respect- 
ing doctrine and discipline ; of reproving, warn- 
ing, or bearing testimony against error in doc- 
trine, or immorality in practice in any church, 


presbytery, or synod ; of corresponding with 
foreign churches ; of putting a stop to schismati- 
cal Contentions and disputations ; and in general 
of recommending and attempting reformation of 
manners, and of promoting charity, truth, and 
holiness in all the churches ; and also of erecting 
new synods when they judge it necessary. 

The confession of faith adopted by the Pres- 
byterian church, embraces what are called the 
Calvinistic doctrines ; and none who disbelieve 
these doctrines are admitted into fellowship with 
their churches. The general assembly of the 
Presbyterian church hold a friendly correspon- 
dence with the general association in Connecticut, 
by letter, and by admitting delegates from their 
respective bodies to sit in each other’s general 
meetings. 

Discontented with the churches of which we 
have been speaking, there are four small presby- 
teries in New England, who have a similar form 
of ecclesiastical government and discipline, and 
profess the same doctrines. 

Besides these, there is the u Associate Presby- 
tery of Pennsylvania,” having a separate eccle- 
siastical jurisdiction in America, and belonging 
to the Associate Synod of Edinburgh, which they 
declare is the only ecclesiastical body, either in 
Britain or America, with which they are agreed 
concerning the doctrine and order of the church 
of Christ, and concerning the duty of confessing 
the truth, and bearing witness to it by a public 
testimony against the errors of the times. This 
connection is not to be understood as indicating- 
subjection to a foreign jurisdiction; but is pre- 
served for the sake of maintaining unity with their 
brethren in the profession of the Christian faith, 
and such an intercourse as might be of service to 
the interests of sectarians. This sect of Presby- 
terians are commonly known by the name of 
Secetlers, on account of their seceding from the 
national church in Scotland, 1736. See H. 
Adams’s View of Religion, article, Seceders. 

The Dutch Reformed churches in the United 
States, who maintain the doctrine of the synod of 
Dort, held in 1618, were, in the year 1790, be- 
tween 70 and 80 in number, constituting six 
classes, which form one synod, styled “ The Dutch 
Reformed Synod of New York and New Jersey.” 
They may now be estimated at double that num- 
ber. The classes consist of ministers and ruling 
elders ; each class delegates two ministers and an 
elder to represent them in synod. From the first 
planting of the Dutch churches in New York and 
New Jersey, they have, under the direction of 
the classes of Amsterdam, been formed exactly] 


80 


UNITED STATES. 


[upon the plan of the established church of Hol- 
land as far as that is ecclesiastical. A strict cor- 
respondence is maintained between the Dutch 
Reformed Synod of New York and New Jersey, 
and the Synod of North Holland and the classes 
of Amsterdam. The acts of their synods are 
mutually exchanged every year, and mutual ad- 
vice is given and received in disputes respecting 
doctrinal points and church discipline. 

The Protestant Episcopal Church in the United 
States (the churches of that denomination in New 
England excepted) met in convention at Philadel- 
phia, October 1785, and revised the book of 
Common Prayer, and administration of the sacra- 
ments, and other rites and ceremonies, with a 
view to render the liturgy consistent with the 
American Revolution. But this revised form 
was adopted by none of the churches, except one 
or two in Philadelphia. 

In October 1789, at another meeting of their 
convention, a plan of union among all the Protes- 
tant Episcopal churches in the United States of 
America was agreed upon and settled ; and an 
adequate representation from the several States 
being present, they again revised the book of 
Common Prayer, which is now published and 
generally adopted by their churches. They also 
agreed upon and published 17 canons for the 
government of their church, the first of which 
declares, that u there shall, in this church, be 
three orders in the ministry, viz. bishops, priests, 
and deacons.” 

At the same time they agreed upon a constitu- 
tion, which provides that there shall be a general 
convention of the Protestant Episcopal Church in 
the United States, on the second Tuesday ofSep- 
tember, of every third year from 1789 ; that each 
State is entitled to a representation of both the 
clergy and laity, or either of them, and may send 
deputies, not exceeding four of each order, chosen 
by the convention of the State ; that the bishops 
of the church, when three or more are present, 
shall, in their eneral conventions, form a sepa- 
rate house, with a right to originate and propose 
acts for the concurrence of the house of deputies, 
composed of clergy and laity ; and with a power 
to negative acts passed by the house of deputies, 
unless adhered to by four-fifths of the other 
house ; that every bishop shall confine the exer- 
cise of his episcopal office to his proper diocese or 


district ; that no person shall be admitted to holy 
orders, until examined by the bishop and two 
presbyters, having produced the requisite testi- 
monials ; and that no person shall be ordained 
until he shall have subscribed the following de- 
claration — u I do believe the Holy Scriptures of 
the Old and New Testament to be the Word of 
God, and to contain all things necessary to sal- 
vation ; and I do solemnly engage to conform to 
the doctrines and worship of the Protestant 
Episcopal Church in the United States.” 

They have not yet adopted any articles of 
religion other than those contained in the Apos- 
tles and Nicene Creeds. The number of Epis- 
copal churches in the United States is not ascer- 
tained ; in New England there were, in 1790, 
between 40 and 50 ; but in the Southern States, 
they were much more numerous. Four bishops, 
viz. Connecticut, New York, Pennsylvania, and 
Virginia, had been elected by the conventions 
of their respective States, and had been duly 
consecrated. The former by the bishops of the 
Scotch church ; the three latter, by the bishops 
of the English church. And these four, in Sep- 
tember 1792, united in the consecration of a 
fifth, Elected by the convention of the State of 
Maryland. 

The Baptists, with some exceptions, are upon 
the Calvinistic plan, as to doctrines, and inde- 
pendents as to church government and discipline. 
Except those who are styled “ open communion 
baptists,” of whom there is but one association, 
they refuse to communicate in the ordinance of 
the Lord’s Supper with other denominations ; 
because they hold that immersion only is the true 
baptism, and that baptism is necessary to com- 
munion ; it is, therefore, improper and incon- 
sistent, in their opinion, to admit unbaptized 
persons, (as all others are, in their view, but 
themselves) to join with them in this ordinance ; 
though they allow ministers of other denomina- 
tions to preach to their congregations, and some- 
times to assist in ordaining their ministers. 

From an account taken, in the year 1790, by 
a preacher, Mr. John Asplund, of the Baptist 
denomination, who had travelled through the 
United States, to ascertain their number and 
state, the following statement of their associa- 
tions, churches, ministers, church members, and 
principles, has been given.] 


UNITED ST A T E 8, 


si 


w 


STATES. 

{“New Hampshire 
Massachusetts 
Rhode Island. 
Connecticut 
Vermont - - « 
New York - « 

New Jersey - - 

Pennsylvania - ■ 
Delaware - - - 

Maryland - - - 

Virginia - - - 

Kentucky - 
Western Territory 
North Carolina 
Deceded Territory 
South Carolina 
Georgia «■ * - 


Of these there were 

Six principle Baptists - * 

Open Communion Ditto 
General Provision Ditto 
Seventh Day Ditto - - « 

Regular or Particular Ditto 


O 




w 

=1 

„ 


Churches. 

33 

- 

- 

- 

- 




&lt;9! 

107 


.. 

- 

- 

9 

9 

» 

9 

38 

- 


&lt;9* 

9 

- 

&lt;* 

V 

9 

55 

* 

- 


- 



9? 

- 

34 

- 

-r 


« 

- 


W 


57 

- 

-■ 

*9 

O 

- 




26 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

• 

■f 

- 

28 

- 

•P 

« 


- 


w 

- 

7 

- 



«p 

=, 


*3 


12 

- 

- 

- 

» 



W 


207 

- 

- 

- 

- 

•9 

- 

- 

=f 

42 




* 

* 

* 


*} 

1 

- 

«. 

- 

9 





94 

- 

- 




9 

* 

13 

18 

« 

* 

&lt;? 


- 


* 

c. 

68 

- 

«a 

- 

9 

- 

- 


9 

42 




Total 

•9 

9 


868 



Assoc. 

Churches, 

- - - * 

9 *3 3 

18 

9 9 9 

? - 1 

15 

9 =3 «=? 9 

- - 3 

30 

«? 9 a s? 

=» p ■mi,. 

10 

- " - » 

- - 30 

795 

Total 

- - 35 

868 


MINISTERS 


ordained, 

licensed. 

Members, 

1,732 

23 

17 

95 

31 

7,116 

37 

39 

3,502 

44 

21 

3,214 

21 

15 

1,610 

53 

30 

3,987 

20 

9 

2,279 

26 

7 

1,231 

9 

l 

409 

8 

3 

776 

157 

109 

20,157 

40 

21 

3,105 

— 

— 

30 

81 

76 

7,742 

15 

6 

889 

48 

28 

4,012 

33 

9 

3,184 

710 

422 

64,975 

MINISTERS 


ordained. 

licensed. 

Members 

26 


1,599 

13 

4 

1,714 

1,948 

26 

19 

13 

3 

887 

632 

392 

58,827 

710 

423 

64,675 


To this account, the compiler conjectured that 
1,500 members, and 30 churches, ought to be 
added— making the whole number of churches 
about 900, and the members about 66,000, He 
supposes, moreover, that at least three times as 
many attend their meetings as have joined their 
churches, which, if we suppose all who attend 
their meetings are in principle Baptists, will 
make the whole number of that denomination in 
these States 198,000, or a twenty-sixth part of 
the inhabitants, at that period, Their increase, 
if only in proportion to the rest of the popular 
tion, would, on an average, amount to 396,000, 
Some of the leading principles of the regular 
or particular Baptists, are— The imputation of 
Adam’s sin to his posterity— the inability of man 
to recover himself— effectual calling by sovereign 
grace — justification by the imputed righteousness 
of Christ — immersion for Baptism, and that on 
profession of faith and repentance— congrega- 
tional churches, and their independency, and 
reception into them upon evidence of sound 
'Conversion, 
yon, v. 


We have next to speak of the people called 
Quakers, This denomination of Christians arose 
about the year 1648, and were first collected 
into religious societies by their highly respected 
elder, George Fox, who was brought before two 
justices in Derbyshire, and one of whom, scoff- 
ing at him, for having bidden him and those 
about him to tremble at the word of the Cord, 
gave to him and his followers the name of Qua- 
kers ; a name by which they have since been 
usually denominated ; but they themselves 
adopted ihe appellation of Friends, They came 
to America as early as 1656. The first settlers 
of Pennsylvania were all of this denomination ; 
and the number of Friends 3 meetings in the 
United States, in 1793, was about 320, at present 
double. 

Their doctrinal tenets may be summarily ex? 
pressed, as follows : In common with other Chris- 
tians, they believe irs One Eternal God, and in J esus 
Christ the Messiah and Mediator of the new cp? 
yenant. To Christ alone, in whose divinity they 
believe, they give the title of the Word of God,] 
n 


82 


UNITED STATES. 


[and not to the scriptures ; yet they profess a high 
esteem for the sacred writings, in subordination 
to the Spirit who indited them, and believe that 
they are able, through faith, to make wise to salva- 
tion. They reverence the excellent precepts of 
scripture, and believe them practicable and bind- 
ing on every Christian : and that in the life to 
come, every man will be rewarded according to 
his works. In order to enable mankind to put 
in practice these precepts, they believe that every 
man coming into the world is endued with a mea- 
sure of the Light, Grace, or Good Spirit of 
Christ ; by which he is enabled to distinguish 
good from evil, and correct the disorderly pas- 
sions and corrupt propensities of his nature, 
which mere reason is altogether insufficient to 
overcome — that this divine grace is, to those 
who sincerely seek it, an all-sufficient and pre- 
sent help in time of need — and that by it the 
snares of the enemy are detected, his allurements 
avoided, and deliverance experienced, through 
faith in its effectual operation, and the soul 
translated out of the kingdom of darkness into 
the marvellous light and kingdom of the Son of 
God. Thus persuaded, they think this divine 
influence especially necessary to the perform- 
ance of the highest act of which the human 
mind is capable, the worship of God in spirit 
and in truth ; and therefore consider, as obstruc- 
tions to pure worship, all forms which divert the 
mind from the secret influence of this unction 
of the Holy One. Though true worship is not 
confined to time or place, they believe it is in- 
cumbent on churches to meet often together, 
but dare not depend for acceptance on a formal 
repetition of the words and experiences of others. 
They think it is their duty to wait in silence to 
have a true sight of their condition bestowed on 
them ; and believe even a single sigh, arising 
from a sense of their infirmities and need of 
divine help, to be more acceptable to God, than 
any performances which originate in the will of 
man. 

They believe the renewed assistance of the 
light and power of Christ, which is not at our 
command, nor attainable by study, but the free 
gift of God, to be indispensably necessary to 
all true ministry. Hence arises their testimony 
against preaching for hire, and conscientious 
refusal to support such ministry by tythes or 
other means. As they dare not encourage any 
ministry, but such as they believe to spring from 
the influence of the Holy Spirit ; so neither dare 
they attempt to restrain this influence to per- 
sons of any condition in life, or to the male 


sex ; but allow such of the female ex as appear 
to be qualified, to exercise their gifts for the 
general edification of the church. 

They hold that as there is one Lord and one 
faith, so his Baptism is one in nature and ope- 
ration, and that nothing short of it can make 
us living members of his mystical body ; and 
that Baptism with water belonged to an inferior 
and decreasing dispensation. With respect to 
the Lord’s Supper, they believe that communi- 
cation between Christ and his church is not 
maintained by that nor any other external ordi- 
nance, but only by a real participation of his 
divine nature, through faith, that this is the sup- 
per alluded to, Rev. iii. 20 — and that where the 
substance is attained, it is unnecessary to attend 
to the shadow. 

Believing that the grace of God is alone suffi- 
cient for salvation, they can neither admit that 
it is conferred on a few only, while others are 
left without it ; nor, thus asserting its univer- 
sality, can they limit its operation to a partial 
cleansing of the soul from sin, even in this life. 
On the contrary, they believe that God doth 
vouchsafe to assist the obedient to submit to the 
guidance of his pure spirit, through w'hose assis- 
tance they are enabled to bring forth fruits unto 
holiness, and to stand perfect in their present 
rank. 

As to oaths, they abide literally by Christ’s 
positive injunction, “ Swear not at all.” They 
believe that “ wars and fightings ” are, in their 
origin and effects, utterly repugnant to the gos- 
pel, which still breathes peace and good-will 
to men. Though during the late war, some of 
their number, contrary to this article of their 
faith, thought it their duty to take up arms in 
defence of their country. This laid the founda- 
tion of a secession from their brethren, and they 
now form a separate congregation in Philadel- 
phia, by the name of the “ Resisting or fighting 
Quakers.” They also are firmly persuaded, that 
if the benevolence of the gospel were generally 
prevalent in the minds of men, it would effec- 
tually prevent them from oppressing, much more 
from enslaving their brethren, of whatever com- 
plexion ; and would even influence their treat- 
ment of the brute creation, which they would 
have no longer to groan the victims of avarice, 
or of the false ideas of pleasure. They profess 
that their principles, which inculcate submission 
to the law's in all cases wherein conscience is not 
violated, are a security to the salutary purposes 
of government. But they hold that the civil 
magistrate has no right to interfere in matters ofj 


UNITED STATES. 


83 


[religion, and think persecution, in any degree, 
unwarrantable. They reject the use of those 
names of the months and days, which, having- 
been given in honour of the heroes, or gods of 
the heathen, originated in their flattery or su- 
perstition; and the custom of speaking to a single 
person in the plural number, as having arisen 
also from motives of adulation. Compliments, 
superfluity of apparel or furniture, outward 
shews of rejoicing or mourning, and observa- 
tions of days and times, they deem incompatible 
with the simplicity and sincerity of a Christian 
life; and they condemn public diversions, gam- 
ing, and other vain amusements of the world. 
They require no formal subscription to any ar- 
ticles, either as the condition of membership, or 
to qualify for the service of the church. 

To effect the salutary purposes of discipline, 
monthly, quarterly, and yearly meetings, are 
established. A monthly meeting is composed of 
several neighbouring congregations. Its busi- 
ness is to provide for the subsistence of the poor, 
and for the education of their offspring — to 
judge of the sincerity and fitness of persons ap- 
pearing to be convinced of the religious princi- 
ples of the society, and desiring to be admitted 
to membership — to excite due attention to the 
discharge of religious and moral duties — to deal 
with disorderly members — to appoint overseers 
to see that the rules of their discipline are put; 
in practice — to allow of marriages, &amp;c. Their 
mode of marrying is as follows : Those who in- 
tend to marry, appear together, and propose 
their intention to the monthly meeting ; and if 
not attended by their parents or guardians, pro- 
duce a w ritten certificate of their consent, signed 
in the presence of witnesses. The meeting then 
appoints a committee to inquire whether they 
are clear of other engagements respecting mar- 
riage ; and if at a subsequent meeting, to which 
the parties also come and declare the continu- 
ance of their intention, no objections are re- 
ported, they have the meeting’s consent to 
solemnize their intended marriage. This is done 
in a public meeting for worship, towards the 
close of which the parties stand up and solemnly 
take each other for husband and wife. A certifi- 
cate of the proceedings is then publicly read, and 
signed by the parties, and afterwards by the re- 
lations and others as witnesses, which closes the 
solemnity. 

A quarterly meeting is composed of several 
monthly meetings. At this meeting are pro- 
-duced written answers from monthly meetings, 


to certain questions respecting the conduct of 
their members, and the meeting’s care over 
them. The accounts thus received, are digested 
and sent by representatives to the yearly meet- 
ing. Appeals from the judgment of monthly 
meetings are brought to the quarterly meetings. 

The yearly meeting has the general super- 
intendance of the society in the country in which 
it is established. But the yearly meeting is a 
misnoma; for the quakers have, in all, seven 
yearly meetings. One in London, to which come 
representatives from Ireland. The other six are 
in the United States. 1. New England. 2. New 
York. 3 . New Jersey and Pennsylvania. 4. 
Maryland. 5. Virginia. 6. The Carolinas and 
Georgia. The business of these meetings is to 
give forth its advice — make such regulations as 
appear to be requisite, or excite to the observ- 
anceof those already made, &amp;c. Appeals from the 
judgment of quarterly meetings are here finally 
determined ; and a brotherly correspondence, by- 
epistles, is maintained w ith other yearly meet- 
ings. , 

As they believe women may be rightly called 
to the work of the ministry, they also think 
they may share in their Christian discipline. 
Accordingly they have monthly, quarterly, and 
yearly meetings of their own sex : held at the 
same time, and in the same place w ith those of 
the men ; but separately, and without the power 
of making rules. 

Their elders and ministers have meetings pe- 
culiar to themselves. These meetings, called 
Meetings of Ministers and Elders, are generally 
held in the compass of each monthly, quarterly, 
and yearly meeting — for the purposes of excit- 
ing each other to the discharge of their several 
duties — of extending advice to those who may 
appear weak, &amp;c. They also, in the intervals 
of the yearly meetings, give certificates to those 
ministers who travel abroad in the work of the 
ministry. 

The yearly meeting, held in London, 1675, 
appointed a meeting to be held in that city, for 
the purpose of advising or assisting in cases of 
suffering for conscience sake, called a meeting 
for suffering^, which is yet .continued. It is com- 
posed of Friends under the name of Corres- 
pondents, chosen by the several quarterly meet- 
ings, who reside in and near the city. This 
meeting is entrusted with the care of printing 
and distributing books, and with the manage- 
ment of its stock, and considered as a standing 
committee of the yearly meeting. In none ofj 
m 9 . 


84 


UNITED STATES. 


[their meetings have they a president, as they be* 
lieve Divine Wisdom alone ought to preside ; 
nor has any member a right to claim pre- 
eminence over the rest. 

The Methodist denomination of Christians 
arose in England in 1739 ; and made their first 
appearance m America about the year 1770. 
Their general style is, “ The United Societies of 
the Methodist Episcopal Church. ” They pro- 
fess themselves to be u a company of men, hav- 
ing the form and seeking the power of godliness, 
united in order to pray together, to receive the 
word of exhortation, and to watch over one an- 
other in love, that they may help each other to 
“Work out their salvation. ” Each society is di- 
vided into classes of 12 persons ; one of whom 
is syled the Leader, whose business it is to see 
each person in his class once a week, in order to 
inquire how their souls prosper, to advise, re- 
prove, comfort, or exhort, as occasion may re- 
quire; and to receive contributions for the relief 
of the Church and Poor. In order to admission 
into their societies they require only one condi- 
tion, viz. “ A desire to flee from the wrath to 
come, i. e . a desire to be saved from their sins.” 
St is expected of all who continue in their so- 
cieties, that they should evince their desire of 
salvation, by doing no harm, by avoiding all 
manner of evil, by doing all manner of good, as 
they have ability and opportunity, especially to 
the household of faith ; employing them prefer- 
ably to others, buying of one another (unless 
they can be served better elsewhere) and helping 
each other in business. And also by attending 
upon all the ordinances of God ; such as public 
worship, the supper of the Lord, family and pri- 
vate prayer, searching the scriptures, and fasting 
or abstinence. The late celebrated Mr. John 
Wesley is considered as the father of this class 
of Methodists, who, as they deny some of the 
leading Calvinistic doctrines, and hold some of 
the peculiar tenets of Arminius, may be called 
Arminian Methodists. The famous Mr. White- 
field was the leader of the Calvinistic Methodists, 
who were numerous in England, and a few are 
in the different parts of the United States, rvho 
are patronized and supplied with ministers, by 
the late Lady Huntingdon. 

In 1788, the number of Wesleian Methodists 
in the United States stood in the following 
manner : 

Georgia ------ 2,011 

South Carolina - - - - 3,366 

North Carolina - - » - 6,779 


Virginia ------ 

14,356 

Maryland- ----- 

11,017 

Delaware - \ 
Pennsylvania/ 

1,998 

New Jersey ----- 

1,751 

New York ----- 

2,004 

Total - « - 

43,282 


Since this estimate of their numbers was taken, 
some few scattering societies have been collected 
in different parts of the New England States, 
and their numbers increased in other parts ; so 
that in 1790, the whole connection amounted to 
57,621. To superintend the Methodist connec- 
tion in America, they had, in 1788, two bishops, 
30 elders, and 50 deacons. 

In Great Britain and Ireland, the whole num- 
ber of persons in full connection with the Metho- 
dist Episcopal church, amounted, in 1790, to 
71,568. * 

The whole number of Roman Catholics in the 
United States, in 1790, was estimated at about 
50,000 ; one-half of which were in the State of 
Maryland. If, as is probable, their increase has 
kept pace with the increase of the population, 
the number may be now estimated at 100,000. 
Their peculiar and leading doctrines and tenets 
are too generally known to need a recital here. 
In 1790, the residence of their bishop was in 
Baltimore. Their congregations are large and 
respectable. 

The German inhabitants in these States, who 
principally belong to Pennsylvania and N ew York, 
are divided into a variety of sects ; the principal of 
which are, Lutherans, Calvinists or Presbyteri- 
ans, Moravians, Tunkers, and Mennonists. Of 
these the German Lutherans are the most nu- 
merous. Of this denomination, and the German 
Presbyterians or Calvinists, who are next to 
them in numbers, there were, in 1790, upwards 
of 60 ministers in Pennsylvania — and the former 
had 12, and the latter six, churches in the State 
of New York. Many of their churches are 
large and splendid, and in some instances fur- 
nished with organs. These two denominations 
live together in the greatest harmony, often 
preaching in each other’s churches, and some- 
times uniting in the erection of a church, in 
which they alternately worship. The number of 
these sects has probably also doubled. 

The Moravians are a respectable body of 
Christians in these States. Of this denomina- 
tion there were, in 1788, about 1,300 souls m] 


UNITED 

fPennsylvania ; viz. at Bethlehem, between 5 and 
600 ; which number since increased, in 1790, at 
Nazareth, to 450— at Litiz, to upwards of 500. 
Their other settlements, in the United States, 
were at Hope, in New Jersey, containing about 
100 souls ; and at Wachovia, on Yadkin river, 
North Carolina, containing six churches. Their 
numbers are now nearly doubled. Besides these 
regular settlements, formed by such only as are 
members of the brethrens’ church, and live toge- 
ther in good order and harmony, there are in 
different parts of Pennsylvania, Maryland, and 
New Jersey, and in the cities of Newport, 
(Rhode Island) New York, Philadelphia, Lan- 
caster, York Town, &amp;c. congregations of the 
Brethren, who have their own church and minis- 
ter, and hold the same principles, and doctrinal 
tenets, and church rites and ceremonies, as the 
former, though their local situation does not ad- 
mit of such particular regulations as are pecu- 
liar to the regular settlements. 

They call themselves, u The United Brethren 
of the Protestant Episcopal Church.” They arc 
called Moravians, because the first settlers in the 
English dominions were chiefly emigrants from 
Moravia. These were the remnant and genuine 
descendants of the church of the ancient United 
Brethren, established in Bohemia and Moravia, 
as early as the year 1456. They left their na- 
tive country to avoid persecution, and to enjoy 
liberty of conscience, and what they conceived 
to be true exercise of the religion of their fore- 
fathers. They were received in Saxony, and 
other Protestant dominions, and were encouraged 
to settle among them, and were joined by many 
serious people of other dominions. They adhere 
to the Augustin Confession of Faith, which was 
drawn up b}^ Protestant divines at the time of 
the Reformation in Germany, in the year 1530, 
and presented at the diet of the empire at Aus- 
burg ; and which, at that time, contained the 
doctrinal system of all the established Protestant 
churches. They retain the discipline of their 
ancient church, and make use of Episcopal or- 
dination, which has been handed down to them 
in a direct line of succession for more than 300 
years, as appears by David Crantz’ History of 
“ The ancient and modern United Brethren’s 
Church, translated from the German, by the Rev. 
Benjamin La Trobe.” London, 1780. 

Lhey profess to live in strict obedience to the 
ordinances of Christ, such as the observation of 
the. Sabbath, Infant Baptism, and the Lord’s Sup- 
per ; and in addition to these, they practise the 


STATES 85 

foot washing, the kiss of love, and the use of 
the lot. 

They were introduced into America by Count 
Zinzendorf, and settled at Bethlehem, which is 
their principal settlement in America, as early as 
1741. Regularity, industry, ingenuity, and (eco- 
nomy, are characteristics of these people. 

The Tunkers are so called in derision, from 
the word tunken, to put a morsel in sauce. The 
English word that conveys the proper meaning 
of Tunkers is sops or dippers. They are also 
called Tumblers, from the manner in which they 
perform Baptism, which is by putting the person, 
while kneeling, head lirst under water, so as to 
resemble the motion of the body in the action of 
tumbling. The Germans sound the letters tand 
b like d and p ; hence the words T unkers and 
Tumblers, have been corruptly written Bunkers 
and Dumplers. 

The first appearing of these people in America 
was in the fall of the year 1719, when about 20 
families landed in Philadelphia, and dispersed 
themselves in various parts of Pennsylvania. 
They are what are called General Baptists, and 
hold to oeneral redemption and general salva- 
tion, They use great plainness of dress and 
language, and will neither swear, nor fight, nor 
go to law, nor take interest for the money they 
lend. They commonly wear their beards— keep 
the first day Sabbath, except one congregation— - 
have the Lord’s Supper with its ancient at- 
tendants of Love Feasts, with washing of feet, 
kiss of charity, and right hand of fellowship. They 
anoint the sick with oil for their recovery, and 
use the trine immersion, with laying on of hands 
and prayer, even while the person baptised is in 
the water. Their church government and dis- 
cipline are the same with those of the English 
Baptists, except that every brother is allowed to 
speak in the congregation ; and their best speaker 
is usually ordained to be their minister. They 
have deacons, deaconesses (from among their 
ancient widows) and exhorters, who are all li- 
censed to use their gifts statedly. On the whole, 
notwithstanding their peculiarities, they appear 
to be humble, well-meaning Christians, and have 
acquired the character of the harmless Tunkers. 

Their principal settlement is at Ephrata, some- 
times called Tunkers Town, in Lancaster County, 
60 miles westward of Philadelphia. It consisted, 
in 1790, of about 40 buildings, of which three 
were places of worship : one is called Sharon, 
and adjoins the sister’s apartment as a chapel ; 
another, belonging to the brother’ apartment, is] 


86 


UNITED S T A T E S. 


pcalled Bethany. To these the brethren and 
sisters resort, separately, to worship morning 
and evening, and sometimes in the night. The 
third is a common church, called Zion, where all 
in the settlement meet once a week for public 
worship. The Brethren have adopted the White 
Friars’ dress, with some alterations; the sisters 
that of the nuns ; and both like them have taken 
the vow of celibacy. All, however, do not keep 
the vow. When they marry, they leave their 
cells, and go among the married people. They 
subsist by cultivating their lands, by attending a 
printing office, a grist mill, a paper mill, an oil 
mill, &amp;c. and the sisters by spinning, weaving, 
sewing, &amp;c. They at first slept on board couches, 
but now on beds, and have otherwise abated 
much of their former severity. This congrega- 
tion keep the seventh day Sabbath. Their sing- 
ing is charming, owing to the pleasantness of 
their voices, the variety of parts, and the devout 
manner of performance. Besides this congre- 
gation at Ephrata, there were, in 1770, 14 others 
in various other parts of Pennsylvania, and some 
in Maryland. The whole, exclusive of those in 
Maryland, amounted to upwards of 2,000 souls. 

The Mennonists derive their name from Menno 
Simon, a native of Witmars, in Germany, a man 
of learning, born in the year 1505, in the time of 
the Reformation by Luther and Calvin. He was 
a famous Roman Catholic preacher, till about 
the year 1531, when he became a Baptist. Some 
of his followers came into Pennsylvania from 
New York, and settled at German Town, as 
early as 1692. This is at present their principal 
congregation, and the mother of the rest. Their 
whole number, in 1770, in Pennsylvania, was 
upwards of 4,000, divided into 13 churches, and 
42 congregations, under the care of 15 ordained 
ministers, and 53 licensed preachers. 

The Mennonists do not, like the Tunkers, hold 
the doctrine of general salvation; yet like them, 
they will neither swear nor fight, nor bear any 
civil office, nor go to law, nor take interest for 
the money they lend, though many break this 
last rule. Some of them wear their beards ; 
wash each others feet, &amp;e. and all use plainness 
of speech and dress. Some have been expelled 
their society for wearing buckles in their shoes, 
and having pocket holes in their coats. Their 
church government is democratical. They call 
themselves the Harmless Christians, Revengeless 
Christians, and Weaponless Christians. They are 
Baptists rather in name than in fact ; for they do 
not use immersion. Their common mode of bap- 


tism is this : the person to be baptized kneels; the 
minister holds his hands over him, into which the 
deacon pours water, which runs through upon 
the head of the person kneeling. After this, fol- 
low imposition of hands aud prayer. 

The denomination, stiled Universalists, though 
their schemes are very various, may properly 
enough be divided into two classes; viz. Those 
who embrace the scheme of Dr. Chauncey, ex- 
hibited in his book, entitled “The Salvation of 
all Men ;” and the disciples of Mr. Winchester 
and Mr. John Murray. 

A judicious summary of Dr. Chauncey’s sen- 
timents has been given in H. Adams’s “ View of 
Religions,” article Universalists, as follows : 

“ That the scheme of revelation has the hap- 
piness of all mankind lying at bottom, as its 
great and idtimate end ; that it gradually tends 
to this end ; and will not fail of its accomplish- 
ment, when fully completed. Some, in conse- 
quence of its operation, as conducted by the Son 
of God, will be disposed and enabled, in this 
present state, to make such improvements in vir- 
tue, the only rational preparative for happiness, 
as that they shall enter upon the enjoyment of it 
in the next state. Others, who have proved in- 
curable under the means which have been used 
with them in this state, instead of being happy 
in the next, will be awfully miserable ; not to 
continue so finally, but that they may be con- 
vinced of their folly, and recovered to a virtuous 
frame of mind : and this will be the effect of the 
future torments upon many ; the consequence 
whereof will be their salvation, they being thus 
fitted for it. And there may be yet other states, 
before the scheme of God may be perfected, and 
mankind universally cured of their moral dis- 
orders, and in this way qualified for, and finally 
instated in, eternal happiness. But however 
many states some of the individuals of the human 
species may pass through, and of however long 
continuance they may be, the whole is intended 
to subserve the grand design of universal happi- 
ness, and will finally terminate in it ; insomuch, 
that the Son of God and Saviour of men will not 
deliver up his trust into the hands of the Father, 
who committed it to him, till he has discharged 
his obligations in virtue of it ; having finally 
fixed all men in heaven, when God will be Ail 
in All.” 

Thenumber of this denomination is not known, 
but it is undoubtedly large, since the doctrine is 
so worldly and convenient. The open advocates 
iudeed of this scheme are few; though the num-J 


UNITED STATES. 


87 


fber is larger of such as embrace the doctrine of 
the salvation of all men, upon principles similar, 
but variously differing from those on which the 
above mentioned scheme is grounded. 

The latter class of Universalists have a new 
scheme, differing essentially from that of the 
former, which they reject as inconsistent and ab- 
surd : and they cannot conceive how they who 
embrace it, can, “ with any degree of propriety, 
be called Universalists, on Apostolic principles, 
as it does not appear that they have any idea of 
being saved by, or in, the Lord, with an ever- 
lasting, or with any salvation.” Hence, accord- 
ing to Mr. Murray, in his “ Letter to a Friend,” 
page 40, 41, printed in Boston, 1791, they call 
them “Pharisaical Universalists, w ho are willing 
to .1 ustify themselves.” 

It is difficult to say what is the present scheme 
of the denomination of which we are now speak- 
ing ; for they differ not only from all other Uni- 
versalists, and from each other, but even from 
themselves at different periods. The reader, 
however, may form an idea of some of their 
tenets from what follow s, collected from the let- 
ter just referred to. This letter, written by the 
head of the denomination, and professing- to rec- 
tify mistakes respecting doctrines propagated 
under the Christian name — to give the character 
of a Consistent Universalist — and to acquaint 
the world with their real sentiments, we have 
reason to conclude, gives as true an account of 
their scheme as can be obtained. 

From this letter it appears, “ that they be- 
lieve, that religion, of some sort or other, is a 
public benefit ;” and that every person is at li- 
berty, and is bound, to support what he con- 
ceives to be the true religion. That public wor- 
ship on every first day of the week, is an incum- 
bent duty on all real lovers of divine truth — that 
prayer, as it indicates trust in, and dependence 
on, God, is part of his woi-ship. They believe 
that the deceiver, who beguiled Eve, and not bur 
first parents themselves, did the deed which 
brought ruin and death on all the human race. 
That there are two classes of fallen sinners — 
the angels who kept not their first estate, and 
the human nature, deceived by the former, and 
apparently destroyed consequent thereon — that a 
just God, in the law given by Moses, has de- 
nounced death and the curse on every one Avho 
continueth not in all things, written in the book 
of the law to do them — but that the same God 
was manifested in the flesh as the head of every 
man, made under the law, to redeem them that 
are under the law, being made a curse for them 


— that he tasted death for every man, being a 
Saviour, not of a few only, but of all men — and 
that the declaration of this is the Gospel. They 
believe that when God denounces on the human 
race, woes, wrath, tribulation, death, damnation, 
&amp;c. in the scriptures, he speaks in his legislative 
capacity, as the just God who will by no means 
clear the guilty — that when he speaks of mercy, 
grace, peace, of life as the gift of God, and sal- 
vation in whole or in part, he speaks in the cha- 
racter of the just God and Saviour — that the 
former is the language of the law ; the latter is 
the language of the gospel. 

Confession of sins — repentance, and supplica- 
tions for mercy and forgiveness, make no part of 
their creed or worship. 

They believe that the Prince of Peace came to 
save the human nature from the power and do- 
minion of the devil, and his works — that he came 
to destroy the latter, that he might save the for- 
mer. That “ Sin is the work of the devil — that 
he is the worker and doer of whatever gives of- 
fence. — That Jesus, as the Saviour of the world, 
shall separate from his kingdom, both the evil 
w orker and his evil works ; the evil w orker, in 
the character of goats — the evil works in the 
character of tares.” They suppose that what is 
wicked in mankind, is represented by the evil 
seed sown by the evil one in human nature, and 
that “ when the sower of the evil seed, and all 
the evil seed sown, shall be separated from the 
seed which God sowed, then the seed which is 
properly God’s seed, will be like him who sowed 
it, pure and holy.” 

They consider all ordinances as merely sha- 
dows ; yet they celebrate the Lord’s Supper, by 
eating and drinking wine — and some of them 
suppose that every time they eat bread and drink 
wine, they comply with our Lord’s injunction, 
“ Do this in remembrance of me.” Various 
other opinions prevail among them respecting 
this ordinance, and that of baptism. They “ad- 
mit of but one baptism, the baptizer Jesus 
Christ ; the elements made use of, the Holy 
Ghost and fire” — yet they are willing, in order 
to avoid contention, “ to become all things to all 
men,” and to baptize infants by sprinkling, or 
adults by immersion — or to omit these signs 
altogether, according as the opinions of parents 
may vary upon this subject. Some think it pro- 
per to dedicate their children to the Lord, by 
putting them into the arms of the minister, to 
be by him presented to Christ, to be baptized 
with his baptism, in the name of the Trinity ; 
the minister at the same time to bless them ini 


88 


UNITED STATES. 


[the words in which God commanded Aaron and 
his sons to bless the children of Israel— 46 The 
Lord bless thee, &amp;c.” It appears, in short, that 
their notions respecting these ordinances are 
various, vague, and unsettled. 

They believe in a judgment past, and a judg- 
ment to come — that the past judgment is either 
that in which the world was judged in the second 
Adam, according to the word of the Saviour, 
44 Now is the judgment of this world— now is 
the prince of this world cast out, and judgment 
executed on them and on the whole human na- 
ture, according to the righteous judgment of 
God— or that which every man is to exercise 
upon himself, according to the words 44 judge 
yourselves and ye shall not be judged.” 44 The 
judgment to come is that in which all who have 
not judged themselves™ all unbelievers of the 
human race, and all the fallen angeis, shall be 
judged by the Saviour ; but these two charac- 
ters, viz. unbelievers of the human race, and 
the fallen angels, shall be placed, the former on 
the right, the latter on the left hand of their 
Judge ; the one under the denomination of 
sheep, for whose salvation the Saviour laid down 
his life— the other under the denomination of 
goats, who are the accursed, whose nature he 
passed by”-— 44 The human nature” (i.e. the sheep 
or unbelievers of the human race) 44 as the off- 
spring of the everlasting Father, and the ran- 
somed of the Lord— shall be brought, by divine 
power, into the kingdom prepared for them, be- 
fore the foundation of the world.”— The other na- 
ture, (i. e. the goats, or fallen angels) 44 will be 
sent into the lire prepared for them From 
which it appears, that it is their opinion, that 
unbelievers of the human race, or sheep, and 
the fallen angels, or goats, will be the only 
classes of creatures concerned in the awards of 
the last judgment ; and that the righteous, or 
believers in Christ, will not then be judged, hav- 
ing previously judged themselves. 44 But the 
rest of mankind,” say they, 44 will be the sub- 
jects of this judgment, when our Saviour shall 
be revealed from heaven in flaming fire, taking 
vengeance on them that know not God, and 
obey not the gospel ; and they shall then be pu- 
nished with everlasting destruction from the pre- 
sence of the Lord, and the glory of his power.” 
Their inference from and exposition of this pas- 
sage, are peculiar, and will serve to give the 


reader an idea of their manner of explaining 
other parallel passages of scripture. From this 
awful revelation of the Saviour, to take ven- 
geance on them that know not God, and oliey 
not the gospel, they infer this consequence, they 
shall then be made to know God, and obey the 
gospel.” The everlasting destruction, from the 
presence of the Lord and the glory of his power, 
with which they shall be punished, they suppose 
is suffered by unbelievers, in consequence of the 
revelation of the everlasting destruction, pre- 
vious to this awful period ; and that they will 
suffer no punishment after it— tor 44 it is not 
said,” they say, 44 that they shall be everlast- 
ingly punished with destruction.” They explain 
their idea of evei’lasting punishment and suffer- 
ing the pain of eternal fire, thus, 44 W ere it 
possible to find a culinary fire that never would 
be extinguished, but in the strictest sense of the 
word, was everlasting or eternal— should any 
member of the body pass through that burning 
flame, though but a moment of time had been 
thus spent, in passing through ; yet even in that 
moment, it would suffer the pain of eternal 
fire.” But whether they believe it possible that 
there should be such a fire, or that unbelievers 
shall be doomed to suffer the punishment of 
eternal fire by thus passing through it, they do 
not declare. 

They do not suppose that 44 ail mankind will 
be on a level in the article of death, but that 
they who die in unbelief, will lie down in sor- 
row, and rise to the resurrection of damnation, 
or condemnation ; and when the books shall be 
opened, and the dead, both small and great, shall 
be judged out of the things written in the books 
—every mouth shall be stopped, and all the 
world become guilty before God; and while con- 
scious of guilt, but ignorant of a Saviour, they 
shall call on the rocks and mountains to fall on 
them to hide them from the wrath of the Lamb. 
But that in this judgment the judge is the Sa- 
viour— -they will be judged by their own head 
and as the head of every man 13 Christ, all of 
course must be acquitted and saved. 

Although they believe that the devil is the 
doer or worker of every thing that gives offence; 
yet they assert, that 44 all men at all times are 
sinners, and come short of the glory of God;”— 
but they believe that what Christ suffered, 44 was 
considered by the Great Lawgiver, as done and 


* The reader will doubtless notice that the plural pronoun them, is several times used to express the singular noun human nature, 
ond Prince of this world, as the human nature, &amp;c. shall be brought into the kingdom prepared for them i ihe other nature will he 
sent into the fire prepared for them — the Prince of this world shall be cast out, and judgment be executed on them. This is_a 
phraseology peculiar to this denomination, for tile grammatical propriety of which the compiler does not hold himself responsible- J 


UNITED STATES. 


80 


[suffered by every man in his own person ; and 
that every man is as much interested in what 
Christ, the second Adam, did, as they were in 
what the first Adam did” — thus believing-, they 
consider God as just in being- their Saviour, as 
he would have been in their eternal damnation. 

The Consistent Universalist, “ does not con- 
sider himself under the law any more than a 
woman considers herself under the direction or 
dominion of a husband that is dead and buried — - 
nor is he afraid of death, being assured that Jesus 
hath abolished death, and left nothing of it but 
the shadow.” 

The Universalists of this denomination, in 
common with other Christians, profess them- 
selves to be the advocates of piety, religion, and 
morality. They assert the duty of doing right 
as men — as members of civil society — and as 
Christians. “ As mere men,” they hold, that 
“ they must follow nature, or they will sink be- 
neath the level of the beasts of the field.” And 
yet they assert, that “ all the righteousness found 
in the best of mere human nature is but a filthy 
rag.” That as members of civil society, they 
must submit to the laws ; or, if thought too 
severe, they may avoid them by a removal from 
the state.” That as Christians they must be 
under the direction of Christ, and do whatso- 
ever he commands them ; and these are his com- 
mandments, “ that we believe in him, and love 
one another.” 

There are but few of this denomination of 
Universalists in the United States. Of these 
few, some are in Pennsylvania ; some in different 
parts of New York, Connecticut, Rhode Island, 
and New Hampshire; but the body of them are 
in Boston, and Gloucester, in Massachusetts. 
They have several constituted churches, which 
are governed by an ecclesiastical constitution, 
formed in 1789, by a small convention of their 
ministers at Philadelphia. 

There is a small and singular sect of Chris- 
tians, called Shakers, which sprung up in 1774 ; 
when a few of this sect came from England to 
New York, and there being joined by a few 
others, they settled at Nisqueunia, above Albany, 
which is their principal settlement : a few others 
are scattered in different parts of the country. 

The head of this party, while she lived, (for 
notwithstanding her predictions and assertions to 
the contrary, she died in 1784 ; and was suc- 
ceeded by one James Whitaker, who also died in 
1787,) was Anna Leese, styled the Elect Lady 
Her followers asserted, that she was the woman 

VOL. v. 


spoken of in the 12th chapter of the Revelation, 
and that she spoke seventy-two tongues : and al- 
though these tongues were unintelligible to the 
living, she conversed with the dead who under- 
stood her language. They alleged also, that she 
was the mother of all the elect ; that she travailed 
for the whole world —that no blessing could de- 
scend to any person but only by and through her, 
and that in the way of her being possessed of 
their sins, by their confessing and repenting of 
them, one by one, according to her direction. 
Joseph Meacham, who attained the reputation 
of a prophet among them, succeeded Whitaker 
as their leader. 

Their leading doctrinal tenets, as given by 
one of their own denomination, are, “ That the 
first resurrection is already come, and now is the 
time to judge themselves. That they have power 
to heal the sick, to raise the dead, and cast out 
devils. That they have a correspondence with 
angels, the spirits of the saints and their departed 
friends. That they speak with divers kind of 
tongues in their public assemblies. That it is 
lawful to practise vocal music with dancing in 
the Christian churches, if it be practised in prais- 
ing the Lord. That their church is come out of 
the order of natural generation, to be as Christ 
was ; and that those who have wives are as 
though they had none. That by these means 
heaven begins upon earth, and they thereby lose 
their earthly and sensual relation to Adam the 
first, and come to be transparent in their ideas, 
in the bright aud heavenly visions of God. That 
some of their people are of the number of the 
144,000, who were redeemed from the earth, and 
were not defiled with women. That the word 
everlasting, when applied to the punishment of 
the wicked, means only a limited period, except 
in the case of those who fall from their church ; 
and that for such there is no forgiveness, neither 
in this world nor that which is to come. That it is 
unlawful to swear, game, or use compliments — ■ 
and that water baptism and the Lord’s Supper 
are abolished. That Adam’s sin is not imputed 
to his posterity — and that the doctrines of elec- 
tion and reprobation are to be rejected.” 

The discipline of this denomination is founded 
on the supposed perfection of their leaders. The 
Mother, or the Elect Lady, it is said, obeys God 
through Christ. European elders obey her. 
American labourers, and common people, obey 
them; while confession is made of every secret 
thing, from the oldest to the youngest. The peo- 
ple are made to believe that they are seen through! 

N 


90 


UNITED STATES. 


[and through in the gospel glass of perfection, by 
their teachers, who behold the state of the dead, 
and innumerable worlds of spirits good and bad. 
These people are generally instructed to be 


very industrious, and to bring m 


according to 


their ability, to keep up the meeting. They vary 
in their exercises. Their heavy dancing, as it is 
called, is performed by a perpetual springing 
from the house floor, about four inches up and 
down, both in the men’s and women’s apartment, 
moving about with extraordinary transport, sing- 
ing sometimes one at a time, sometimes more, 
making a perfect charm. 

This elevation affects the nerves, so that they 
have intervals of shuddering, as if they were in 
a strong fit of the ague. They sometimes clap 
hands and leap so as to strike the joists above 
their heads. They throw off their outside gar- 
ments in these exercises, and spend their strength 
very cheerfully this way. Their chief speaker 
often calls for attention ; when they all stop and 
hear some harangue, and then fall to dancing 
again. They assert that their dancing is the 
token of the great joy and happiness of the new 
Jerusalem state, and denotes the victory over 
sin. One of the postures, which increases among 
them, is turning round very swift for an hour or 
two. This, they say, is to show the great power 
of God. 

They sometimes fall on their knees and make 
a sound like the roaring of many waters, in 
groans and cries to God, as they say, for the 
wicked world who persecute them. A larger 
account may be seen in H. Adams’s View of Re- 
ligions ; article Shakers. 

The Jews are not numerous in the United 
States. They have synagogues at Savannah, 
Charleston (S. Carolina), Philadelphia, New 
York, and Newport. Besides those who reside 
at these places, there are others scattered in dif- 
ferent towns in the United States. 

The Jews in Charleston, among other peculia- 
rities in burying tbeir dead, have these : — after 
the funeral dirge is sung, and just before the 
corpse is deposited in the grave, the coffin is 
opened, and a small bag of earth, taken from the 
grave, is carefully put under the head of the de- 
ceased ; then some powder, said to be earth 
brought from Jerusalem, and carefully kept for 
this purpose, is taken and put upon the eyes of 
the corpse, in token of their remembrance of the 
Holy Land, and of their expectations of returning 
thither in God’s appointed time. Whether this 
custom is universal among the Jews, is uncer- 


tain ; but for the articles of their faith, &amp;c. see 
H. Adams’s View of Religions ; article Jews, 
p. 290 : also Bellamy’s History of all Religions ; 
London. 

They generally expect a glorious return to the 
Holy Land, when they shall be exalted above all 
the nations of the earth. And they flatter them- 
selves that the period of their return will speedily 
arrive, though they do not venture to fix the pre- 
cise time. 

The whole number of persons who profess the 
Jewish religion, in all parts of the world, they 
suppose to be about 3,000,000, who, as their 
phrase is, are witnesses of the unity of God in all 
the nations in the world. 

Besides the religious sects enumerated, there 
are a few of the German inhabitants in Penn- 
sylvania, who are styled Swinseildians, and, in 
Maryland, a small number called Nicolaites, or 
New Quakers; but with the distinguishing sen- 
timents of these sects we are not acquainted. 

History . — In addition to what has been else- 
where said of the discovery and settlement of 
N. America, we shall here give a brief history of 
the late war with Great Britain, with a sketch of 
the events which preceded and prepared the way 
for the revolution. This general view of the 
history of the United States will serve as a suit- 
able introduction to the particular histories of 
the several states, which are given in their proper 
places. 

America was originally peopled by uncivilized 
nations, who lived mostly by hunting and fishing. 
The Europeans, who first visited these shores, 
treating the natives as wild beasts of the forest, 
which have no property in the woods where they 
roam, planted the standard of their respective 
masters, where they first landed, and in their 
names claimed the country by right of discovery. 
Prior to any settlement in N. America, numerous 
titles of this kind were acquired by the English, 
French, Spanish, and Dutch navigators, who 
came hither for the purposes of fishing and trad- 
ing with the natives. Slight as such titles were, 
they were afterwards the causes of contention be- 
tween the European nations. The subjects of 
different princes often laid claim to the same 
tract of country, because both had discovered 
the same river or promontory; or because the 
extent of their respective claims was undeter- 
mined. 

While the settlements in this vast uncultivated 
country were inconsiderable and scattered, and 
the trade of it confined to the bartering of a] 


UNITED STATES. 


91 


[few trinkets for furs, a trade carried on by a few 
adventurers, the interfering of claims produced no 
important controversy among the settlers or the 
nations of Europe. But in proportion to the 
progress of population, and the growth of the 
American trade, the jealousies of the nations, 
which had made early discoveries and settlements 
on this coast, were alarmed ; ancient claims were 
revived ; and each power took measures to ex- 
tend and secure its own possessions at the ex- 
pense of a rival. 

By the treaty of Utrecht in 17 13, the English 
claimed a right of cutting logwood in the Bay of 
Campeachy, in S. America. In the exercise of 
this right, the English merchants had frequent 
opportunities of carrying on a contraband trade 
with the Spanish settlements on the continent. 
To remedy this evil, the Spaniards resolved to 
annihilate a claim, which, though often acknow- 
ledged, had never been clearly ascertained. To 
effect this design they captured the English ves- 
sels, which they found along the Spanish main, 
and many of the British subjects were doomed to 
work in the mines of Potosi. 

Repeated severities of this kind at length, 
1739, produced a war between England and 
Spain. Porto Bello was taken from the Spa- 
niards by Admiral Vernon. Commodore Anson, 
with a squadron of ships, sailed to the S. Seas, 
distressed the Spanish settlements on the w. shore 
of America, and took a galleon laden with im- 
mense riches. But in 1741, a formidable arma- 
ment, destined to attack Carthagena, under the 
command of Lord Cathcart, returned unsuccess- 
ful, with the loss of upwards of 12,000 British 
soldiers and seamen ; and the defeat of the ex- 
pedition raised a clamour against the minister, 
Sir Robert Walpole, which produced a change in 
the administration. This change removed the 
scene of war to Europe, so that America was not 
immediately affected by the subsequent trans- 
actions, except that Louisburgh, the principal 
fortress of Cape Breton, was taken from the 
French by General Pepperell, assisted by Com- 
modore Warren and a body of New England 
troops. 

This war was ended in 1748, by the treaty of 
peace signed at Aix la Chapelle, by which resti- 
tution was made, on both sides, of all places dur- 
ing the war. 

Peace however was of short duration. The 
French possessed Canada, and had made con- 
siderable settlements in Florida, claiming the 
country on both sides of the Mississippi, by right 
ef discovery. To secure and extend their claims, 


they established a line of forts from Canada to 
Florida. They had secured the important pass 
at Niagara, and erected a fort at the junction of 
the Allegany and Monongahela rivers, called 
Fort Du Quesne. They took pains to secure 
the friendship and assistance of the natives ; en- 
croachments were made upon the English posses- 
sions, and mutual injuries succeeded. The dis- 
putes among the settlers in America, and the 
measures taken by the French to command all 
the trade of the St. Lawrence River on the n. 
and of the Mississippi on the s. excited a jea- 
lousy in the English nation, which soon broke 
forth in open war. 

The next year three other expeditions were 
undertaken in America against the French. One 
was conducted by General Monckton, who had 
orders to drive the French from their encroach- 
ments on the province of Nova Scotia. This 
expedition was attended with success. General 
Johnson was ordered, with a body of troops, to 
take possession of Crown Point, but he did not 
succeed. General Shirley commanded an expe- 
dition against the fort at Niagara, but lost the 
season by delay. 

In 1755, General Braddock marched against 
Fort Du Quesne, but in penetrating through the 
wilderness, he incautiously fell into an ambus- 
cade, and suffered a total defeat. General Brad- 
dock was killed, but the enemy not pursuing the 
vanquished across the river, being eager in plun- 
dering the baggage of the dead, a part of his 
troops were saved by flight under the conduct of 
General Washington, at that time a colonel, who 
then began to exhibit proofs of those military 
talents, by which he afterwards conducted the 
armies of America to victory, and his country to 
independence. 

The ill success of these expeditions left the 
English settlements in America exposed to the 
depredations of both the French and Indians. 
But the war now raged in Europe and the E. In- 
dies, and engaged the attention of both nations 
in those quarters. 

It w as not until the campaign in 1758, that 
affairs assumed a more favourable aspect in Ame- 
rica. But upon a change of administration, Mr. 
Pitt was appointed prime minister, and the ope- 
rations of war became more vigorous and success- 
ful. General Amherst was sent to take posses- 
sion of Cape Breton ; and after a warm siege, 
the garrison of Louisburgh surrendered by capi- 
tulation. General Forbes was successful in tak- 
ing possession of Fort Du Quesne, which the 
French thought fit to abandon. But Gsneral] 
n 2 


92 


UNITED STATES. 


[Abercrombie, who commanded the troops des- 
tined to act against the French at Crown Point 
and Ticonderoga, attacked the lines at Ticonde- 
roga, and was defeated with a terrible slaughter 
of his troops. After his defeat, he returned to 
his camp at Lake George. 

The next year, more effectual measures were 
taken to subdue the French in America. General 
Prideaux and Sir William Johnson began the 
operations of the campaign by taking the French 
fort near Niagara. General Amherst took pos- 
session of the forts at Crown Point and Ticonde- 
roga, which the French had abandoned. 

But the decisive blow which proved fatal to 
the French interest in America, was the defeat of 
the French army, and the taking of Quebec, by 
the brave General Wolfe. This hero was slain 
in the beginning of the action on the plains of 
Abram, and Monsieur Montcalm, the French 
commander, likewise lost his life. The loss of 
Quebec was soon followed by the capture of 
Montreal, by General Amherst, and Canada has 
remained ever since in possession of the English. 

Colonel Grant, in 1761, defeated the Chero- 
kees in Carolina, and obliged them to sue for 
peace. The next year Martinico was taken by 
Admiral Rodney and General Monckton ; and 
also the island of Grenada, St. Vincents, and 
others. The capture of these was soon followed 
by the surrender of the Havannah, the capital of 
the island of Cuba. 

In 1763, a definitive treaty of peace was con- 
cluded at Paris, between Great Britain, France, 
and Spain ; by which the English ceded to the 
French several islands which they had taken from 
them in the W. Indies, but were confirmed in the 
possession of all N. America on this side the 
Mississippi, except the island of Orleans. 

But this war, however brilliant the successes 
and glorious the event, proved the cause of great 
and unexpected misfortunes to Great Britain. 
Engaged with the combined powers of France 
and Spain, during several years, her exertions 
were surprising and her expense immense. To 
discharge the debts of the nation, the parliament 
was obliged to have recourse to new expedients 
for raising money. Previous to the last treaty in 
1763, the parliament had been satisfied to raise a 
revenue from the American colonies by a mono- 
poly of their trade. 

It will be proper here to observe, that there 
were four kinds of government established in the 
British American colonies. The first was a 
charter government, by which the powers of le- 
gislation were vested in a governor, council, and 


assembly, chosen by the people. Of this kind 
were the governments of Connecticut and Rhode 
Island. The second was a proprietary govern- 
ment, in which the proprietor of the province 
was governor ; although he generally resided 
abroad, and administered the government by a 
deputy of his own appointment ; the assembly 
only being chosen by the people. Such were the 
governments of Pennsylvania and Maryland ; and 
originally of New Jersey and Carolina. The 
third kind was that of royal government, where 
the governor and council were appointed by the 
crown, and the assembly by the people. Of this 
kind were the governments of New Hampshire, 
New York, New Jersey, (after the year 1702) 
Virginia, the Carolinas, after the resignation of 
the proprietors, in 1728, and Georgia. The 
fourth kind was that of Massachusetts, which dif- 
fered from all the rest. The governor was ap- 
pointed by the king ; so far it was a royal go- 
vernment ; but the members of the council were 
elected by the representatives of the people. The 
governor, however, had a right to negative a cer- 
tain number, but not to fill up vacancies thus oc- 
casioned. This variety of governments created 
different degrees of dependence on the crown. 
In the royal government, to render a law valid, 
it was constitutionally required that it should be 
ratified by the king ; but the charter govern- 
ments were empowered to enact laws and no ra- 
tification by the king was necessary. It was only 
required that such laws should not be contrary 
to the laws of England. The charter of Connec- 
ticut is express to this purpose. 

Of the proceedings of all these governments 
those of Massachusetts were perhaps the most 
interesting; as giving the best leading fea- 
tures of the state of political influence prevalent 
throughout the colonies previously to, and about 
the period of, their separation. A diffuse account 
of the transactions that took place is therefore 
given under the article Massachusetts. 

At the beginning of the war with France, com- 
missioners from many of the colonies had assem- 
bled at Albany, and proposed that a great coun- 
cil should be formed by deputies from the se- 
veral colonies, which, with a general governor 
to be appointed by the crown, should be em- 
powered to take measures for the common safety, 
and to raise money for the execution of their de- 
signs. This proposal was not relished by the 
British ministry ; but in place of this plan, it 
was proposed, that the governors of the colonies, 
with the assistance of one or two of their council, 
should assemble and concert measures for the] 


UNITED STATES. 


93 


[general defence ; erect forts, levy troops, and 
draw on the treasury of England for monies that 
should be wanted; but the treasury to be reim- 
bursed by a tax on the colonies, to be laid by the 
English parliament. To this plan, which would 
imply an avowal of the right of parliament to 
tax the colonies, the provincial assemblies ob- 
jected with unshaken firmness. It seems there- 
fore that the British parliament, before the war, 
had it in contemplation to exercise the right they 
claimed of taxing the colonies at pleasure, with- 
out permitting them to be represented. Indeed 
it is obvious that they laid hold of the alarming 
situation of the colonies, about the year 1754 and 
1755, to force them into an acknowledgment of 
the right, or to the adoption of measures that 
might afterwards be drawn into precedent. The 
colonies, however, with an uncommon foresight 
and firmness, defeated all their attempts. The 
war was carried on by requisitions on the colo- 
nies for supplies of men and money, or by volun- 
tary contributions. 

But no sooner was peace concluded, than the 
English parliament resumed the plan of taxing 
the colonies ; and to justify their attempts, said, 
that the money to be raised, was to be appro- 
priated to defray the expense of defending them 
in the late war. 

The first attempt to raise a revenue in Ame- 
rica appeared in the memorable Stamp Act, 
passed March 22, 1765 ; by which it was en- 
acted, that certain instruments of writing, as 
bills, bonds, &amp;c. should not be valid in law, un- 
less drawn on stamped paper, on which a duty 
was laid. When this bill was brought in, Mr. 
Charles Townsend concluded a speech in its fa- 
vour, with words to the following effect : “ And 
now, will these Americans, children planted by 
our care, nourished up by our indulgence, till 
they are grown to a degree of strength and opu- 
lence, and protected by our arms, will they 
grudge to contribute their mite to relieve us 
from the heavy weight of that burden which we 
lie under?” To which Colonel Barre replied, 
“ They planted by your care ! No, your oppres- 
sions planted them in America. They fled from 
tyranny to a then uncultivated and unhospitable 
country, where they exposed themselves to al- 
most all the hardships to which human nature is 
liable ; and among others to the cruelty of a sa- 
vage foe, the most subtle, and I will take upon 
me to say, the most formidable of any people 
upon the face of God’s earth ; and yet, actuated 
by principles of true English liberty, they met all 
hardships with pleasure, compared with those 


who suffered in their own country, from the 
hands of those who should have been their 
friends. They nourished up by your indulgence ! 
They grew by your neglect of them. As soon as 
you began to care about them, that care was ex- 
ercised in sending persons to rule them in one 
department and another, who were perhaps the 
deputies of deputies to some members of this 
house, sent to spy out their libei’ties, to mis- 
represent their actions, and to prey upon them. 
Men whose behaviour, on many occasions, has 
caused the blood of those sons of liberty to recoil 
within them. Men promoted to the highest seats 
of justice, some, who to my knowledge were 
glad, by going to a foreign country, to escape 
being brought to the bar of a court of justice in 
their own. They protected by your arms ! They 
have nobly taken up arms in your defence, have 
exerted a valour amidst their constant and labo- 
rious industry, for the defence of a country whose 
frontier was drenched in blood, while its interior 
parts yielded all its little savings to your emolu- 
ment ; and believe me, remember I this day told 
you so, that the same spirit of freedom which ac- 
tuated that people at first, will accompany them 
still : but prudence forbids me to explain myself 
farther. God knows, I do not at this time speak 
from any motives of party heat ; what I deliver 
are the genuine sentiments of my heart. How- 
ever superior to me in general knowledge and 
experience, the respectable body of this house 
may be, yet I claim to know more of America 
than most of you, having seen and been conver- 
sant in that country. The people, I believe, are 
as truly loyal as any subjects the king has, but a 
people jtalous of their liberties, and who will 
vindicate- them if ever they should be violated: 
but the subject is too delicate. I will say no 
more.” 

No sooner was this act published in America, 
than it raised a general alarm. The people were 
filled with apprehension at an act which they 
supposed to be an attack on their constitutional 
rights. The colonies petitioned the king and 
parliament for a redress of the grievance, and 
formed associations for the purpose of prevent- 
ing the importation and use of British manufac- 
tures, until the act should be repealed. This 
spirited and unanimous opposition of the Ameri- 
cans produced the desired effect ; and on 
March 18, 1766, the Stamp Act was repealed. 
The news of the repeal was received in the colo- 
nies with universal joy, and the trade between 
them and Great Britain was renewed on the 
most liberal footing.] 


94 


UNITED STATES. 


[The parliament, by repealing this act so ob- 
noxious to their American brethren, did not in- 
tend to lay aside the scheme of raising a revenue 
in the colonies, but merely to change the mode. 
Accordingly, the next year, they passed an act, 
laying a certain duty on glass, tea, paper, and 
painters colours ; articles which were much 
wanted, and not manufactured in America. [We 
must be here excused, if entering into some re- 
capitulation of the text of Algedo.] This act 
kindled the resentment of the Americans, and 
excited a general opposition to the measure ; so 
that parliament thought proper, in 1770, to take 
off these duties, leaving only three-pence a 
pound on tea. Yet this duty, however trifling, 
kept alive the jealousy of the colonists, and their 
opposition to parliamentary taxation continued 
and increased. 

But it must be remembered that the inconve- 
nience of paying the duty was not the sole, nor 
principal cause of the opposition ; it was the 
principle, which, once admitted, would have sub- 
jected the colonies to unlimited parliamentary 
taxation, without the privilege of being repre- 
sented. The right, abstractly considered, was 
denied ; and the smallest attempt to establish the 
claim by precedent, was uniformly resisted. The 
Americans could not be deceived as to the views 
of parliament ; for the repeal of the Stamp Act 
was accompanied with an unequivocal declara- 
tion, “ that the parliament had a right to make 
laws of sufficient validity, to bind the colonies in 
all cases whatsoever.” 

The colonies therefore entered into measures 
to encourage their own manufactures, and home 
productions, and to retrench the use of foreign 
superfluities; while the importation of tea was 
prohibited. In the roj^al and proprietary go- 
vernments, and in Massachusetts, the governors 
and people were in a state of continual warfare. 
Assemblies were repeatedly called, and suddenly 
dissolved. While sitting, the assemblies em- 
ployed the time in stating grievances and fram- 
ing remonstrances. To inflame these discon- 
tents, an act of parliament was passed, ordaining 
that the governors and judges should receive 
their salaries of the crown ; thus making them 
independent of the provincial assemblies, and re- 
movable only at the pleasure of the king. 

These arbitrary proceedings, with many others 
not here mentioned, but which may be seen in 
an enumeration of grievances in the Act of In- 
dependence, and in a variety of petitions to the 
king and parliament, could not fail of producing 
a rupture. 


On the second of March, a fray took place in 
Boston, near Mr. Gray’s rope- walk, between a 
private soldier of the 29th regiment, and an in- 
habitant. The former was supported by his 
comrades, the latter by the rope-makers, till se- 
veral on both sides were involved in the conse- 
quences. On the fifth a more dreadful scene 
was presented. The soldiers, when under arms, 
were pressed upon, insulted, and pelted by a 
mob, armed with clubs, sticks, and snow-balls 
covering stones. They were also dared to fire. 
In this situation, one of the soldiers who had re- 
ceived a blow, in resentment fired at the sup- 
posed aggressor. This was followed by a single 
discharge from six others. Three of the inha- 
bitants were killed, and five were dangerously 
wounded. The town was immediately in com- 
motion. Such was the temper, force, and num- 
ber of the inhabitants, that nothing but an en- 
gagement to remove the troops out of the town, 
together with the advice of moderate men, pre- 
vented the townsmen from falling on the sol- 
diers. The killed were buried in one vault, and 
in a most respectful manner, in order to express 
the indignation of the inhabitants at the slaugh- 
ter of their brethren, by soldiers quartered 
among them, in violation of their civil liberties. 
Captain Preston, who commanded the party 
which fired on the inhabitants, was committed 
to jail, and afterwards tried. The captain, and 
six of the men, were acquitted. Two were 
brought in guilty of manslaughter. It appeared 
on the trial, that the soldiers were abused, in- 
sulted, threatened, and pelted, before they fired. 
It was also proved, that only seven guns were 
fired by the eight prisoners. These circum- 
stances induced the jury to make a favourable 
verdict. The result of the trial reflected great 
honour on John Adams, and Josiah Quincy, 
Esqrs. the council for the prisoners ; and also on 
the integrity of the jury, who ventured to give 
an upright verdict, in defiance of popular opi- 
nions. 

The consequences of this tragical event sunk 
deep in the minds of the people, and were made 
subservient to important purposes. The anni- 
versary of it was observed with great solemnity 
for 13 years. Eloquent orators were succes- 
sively employed to deliver an annual oration to 
preserve the remembrance of it fresh in their 
minds. On these occasions the blessings of li- 
berty, the horrors of slavery, the dangers of a 
standing army, the rights of the colonies, and a 
variety of such topics, were represented to the 
public view under their most pleasing and alarm-] 


UNITED STATES. 


95 


fing forms. These annual orations administered 
fuel to the fire of liberty, and kept it burning, 
with an incessant flame. 

In 1773, the spirit of the Americans broke out 
into open violence. The Gaspee, an armed 
schooner belonging- to his Britannic Majesty, had 
been stationed at Providence, in Rhode Island, 
to prevent smuggling-. The vigilance of the 
commander irritated the inhabitants to that de- 
gree, that about 200 armed men entered the ves- 
sel at night, compelled the officers and men to 
go ashore, and set fire to the schooner. A re- 
ward of £ 500, offered by government for appre- 
hending any of the persons concerned in this 
daring act, produced no effectual discovery. 

About this time the discovery and publication 
of some private confidential letters, written by 
the royal officers in Boston, to persons in office 
in England, served to confirm the apprehensions 
of the Americans with respect to the designs of 
the British government. It was now made ob- 
vious that more effectual measures would be 
taken to establish the supremacy of the British 
parliament over the colonies. The letters re- 
commended decisive measures, and the writers 
were charged, by the exasperated Americans, 
with betraying their trust and the people they 
governed. 

As the resolutions of the colonies not to im- 
port or consume tea, had, in a great measure, 
deprived the English government of a revenue 
from this quarter, the parliament formed a 
scheme of introducing tea into America, under 
cover of the East India Company. For this pur- 
pose an act was passed, enabling the Company to 
export all sorts of teas, duty free, to any place 
whatever. The Company departed from their 
usual mode of doing business, and became their 
own exporters. Several ships were freighted 
with teas, and sent to the American colonies, and 
factors were appointed to receive and dispose of 
their cargoes. 

The Americans, determined to oppose the re- 
venue system of the English parliament in every 
possible shape, considered the attempt of the 
E. India Company to evade the resolutions of 
the colonies, and dispose of teas in America, as 
an indirect mode of taxation, sanctioned by the 
authority of parliament. The people assembled 
in various places, and in the large commercial 
towns, took measures to prevent the landing of 
the teas. Committees were appointed, and armed 
with extensive powers to inspect merchants 
books, to propose tests, and to make use of other 
expedients to frustrate the designs of the E. India 


Company. The same spirit pervaded the people 
from New Hampshire to Georgia. In some 
places, the consignees of the teas were intimi- 
dated so far as to relinquish their appointments, 
or to enter into engagements not to act in that 
capacity. The cargo sent to S. Carolina was 
stored, the consignees being restrained from offer- 
ing the tea for sale. In other provinces, the ships 
returned back without discharging their cargoes. 

It was otherwise in Massachusetts. The tea 
ships destined for the supply of Boston were con- 
signed to the son, cousins, and particular friends 
of Governor H utchinson . When they were called 
upon to resign, they answered, u That it was 
out of their power.” The collector refused to 
give a clearance, unless the vessels were dis- 
charged of dutiable articles. The governor re- 
fused to give a pass for the vessels, unless pro- 
perly qualified from the custom-house. The 
governor likewise requested Admiral Montague 
to guard the passages out of the harbour, and 
gave orders to suffer no vessels, coasters excepted, 
to pass the fortress, from the town, without a 
pass signed by himself. From a combination of 
these circumstances, the return of the tea vessels 
from Boston was rendered impossible. The in- 
habitants then had no alternative, but to prevent 
the landing of the tea, or to suffer it to be landed, 
and depend on the unanimity of the people not 
to purchase it, or to destroy the tea, or to suffer 
a deep laid scheme against their sacred liberties 
to take effect. The first would have requix-ed in- 
cessant watching by night, as well as by day, for 
a period of time, the duration of which no one 
could compute. The second would have been 
visionary to childishness, by suspending the liber- 
ties of a growing country, on the self-denial and 
discretion of every tea-drinker in the province. 
They viewed the tea as a vehicle of an unconsti- 
tutional tax, and as inseparably associated with 
it. To avoid the one they resolved to destroy 
the other. About 17 persons, dressed as Indians, 
repaired to the tea ships, broke open 342 chests 
of tea, and without doing any other damage, dis- 
charged their contents into the water. 

No sooner did the news of this destruction of 
the tea reach Great Britain, than the parliament 
determined to punish that devoted town. On 
the King’s laying the American papers before 
them, a bill was brought in and passed, to “ dis- 
continue the landing and discharging, lading and 
shipping of goods, wares, and merchandises, at 
the town of Boston, or within the harbour.” 

This act passed March 25, 1774, and calked 
the Boston Port Bill, threw the inhabitants intol 

' -A 


96 


UNITED STATES. 


[the greatest consternation. The town of Boston 
passed a resolution, expressing their sense of this 
oppressive measure, and a desire that all the 
colonies would concur to stop all importations 
from Great Britain. Most of the colonies en- 
tered into spirited resolutions on this occasion, 
to unite with Massachusetts in a firm opposition 
to the severe measures of the parliament. The 
first of June, the day on which the Port Bill was 
to take place, was appointed to be kept as a day 
of humiliation, fasting, and prayer throughout the 
colonies, to seek the Divine direction and aid, in 
that critical and gloomy juncture of affairs. 

It ought here to be observed, that this rational 
and pious custom of observing fasts in times of 
distress and impending danger, and of celebrating 
days of public thanksgiving, after having received 
special tokens of Divine favour, has ever pre- 
vailed in New England, since its first settlement, 
and in some parts of other States. 

During the height of the consternation and 
confusion which the Boston Port Bill occasioned, 
and at the very time when a town meeting was 
sitting to consider of it, General Gage, who had 
been appointed to the government of Massachu- 
setts, arrived in the harbour. His arrival, how- 
ever, did not allay the popular ferment, or check 
the progress of the measures then taking, to unite 
the colonies in opposition to the oppressive acts 
of parliament. He was received with all the 
honours usual on such occasions. 

But the Port Bill was not the only act that 
alarmed the apprehensions of the Americans. 
Determined to compel the province of Massachu- 
setts to submit to their laws, parliament passed an 
act for u The better regulating government in 
the province of Massachusetts Bay.” The object 
of this act was to alter the government, as it 
stood on the charter of King William ; and to 
make the judges and sheriffs dependent on the 
king, and removable at his will and pleasure. 

This act was soon followed by another, which 
ordained that any person, indicted for murder, or 
other capital offence, committed in aiding the 
magistrates in executing the laws, might be sent 
by the governor, either to any other colony, or to 
Great Britain, for his trial. 

This was soon followed by the Quebec Bill, 
which extended the bounds of that province, and 
granted many privileges to the Roman Catholics. 
The object of this bill was, to secure the attach- 
ment of that province to the crown of England, 
and prevent its joining the colonies in their resist- 
ance of the laws of parliament. 

But these measures did not intimidate the 


Americans. On the other hand, they served to 
confirm their former apprehensions of the evil 
designs of government, and to unite the colonies 
in their opposition. A correspondence of opinion 
with respect to the unconstitutional acts of par- 
liament, produced an uniformity of proceedings 
in the colonies. The people generally concurred 
in a proposition for holding a congress, by depu- 
tation from the several colonies, in order to con- 
cert measures for the preservation of their rights. 
Deputies were accordingly appointed, and met at 
Philadelphia, October 26, 1774. 

In this first congress, the proceedings were 
cool, deliberate, and loyal ; but marked with 
unanimity and firmness. Their first act was a 
declaration or statement of their claims as to the 
enjoyment of all the rights of British subjects, 
and particularly that of taxing themselves exclu- 
sively, and of regulating the internal police of 
the colonies. They also drew up a petition to 
the king, complaining of their grievances, and 
praying for a repeal of the unconstitutional and 
oppressive acts of parliament. They signed an 
association to suspend the importation of British 
goods, and the exportation of American produce, 
until their grievances should be redressed. They 
sent an address to the inhabitants of Great Bri- 
tain, and another to the people of America ; in 
the former of which they enumerated the oppres- 
sive steps of parliament, and called on their 
British brethren not to aid the ministry in en- 
slaving their American subjects ; and in the latter 
they endeavoured to confirm the people in a 
spirited and unanimous determination to defend 
their constitutional rights. 

In the mean time every thing in Massachusetts 
wore the appearance of opposition by force. A 
new council for the governor had been appointed 
by the crown. New judges were appointed, and 
attempted to proceed in the execution of their 
office ; but the juries refused to be sworn under 
them. In some counties, the people assembled 
to prevent the courts from proceeding to business; 
and in Berkshire they succeeded, setting an ex- 
ample of resistance that was afterwards followed, 
in violation of the laws of the State. 

In this situation of affairs, the day for the 
annual muster of the militia approached. Gene- 
ral Gage, apprehensive of some violence, had the 
precaution to seize the magazines of ammunition 
and stores at Cambridge and Charlestown, and 
lodged them in Boston. This measure, with the 
fortifying of the neck of land which joins Boston 
to the main land at Roxbury, caused an universal 
alarm and ferment.] 


97 


UNITED 

[On , this occasion, an assembly of delegates 
from all the towns in Suffolk County was called ; 
the several spirited resolutions were agreed to. 
These resolutions were prefaced with a declara- 
tion of allegiance ; but they breathed a spirit of 
boldness peculiar to the known character of the 
delegates. They declared that the late acts of 
parliament, and the proceedings of General Gage, 
were glaring infractions of their rights and liber- 
ties, which their duty called them to defend by all 
lawful means. 

This assembly remonstrated against the fortifi- 
cation of Boston Neck, and against the Quebec 
Bill ; and resolved upon a suspension of com- 
merce, an encouragement of arts and manufac- 
tures, the holding of a Provincial Congress, and a 
submission to the measures which should be re- 
commended by the Continental Congress. They 
recommended that the collectors of taxes should 
not pay any money into the treasury without fur- 
ther orders ; they also recommended peace and 
good order, giving it to be understood that they 
meant to act merely upon the defensive. 

In answer to their remonstrance, General Gage 
assured them that he had no intention to prevent 
the free egress and regress of the inhabitants to 
and from the town of Boston, and that he would 
not suffer any person under his command to in- 
jure the person or pi’operty of any of his majesty’s 
subjects. 

Previous to this, a general assembly had been 
summoned by the governor to meet at Salem ; 
and notwithstanding the writs had been counter- 
manded by the governor’s proclamation, on ac- 
count of the violence of the times, and the resig- 
nation of several of the new counsellors, yet in 
defiance of the proclamation, 90 of the newly- 
elected members met at the time and place ap- 
pointed ; and soon after resolved themselves into 
a Provincial Congress and adjourned to Concord, 
19 miles from Boston, and after choosing Mr. 
Hancock president, proceeded to business. 

The Congress addressed the governor with a 
rehearsal of their distresses, and took the neces- 
sary steps for defending the principles they had 
adopted. They regulated the militia, made pro- 
vision for supplying the treasury and furnishing 
the people with arms ; who, eager for change, 
listened with enthusiasm to the recommendations 
of the Provincial Congress. 

General Gage was incensed at these measures. 
He declared in his answer to the address, that 
Britain could never harbour the black design of 
enslaving her subjects, and published a proclama- 
tion, in which he insinuated that such proceedings 

VOL. V. 


STATES. 

amounted to rebellion. He also ordered barracks 
to be erected for the soldiers ; but he found diffi- 
culty in procuring labourers, either in Boston or 
New York. 

In the beginning of 1775, the fishery bills were 
passed in parliament, by which the colonies were 
prohibited to trade with Great Britain, Ireland, 
or the W. Indies, or take fish on the banks of 
Newfoundland. 

The effects intended to be produced by these 
acts of parliament, especially with regard to the 
town of Boston, were in a great measure counter- 
acted by the large supplies of provision furnished 
by the inhabitants of different towns from New 
Hampshire to Georgia, and shipped to the relief 
of the sufferers. 

Preparations began to be made, to oppose by 
force the execution of these acts of parliament. 
The militia of the country were trained to the 
use of arms ; great encouragement was given for 
the manufacture of gunpower, and measures were 
taken to obtain all kinds of military stores. 

In February, Colonel Leslie was sent with a 
detachment of troops from Boston, to take pos- 
session of some cannon at Salem. But the people 
who had by some means procured intelligence of 
the design, took up the draw-bridge in that town, 
and prevented the troops from passing, until the 
cannon were secured. 

Provisions and military stores were also col- 
lected and stored in different places, particularly 
at Concord. General Gage, though zealous for 
his royal master’s interest, discovered a prevail- 
ing desire after a peaceable accommodation. He 
w ished to prevent hostilities by depriving the in- 
habitants of the means necessary for carrying 
them on. With this view, he is supposed to have 
had for his object the seizure of the persons of 
Messrs. Hancock and S. Adams, who by their 
spirited exertions had rendered themselves ob- 
noxious to him, and to have determined to de- 
stroy the stores which he knew were collected 
for the support of a provincial army ; and wish- 
ing to accomplish this without bloodshed, he 
took every precaution to effect it by surprise, 
and without alarming the country. At 1 1 o’clock 
at night 800 grenadiers and light infantry, the 
flower of the royal army, embarked at the com- 
mon, landed at Leechmore’s Point and marched 
for Concord, under the command of Lieutenant- 
colonel Smith. Neither the secrecy with which 
this expedition was planned, the privacy with 
which the troops marched out, nor an order that 
no inhabitant should leave Boston, were sufficient 
to prevent intelligence from being sent to the] 
o 


98 


UNITED STATES. 


[country militia of what was going on. About 
two in the morning, 130 of the Lexington militia 
had assembled to oppose them, but the air being 
chilly, and intelligence respecting the regulars 
uncertain, they were dismissed, with orders to 
appear again at the beat of drum. They collected 
a second time, to the number of 70, between four 
and five o’clock in the morning, and the British 
regulars soon after made their appearance. Ma- 
jor Pitcairn, who led the advanced corps, rode up 
to them and called out, “ Disperse, you rebels; 
throw down your arms and disperse.’ ’ They 
still continued in a body, on which he advanced 
nearer, discharged his pistol, and ordered his 
soldiers to fire. A dispersion of the militia was 
the consequence, but not till after three or four 
of them had been killed. The royal detachment 
proceeded on to Concord, and executed their 
commission. They disabled two 24 pounders, 
threw 5001b. of ball into rivers and wells, and 
broke in pieces about 60 barrels of flour. Mr. 
John Buterick, major of a minute regiment, not 
knowing what had passed at Lexington, ordered 
his men not to give the first fire, under the idea 
that they might thus prove themselves not to be 
the aggressors. Upon his approaching near the 
regulars, they fired, and killed Captain Isaac 
Davis, and one private of the provincial minute 
men. The fire was returned, and a skirmish 
ensued. The king’s troops having done their 
business, began their retreat towards Boston. 
This was conducted with expedition, for the 
adjacent inhabitants had assembled in arms and 
began to attack them in every direction. In 
their return to Lexington they were exceedingly 
annoyed, both by those who pressed on their 
rear, and others who poured in from all sides, 
firing from behind stone walls, and such like 
coverts, which supplied the place of lines and 
redoubts. At Lexington the regulars were joined 
by a detachment of 900 men under Lord Piercy, 
which had been sent out by General Gage to 
support Lieutenant colonel Smith. This rein- 
forcement, having two pieces of cannon, awed the 
provincials, and kept them at a greater distance; 
but they continued a constant, though irregular 
and scattering fire, which did great execution. 
The close firing from behind the walls by good 
marksmen, put the regular troops in no small 
confusion, but they nevertheless kept up a brisk 
retreating fire on the militia and minute men. 
A little after sunset the regulars reached Bun- 
ker’s Hill, worn down with excessive fatigue, 
having marched that day between 30 and 40 miles. 
On the next day they crossed Charlestown ferry 
to Boston. 


'There never were more than 400 provincials 
engaged at one time, and often not so many. As 
some tired and gave out, others came up and 
took their places. There was scarcely any disci- 
pline observed among them. Officers and pri- 
vates fired when they were ready and saw a royal 
uniform, without waiting for the word of com- 
mand. Their knowledge of the country enabled 
them to gain opportunities, by crossing fields and 
fences, and to act as flanking parties against the 
king’s troops, who kept to the main road. 

The American accounts state that the regulars 
had 65 killed, 174 wounded, and 24 made pri- 
soners ; and that of the provincials 49 were 
killed, and 39 wounded and missing. 

Here was spilt the first blood in the late w r ar : 
a war which severed America from the British 
empire. Lexington opened the first scene to this 
great drama, which, in its progress, exhibited 
such striking characters and events, and closed 
with a revolution so important in its consequences 
to mankind. 

This battle roused all America. The Provin- 
cial Congress of Massachusetts being at this time 
in session, voted that “ An army of 30,000 men 
be immediately raised ; that 13,600 be of their 
own province, and that a letter and delegate be 
sent to the several colonies of New Hampshire, 
Connecticut, and Rhode Island.” The militia 
collected from all quarters, and Boston, in a few 
days, was besieged by 20,000 men. A stop was 
put to all intercourse between the town and 
country, and the inhabitants were reduced to 
great want of provisions. 

At this time General Gage made a proposal 
with some want of foresight, and which it was 
partly out of his power to fulfil. Knowing that 
there were a great quantity of arms concealed in 
thjJ town, he gave out that such as should sur- 
render them up, should be entitled to leave the 
town with their effects; accordingly, in the course 
of five days after the agreement, the inhabitants 
had lodged 1,778 fire arms, 634 pistols, 273 bayo- 
nets, and 38 blunderbusses, and several were per- 
mitted to depart ; but the fatal tendency of this 
leniency was perceived too late, when the go- 
vernor discovered that whilst some arms were 
given up, others of more consequence were re- 
tained ; and that even the royal party were ob- 
liged to retreat in their own defence, alledging 
that the provincialists would return and set fire 
to the town. Hence circumstances arose, which, 
however irremidiable, were certainly of a some- 
what aggravated nature, and which formed 
grounds for some bitter complaints of the Con- 
gress.] 


UNITED STATES. 


99 


[About the latter end of May a great part of the 
reinforcements ordered from Great Britain arrived 
at Boston. Three British generals, Howe, Bur- 
goyne, and Clinton, whose behaviour in the pre- 
ceding war had gained them great reputation, 
also arrived about the same time. General 
Gage, thus reinforced, prepared for acting with 
more decision ; but before he proceeded to ex- 
tremities, he conceived it due to ancient forms to 
issue a proclamation, holding forth to the inhabi- 
tants the alternative of peace or war. He there- 
fore offered pardon in the king’s name, to all who 
should forthwith lay down their arms, and return 
to their respective occupations and peaceable 
duties, excepting only from the benefit of that 
pardon “ Samuel Adams and John Hancock,” 
whose offences were said to be of too flagitious 
a nature to admit of any other consideration than 
that of condign punishment.” He also pro- 
claimed, that not only the persons above named 
and excepted, but also all their adherents, asso- 
ciates, and correspondents should be deemed 
guilty of treason and rebellion, and treated ac- 
cordingly. By this proclamation it was also de- 
clared, “ that as the courts of judicature were 
shut, martial law should take place, till a due 
course of justice should be re-established.” It 
was supposed that this proclamation was a pre- 
lude to hostilities, and preparations were accord- 
ingly made by the Americans. The heights of 
Charlestown were so situated as to make the 
possession of them a matter of great consequence 
to either of the contending parties. Orders were 
therefore issued, June 16th, by the provincial 
commanders, that a detachment of 1,000 men 
should intrench upon Breed’s Hill, for it should 
be observed, that historians, through mistake, have 
called the hill where the battle was fought, Bun- 
ker’s Hill, which is a quarter of a mile n. of 
Breed’s Hill, where the battle was really fought. 
Here the Americans, between midnight and morn- 
ing, with uncommon expedition aud silence, 
threw up a small redoubt, which the British hav- 
ing discovered on the morning of the 17th, began 
an incessant firing, and continued it till the 
afternoon ; though they could not eventually 
prevent the Americans from finishing their re- 
doubt, and throwing up a breastwork, extending 
e. of it to the bottom of the hill. About noon 
General Gage detached Major-general Howe and 
Brigadier-general Pigot, with the flower of his 
army, in two detachments, amounting in the 
whole to nearly 3,000 men. They landed at a 
point about 150 or 200 rods s. e. of the redoubt, 
and deliberately prepared for the attack. While 


the troops, who first landed, were waiting for a 
reinforcement, the Americans on the left wing, 
towards Mystic River, for their security, pulled 
up some adjoining post and rail fence, and set it 
down in parallel lines, near each other, and filled 
the space between with hay, which the day before 
was mowed, and remained in the adjacent field. 
The British troops, in the mean time, formed in 
two lines, and about three o’clock advanced 
slowly towards the Americans. The hills and 
steeples in Boston, and the circumjacent country, 
were crowded with anxious spectators of the du- 
bious conflict. The attack commenced on the 
part of the British troops. The Americans had 
the precaution to reserve their fire, till the Bri- 
tish had approached within 10 or 12 rods of their 
works. They then began a well-directed and 
furious discharge of small arms, which did great 
execution, and seemed likely, at three different 
periods, to turn the fate of the day. But this 
conduct, on the part of the Americans, was pre- 
sently overruled by that of his Majesty’s forces, 
who had now, under the unyielding gallantry of 
General Howe, attacked the redoubt on two 
sides. Under these circumstances, a retreat was 
ordered ; the left wing of the Americans, n. e. of 
the redoubt, still continuing their fire, ignorant 
of what had taken place on the right, till the 
British had nearly surrounded them. The re- 
treat was effected with an inconsiderable loss, 
considering the greater part of the distance they 
had to pass was completely exposed to the inces- 
sant fire of the Glasgow man of war and two 
floating batteries. 

During the heat of this bloody action, by order 
of General Gage, Charlestown was set on fire by 
a battery on Cops Hill, in Boston, and a party 
from the Somerset man of war lying in Charles 
River, and nearly 400 houses, including six pub- 
lic buildings, were consumed, with their furni- 
ture, &amp;c. the whole being valued at about 
^.156,900 specie. 

The number of Americans engaged in this 
memorable action amounted, according to their 
own statements, to 1,500 only; but it is certain 
that the disparity between them and the British 
was by no means so great. There have been 
few battles in modern wars in which, all circum- 
stances considered, there was a areater slaughter 
of men than in this short engagement. The loss 
of the British, as acknowledged by General Gage, 
amounted to 1,054 men. Nineteen commissioned 
officers were killed, and 70 wounded. The loss 
of the Americans, as allowed by themselves, was 
77 killed, 278 wounded and missing.] 
o 2 


100 


UNITED 

[The death of Major-General Warren, who 
four days before had received his commission, 
and who, having had no command assigned him, 
fought this day as a volunteer, was a severe, blow 
to the Americans ; but the loss in officers to the 
British seemed to be almost irreparable; 19 of 
whom were killed, and 70 more were wounded, 
a circumstance which is to be accounted for by 
their having been picked out by the provincials, 
who, from hunting and amusements of the chase, 
had become distinguished marksmen. 

About this time a scheme was laid by a number 
of gentlemen in Connecticut, to take possession 
ofTiconderoga, where a great quantity of military 
stores were lodged, and which is the key to Ca- 
nada. Having made the necessary preparations, 
and collected 270 men, chiefly Green Mountain 
boys, they rendezvoused at Castleton, where they 
were joined by Col. Allen, and shortly after by 
Col. Arnold from Cambridge, under commission 
from the Provincial Congress. Col. Allen com- 
manded this volunteer party. Having arrived at 
Lake Champlain, opposite Ticonderoga, in the 
night, Cols. Allen and Arnold, with 83 men, 
crossed over, and at the dawn of day entered the 
fort without resistance, and called upon the com- 
mander, who was in bed, to surrender the fort. 
He asked by what authority ? Col. Allen replied 
— “ I demand it in the name of the Great Jeho- 
vah, and of the Continental Congress.” Thus 
the fort was captured, with its valuable stores 
and 48 prisoners. Crown Point was taken at the 
same time by Col. Warren, and the possession 
of all Lake Champlain was shortly after the con- 
sequence. 

On the 15th of June, two days before the 
memorable battle on Breed’s Hill, the Conti- 
nental Congress unanimously appointed George 
Washington, Esq. a native of Virginia, to the 
chief command of the American army. It is but 
justice to say, that this gentleman had been a 
distinguished and successful officer in the preced- 
ing war: that he accepted the appointment with 
a diffidence which was a proof of his modesty, his 
prudence, and his greatness, and that by his emi- 
nent skill, fortitude, and perseverence, he con- 
ducted America through difficulties as great as 
they were extraordinary. 

It cannot, indeed, be thought an improper di- 
gression from the subject, to give in this place a 
short sketch of the life of this distinguished man. 

Notwithstanding it has often been asserted, 
with confidence, that President Washington was 
a native of England, certain it is his ancestors 
went over from thence to America, so long ago as 


STATES. 

the year 1657. He, in the third descent of their 
migration, was born, February 11, 1732, (old 
style), at the parish of Washington, in West- 
moreland County, in Virginia. His father’s family 
was numerous, and he was the first fruit of a 
second marriage. His education having been 
principally conducted by a private tutor, at 15 
years old he was entered a midshipman on board 
of a British vessel of war, stationed on the coast 
of Virginia, and his baggage prepared for embark- 
ation ; but the plan was abandoned on account 
of the reluctance his mother expressed to his en- 
gaging in that profession. 

Previous to this transaction, when he was but 
10 years of age, his father died, and the charge of 
the family devolved on his eldest brother. His 
eldest brother, a young man of the most promis- 
ing talents, had a command in the colonial troops 
employed against Carthagena, and on his return 
from the expedition, named his new patrimonial 
mansion Mount Vernon, in honour of the admi- 
ral of that name, from whom he had received 
many civilities. He was afterwards made adju- 
tant-general of the militia of Virginia, but did not 
long survive. At his decease, the eldest son by 
the second marriage inherited this seat, and a 
considerable landed property. In consequence 
of the extensive limits of the colony, the vacant 
office of adjutant-general was divided into three 
districts, and the future hero of America, before 
he attained his 20th year, began his military ser- 
vice by a principal appointment in that depart- 
ment, with the rank of major. 

When lie was little more than 21 years of 
age, an event occurred which called his abilities 
into public notice. In 1753, while the govern- 
ment of the colony was administered by Lieute- 
nant-governor Dinwiddie, encroachments were 
reported to have been made by the French from 
Canada, on the territories of the British colonies, 
at the w. Mr. Washington, who was sent with 
plenary powers to ascertain the facts, treat with 
the savages, and warn the French to desist from 
their aggressions, performed the duties of his 
mission with singular industry, intelligence, and 
address. His journal and report to Governor 
Dinwiddie, which were published, announced to 
the world that correctness of mind, manliness in 
style, and accuracy in mode of doing business, 
which have since characterised him in the conduct 
of more arduous affairs. But it was deemed, by 
some, an extraordinary circumstance that so 
juvenile and inexperienced a person should have 
been employed on a negociation, with which sub- 
jects of the greatest importance were involved ;] 


101 


UNITED 

[subjects, which shortly after became the origin 
of a war between England and France, that 
raged for many years throughout every part of 
the globe. 

It would not comport with the intended bre- 
vity of this sketch, to mention in detail the fa- 
tigues he endured, the plans he suggested, or the 
system he pursued for the defence of the fron- 
tiers, during this war, until the year 1758. 

Tranquillity on the frontiers of the middle 
colonies having been restored, and the health of 
Colonel Washington having become extremely 
debilitated by an inveterate pulmonary complaint, 
in 1759, he resigned his military appointment. 

His health was gradually re-established. He 
married Mrs. Custis, a handsome and amiable 
young widow, possessed of an ample jointure ; 
and settled as a planter and farmer on his estate 
at Mount Vernon, in Fairfax County. 

• After he left the army, until the year 1775, he 
cultivated the arts of peace. He was constantly 
a member of assembly, a magistrate of his county, 
and a judge of the court. He was elected a 
delegate to the first Congress in 1774, as well as 
to that which assembled in the year following. 
Soon after the war broke out he was appointed, 
as we have mentioned, by Congress, commander 
in chief of the forces of the United Colonies. 

It would be less desirable to particularise, in 
this place, his transactions in the course of the 
late war, because they would form an invidious 
distinction to the outline we are now furnishing ; 
but from them posterity might be taught, in what 
manner he transformed an undisciplined body of 
peasantry into a regular army of soldiers. Com- 
mentaries on his campaigns would undoubtedly 
be highly interesting and instructive to future 
generations. The conduct of the first campaign 
in compelling the British troops to abandon Bos- 
ton, by a bloodless victory, will merit a minute 
narration. But a volume would scarcely contain 
the mortifications he experienced, and the hazards 
to which he was exposed, in 1776 and 1777, in 
contending against the prowess of Britain, with 
an inadequate force. His good destiny and con- 
summate prudence, prevented want of success 
from producing want of confidence on the part 
of the public ; for want of success is apt to lead 
to the adoption of pernicious counsels, through 
the levity of the people, or the ambition of their 
demagogues. Shortly after this period, sprang 
up the only cabal that ever existed during his 
public life, to rob him of his reputation and 
command. It proved as impotent in effect, as 
it was audacious in design. In the three suc- 


S TATES. 

ceeding years the germ of discipline unfolded ; 
and the sources of America having been called 
into co-operation with the land and naval armies 
of France, produced the results of the campaign 
of 1781. From this time the gloom began to 
disappear from the political horizon, and the 
a flairs of the Union proceeded in a meliorating 
train, till a peace was negociated by the ambas- 
sadors in Europe in 1783. 

“ No person,” says his biographer, u who had 
not the advantage of being present when General 
Washington received the intelligence of peace, 
and who did not accompany him to his domestic 
retirement, can describe the relief which that 
joyful event brought to his labouring mind, or 
the supreme satisfaction with which he withdrew 
to private life. From his triumphal entry into 
New York, upon the evacuation of that city by 
the British army, to his arrival at Mount Vernon, 
after the resignation of his commission to Con- 
gress, festive crowds impeded his passage through 
ail the populous towns; the devotion of a whole 
people pursued him with prayers to heaven for 
blessings on his head, while their gratitude 
sought the most expressive language of manifest- 
ing itself to him, as their common father and 
benefactor. When he became a private citizen, 
he had the unusual felicity to find that his native 
State was among the most zealous in doing jus- 
tice to his merits; and that stronger demonstra- 
tions of affectionate esteem (if possible) were 
given by the citizens of his neighbourhood, than 
by any other description of men on the continent. 
But he constantly declined accepting any com- 
pensation for his services, or provision for the 
augmented expenses which w ere incurred by him 
in consequence of his public employment, although 
proposals were made in the most delicate manner, 
especially by the States of Virginia and Penn- 
sylvania.” 

The happiness of private life he did not long 
enjoy. In 1789, by the unanimous voice of his 
countrymen, he was called to the high office of 
chief magistrate of the United States of America ; 
which office he sustained with considerable dig- 
nity, prudence, and ability, till 1796, when he 
refused to stand the election, and was succeeded 
by Mr. Adams. 

But, to return to the history of the campaign, 
General Washington, w ith other officers appointed 
by Congress, arrived at Cambridge, and took 
command of the American army in July, 1775. 
From this time, the affairs of America began to 
assume the appearance of a regular and general 
opposition to the forces of Great Britain.] 


I0:&gt; 


UNITED STATES. 


[In autumn, a body of troops, under the com- 
mand of General Montgomery, besieged and took 
the garrison at St. John’s, which commands the 
entrance into Canada. The prisoners amounted 
to about 700. General Montgomery pursued his 
success, and took Montreal ; and designed to push 
his victories to Quebec. 

A body of troops, commanded by General 
Arnold, was ordered to march to Canada by the 
river Kennebeck, and through the wilderness. 
After suffering every hardship, and the most dis- 
tressing hunger, they arrived in Canada, and 
were joined by General Montgomery, before 
Quebec. This city, which was commanded by 
Governor Carleton, was immediately besieged ; 
but there being little hope of taking the town by 
a siege, it was determined to storm it. 

The garrison of Quebec, at this time, consisted 
of about 1,520 men, of which 800 were militia. 
The American army consisted of 800 men. Ge- 
neral Montgomery having divided his forces 
into four detachments, ordered two feints to be 
made against the upper town, one by Colonel 
Livingston, at the head of the Canadians, against 
St. John’s Gate; the other by Major Brown 
against Cape Diamond; reserving to himself and 
Colonel Arnold, the two principal attacks against 
the lower town. At five o’clock in the morning 
General Montgomery advanced against the lower 
town; he passed the first barrier, and was just 
opening to attack the second, when he was killed, 
together with his aid-de-camp, Captain M‘Pher- 
son. The dispersion of the Americans immedi- 
ately ensued, and Colonel Campbell, on whom 
the command devolved, was obliged to make 
the best retreat he was able. In the mean time 
Colonel Arnold, with 350 men, made a successful 
attack on another part of the town. In the at- 
tack of the first battery, Colonel Arnold was 
wounded, and was obliged to be carried off 
the field of battle. His party, however, com- 
manded by Captain Morgan of Virginia, pro- 
ceeded and entered the town; but not being- 
joined by the other parties, was obliged to sur- 
render to superior force. 

The loss of the Americans in killed and 
wounded was about 100, and 300 were taken 
prisoners. Historians must do justice to the 
bravery as well of the pi-ovincial as of the British 
troops on this occasion. 

After the defeat, Colonel Arnold, who now 
commanded the troops, continued some months 
before Quebec, although his troops were reduced 
in numbers, and suffered incredibly from cold and 
sickness. 


The death of General Montgomery was greatly 
and sincerely regretted on both sides. u His 
many amiable qualities had procured him an 
uncommon share of private affection, and his 
great abilities, an equal proportion of public 
esteem.” His name was mentioned in parlia- 
ment with singular respect : the minister himself 
acknowledged his worth, while he reprobated the 
cause in which he fell. He concluded an invo- 
luntary panegyric, by saying, u Curse on his vir- 
tues, they have undone his country.” 

He was descended from a respectable family in 
the n. of Ireland, and was born in the year 1737. 
His attachment to liberty was innate, and matured 
by a fine education and an excellent understand- 
ing. Having married a wife, and purchased an 
estate in New York, he was, from these circum- 
stances, as well as from his natural love of free- 
dom, and from a conviction of the justness of such 
a cause, induced to consider himself as an Ameri- 
can. From principle, he early embarked in her 
cause, and quitted the sweets of easy fortune, the 
enjoyment of a loved and philosophical rural 
life, with the highest domestic felicity, to take an 
active share in all the hardships and dangers that 
attend the soldier’s life. Before he came over to 
America, he had been an officer in the service of 
England, and had successfully fought her battles 
with the immortal Wolfe at Quebec, in the w ar 
1756 ; and it is something extraordinary that he 
should have met with defeat and death on the 
very spot where he had once been victorious, and 
from the very standards under which he had 
conquered. 

About this time, the large and flourishing town 
of Norfolk in Virginia, having refused to supply 
his Majesty’s ships with provisions, on the requi- 
sition of the governor, Lord Dunmore, was, by his 
order, reduced to ashes ; and the same fate shortly 
after awaited Falmouth, a considerable town in 
the province of Main in Massachusetts. 

General Gage went to England in September, 
and w as succeeded in the command by General 
Howe. 

The British government entered into treaties 
Avith some of the German princes for about 14 
thousand men, who were to be sent to America 
the next year, to assist in subduing the colonies. 
The parliament also passed an act, forbidding all 
intercourse with America ; and while they re- 
pealed the Boston port and fishery bills, they de- 
clared all American property on the high seas, 
forfeited to the captors. 

Measures were taken to annoy the British 
party in Boston ; for this purpose, batteries were] 


103 


UNITED STATES. 


[opened on several hills, from whence shot and 
bombs were thrown into the town. The batte- 
ries which were opened on Dorchester Point had 
great effect, and eventually obliged General 
Howe to abandon the town. In March 1776 the 
British troops embarked for Halifax, and General 
Washington entered Boston in triumph. 

In the ensuing summer, a small squadron of 
ships, commanded by Sir Peter Parker, and a 
body of troops under the Generals Clinton and 
Cornwallis, attempted to take Charleston, the 
capital of S. Carolina. The ships made a gallant 
attack upon the fort on Sullivan’s Island, but 
meeting with a strong repulse, the expedition 
was obliged to be abandoned. 

In July, Congress published their declaration 
of independence, which separated America from 
Great Britain. This great event took place 284 
years after the discovery of America by Columbus 
— 166 from the first effectual settlement in Vir- 
ginia, and 156 from the first settlement of Ply- 
mouth in Massachusetts, which were the earliest 
English settlements in America. 

Just after this declaration, General Howe, 
with a powerful force, arrived near New York, 
and landed his troops on Staten Island. General 
Washington was in New York with about 13,000 
men, who were encamped either in the city or 
the neighbouring fortifications. 

The operations of the British began by the 
action on Long Island in the month of August. 
The American Generals Sullivan and Lord Ster- 
ling, with a large body of men, were made pri- 
soners. The night after the engagement, a re- 
treat was ordered, and executed with such silence 
that the Americans left the island without alarm- 
ing their enemies, and without loss. 

In September, the city of New York was taken 
by the British. 

In November, Fort Washington on York 
Island was taken, and more than 2,000 Americans 
made prisoners. Fort Lee, opposite to Fort 
Washington, on the Jersey shore, was soon after 
taken, but the garrison escaped. 

About the same time, General Clinton was 
sent with a body of troops to take possession of 
Rhode Island, and succeeded. In addition to all 
these losses and defeats, the American army suf- 
fered by desertion, and more by sickness, which 
was epidemic and very mortal. 

The northern army at Ticonderoga was in a 
disagreeable situation, particularly after the bat- 
tle on Lake Champlain, in which the American 
force, consisting of a few light vessels, under 
the command of Generals Arnold and Water- 
bary, was totally dispersed. But General Carle- 


ton, not thinking it prudent to follow up his vic- 
tory, landed at Crown Point, reconnoitered the 
posts at Ticonderoga and Mount Independence, 
and returned to winter quarters in Canada. 

The American army might now be said to be 
no more. All that now remained of an army, 
which, at the opening of the campaign, amounted 
to at least 25,000 men, did not now exceed 3,000. 
The term of their engagements being expired, 
they returned in large bodies to their families and 
friends ; the few, who, from personal attach- 
ment, local circumstances, or superior perseve- 
rance and bravery, continued with the Generals 
Washington and Lee, were too inconsiderable to 
appear formidable in the view of a powerful and 
victorious enemy. 

In this alarming and critical situation of 
affairs, General Lee, through an imprudent care- 
lessness, which ill became a man in his important 
station, was captured by a party of British light 
horse, commanded by Colonel Harcourt. This 
circumstance gave a severe shock to the remain- 
ing hopes of the Americans, and rendered their 
situation truly distressing. 

While these things were transacting in New 
Jersey, General Washington, not discouraged 
by the loss of Genera] Lee, and anxious to take 
every advantage to raise the drooping spirits of 
his handful of men, had made a stand on the 
Pennsylvania side of the Delaware. He collected 
his scattered forces, called in the assistance of 
the Pennsylvania militia, and on the night of 
December 25, 1776, when the enemy were lulled 
into security by the idea of his weakness, and by 
the inclemency of the night, which was remark- 
ably boisterous, as well as by the fumes of a 
Christmas eve, he crossed the river, and, at the 
breaking of day, marched down to Trenton, and 
so completely surprised them, that the greater 
part of the detachment, which were stationed at 
this place, surrendered after a short resistance. 
The horsemen and a few others made their escape 
at the opposite end of the town. Upwards of 
900 Hessians were taken prisoners at this time. 

The success of this bold enterprise revived the 
desponding hopes of America. The loss of the 
Americans was, however, considerable ; and, 
amongst the rest, they had to deplore that of Ge- 
neral Mercer. 

The following year, 1777, was distinguished 
by very memorable events in favour of America. 
On the opening of the campaign, Governor 
Tyron was sent with a body of troops to destroy 
the stores at Danbury in Connecticut. This plan 
was executed, and the town mostly burnt. The 
British suffered in their retreat, but the Ameri-J 


104 UNITED 

[cans lost General Wooster, a brave and ex- 
perienced officer. 

General Prescot was taken from his quarters 
on Rhode Island, by a force under the command 
of Colonel Barton, and conveyed prisoner to the 
continent. 

General Burgoyne, who commanded the north- 
ern British army, took possession ofTiconderoga, 
after having driven the Americans from that post. 
He pushed his successes, crossed Lake George, 
and encamped upon the banks of the Hudson, 
near Saratoga. His progress, however, was 
checked by the defeat of Colonel Baum, near Ben- 
nington, in which the undisciplined militia, under 
General Stark, displayed great bravery, and cap- 
tured almost the whole detachment. The militia 
assembled from all parts of New England to slop 
the progress of General Burgoyne. 

These, witl* the regular troops, formed a re- 
spectable army, commanded by General Gates. 
After two severe actions, in which the Generals 
Lincoln and Arnold were wounded, General 
Burgoyne found himself surrounded by superior 
numbers, and after a most desperate and valiant 
conflict, was forced to surrender his whole army, 
amounting to 5,752 men, into the hands of the 
Americans. When General Burgoyne left Ca- 
nada, his army consisted of 10,000 men, toge- 
ther with a fine train of artillery. The above 
event, which happened on October 17, 1777, was 
made the most of by the provincials. It was 
blazoned forth in the most lively colours, and is 
by them considered to have been instrumental 
to laying the foundation for their treaty with 
France. 

But before these transactions, the main body of 
the British forces had embarked at New York, 
sailed up the Chesapeak, and landed at the head 
of Elk River. The army soon began their march 
for Philadelphia. General Washington had de- 
termined to oppose them, and for this purpose 
made a stand, tirst at Red Clay Creek, and then 
upon the heights near Brandywine Creek. Here 
the armies engaged, and the Americans were 
overpowered, and suffered great loss. The British 
soon pursued their march, and took possession 
of Philadelphia towards the close of September. 

Not long after, the two armies were again 
engaged at Germantown, and in the beginning of 
the action, the Americans had the advantage; 
but the fortune of the day was eventually turned 
in favour of the British. Both sides suffered 
considerable losses ; on the side of the Americans 
was General Nash. 

In an attack upon the forts at Mud Island and 
Bed Bank, the Hessians were unsuccessful, and 


STATES. 

their commander, Colonel Donop, killed. The 
British also lost the Augusta, a ship of the line. 
But the forts were afterwards taken, and the 
navigation of the Delaware opened. General 
Washington was reinforced with a part of the 
troops which had composed the northern army, 
under General Gates ; and both armies retired 
to winter quarters. 

In October, the same month in which General 
Burgoyne was taken at Saratoga, General V aughan, 
with a small fleet, sailed up Hudson’s River, and 
burnt Kingston, a beautiful Dutch settlement on 
the w. side of the river. 

The beginning of the next year, 1778, was dis- 
tinguished by a treaty of alliance between France 
and America ; by which the latter obtained a 
powerful ally. When the English ministry were 
informed that this treaty was on foot, they dis- 
patched commissioners to America, to attempt a 
reconciliation. But America would not now 
accept their offers. Early in the spring, Count 
d’Estaing, with a fleet of 15 sail of the line, 
was sent by the court of France to assist America. 

General Howe left the army, and returned to 
England ; the command then devolved upon Sir 
Henry Clinton. 

In June the British army left Philadelphia, and 
marched for New York ; on their march they 
met, as was natural, with much annoyance from 
the Americans : but at Monmouth a very regular 
action took place between part of the armies ; 
when the latter were repulsed with great loss. 
General Lee, for his misconduct that day, was 
suspended, and was never afterwards permitted 
to join the army. 

General Lee’s conduct, at several times before 
this, had been very suspicious. In December, 
1776, he lay at Chatham, about 11 miles from 
Elizabeth Town, with a brigade of troops, when 
a great quantity of baggage was stored at Eliza- 
beth Town, under a guard of only 500 Hessians. 
General Lee was apprised of this, and might 
have surprised the guard and taken the bag- 
gage ; but he neglected the opportunity, and 
after several marches and counter-marches be- 
tween Troy, Chatham, and Morris Town, he 
took up his quarters at or near White’s tavern, 
where he was surprised and taken by a party of 
the British horse. He was heard to say, repeat- 
edly, that General Washington would ruin a fine 
army. It was suspected that he had designs to 
supplant the general, and his friends attempted 
to place him at the head of the army. General 
Washington’s prudent delays and cautious move- 
ments afforded General Lee’s friends many oppor- 
tunities to spread reports unfavourable to his] 


U IN 1 T E 1) S T A T E S. 


105 


( character. It was insinuated with some success, 
that General Washington wanted courage and 
abilities. Reports of this kind, at one time, ren- 
dered General Lee very popular, and, it is sup- 
posed, he wished to frustrate General Washing- 
ton’s plans, in order to increase the suspicions 
already entertained of his generalship, and turn 
the public clamour in his own favour. His con- 
duct at Monmouth was, by some, supposed to 
have proceeded from such a design ; for he com- 
manded the flower of the American army, and was 
not destitute of courage. 

In August, General Sullivan, with a large 
body of troops, attempted to take possession of 
Rhode Island, but did not succeed. Soon after, 
the stores and shipping at Bedford, in Massachu- 
setts, were burnt by a party of the British troops. 
The same year, Savannah, the capital of Georgia, 
was taken by the British, under the command of 
Colonel Campbell. 

In the following year, 1779, General Lincoln 
was appointed to the command of the southern 
army. 

Governor Try on and Sir George Collier made 
an incursion into Connecticut, and burnt the 
towns of Fairfield and Norwalk. But the Ameri- 
can arms were crowned with success in a bold 
attack upon Stoney Point, which was surprised 
and taken by General Wayne in the night of July 
15, 1779. Five hundred men were made prisoners, 
with little loss on either side. 

A party of British forces attempted this sum- 
mer to build a fort on Penobscot river, for the 
purpose of cutting timber in the neighbouring 
forest. A plan was laid in Massachusetts to dis- 
lodge them, and a considerable fleet collected for 
the purpose ; but the plan failed of success, and 
the whole marine force fell into the hands of the 
British, except some vessels which were burnt by 
the Americans themselves. 

In October, General Lincoln and Count d’Es- 
taing made an assault upon Savannah ; but they 
were repulsed with considerable loss. In this 
action, the celebrated Polish Count Pulaski, who 
had acquired the reputation of a brave soldier, 
was mortally wounded. 

In this summer General Sullivan marched with 
a body of troops into the Indian country, in the 
w. part of the New York State, and burnt and 
destroyed all their provisions and settlements 
that fell in their way. 

On the opening of the campaign the next year, 
1780, the British troops left Rhode Island. An 
expedition, under General Clinton and Lord 
Cornwallis, was undertaken against Charleston, 

von. v. 


S. Carolina, where General Lincoln commanded. 
This town, after a close siege of about six weeks, 
was surrendered to the British commander ; and 
General Lincoln, and the whole American garri- 
son, were made prisoners. 

General Gates was appointed to the command 
in the s. department, and another army collected. 
In August, Lord Cornwallis attacked the Ameri- 
can troops at Camden, in S. Carolina, and routed 
them with considerable loss. He afterwards 
marched through the Southern States, and sup- 
posed them entirely subdued. 

The same summer the British troops made fre- 
quent incursions from New York into the Jer- 
seys, ravaging and plundering the country. 

In July a French fleet, under Monsieur de 
Ternay, with a body of land forces, commanded 
by Count de Rochambeau, ai rived at Rhode 
Island, to the great joy of the Americans. 

This year was also distinguished by the trea- 
chery of General Arnold. General Washington 
having some business to transact at Weathers- 
field, in Connecticut, left Arnold to command the 
important post of W. Point, which guards a pass 
in Hudson’s river, about 60 miles from New 
York. Arnold’s conduct in the city of Philadel- 
phia, the preceding winter, had been censured ; 
and the treatment he received, in consequence, 
had given him offence. 

He determined to take revenge, and, for this 
purpose, he entered into a negociation with Sir 
Henry Clinton to deliver W. Point and the army 
into the hands of the British. While General 
Washington was absent, he dismounted the can- 
non in some of the forts, and took other steps to 
render the taking of the post easy for the enemy. 

The plan was, however, wholly defeated. 
Major Andre, adjutant-general in the British 
army, aid-de-camp to General Clinton, a brave 
officer, who had been sent up the river as a spy, 
to concert the plan of operations with Arnold, 
was taken, condemned by a court-martial, and 
executed. Arnold made his escape, by getting- 
on board the Vulture, a British vessel which lay 
in the river. General Washington arrived in 
camp just after Arnold made his escape, and re- 
stored order in the garrison. 

After the defeat of General Gates, in Carolina, 
General Greene was appointed to command in 
the southern department. From this period, 
things in that quarter wore a more favourable 
aspect. Colonel Tarleton, the active commander 
of the British legion, was defeated by General 
Morgan, the commander of the riflemen. 

After a variety of movements the two armies] 

p 


106 


UNITED 8 T A T E S. 


[met at Guildford, in Carolina. Here was one of 
the best fought actions during the war. General 
Greene and Lord Cornwallis exerted themselves 
at the head of their respective armies ; and al- 
though the Americans were obliged to retire from 
the field, jet the British army suffered an im- 
mense loss, and could not pursue the victory. 
The action happened March 15, 1781. 

In the spring, General Arnold, who was made 
a brigadier-general in the British service, with a 
small number of troops sailed for Virginia, and 
plundered the country. This called the attention 
of the French fleet to that quarter, and a naval 
engagement took place between the English and 
French, in which some of the English ships were 
much damaged, and one entirely disabled. 

After the battle of Guildford General Greene 
moved towards S. Carolina to drive the British 
from their posts in that State. Here Lord Raw- 
don obtained an inconsiderable advantage over 
the Americans, near Camden. But General 
Greene more than recovered this disadvantage, 
by a successful action at the Eutaw Springs ; 
where General Marian distinguished himself, and 
Colonel Washington was wounded and taken 
prisoner. 

Lord Cornwallis, finding General Greene suc- 
cessful in Carolina, marched to Virginia, col- 
lected his forces, and fortified himself in York 
Town. In the meantime Arnold made an in- 
cursion into Connecticut, burnt a part of New 
London, took Fort Griswold by storm, and put 
the garrison to the sword. The garrison con- 
sisted chiefly of men collected from the little 
town of Groton. The attack was most violent ; 
and in one hour almost all its heads of families 
were corpses. Colonel Ledyard, who commanded 
the fort, was slain with his own sword after he 
had surrendered. 

The Marquis de la Fayette, a brave and gene- 
rous nobleman, had been dispatched with about 
2000 light infantry from the main army, to watch 
the motions of Lord Cornwallis in Virginia. He 
prosecuted this expedition with the greatest mili- 
tary ability. Although his force was much in- 
ferior to that of the enemy, he obliged them 
to leave Richmond and Williamsburgh, and to 
seek protection under their shipping. 

About the last of August Count de Grasse ar- 
rived in the Chesapeake, and blocked up the Bri- 
tish troops at York-town. Admiral Greaves, 
with a British fleet, appeared off the Capes, and 
an action succeeded; but it was not decisive. 

General Washington had before this time 
moved the main body of his army, together with 


the French troops, to the s . ; and as soon as he 
heard of the arrival of the French fleet in the 
Chesapeake, he made rapid marches to the head 
of Elk, where embarking, the troops soon arrived 
at York-town. 

A close siege immediately commenced, and 
was carried on with such vigour, by the combined 
forces of America and France, that Lord Corn- 
wallis was obliged to surrender. This event, 
which took place October 19, 1781, decided the 
contest in favour of America, and laid the foun- 
dation of a general peace. 

A few months after the surrender of Cornwallis, 
the British evacuated all their posts in S. Caro- 
lina and Georgia, and retired to the main army 
in New York. 

The next spring, 1782, Sir Guy Carleton ar- 
rived in New York, and took the command of 
the British army in America : immediately on 
his arrival, he acquainted General Washington 
and Congress that negociations for peace had 
commenced at Paris. 

On November 30, 1782, the provisional arti- 
cles of peace and reconciliation, between Great 
Britain and the American States, were signed at 
Paris ; by which Great Britain acknowledged 
the independence and sovereignty of the United 
States of America. These articles were ratified 
by a definitive treaty, September 3, 1783. This 
peace was negociated on the part of Great Bri- 
tain by Mr. Oswald, and the definitive treaty was 
signed by Mr. Hartley ; and on the part of the 
United States by John Adams, John Jay, and 
Benjamin Franklin, Esqrs. The characters of 
these men having been such as to excite much 
interest, a short sketch of them will be here given. 

Mr. Adams was a descendent of one of the first 
families that founded the colony of Massachusetts 
Bay, in 1630. He was born at Braintree, in 
Massachusetts, October 19, 1735. 

Mr. John Jay was a descendent of one of the 
French Protestant emigrants, who came to Ame- 
rica, in consequence of the revocation of the 
Edict of Nantz, in 1685. It is remarkable that 
among the descendants of these emigrants, some 
of whom settled in New York and some in Bos- 
ton, there have been the following eminent cha- 
racters : James Bowdoin, Esq. who had been 
Governor of the Commonwealth of Massachu- 
setts, and, at his death, was President of the 
American Academy of Arts and Sciences ; Henry 
Laurens, Esq. who has been President of Con- 
gress and Ambassador to a foreign court ; Elias 
Boudinot, Esq. who has been President of Con- 
gress ; and John Jay, Esq. who has been Presi-] 


UNITED STATES. 


ior 


[dent of Congress, Ambassador to a foreign court, 
and Chief Justice of the American States. 

Dr. Franklin was born in Boston, January 6, 
1706, O. S. He was educated to the business of 
printing. In the first 24 years of his life he 
passed through an uncommon variety of scenes, 
which he improved to valuable purposes. He 
early discovered a strong and distinguishing mind, 
and a fertile and inventive genius. About the 
age of 24 he married Miss Read of Philadelphia, 
where he had established himself as a printer. 
In 1736 he was chosen Clerk of the General As- 
sembly of Pennsylvania ; and the year following 
was appointed Postmaster in Philadelphia. In 
1744, he broached the idea of the A merican Phi- 
losophical Society, and had the pleasure to find 
it meet with all the success he could desire. He 
was the principal instrument also in planning and 
establishing the Academy of Philadelphia, from 
which have sprung the College and University of 
that city. 

In 1747, and for 20 years after, successively, 
he was chosen a representative to the Assembly 
for the city of Philadelphia ; in which situation 
he was highly respected and singularly useful. 
He was appointed joint Postmaster-general with 
Mr. William Hunter in 1753. He was greatly 
instrumental in carrying into effect Dr. Bond’s 
plan for an hospital in Philadelphia, the advan- 
tages of which have been extensively experienced. 
By this time his character as a philosopher was 
known in Europe as well as America ; and he 
received the honorary degree of Master of Arts 
from Yale and Harvard Colleges. 

In 1754 he was appointed one of the Commis- 
sioners, from Pennsylvania, to attend the cele- 
brated Albany Congress, in order to devise a plan 
for defending the country against the French. 
Here he drew up his “ Albany Plan of Union,” 
which was unanimously agreed to by Congress ; 
but, though wisely adapted to preserve the har- 
mony between Great Britain and her colonies, 
was ultimately rejected. 

In 1757 the Assembly of Pennsylvania, indig- 
nant at the obstinacy of the governors who were 
shackled with instructions not to assent to any 
tax bill, that did not exempt the estates of the 
proprietors from contributing to the public ser- 
vice, determined to send an agent to London, to 
petition the King for redress. Mr. Franklin was 
appointed for this purpose, and ably negociated 
the business ; for which, on his return to Phila- 
delphia, he received the thanks of the General 
Assembly. 

His distinguished literary reputation procured 


him, while in England, the honorary title of Doc' 
tor of Laws from Edinburgh and Oxford Univer- 
sities. 

Some time after this he was again sent to Eng- 
land, by the Assembly of Pennsylvania, with a 
petition to have a new form of government es- 
tablished, and to be taken under the royal pro- 
tection. Before his return to America he tra- 
velled, in 1766, into Germany, and, in 1767, into 
France; and wherever he appeared he was re- 
ceived with the highest respect and veneration. 
His endeavours to prevent the enaction of the 
stamp act, the ability with which he sustained his 
examination at the bar of the House of Commons, 
his obtaining and forwarding to Boston the in- 
sidious letters of Governor Hutchinson, pro- 
cured for him, on his return to America, the most 
unbounded applause of his countrymen. He 
was soon elected a member of Congress ; and, in 
1776, was chosen with John Adams and Edward 
Rutledge, Esqrs. a Committee of Congress to 
wait on Lord Howe, and to inquire into the ex- 
tent of his powers to treat of the restoration of 
peace. Lord Howe having expressed his con- 
cern at being obliged to distress those whom he 
so much regarded, Dr. Franklin assured him that 
the Americans, out of reciprocal regard, would 
endeavour to lessen, as much as possible, the 
pain he might feel on their account, by taking 
the utmost care of themselves. 

In 1776 a convention was called, in Pennsyl- 
vania, to establish a new form of government. 
Dr. Franklin was appointed President. The 
latter end of the same year he was sent to France, 
where, with the assistance of Mr. Silas Dean, he 
negociated a treaty with France, Feb. 1778. 

We have already mentioned his being one of 
the three commissioners who negociated the peace 
of 1783. He returned to America in 1785, and 
was chosen President of the Supreme Executive 
Council of Pennsylvania, and in 1787 was ap- 
pointed a delegate from that State to the august 
body which formed the present frame of govern- 
ment of the United States. 

On April 17, 1790, after a long and painful 
illness, he resigned a life which had been singu- 
larly devoted to the welfare of his country and 
the good of mankind. 

Among the many testimonies of respect paid 
to his memory, the Congress of the United States, 
and the National Assembly of France, went into 
mourning on his death. 

Dr. Franklin possessed an original genius. 
The faculties of his mind qualified him to pene- 
trate into every science ; and his singular and] 

p 2 


S 08 


U N i T £ D 8 T A T E S. 


[unremitting' diligence left no field of knowledge 
unexplored. He was eminently distinguished as 
a politician and a scholar, and if possible more 
so as a man and a citizen. He was great in com- 
mon things, and his life was useful beyond most 
men that have lived. The whole tenor of his life 
was a perpetual lecture against the idle, the ex- 
travagant, and the proud, it was his principal 
aim to inspire mankind with a love of industry, 
temperance, and frugality. By a judicious divi- 
sion of time, he acquired the art of doing every 
thing to advantage. In whatever situation he 
was placed, by chance or design, he extracted 
something useful for himself or others. His 
manners were easy and accommodating, and his 
address winning and respectful. All who knew 
him speak of him as an agreeable man ; and all 
who have heard of him applaud him as a very 
useful one. A man so wise and so amiable, could 
not hut have many admirers and many friends. 
(American Museum, vol. viii.) 

But, to return to our history, we find that, 
according to the report of the committee ap- 
pointed for that purpose, the foreign debt of the 
United States, incurred by the war, amounted to 
7,885,085 dollars, and the domestic debt to 
34,115,290, total at 4s. 6d. each, equal to 

9,450,084 sterling, the interest of which, at 6 
per cent, is ^.567,005. But the cost to Great 
Britain is moderately computed at Jg. 115, 654, 914 
since January, 1775. As to the loss of men dur- 
ing the unhappy war, the States of America, ac- 
cording to authentic estimates, lost, by the sword 
and in prison, near 80,000 men ; and, by the 
British returns at New York, the number of sol- 
diers killed in the service amounted to 43,633. 

Such was the end of the contest between Great 
Britain and America. A contest by which the 
latter attained to an independent rank amongst 
the nations that may be productive of more im- 
portant consequences than may yet be foreseen ; 
and in which the former, happily for herself, was 
forced to relinquish a sovereignty that served 
only to depress her own internal industry, and 
retard her prosperity. She has, in the event, only 
suffered a diminution of an unwieldy empire, 
which has been more than compensated by an in- 
crease of population, commerce, revenues, and 
wealth. 

Holland acknowledged the independence of 
the United States, April 19, 1782; Sweden, Fe- 
bruary 5; Denmark, February 25; Spain, in 
March; and Russia, in July, 1783. 

No sooner was peace restored by the definitive 
treaty, and the British troops withdrawn from the 


country, than the United States began to expe- 
rience the defects of their general government. 
While an enemy was in the country, fear, which 
had first impelled the colonies to associate in 
mutual defence, continued to operate as a band 
of political union. It gave to the resolutions and 
recommendations of Congress the force of laws, 
and generally commanded a ready acquiescence 
on the part of the State legislatures. Articles of 
confederation and perpetual union had been 
framed in Congress, and submitted to the consi- 
deration of the States, in the year 1778. Some 
of the States immediately acceded to them ; but 
others, which had not unappropriated lands, he- 
sitated to subscribe a compact, which would give 
an advantage to the States which possessed large 
tracts of unlocated lands, and were thus capable 
of a great superiority in wealth and population. 
All objections, however, had been overcome, and, 
by the accession of Maryland in March, 1781, 
the articles of confederation were ratified, as the 
frame of government for the United States. 

These articles, however, were framed during 
the rage of war, when a principle of common 
safety supplied the place of a coercive power in 
government, by men who could have had no ex- 
perience in the art of governing an extensive 
country, and under circumstances the most criti- 
cal and embarrassing. To have offered to the 
people, at that time, a system of government 
armed with the powers necessary to regulate and 
controul the contending interests of 13 States, 
and the possession of millions of people, might 
have raised a jealousy between the States or in 
the minds of the people at large, that would have 
weakened the operations of war, and perhaps 
have rendered an union impracticable. Hence 
the numerous defects of the confederation. 

On the conclusion of peace these defects began 
to be felt. Each State assumed the right of dis- 
puting the propriety of the resolutions of Con- 
gress, and the interest of an individual State was 
placed in opposition to the common interest of 
the union. In addition to this source of division, 
a jealousy of the powers of Congress began to be 
excited in the minds of people. 

This jealousy of the privileges of freemen had 
been roused by the oppressive act of the British 
parliament ; and no sooner had the danger from 
this quarter ceased, than the fears of people 
changed their object, and were turned against 
their own rulers. 

In this situation there were not wanting men 
of industry and talents, who had been enemies to 
the revolution, and who embraced the opportu-] 


UNITED STATES. 


10.9 


[nity to multiply the apprehensions of people and 
increase the popular discontents. A remarkable 
instance of this happened in Connecticut. As 
soon as the tumults of war had subsided, an 
attempt was made to convince the people that 
the act of Congress, passed in 1778, granting to 
the officers of the army half-pay for life, was 
highly unjust and tyrannical ; and that it was but 
the first step towards the establishment of pen- 
sions and an uncontrolable despotism. The act 
of Congress passed in 1783, commuting half-pay 
for life for five years full pay, was designed to 
appease the apprehensions of people, and to con- 
vince them that this gratuity was intended merely 
to indemnify the officers for their losses by the 
depreciating of the paper currency, and not to 
establish a precedent for the granting of pensions. 
This act, however, did not satisfy the people, 
who supposed that the officers had been generally 
indemnified for the loss of their pay, by the grants 
made them, from time to time, by the legislatures 
of the several States. Besides, the act, while it 
gave five years full pay to the officers, allowed 
but one year’s pay to the privates ; a distinction 
which had great influence in exciting and con- 
tinuing the popular ferment, and one that turned 
a large share of the public rage against the offi- 
cers themselves. 

The moment an alarm was made respecting 
this act of Congress, the enemies of independence 
became active in blowing up the flame, by spread- 
ing reports unfavourable to the general govern- 
ment, and tending to create public dissensions. 
Newspapers, in some parts of the country, were 
filled with inflammatory publications ; while false 
reports and groundless insinuations were indus- 
triously circulated to the prejudice of Congress 
and the officers of the late army. Among a peo- 
ple feelingly alive to every thing that could affect 
the rights for which they had been contending, 
these reports could not fail of having a powerful 
effect ; the clamour soon became general ; the 
officers of the army, it was believed, had at- 
tempted to raise their fortunes on the distresses 
of their fellow-citizens, and Congress become the 
tyrants of their country. 

Connecticut was the seat of this uneasiness ; 
although other States were much agitated on the 
occasion. But the inhabitants of that State, ac- 
customed to order and a due subordination to the 
laws, did not proceed to outrages ; they took 
their usual mode of collecting the sense of the 
State— assembled in town meetings — appointed 
committees to meet in convention, and consult 
what measures should be adopted to procure a 


redress of their grievances. In this convention, 
which was held at Middletown, some nugatory 
resolves were passed, expressing the disapproba- 
tion of the half-pay act, and the subsequent com- 
mutation of the grant for five years whole pay. 
The same spirit also discovered itself in the as- 
sembly, at their October session, 1783. A re- 
monstrance against the acts in favour of the 
officers was framed in the House of Representa- 
tives, and, notwithstanding the Upper House 
refused to concur in the measure, it was sent to 
Con gress. 

During this situation of affairs, the public 
odium against the officers was augmented by 
another circumstance. The officers, just before 
the disbanding of the army, had formed a society, 
called by the name of the Cincinnati, after the 
Roman Dictator, Cincinnatus. 

Whatever were the real views of the framers 
of this institution, its design was generally under- 
stood to be harmless and honourable. The os- 
tensible views of the society could not however 
screen it from popular jealousy. A spirited 
pamphlet appeared in S. Carolina, the avowed 
production of Mr. Burke, one of the judges of 
the supreme court in that State, in which the 
author attempted to prove that the principles, on 
which the society was formed, would, in process 
of time, originate and establish an order of nobi- 
lity in the country, which would be repugnant to 
the genius of republican governments, and dan- 
gerous to liberty. This pamphlet appeared in 
Connecticut, during the commotions raised by the 
half-pay and commutation acts, and contributed 
not a little to spread the flame of opposition. 

Notwithstanding the discontents of the people 
were general, and ready to burst forth in sedi- 
tion, yet men of in formal ion, viz. the officers of 
government, the clergy, and persons of liberal 
education, were mostly opposed to the uncon- 
stitutional steps taken by the committees and 
convention at Middletown. They supported the 
propriety of the measures of Congress, both by 
conversation and writing, proved that such grants 
to the army were necessary to keep the troops 
together, and that the expense would not be 
enormous nor oppressive. During the close of 
the year 1783, every possible exertion was made 
to enlighten the people, and such was the effect 
of the arguments used by the minority ; that in 
the beginning of the following year, the oppo- 
sition subsided, the committees were dismissed, 
and tranquillity restored to the State. In May, 
the legislature were able to carry several mea- 
sures which had before been extremely unpo-] 


no 


UNITED STATES. 


f pular. An act was passed granting the impost 
of five per cent, to Congress ; another giving 
great encouragement to commerce ; and several 
towns were incorporated with extensive privi- 
leges, for the purpose of regulating the exports 
of the State, and facilitating the collection of 
debts. 

The opposition to the congressional acts in 
favour of their officers, and to the order of the 
Cincinnati, did not rise to the same pitch in the 
other States as in Connecticut ; yet it produced 
much disturbance in Massachusetts, and some 
others. Jealousy of power had been universally 
spread among the people of the United States. 
The destruction of the old forms of govern- 
ments, and the licentiousness of war, had, in a 
great measure, broken their habits of obedience ; 
their passions had been inflamed by the cry of 
despotism ; and like centinels, who have been 
suddenly surprized by the approach of an enemy, 
the rustling of a leaf was sufficient to give them 
an alarm. This spirit of jealousy operated with 
other causes to relax the energy of federal ope- 
rations. 

During the war, vast sums of paper currency 
had been emitted by Congress, and large quan- 
tities of specie had been introduced, towards the 
close of the war, by the French army, and the 
Spanish trade. This plenty of money enabled 
the States to comply with the first requisitions of 
Congress ; so that during two or three years, 
the federal treasury was, in some measure, sup- 
plied. But when the danger of war had ceased, 
and the vast importations of foreign goods had 
lessened the quantity of circulating specie, the 
States began to be very remiss in furnishing 
their proportion of monies. The annihilation 
of the credit of the paper bills had totally 
stopped their circulation, and the specie was 
leaving the country in cargoes for remittances to 
Great Britain; still the luxurious habits of the 
people, contracted during the war, called for 
new supplies of goods, and private gratification 
seconded the narrow policy of state interest in 
defeating the operations of the general govern- 
ment. 

Thus the revenues of Congress were annually 
diminishing ; some of the States wholly neglect- 
ing to make provision for paying the interest of 
the national debt ; others making but a partial 
provision, until the scanty supplies received from 
a few of the richest States, would hardly satisfy 
the demands of the civil list. 

This weakness of the federal government, in 
conjunction with the flood of certificates or public 


securities, which Congress could neither fund 
nor pay, occasioned them to depreciate to a very 
inconsiderable value. The officers and soldiers 
of the late army, and those who furnished sup- 
plies for public exigencies, were obliged to re- 
ceive for wages these certificates, or promissory 
notes, which passed at a fifth, an eighth, or a 
tenth of their nominal value ; being thus de- 
prived at once of the greatest part of the reward 
due for their services. Some indeed profited by 
speculations in these evidences of the public 
debt; but such as were under a necessity of 
parting with them, were robbed of that support 
which they had a right to expect and demand 
from their countrymen. 

Pennsylvania indeed made a provision for 
paying the interest of her debt, both state and 
federal; assuming t, her supposed proportion of 
the continental debt, and giving the creditors of 
her own State notes in exchange for those of the 
United States. The resources of that State are 
immense, but she was not able to make punctual 
payments, even in a depreciated paper cur- 
rency. 

Massachusetts, in her zeal to comply fully 
with the requisitions of Congress, and satisfy 
the demands of her own creditors, laid a heavy 
tax upon the people. This was the immediate 
cause of the rebellion in that State, in 1786. 
But a heavy debt lying on the State added to 
burdens of the same nature, upon almost every 
corporation within it ; a decline, or rather an 
extinction of public credit ; a relaxation and 
corruption of manners, and a free use of foreign 
luxuries ; a decay of trade and manufactures, 
with a prevailing scarcity of money ; and, above 
all, individuals involved in debt to each other. 
These were the real, though more remote causes 
of the insurrection. It was the tax which the 
people were required to pay, that caused them to 
feel the evils which we have enumerated — this 
called forth all their other grievances ; and the 
first act of violence committed was the burning 
or destroying of the tax bill. This sedition threw 
the State into a convulsion which lasted about a 
year; courts of justice were violently obstructed; 
the collection of debts was suspended; and a 
body of armed troops, under the command of 
General Lincoln, was employed during the win- 
ter of 1786, to disperse the insurgents. Yet so 
numerous were the latter in the counties of 
Worcester, Hampshire, and Berkshire, and so 
obstinately combined to the execution of law by 
force, that the governor and council of the State 
thought proper not to intrust General LincolnJ 


UNITED 


STATES. ill 


[with military powers, except to act on the de- 
fensive, and to repel force with force, in case 
the insurgents should attack him. The leaders 
of the rebels, however, were not men of talents ; 
they were desperate, but without fortitude ; and 
even while they were supported with a superior 
force, they appeai'ed to be impressed with that 
consciousness of guilt, which awes the most 
daring wretch, and makes him shrink from his 
purpose. This appears by the conduct of a 
large party of the rebels before the magazine at 
Springfield, where General Shepard, with a small 
guard, was stationed to protect the continental 
stores. The insurgents appeared upon the 
plain, with a vast superiority of numbers, but a 
few shot from the artillery made the multitude 
retreat in disorder with the loss of four men. 
This spirited conduct of General Shepard, with 
the industry, perseverance, and prudent firmness 
of General Lincoln, dispersed the rebels — drove 
the leaders from the State, and restored tran- 
quillity. An act of indemnity was passed in the 
legislature for all the insurgents, except a few 
of the leaders, on condition they should become 
peaceable subjects, and take the oath of alle- 
giance. The leaders afterwards petitioned for 
pardon, which, from motives of policy, was 
granted by the legislature. See an elegant and 
impartial History of this Rebellion, by George 
Richards Minot, Esq. 

But the loss of public credit, popular dis- 
turbances, and insurrections, were not the only 
evils which were generated by the peculiar cir- 
cumstances of the times. The emissions of bills 
of credit and tender laws were added to the 
black catalogue of political disorders. 

The expedient of supplying the deficiencies of 
specie, by emissions of paper bills, was adopted 
very early in the colonies. The expedient was 
obvious, and produced good effects. In a new 
country, where population is rapid, and the 
value of lands increasing, the farmer finds an 
advantage in paying legal interest for money ; 
for if he can pay the interest by his profits, the 
increasing value of his lands will in a few years 
discharge the principal. 

In no colony was this advantage more sensibly 
experienced than in Pennsylvania. The emi- 
grations to that province were numerous — the 
natural population rapid — and these circum- 
stances combined, advanced the value of real 
property to an astonishing degree. As the first 
settlers there, as well as in other provinces, 
were poor, the purchase of a few foreign arti- 
cles drained them of specie. Indeed, for many 


years, the balance of trade must have necessarily 
been greatly against the colonies. 

But bills of credit, emitted by the State and 
loaned to the industrious inhabitants, supplied 
the want of specie, and enabled the farmer to 
purchase stock. These bills were generally a 
legal tender in all colonial or private contracts, 
and the sums issued did not generally exceed 
the quantity requisite for a medium of trade ; 
they retained their full nominal value in the pur- 
chase of commodities : but as they were not re- 
ceived by the British merchants, in payment of 
their goods, there was a great demand for specie 
and bills, which occasioned the latter at various 
times to appreciate. Thus was introduced a dif- 
ference between the English sterling money and 
the currencies of the colonies, which remains to 
this day. 

The advantages the colonies had derived from 
bills of credit, under the British government, 
suggested to Congress, in 1775, the idea of issu- 
ing bills for the purpose of carrying on the war ; 
and this was perhaps their only expedient. 
Money could not be raised by taxation — it could 
not be borrowed. The first emissions had no 
other effect upon the medium of commerce, than 
to drive the specie from circulation. But when 
the paper substituted for specie had, by repeated 
emissions, augmented the sum in circulation, 
much beyond the usual sum of specie, the bills 
began to lose their value. The depreciation 
continued in proportion to the sums emitted, 
until 70 and even 150 nominal paper dollars, 
were hardly an equivalent for one Spanish milled 
dollar. Still, from the year 1775 to 1781, this 
depreciating paper currency was almost the only 
medium of trade. It supplied the place of specie, 
and enabled Congress tosupportanumerousarmy ; 
until the sum in circulation amounted to 200 mil- 
lions of dollars. But about the year 1780, specie 
began to be plentiful, being introduced by the 
French army, a private trade with the Spanish 
islands, and an illicit intercourse with the Bri- 
tish garrison at New York. This circumstance 
accelerated the depreciation of paper bills, until 
their value had sunk almost to nothing. In 1781, 
the merchants and brokers in the Southern States, 
apprehensive of the approaching fate of the cur- 
rency, pushed immense quantities of it suddenly 
into New England — made vast purchases of 
goods in Boston — and instantly the bills vanished 
from circulation. 

The whole history of this continental paper is 
a history of public and private frauds. Old 
specie debts were often paid in a depreciated] 


112 


UNITED STATES. 


[currency — and even new contracts for a few 
weeks or days w ere often discharged with a small 
part of the value received. From this plenty 
and fluctuating state of the medium sprung hosts 
of speculators and itinerant traders, who left 
their honest occupations for the prospect of im- 
mense gains, in a fraudulent business, that de- 
pended on no fixed principles, and the profits of 
which could be reduced to no certain calcu- 
lations. 

T o increase these evils, a project was formed 
to fix the prices of articles, and restrain persons 
from giving or receiving more for any commodity 
than the price stated by authority. These regu- 
lating acts were reprobated by every man ac- 
quainted with commerce and finance ; as they 
were intended to prevent an effect without re- 
moving the cause. To attempt to fix the value 
of money, while streams of bills were incessantly 
flowing from the treasury of the United States, 
was as ridiculous as an attempt to restrain the 
rising of water in rivers amidst showers of 
rain. 

Notwithstanding all opposition, some States 
framed and attempted to enforce these regulating 
acts. The effect was, a momentary apparent 
stand in the price of articles innumerable acts 
of collusion and evasion among the dishonest ; 
numberless injuries done to the honest ; and 
finally, a total disregard of all such regulations, 
and the consequent contempt of laws, and the 
authority of the magistrate. 

During these fluctuations of business, occa- 
sioned by the variable value of money, people 
lost sight, in some measure, of the steady prin- 
ciples which had before governed their inter- 
course with each other. Speculation followed 
and relaxed the rigour of commericial obli- 
gations. 

Industry likewise had suffered by the flood of 
money which had deluged the States. The prices 
of produce had risen in proportion to the quan- 
tity of money in circulation, and the demand for 
the commodities of the country. This made the 
acquisition of money easy, and indolence and 
luxury, with their train of desolating conse- 
quences, spread themselves among all descrip- 
tions of people. 

But as soon as hostilities between Great Bri- 
tain and America were suspended, the scene was 
changed. The bills emitted by Congress had 
for some time ceased to circulate ; and the 
specie of the country was soon drained off 
to pay for foreign goods, the importations of 
which exceeded all calculations. Within two 


years from the close of the war, a scarcity of 
money was the general cry. The merchants 
found it impossible to collect their debts, and 
make punctual remittances to their creditors in 
Great Britain ; and the consumers were driven 
to the necessity of retrenching their superfluities 
in living, and of returning to their ancient habits 
of industry and (economy. 

This change was, however, progressive and 
slow. In many of the States which suffered by 
the numerous debts they had contracted, and 
by the distresses of war, the people called aloud 
for emissions of paper bills to supply the defi- 
ciency of a medium. The depreciation of the 
continental bills was a recent example of the ill 
effects of such an expedient, and the impossi- 
bility of supporting the credit of paper was 
urged by the opposers of the measure as a sub- 
stantial argument against adopting it. But no- 
thing would silence the popular clamour ; and 
many men of the first talents and eminence 
united their voices with that of the populace. 
Paper money had formerly maintained its credit, 
and been of singular utility : and past expe- 
rience, notwithstanding a change of circum- 
stances, was an argument in its favour that bore 
down all opposition. 

Pennsylvania, although one of the richest 
States in the union, was the first to emit bills of 
credit, as a substitute for specie. But the revo- 
lution had removed the necessity of it, at the 
same time that it had destroyed the means by 
which its former credit had been supported. 
Lands, at the close of the war, were not rising 
in value — bills on London could not so readily 
be purchased, as while the province was de- 
pendent on Great Britain — the State was split 
into parties, one of which attempted to defeat 
the measures most popular with the other — 
and the depreciation of continental bills, with 
the injuries which it had done to individuals, 
inspired a general distrust of all public pro- 
mises. 

Notwithstanding a part of the money was 
loaned on good landed security, and the faith of 
that wealthy State pledged for the redemption of 
the whole at its nominal value, yet the advan- 
tages of specie as a medium of commerce, espe- 
cially as an article of remittance to London, 
soon made a difference of ten per cent, between 
the bills of credit and specie. This difference 
may be considered rather as an appreciation of 
gold and silver, than a depreciation of paper ; 
but its effects, in a commercial state, must be 
highly prejudicial. It opens the door to frauds] 


UNITED STATES. 


113 


fof all kinds, and frauds are usually practised on 
the honest and unsuspecting, especially upon all 
classes of labourers. 

N; Carolina, S. Carolina, and Georgia, had 
recourse to the same wretched expedient to sup- 
ply themselves with money ; not reflecting that 
industry, frugality, and good commercial laws, 
are the only means of turning the balance of 
trade in favour of a country, and that this 
balance is the only permanent source of solid 
wealth and ready money. But the bills they 
emitted shared a worse fate than those of Penn- 
sylvania ; they expelled almost all the circulat- 
ing cash from the States ; they lost a great part 
of their nominal value, they impoverished the 
merchants, and embarrassed the planters. 

The State of Virginia tolerated a base prac- 
tice among the inhabitants of cutting dollars and 
smaller pieces of silver, in order to prevent it 
from leaving the State. This pernicious prac- 
tice prevailed also in Georgia. A dollar was 
usually cut in five pieces, and each passed for a 
quarter ; so that the man who cut it gained a 
quarter, or rather a fifth. 

Maryland escaped the calamity of a paper 
currency. The house of delegates brought for- 
ward a bill for the emission of bills of credit to 
a large amount ; but the Senate firmly and suc- 
cessfully resisted the pernicious scheme. The 
opposition between the two houses was violent 
and tumultuous ; it threatened the State with 
anarchy ; but the question was carried to the 
people, and the good sense of the Senate finally 
prevailed. 

New Jersey is situated between two of the 
largest commercial towns in America, and con- 
sequently drained of specie. This State also 
emitted a large sum in bills of credit, which 
served to pay the interest of the public debt; 
but the currency depreciated, as in other States. 

Rhode Island exhibited a melancholy proof 
of that licentiousness and anarchy which always 
folldws a relaxation of the moral principles. In 
a rage for supplying the State with money, and 
filling every man’s pocket without obliging him 
to earn it by his diligence, the legislature passed 
an act for making 100,000 pounds in bills; a sum 
much more than sufficient for a medium of trade 
in that State, even without any specie. The 
merchants in Newport and Providence opposed 
the act with firmness ; and their opposition 
added fresh vigour to the resolution of the as- 
sembly, and induced them to enforce the scheme 
by a legal tender of a most extraordinary na- 

VOL. V. 


ture. They passed an act, ordaining that if any 
creditor should refuse to take their bills, for any 
debt whatever, the debtor might lodge the sum 
due with a justice of the peace, who should give 
notice of it in the public papers ; and if the cre- 
ditor did not appear and receive the money 
within six months from the first notice, his debt 
should be forfeited. This act astonished all honest 
men ; and even the promoters of paper money- 
making in other States, and other principles, 
reprobated this act of Rhode Island, as wicked 
and oppressive. But the State was governed by 
faction. During the cry for paper money, a num- 
ber of boisterous, ignorant men, were elected 
into the legislature, from the smaller towns in 
the State. Finding themselves united with a 
majority in opinion, they formed and executed 
any plan their inclination suggested ; they op- 
posed every measure that was agreeable to the 
mercantile interest ; they not only made bad laws 
to suit their own wicked purposes, but appointed 
their own corrupt creatures to fill the judicial 
and executive departments. Their money de- 
preciated sufficiently to answer all their vile 
purposes in the discharge of debts — business 
almost totally ceased, all confidence was lost, the 
State was thrown into confusion at home, and 
was execrated abroad. 

Massachusetts Bay had the good fortune, amidst 
her political calamities, to prevent an emission 
of bills of credit. New Hampshire made no 
paper ; but in the distresses which followed her 
loss of business after the war, the legislature 
made horses, lumber, and most articles of pro- 
duce, a legal tender in the fulfilment of con- 
tracts It is doubtless unjust to oblige a creditor 
to receive any thing for his debt, which he had 
not in contemplation at the time of the contract. 
But as the commodities which were to be a tender 
by law, in New Hampshire, were of intrinsic 
value, bearing some proportion to the amount 
of the debt, the injustice of the law was less 
flagrant than that which enforced the tender of 
paper in Rhode Island. Indeed a similar law 
prevailed for some time in Massachusetts ; and 
in Connecticut it is optional with the creditor, 
either to imprison the debtor or take land on 
execution at a price to be fixed by three indif- 
ferent freeholders ; provided no other means of 
payment shall appear to satisfy the demand. It 
must not, however, be omitted, that while the 
most flourishing commercial States introduced a 
paper medium, to the great injury of honest 
men, a bill for an emission of paper in Connec-1 
Q 


114 


UNITED STATES. 


[ticut, where there was very little specie, could 
never command more than one-eighth of the 
votes ot the legislature. The movers of the bill 
hardly escaped ridicule ; so generally was the 
measure reprobated as a source of frauds and 
public mischief. 

The legislature of New York, a State that 
had the least necessity and apology for making 
paper money, as her commercial advantages 
always furnish her with specie sufficient for a 
medium, issued a large sum in bills of credit, 
which supported their value better than the cur- 
rency of any other State. Still the paper raised 
the value of specie, which is always in demand 
for exportation, and this difference of exchange 
between paper and specie ever exposes com- 
merce to most of the inconveniencies resulting 
from a depreciated medium. 

Such is the history of paper money thus far ; 
a miserable substitute for real coin, in a coun- 
try where the reins of government are too weak 
to compel the fulfilment of public engagements, 
and where all confidence in public faith is 
wanting. 

While the States were thus endeavouring to 
repair the loss of specie by empty promises, and 
to support their business by shadows, rather than 
by reality, the British ministry formed some com- 
mercial regulations that deprived them of the pro- 
fits of their trade to theWest Indies and Great Bri- 
tain. Heavy duties were laid upon such articles 
as were remitted to the London merchants for 
their goods, and such were the duties upon Ame- 
rican bottoms, that the States were almost 
wholly deprived of the carrying trade. A pro- 
hibition was laid upon the produce of the United 
States, shipped to the English West India 
Islands in American-built vessels, and in those 
manned by American seamen. These restric- 
tions fell heavy upon the Eastern States, which 
depended much upon ship-building for the support 
of their trade ; and they materially injured the 
business of the other States. 

Without a union that was able to form and 
execute a general system of commercial regula- 
tions, some of the States attempted to impose 
restraints upon the British trade that should in- 
demnify the merchant for the losses he had suf- 
fered, or induce the British ministry to enter into 
a commercial treaty, and relax the rigour of 
their navigation laws. These measures, how- 
ever, produced nothing but mischief. The States 
did not act in concert, and the restraints laid on 
the trade of one State operated to throw the 


business into the hands of its neighbour. Mas- 
sachusetts, in her zeal to counteract the effect of 
the English navigation laws, laid enormous du- 
ties upon British goods imported into that State; 
but the other States did not adopt a similar mea- 
sure ; and the loss of business soon obliged that 
State to repeal or suspend the law. Thus when 
Pennsylvania laid heavy duties on British goods, 
Delaware and New Jersey made a number of 
free ports to encourage the landing of goods 
within the limits of those States ; and the duties 
in Pennsylvania served no purpose but to create 
smuggling. 

Thus divided, the States began to feel their 
weakness : most of the legislatures had neglected 
to comply with the requisitions of Congress for 
furnishing the federal treasury ; the resolves of 
Congress were disregarded ; the proposition for 
a general impost to be laid and collected by 
Congress was negatived, first by Rhode Island, 
and afterwards by New York. The British 
troops continued, under pretence of a breach of 
treaty on the part of America, to hold possession 
of the forts on the frontiers of the States. Many 
of the States individually were infested with 
popular commotions or iniquitous tender laws, 
while they were oppressed with public debts ; 
the certificates or public notes had lost most of 
their value, and circulated merely as the objects 
of speculation ; Congress lost their respecta- 
bility, and the United States their credit and 
importance. 

In the midst of these calamities, a proposition 
was made in 1785, in the House of Delegates in 
Virginia, to appoint Commissioners to meet such 
as might be appointed in the other States, who 
should form a system of commercial regulations 
for the United States, and recommend it to the 
several legislatures for adoption. Commissioners 
were accordingly appointed, and a request was 
made to the legislatures of the other States to 
accede to the proposition. Accordingly, several 
of the States appointed Commissioners, who met 
at Annapolis in the summer of 1786, to consult 
what measures should be taken to unite the 
States in some general and efficient commercial 
system. But as the States were not all repre- 
sented, and the powers of the Commissioners 
were, in their opinion, too limited to propose a 
system of regulations adequate to the purposes 
of government, they agreed to recommend a 
general convention to be held at Philadelphia 
the next year, with powers to frame a general 
plan of government for the United States. This] 


UNITED STATES. 


115 


["measure appeared to the Commissioners ab- 
solutely necessary. The old confederation was 
essentially defective : it was destitute of almost 
every principle necessary to give effect to legis- 
lation. 

It was defective in the article of legislating 
over States, instead of individuals. All history 
testifies that recommendations will not operate 
as laws, and compulsion cannot be exercised 
over States without violence, war, and anarchy. 
The confederation was also destitute of a sanc- 
tion to its laws. When resolutions were passed 
in Congress, there was no power to compel obe- 
dience by fine, by suspension of privileges, or 
other means: it was also destitute of a guarantee 
for the State governments. Had one State been 
invaded by its neighbour, the Union was not con- 
stitutionally bound to assist in repelling the inva- 
sion, and supporting the constitution of the 
invaded State. The confederation was further 
deficient in the principle of apportioning the 
quotas of money to be furnished by each State ; 
in a want of power to form commercial laws, 
and to raise troops for the defence and security 
of the Union ; in the equal suffrage of the 
States, which placed Rhode Island on a footing 
in Congress with Virginia; and to crown all the 
defects, we may add the want of a judiciary 
power, to define the laws of the Union, and to 
reconcile the contradictory decisions of a number 
of independent judicatories. 

These and many inferior defects were obvious 
to the Commissioners, and therefore they urged 
a general convention, with powers to form, and 
offer to the consideration of the States, a system 
of general government that should be less ex- 
ceptionable : accordingly, in May, 1787, dele- 
gates from all the States, except Rhode Island, 
assembled at Philadelphia, and chose General 
Washington for their President. After four 
months deliberation, in which the clashing in- 
terests of the several States appeared in all their 
force, the convention agreed to recommend the 
plan of federal government, which we have 
already recited. 

As soon as the plan of the federal constitution 
was submitted to the legislatures of the several 
States, they proceeded to take measures for col- 
lecting the sense of the people upon the pro- 
priety of adopting it. In the small State of De- 
laware, a convention was called in November, 
which, after a few days deliberation, ratified the 
constitution without a dissenting voice. 

In the convention of Pennsylvania, held the 
same month, there was a spirited opposition to 


the new form of government. The debates were 
long and interesting. Great abilities and firm- 
ness were displayed on both sides ; but, on the 
13th of December, the constitution was received 
by two-thirds of the members. The minority 
were dissatisfied ; and, with an obstinacy that 
ill became the representatives of a free people, 
published their reasons of dissent, which were 
calculated to inflame a party already violent, and 
which, in fact, produced some disturbances in the 
western part of the State. 

In New Jersey, the convention which met in 
December, were unanimous in adopting the con- 
stitution ; as was likewise that of Georgia. 

In Connecticut, there was some opposition ; 
but the constitution was, on the 9th of January, 
1788, ratified by three-fourths of the votes in 
convention, and the minority peaceably ac- 
quiesced in the decision. 

In Massachusetts, the opposition was large and 
respectable. The convention, consisting of more 
than 300 delegates, were assembled in January, 
and continued their debates, with great candour 
and liberality, about five weeks. At length the 
question was carried for the constitution by a 
small majority ; and the minority, with that 
manly condescension which becomes great minds, 
submitted to the measure, and united to support 
the government. 

In New Hampshire, the federal cause was for 
some time doubtful. The greatest number of 
the delegates in convention were, at first, on the 
side of the opposition ; and some, who might 
have had their objections removed by the discus- 
sion of the subject, were instructed to reject the 
constitution. Although the instructions of con- 
stituents cannot, on the true principles of repre- 
sentation, be binding upon a deputy, in any le- 
gislative assembly, because his constituents are 
but a part of the State, and have not heard the 
arguments and objections of the whole ; whereas 
his act is to affect the whole State, and therefore 
is to be directed by the sense or wisdom of the 
whole, collected in the legislative assembly ; yet 
the delegates in the New Hampshire convention 
conceived very erroneously, that the sense of 
the freemen in the towns, those little districts, 
where no act of legislation can be performed, 
imposed a restraint upon their own wills. An 
adjournment was therefore moved and carried. 
This gave the people opportunity to gain a far- 
ther knowledge of the merits of the constitution ; 
and at the second meeting of the convention it 
was ratified by a respectable majority. 

In Maryland, several men of abilities appeared] 

Q 2 


1 16 


UNIT E D STATES. 


[in the opposition, and were unremitted in their 
endeavonrs to persuade the people, that the pro- 
posed plan of government was artfully calculated 
to deprive them of their dearest rights ; yet in 
convention it appeared, that five-sixths of the 
voices were in favour of it. 

In S. Carolina, the opposition was respecta- 
ble ; but two-thirds of the convention appeared to 
advocate and vote for the constitution. 

In Virginia, many of the principal characters 
opposed the ratification of the constitution with 
great abilities and industry ; but, after a full dis- 
cussion of the subject, a small majority, of a nu- 
merous convention, appeared for its adoption. 

In New York, two-thirds of the delegates in 
convention were, at their first meeting, deter- 
mined to reject the constitution. Here, there- 
fore, the debates were the most interesting, and 
the event extremely doubtful. The argument 
was managed with uncommon address and abili- 
ties on both sides of the question. But during 
the session, the 9th and 10th States had acceded 
to the proposed plan, so that by the constitution, 
Congress were empowered to issue an ordinance 
for organizing the new government. This event 
placed the opposition on new ground ; and the 
expediency of uniting with the other States — the 
generous motives of conciliating all difterences, 
and the danger of a rejection, influenced a re- 
spectable number, who were originally opposed 
to the constitution, to join the federal interest. 
The constitution was accordingly ratified by a 
small majority ; but the ratification was accom- 
panied here, as in Virginia, with a bill of rights, 


declaratory of the sense of the convention as to 
certain great principles, and with a catalogue of 
amendments, which were to be recommended to 
the consideration of the new Congress, and the 
several state legislatures. 

N. Carolina met in convention in July, to de- 
liberate on the new constitution. After a short 
session, they rejected it by a majority of 176 
against 76. In November, 1789, however, this 
State again met in convention, and ratified the 
constitution by a large majority. 

Rhode Island was doomed to be the sport of 
a blind and singular policy. The legislature, in 
consistency with the measures whicli had been 
before pursued, did not call a convention to col- 
lect the sense of the State upon the proposed 
constitution ; but in an unconstitutional and ab- 
surd manner, submitted the plan of government 
to the consideration of the people. Accordingly, 
it was brought before town-meetings, and in most 
of them rejected. In some of the large towns, 
particularly in Newport and Providence, the 
people collected and resolved with great pro- 
priety, that they could not take up the subject; 
and that the proposition for embracing or reject- 
ing the federal constitution could come before 
no tribunal but that of the State in convention or 
legislature. On May 24, 1790, a convention of 
this State met at Newport, and on the 29th, 
adopted the constitution by a majority of two 
only. 

Vermont, in convention at Bennington, Ja- 
nuary 10, 1791, ratified the constitution of the 
United States by a great majority. 


The following exhibits at one view the order, time, &amp;c. in which the several States ratified the 
Federal Constitution : 


Delaware, - - 

December 

3, 

1787, 

Pennsylvania, - 

December 

13, 

- - 

New Jersey, 

December 

19, 

- - 

Georgia, 

January 

2, 

1788, 

Connecticut, 

January 

9 , 

- - 

Massachusetts, - 

February 

6, 

- - 

Maryland, - - 

April 

28, 

- - 

S. Carolina, 

May 

23, 

- 

New Hampshire, 

J une 

21, 

- - 

Virginia, - - 

J une 

25, 

- 

New York, 

July 

26, 

- - 

N. Carolina, - 

November 27, 

1789, 

Rhode Island, - 

May 

29, 

1790, 

Vermont, - 
Kentucky.] 

January 

10 , 

1791, 


unanimously. 

Major 

46 to 

23 

- 23 

unanimously. 


unanimously. 


128 to 

40 

- 88 

187 to 

168 

- 19 

63 to 

12 

- 51 

149 to 

73 

- 76 

57 to 

46 

- 11 

89 to 

79 

- 10 

30 to 

25 

- 5 

193 to 

75 

- 118 


________ o 

- - - by a great majority. 


UNITED STATES. 


1 17 


[From the moment the proceedings of the ge- 
neral convention at Philadelphia transpired, the 
public mind was exceedingly agitated, and sus- 
ended between hope and fear, until nine States 
ad ratified their plan of a federal government. 
Indeed the anxiety continued until Virginia and 
New York had acceded to the system. But this 
did not prevent the demonstrations of them joy 
on the accession of each State. 

On the ratification in Massachusetts, the citi- 
zens of Boston, in the elevation of their joy, 
formed a procession in honour of the happy 
event, which was novel, splendid, and magnifi- 
cent. This example was afterwards followed, 
and in some instances improved upon, in Bal- 
timore, Charleston, Philadelphia, Newhaven, 
Portsmouth, and New York, successively. No- 
thing could equal the beauty and grandeur of 
these exhibitions. A ship was mounted upon 
wheels, and drawn through the streets; mecha- 
nics erected stages, and exhibited specimens of 
labour in their several occupations as they 
moved along the road; flags with emblems, de- 
scriptive of all the arts and of the federal union, 
were invented and displayed in honour of the 
government ; multitudes of all ranks in life as- 
sembled to view the splendid scenes ; while so- 
briety, joy, and harmony, marked the brilliant 
exhibitions, by which the Americans celebrated 
the establishment of their empire. 

On March 3, 1789, the delegates from the 
11 States, which at that time had ratified the 
constitution, assembled at New York, where a 
convenient and elegant building had been pre- 
pared for their accommodation. On opening and 
counting the votes for President, it was found 
that George Washington was unanimously elected 
to that dignified office, and that John Adams was 
chosen Vice-President. The annunciation of the 
choice of the first and second magistrates of the 
United States occasioned a general diffusion of 
joy among the friends to the union, and fully 
evinced that these eminent characters were the 
choice of the people. 

On April 30, 1789, George Washington was 
inaugurated President of the United States of 
America, in the city of New York. The cere- 
mony was performed in the open gallery of Fe- 
deral Hall, in the view of many thousand specta- 
tors. The oath was administered by Chancellor 
Lhingston. Several circumstances concurred to 
render the scene unusually solemn. 

This great man has been succeeded in the pre- 
sidency by Mr. Adams, Mr. Jefferson, and Mr. 


Maddison, the latter of whom at present holds 
that office, and of the policy of whose measures 
we shall be enabled to judge with some precision 
by the following retrospect of the relations in 
which the Americans seem of late years to have 
stood with the European powers. 

It would however not be doing justice to the 
subject of which we are treating were it not ge- 
nerally to be observed, that hitherto the delibe- 
rations of the legislature of the union, have been 
for the most part marked with wisdom, and the 
measures they have adopted have been produc- 
tive of great national prosperity. The wise ap- 
pointments to office, which, in general, have been 
made — the establishment of a revenue and judi- 
ciary system, and of a national bank — the as- 
sumption of the debts of the individual States, 
and the encouragement that has been given to 
manufactures, commerce, literature, and to use- 
ful inventions, have, it must be confessed, opened 
a fair prospect, if not of general peace or union, 
at least of increasing respectability and import- 
ance, and given a great additional preponder- 
ant to that which they had at first enjoyed in 
the scale of nations. 

Analysis of the Berlin and Milan Decrees , of the 
several Orders in Council , and of the American 
Seamen , Non-importation and Embargo Acts . 

From the importance and universal interest 
which have attached to the Orders of Council, it 
is desirable that a full and correct account of 
them should be recorded. The subject is un- 
questionably difficult to be understood, but it 
lias been much simplified by an able publication, 
from which the following illustrations are, for the 
most part, selected ; intending to present the 
whole series of French, British, and American 
proceedings in one view, and to give an impar- 
tial, compendious, and chronological statement 
of the several official document:- which have been 
produced, interspersing and subjoining such ob- 
servations as may tend to exhibit the whole case 
in the clearest and truest point of view. 

I. The first of these documents is the Berlin 
Decree, so called because it was issued from the 
camp near that city, on November 21, 1806. It 
consists of two parts : — 

1st. A statement of the wrongs done by Eng- 
land. 

2d. Of the measures which these wrongs have 
obliged the Emperor Napoleon to adopt. 

The first part states: u That England has] 


118 


UNITED STATES. 


[ceased to observe the laws of civilised nations — 
that she considers the individuals of a hostile 
nation as enemies — that she seizes as prize the 
property of such individuals — that she blockades 
commercial ports, bays, and mouths of rivers, 
and other places not fortified — that she declares 
places to be in a state of blockade, where she has 
no actual force to enforce the blockade — that this 
abuse is intended to aggrandise the commerce and 
industry of England, by means of the commerce 
and industry of the Continent — that those who 
traffic in English commodities on the Continent 
second her views and render themselves her ac- 
complices — that this conduct of England is wor- 
thy the age of barbarism, and is advantageous to 
her at the expense of every other nation — that it 
is just to attack her with the same weapons which 
she employs.” 

And in pursuance of this assertion the second 
part proceeds to decree : — 

“ — that the British islands are in a state of 
blockade. 

u — that all commerce and correspondence 
with the British isles are prohibited. 

“ — that letters and packets addressed to Eng- 
land or to Englishmen, or written in English, 
shall be intercepted. 

“ — that every British individual whom the 
troops of France or those of her allies can lay 
hold of, shall be a prisoner of war. 

“ — that every warehouse, any commodity, 
every article of commerce which may belong to a 
British subject, is good prize. 

“ — that the trade in English goods is pro- 
hibited, and every article that belongs to Eng- 
land, or is the produce of her manufactories or 
colonies, is good prize. 

“ — that no ship from England or her colo- 
nies, or which shall have touched there, shall be 
admitted into any harbour. 

“ — that this Decree shall be communicated 
to all our allies whose subjects as well as those 
of France have been victims of the injustice and 
barbarity of the English maritime code. 

“ — and this Decree is further stated to be in 
force, and considered as a fixed and fundamental 
law of the French empire, as long as England 
shall adhere to the principles herein complained 
of.” 

The sum of this Decree is, that England shall 
be erased from the list of commercial and even 
civilised nations, until she abandons her mari- 
time code which has raised her to her present 
pitch of superiority over other nations, and that 


France and her allies and dependants are pledged 
and required invariably to maintain this which 
has been since called the continental system, till 
England shall have been reduced to make these 
concessions. 

II. On November 24, 1806, the above decree 
was recapitulated in a proclamation from the 
French minister to the senate of Hamburgh, 
which states : — 

“ That as several of the citizens of Hamburgh 
were notoriously engaged in trade with England, 
the Emperor of the French was obliged to take 
possession of the city in order to execute his 
decree.” 

This threat w as the same day executed by Mar- 
shal Mortier, at the head of a division of the 
French army. 

This proclamation and occupation of Ham- 
burgh was particularly important, as being the 
first act of that principle on which France has 
ever since, as we shall see, proceeded, of not only 
extending her continental system to all places 
within her reach, but actually seizing upon neu- 
tral countries, that she might extend the conti- 
nental system to them ; so that the original vio- 
lence and injustice against England became the 
source and pretence of more violence and injus- 
tice against all rights and laws of nations, and an 
excuse for the most outrageous usurpation and 
hostile seizure of neutral territory that has ever 
been attempted. 

III. These proceedings of the government of 
France produced, on the part of England, the 
measure which is called Lord Grey’s Order in 
Council, because his Lordship was Secretary of 
State at the time it was issued — January 7, 1807. 
This order states 

u That the decrees issued by the French go- 
vernment to prohibit the commerce of neutral 
nations with the British dominions, or in their 
produce or manufactures, are in violation of the 
usages of war. 

“ — that such attempts on the part of the 
enemy would give his Majesty an unquestionable 
right of retaliation, and would warrant his Ma- 
jesty in enforcing against all commerce with 
France, the same prohibition which she vainly 
hopes to effect against us. 

“ — that his Majesty, though unwilling to 
proceed to these extremities, yet feels himself 
bound not to suffer such measures to be taken by 
the enemy, without some step on his part to re- 
strain this violence, and to retort upon them the 
evils of their own injustice.] 


UNITED STATES. 


[“ — and that therefore it is ordered, that no 
vessel shall be permitted to trade from one port 
to another belonging to France or her allies, or 
so far under her control that British vessels may 
not freely trade thereat.” 

This was, as it expresses itself to be, a miti- 
gated measure of retaliation, one intended rather 
to call France to a sense of her injustice, and the 
neutrals to a sense of their own duty, than to in- 
flict a vengeance on the enemy adequate to his 
aggression ; but it very properly states the right 
in Great Britain to go the whole length of com- 
plete retaliation; and it strongly intimates that 
if this moderate proceeding should fail of its ef- 
fect, more effective, but equally justifiable modes 
of retaliation would be adopted. 

Shortly after the publication of this order, 
Lord Grenville’s and Lord Grey’s ministry went 
out of power, and that of the Duke of Portland, 
which included Mr. Perceval and Mr Canning, 
came in. Their first proceeding in this matter 
was on November 11, 1807; when finding the 
measures of further retaliation, threatened in 
Lord Grey’s order of January preceding, were 
become absolutely necessary from the increasing 
violence of the French, and the continued supine- 
ness of the neutrals, they published an Order in 
Council, which is the next document that fol- 
lows : — 

IV. On November 11, 1807, the Duke of Port- 
land’s administration issued two Orders in Coun- 
cil ; the first of which states : — 

“ — that the Order of the 7th January has net 
effected the desired purpose either of compelling 
the enemy to recall his Orders, or of inducing 
neutral nations to interpose against them ; but, 
on the contrary, that they have been recently en- 
forced with increased vigour 

“ — that his Majesty is therefore obliged to 
take further measures for vindicating the just 
rights and maritime powers of his people, which 
are not more essential to our own safety, than to 
the independence and general happiness of man- 
kind ; and in pursuance of these principles of re- 
taliation (already inserted in the first Order) all 
the ports of France and her allies, and all other 
ports or places in Europe from which the British 
flag is excluded, shall be considered in a state of 
blockade ; and all their goods and manufactures 
shall be considered as lawful prize, thus reta- 
liating upon France and her allies, their own vio- 
lence. 

“ — that his Majesty would of course be jus- 
tified in making this retaliation, as unqualified 
and without limit, as the original offence ; but 


119 

that unwilling to subject neutrals to more incon- 
venience than is necessary, he will permit to neu- 
trals such trade with the enemy’s ports, as may 
be carried on directly with the ports of his Ma- 
jesty’s dominions, under several specifications 
and conditions which are set forth as favourable 
exceptions to the general rules of blockade.” 

The second Order in Council of this date sets 
forth : 

“ — that articles of the growth or manufacture 
of foreign countries cannot be by law (namely, 
the Navigation Act), imported into Great Bri- 
tain, except in British ships, or the native ship- 
ping of the country itself which produces the 
goods. 

“ — that in consequence of the former order 
of this date, which says, that all neutral trade 
with France must touch at a British port, it is 
expedient to relax, in some degree, this law, and 
to permit the shipping of any friendly or neutral 
country to import into Great Britain the produce 
or manufactures of countries at war with her. 

“ — that all goods so imported shall be liable 
to the same duties, and under the same ware- 
housing regulation as if imported according to the 
Navigation Act.” 

The sum of these Orders in Council is, that 
France having declared that there shall be no 
trade in communication with England, his Ma- 
jesty resolves that the ports of France, and every 
port from which, by the control of France, the 
British flag is excluded, shall have no trade ex- 
cept to or from a British port ; but that his Ma- 
jesty is still desirous to encourage and protect 
neutral commerce, as far as is consistent with 
such an opposition to the enemy’s measures, as is 
essential to the safety and prosperity of the Bri- 
tish dominions. 

Next comes the Decree, dated Milan, Decem- 
ber 17, and published in Paris, December 26, 
1807, reciting : 

“ — that the ships of neutral and friendly 
powers are, by the English Orders in Council of 
the 1 1th of November, made liable not only to 
be searched, but to be detained in England, and 
to pay a tax rateable per centum on the cargo. 

“ - — that, by these acts, the British govern- 
ment denationalizes ships of every nation ; and 
that it is not competent to any sovereign or coun- 
try to submit to this degradation of the neutral 
flag, as England would construe such submission 
into an acquiescence in her right to do so, as she 
has already availed herself of the tolerance of 
other governments, to establish the infamous 
principle that free ships do not make free goods,] 


120 


UNITED STATES. 


[and to give the right of blockade an arbitrary ex-, 
tension, which infringes on the sovereignty of 
every state, and it is therefore decreed, 

“ — that every ship, to whatever nation it 
may belong, which shall have submitted to be 
searched by an English ship, or to a voyage to 
England, or shall have paid any English tax, is, 
for that alone, declared to be denationalized, to 
have forfeited the protection of its own sove- 
reign, and to have become English property. 

“ — that all such ships, whether entering the 
ports of France, or her allies, or met at sea, are 
good prizes. 

“ — that the British islands are in a state of 
blockade, both by sea and land, and that all ves- 
sels sailing from England, or any of her colonies, 
or the port of any of her allies, to England or 
her colonies, or the port of an ally, are declared 
good and lawful prize. 

w — that these measures (which are resorted 
to only in just retaliation of the barbarous system 
adopted by England, which assimilates its legis- 
lation to that of Algiers), shall cease to have ef- 
fect with respect to all nations who shall have 
the firmness to compel the English government 
to respect their flag. They shall continue to be 
rigorously enforced as long as that government 
does not return to the principle of the law of na- 
tions, which regulates the relation of civilised 
states in a state of war. The provisions of the 
present Decree shall be abrogated and null, in 
fact, as soon as the English abide again by the 
principles of the law of nations, which are also 
the principles of justice and honour.” 

A good deal of discussion arose with America 
about the operation of these Decrees and Orders 
upon the American trade ; and in order to sim- 
plify the construction of the latter, and to apply 
the principle of retaliation more directly against 
France herself, and with less injury to neutrals, 
the Orders of November 1807, were superseded 
by that of April 26, 1809 ; which declares “ the 
whole coast of France and her dominions, as far 
northward as the river Ems, and southward to 
Pesaro and Orbitello in Italy, to be under 
blockade, and all vessels coming from any port 
whatever to any French port, liable to capture 
and condemnation the effect of this order was 
to open all ports, not actually ports of France, 
even though the British flag should be excluded 
therefrom, to neutral commerce, and to place 
France, and France only, in the precise situation 
in which, by her decrees, she endeavours to place 
Great Britain. 

V. By a decree of the French government, 


issued at Fontainbleau on October 19, 1810, it 
was expressly declared, “ that in pursuance of 
the 4th and 5th articles of the Berlin decrees, all 
kinds of British merchandise and manufactures 
which may be discovered in the custom-houses, 
or other places of France, Holland, the Grand 
Duchy of Berg, the Hans t owns, (from the 
Mayne to the sea), the kingdom of Italy, the Illy- 
rian provinces, the kingdom of Naples, and in 
such towns of Spain and their vicinities as may 
be occupied by French troops, shall be confis- 
cated and burned.” 

Thus then the matter stood; on the side of 
France the decrees of Berlin and Milan were in 
force, and to them were opposed the British 
order of April 26, 1809; and as long as the 
blockade of England by France remained unre- 
pealed, so long did England possess an undoubted 
right to persist in her system of retaliation. 

It now becomes necessary to explain shortly 
the conduct of America towards England and 
France respectively: from which we shall judge 
whether America has always acted with a strict 
impartiality towards the two belligerents, and 
whether she really had any fair ground of com- 
plaint against Great Britain. 

VI. A very short time before France began 
to act upon these new principles, a treaty of com- 
merce had been, in 1806, negotiated at London 
(between Lords Holland and Auckland on the 
part of England, and Messrs. Munroe and Pinck- 
ney on that of America), and sent over to America 
to be ratified : but the Berlin decree having 
appeared almost at the moment of the signature 
of this treaty, it was accompanied by a declara- 
tion by Lords Holland and Auckland on the part 
of England : 

a That in consequence of the new and extra- 
ordinary measures of hostility on the part of 
France, as stated in the Berlin Decree, Great 
Britain reserved to herself (if the threats should 
be executed, and that neutrals should acquiesce 
in such usurpations) the right of retaliating on 
the enemy in such manner as circumstances might 
require.” 

VII. This treaty, the President of the United 
States refused to ratify ; principally “ because the 
question of impressing seamen was not definitively 
settled.” The British government replied, “ that 
this was a subject of much detail, and of consider- 
able difficulty, arising out of the almost impossi- 
bility of distinguishing British subjects from 
Americans : and, it added, that it would be 
highly inexpedient that the general treaty should 
be lost, or even delayed on this account; that] 


UNITED STATES. 


121 


fGreat Britain was ready immediately to proceed 
in a separate negociation in this point ; and that 
in the mean time, her officers should be ordered 
to exercise the right of search and impressment, 
with the greatest possible forbearance.” 

These arguments and this proposition did not, 
however, induce the American President to ratify 
the treaty. 

It unfortunately happened, that in June, 1807, 
the commanding officer of his Majesty’s ship 
Leopard having understood that some deserters 
from his ship had been received on board the 
American frigate Chesapeake, and having in vain 
required their release from the American captain, 
attacked the Chesapeake at sea, and obliged her 
to strike ; but he then contented himself with 
taking out of her his own men, and restored the 
ship to the American commander. An event of 
this nature called for, and received the immediate 
disavowal of his Majesty’s government ; the cap- 
tain was tried, and his admiral superseded ; and 
Mr. Rose was sent without loss of time to America 
to offer reparation, a-nd to state to the American 
government, “ that Great Britain did not pretend 
to a right to demand by force any sailors what- 
ever from the national ship of a power with 
which she was on terms of peace and amity.” In 
the mean time the President had issued a procla- 
mation, excluding all English ships of war from 
the American harbours. 

X. Exclusive of this affair of the Chesapeake, 
America appeared, in the spring of 1808, to 
have considered herself equally aggrieved by the 
acts of both countries. 

In this view they laid a general embargo upon 
all the shipping in their ports, and denied them- 
selves all commercial intercourse whatever with 
any European State. 

XI. This act of the American government was 
very unpopular throughout the Union, and on 
March 1 , 1809, the non-intercourse law was sub- 
stituted in its place, “ by which the commerce of 
America was opened to all the world except to 
England and France, and British and French 
ships of war were equally excluded prospectively 
from the American ports.” 

XII. In the interval, Mr. Canning had in- 
structed Mr. Erskine, his Majesty’s minister, to 
offer to America “ a reciprocal repeal of the pro- 
hibitive laws on both sides upon certain terms ; 
namely, 1st. The enforcement of the non-inter- 
course and non-importation acts against France. 
2dly, The renunciation on the part of America 
of all trade with the enemies’ colonies, from which 
she was excluded during peace. Sdly, Great 

VOL. v. 


Britain to enforce the American embargo against 
trade with France, or powers acting under her 
decrees. 

XIII. In the mean time the French govern- 
ment, in a decree dated from Rambouillet, March 
S3, 1810, declared, “ that from May SO, 1809, all 
American vessels which should enter the French 
ports, or ports occupied by French troops, should 
be sold and sequestered.” This act however was 
not made known till May 14, 1810. 

XIV. Notwithstanding these acts of violence 
on the part of France, America could not be per- 
suaded that her honour and interests demanded 
some immediate act of retaliation, and nothing 
was done till the non-intercourse act expired, 
when an act of the Congress was passed, eventu- 
ally renewing certain parts of the non-intercourse 
act in certain events. By this act it was decreed, 
“ that in case either of the belligerents should 
cease to violate the neutral rights of America be- 
fore February S, 1811, the non-importation arti- 
cles of the non-intercourse act should be revived 
against the other.” By this act, America still 
contemplated France and England equally injur- 
ing her commerce ; and contented herself with 
merely complaining, through her minister, of the 
operation of the Rambouillet decree, though it 
was, at the same time, characterised by America 
“ as a signal aggression on the principles of jus- 
tice and good faith.” 

XV. The condition thus offered by America, 
France determined speciously to accept ; but in 
accepting it to act in such a manner as still to 
reap the advantages accruing from her decrees, 
without relieving England from her part of the 
pressure occasioned by them. 

XVI. As England could not, upon this insidi- 
ous offer, accept the first part of the alternative 
offered by France, America in her turn accepted 
the second, and declared that she would cause 
her flag to be respected : but as there would be 
some inconvenience in demanding from England 
the abandonment of her most sacred maritime 
rights, such as the right of visiting and searching 
a neutral ship for enemy’s property — the right of 
blockading, hy actual force, the ports and har- 
bours and rivers of the enemy’s coast — the right 
of precluding a neutral from carry ing on, in 
time of war, the trade of a belligerent, to which 
she is not admitted in time of peace, (all of which 
and more indeed was demanded by France, and 
apparently acceded to by America) the Govern- 
ment and Congress of the United States deemed 
it to be sufficiently conformable to the demands 
of France, “ that they should exclude British] 

it 


122 


UNITED STATE S. 


[ships of war from their ports, and prohibit all 
importation of British produce and France 
seemed to consent to consider a these restrictions 
as tantamount to causing- the American flag to be 
respected, and as rescuing the American ships 
from the imputation of being denationalized.” 
Upon this principle the President proclaimed the 
renewal of the non importation articles of the 
non-intercourse act against Great Britain on 
November 2, 1810, and the Congress enacted the 
same by law on February 28, 1811. When this 
act passed, the relations of peace and commercial 
intercourse were restored between France and 
America, and French ships were allowed to enter 
into American ports, at a time when “ France 
still retained many millions of American property 
seized under the Rambouillet decree,” which had 
had a retrospective effect for the space of 12 
months, and when the operation of the burning 
decree was carried into effect, without any regard 
whether or not the produce of British industry, 
so destroyed, had legally become, by purchase or 
barter, the “ bona fide property of neutral mer- 
chants.” 

With respect to England, who by the act of 
February 28, 1811, was put upon the footing of 
an enemy, the only source of complaint which 
America possessed, was that the blockade of the 
French coast was still persisted in and enforced, 
as the only effectual means of retaliating upon 
the violent and unjust decrees of the enemy. 

XVII. On November 1, 1811, Mr. Foster, his 
Majesty’s minister in America, was at length 
enabled to bring to a conclusion the differences 
which had arisen on the Chesapeake affair, with- 
out sacrificing the rights of Great Britain, or 
derogating from the honour of his Majesty’s 
crown ; but it cannot be said, that the American 
government accepted the concession and atone- 
ment with either dignity or grace. 

XVIII. While America was thus asserting that 
the French decrees were repealed, the minister of 
foreign relations at Paris put an end to all doubt 
on the subject, by an official report to the Empe- 
ror, dated March 10, 1812, which sets forth, first, 
an explanation of the maritime laws of the 
nations, viz. 

“ The flag covers merchandise ; the goods of 
an enemy under a neutral flag are neutral, and 
the goods of a neutral under an enemy’s flag are 
enemy’s goods — the only goods not covered by 
the flag, is contraband of war ; and the only con- 
traband of war are arms and ammunition. — In 
visiting neutrals, a belligerent must send only a 
few men in a boat, but the belligerent ship must 


keep out of cannon shot. — Neutrals may trade 
between one enemy’s port to another, and be- 
tween enemy’s and neutral ports — the only ports 
excepted, are those really blockaded ; and ports 
really blockaded, are those only which are actu- 
ally invested, besieged, and in danger of being 
taken — such are the duties of belligerents and 
the rights of neutrals.” The report then pro- 
ceeds to state, “ that the Berlin and Milan de- 
crees have rendered the manufacturing towns of 
Great Britain deserts — distress has succeeded 
prosperity ; and the disappearance of money and 
the want of employment endangers the public 
tranquillity and then it denounces that, “ until 
Great Britain recalls her orders in council, and 
submits to the principles of maritime law above- 
mentioned, the French decrees must subsist 
against Great Britain, and such neutrals as should 
allow their flags to be denationalized and 
finally, the report avows, “ that nothing will 
divert the French Emperor from the objects of 
these decrees, — that he has already, for this pur- 
pose, annexed to France, Holland, the Hans 
Towns and the coasts from the Zuyder Zee to 
the Baltic, that no ports of the Continent must 
remain open, either to English trade or denation- 
alized neutrals ; and that all the disposable force 
of the French empire shall be directed to every 
part of the continent, where British and dena- 
tionalized flags still find admittance : and, finally, 
this system shall be persevered in, till England, 
banished from the continent and separated from 
all other countries, shall return to the laws of 
nations recognized by the treaty of Utrecht.” 

The sum of this report is, that the Berlin and 
Milan decrees are in full force, and must continue 
to be so, until England shall not only recall her 
orders in council, but shall also abandon all her 
great maritime rights; and that these decrees 
subsist against not England alone, but America, 
and all other countries which shall not unite in 
an endeavour to overthrow the ancient system of 
maritime law ; and further, that France considers 
herself authorized to invade and seize any neutral 
territory whatsoever, for the sole object of ex- 
cluding all British trade from the Continent, and 
that all his violent and outrageous usurpations in 
Holland, Germany, and the shores of the Baltic, 
have been prompted, and are attempted to be 
justified by this motive. 

XIX. In order to bring to a distinct issue the 
verbal discussion between England and America, 
and to place the relative measures of England 
and France clearly before the neutrals ; the 
British government on April 21, 1812, put forth] 


UNITED STATES. 


123 


[to the public a declaration and order in council, 
detailing’ “ the present state of the contest be- 
tween the two belligerents” — and stating “ that 
as soon as the Berlin and Milan decrees are 
revoked, the orders in council are abrogated — 
and engaging beforehand that a proof of the ab- 
solute repeal of the French decrees produced in 
an Admiralty court shall be held, in fact, to be a 
satisfactory proof of the absolute revocation of 
the British orders in council. 

XX. Since this declaration, but before it 
reached America, an embargo was laid on by an 
act of Congress for 90 days, from April 4, 1812. 

XXI. Also, by a bill brought into Congress 
in the spring of this year, entitled “ a bill for the 
more effectual protection of American seamen,” it 
is enacted, “ that any British or other subjects, 
proved to have been guilty of impressing Ameri- 
can seamen, shall be deemed pirates and felons , 
and punished with death ; such persons to be 
tried on the spot, wherever they may be found. 

« That the President be authorized to order the 
ships of war of the United States, to bring in any 
foreign armed vessels that may be found on the 
coast, molesting American ships, or hovering on 
their shores. 

u That American seamen who shall have been 
impressed, shall be authorized to levy on British 
debts, or British property in America, as an in- 
demnification for the time of detention, at the 
rate of 30 dollars a month each.” 

By the farther clauses of this bill, the American 
flag is made to cover all persons on board, ex- 
cepting such as may be in the actual service of 
Great Britain ; and it is ordered that the govern- 
ment do seize so many British subjects in the 
United States, or in the territories of Great Bri- 
tain. , as may be equivalent to the number of 
Americans detained on board the British navy ; 
these hostages to be detained until a regular ex- 
change by the usual way of cartel. 

XXII. On the 18th of June war was actually 
declared by the United States against Great Bri- 
tain ; but the revocation of the Orders in Coun- 
cil, which took place June 23, had not then 
reached them, whereupon the government “ for- 
bore , at that time , to direct Letters of Marque and 
Reprisal to be issued against the ships , goods, and 
citizens of the said United States of America, under 
the expectation that the said government would, 
upon the notification of the Order in Council of the 
23d of June last, forthwith recall and annul the 
said declaration of war against His Majesty .” 

This leniency, (communicated by an Order in 
Council, October 18, 1812), had no effect, and 


we accordingly find that, on December 18 of the 
year following (1813) an embargo law passed 
both Houses of Congress to continue for one year, 
wherein it was enacted, that “ all neutral vessels 
would discharge and clear out, on pain of confisca- 
tion, within 14 days." 

XXIII. On the 7th of April of this year (1814) 
the embargo and non-importation acts were re- 
pealed, by a majority of 115 to 37. By a clause 
in this act all British produce and manufactures 
are allowed to be imported into the United States, 
even in neutral bottoms : it is also enacted, 

“ Sec. 3. That no foreign ship or vessel shall 
receive a clearance, or be permitted to depart 
from the United States, whose officers and crew 
shall not consist wholly of the citizens or subjects 
of the country to which such ship or vessel shall 
belong, or of a country in amity with the United 
States.” And no citizen of those States is per- 
mitted to depart in such ship or vessel without 
a passport from the President. 

XXIV. On the 25th of April the blockade was 
extended to all the American ports by Sir Borlase 
Warren. 

Conclusion. — It may be observed by way of a 
summary view of the above decrees, that it was 
impossible that Great Britain could relinquish 
the principle of retaliation. Great Britain, who 
is herself the main spring of the commerce of the 
world, must more than any other country regret 
and suffer from the interruptions of trade ; but 
would trade have revived if she had receded ? 
Will commerce thrive, if she abandons her ancient 
maritime rights ? For it is nothing less than this, 
that France demanded, and America endeavoured 
collaterally to enforce. 

If America admits that France, under the pre- 
tence of municipal regulations, had a right to 
prohibit all commerce with Great Britain ; and 
that British produce and manufactures (to whom- 
soever belonging or wherever found, not only in 
France itself, but in countries under hercontroul, 
or in territories adjoining to France, and subject 
to invasion from her on this very pretence), were 
to be seized, confiscated, and burned ; if, we say, 
America suffered all these infractions of neutral 
rights, without remonstrance or complaint, it is 
plain, that, as far as she was concerned, she 
played into the hands of France, and lent her 
assistance to the ruin of England. 

But what effects would the repeal of the Orders 
in Council actually have had, had not the decrees 
of Berlin and Milan been virtually nullified by 
the impracticability of their enforcement ? We 
will enumerate them.] 
h 2 


124 


UNITED STATES. 


£1. It would have restored the American trade, 
and that portion of manufactures which are usually 
consumed in America itself would immediately 
H have revived. 

2. It would have opened to England no other 
market for any branch of manufacturing what- 
soever than the home market of America — for 
France having a right, by municipal regulations, 
to exclude British articles from her territory, and 
to extend for this purpose her territory over the 
whole face of Europe; any article of British pro- 
duce and manufacture, imported by an American, 
would have been as liable to be confiscated or 
burned as before such repeal. 

3. France would have been relieved from all 
the pressure she then felt. America would have 
supplied her with all kinds of raw materials, as 
well as of colonial produce, and would have con- 
veyed to her, from the distant parts of Europe, 
all kinds of stores and timber, and the various 
materials of naval strength. France would have 
had just what trade she pleased; she would have 
continued the prohibition, all over Europe, of 
British manufactures, with a double view, first to 
encourage her own, and next to ruin that of her 
enemy. And all inconvenience and pressure 
being thus removed from her, there would no 
longer have existed any means or hopes of forcing 
her to a system more equitable towards Great 
Britain. 

4. America would have become the carrier of 
the world. — She and France would have divided 
the trade of the globe ; and Great Britain, with 
all her command of the sea, would have the mor- 
tification to have seen the ocean covered with the 
commerce of France, protected under the Ameri- 
can flag. 

5. The British shipping interest would have 
been annihilated, and that of America would have 
risen up in its stead. — The E. and W. Indies and 
the home-coasting trade would alone have re- 
mained to Britain ; and the two former she should 
not long have possessed, in competition with a 
rival whose means of ship building are inex- 
haustible ; whose flag would have been the only 
neutral flag in the world; whose ships alone 
could have traded at the ports of the continent 
of Europe ; whose rates of freight and insurance 
would have been proportionably small ; in short, 
who would have had all possible advantages, 
while Great Britain would have had to labour 
with every possible disadvantage. 

6. All British produce and manufacture would 
have declined and expired, except only those for 
American or home consumption ; because Ame- 


rica, which would then have brought the produce 
of all other countries to France, would have re- 
turned with the manufacture of France to all 
other countries. It may be said, that England 
would have undersold France: and so she cer- 
tainly would in a fair state of trade ; but, excluded 
from Europe and rivalled by America, there 
would have remained to her neither the means nor 
motives of commercial enterprise. 

7. Nor would the American market itself have 
been of the advantage to Great Britain that at 
first appears ; much of the ironwork, and all the 
linens of Germany would soon have undersold 
the similar articles of English or Irish manufac- 
ture ; and the increased intercourse betw r eeu 
America and France, would inevitably have 
obliged the merchants of the former to have taken 
returns in the produce of France, or the continent 
of Europe ; and, by degrees, it would have been 
found that the natural result of such an inter- 
course would have been the advancement 

OF MANUFACTURES AND THE INFLUENCE OF 
FRANCE, AND THE DECLINE OF THOSE OF 

great Britain. — To the steady prevention of 
which the British councils have so mutually and 
so successfully been exerted. 

Notices of the Campaign of 1812 and 1813. 

Russian Mediation. 

We have already said that war had been offi- 
cially declared, June 18, 1812. On the 12th of 
the following month the invasion of Upper 
Canada took place, under the command of Briga- 
dier-general Hull, who secured a post at Sand- 
wich, and succeeded in forcing Major-general 
Brock, who commanded the troops of his Britan- 
nic Majesty, to surrender Fort Detroit, August 
16 ; but, before the end of the year, the whole of 
General Hull’s army surrendered to the English. 
It is true, however, that the attacks of the Bri- 
tish on Craney Island, on Fort Snugs, on Sacketts 
Harbour, and on Sandusky, were vigorously and 
successfully repulsed ; and the movements of the 
American army had been followed by the reduc- 
tion of York, and of Forts George, Erie, and 
Malden ; by the recovery of Detroit, and the ex- 
termination of the Indian war in the w. 

The campaign of 1813 consisted of a series of 
defeats over the Americans, commanded by the 
Generals Harrison, Wilkinson, and Hampton, 
who had, with a simultaneous operation, at- 
tempted the invasion of the lower province. 
Harrison crossed over with his force, at the head 
of Lake Erie, to Detroit, causing General Proctor] 


UNITED STATES. 


125 


fto withdraw beyond York. Wilkinson crossed 
over, with a powerful division of the army, at the 
bottom of Lake Ontario to Kingston, and was 
completely and disgracefully beaten by Colonel 
Morrison, by a handful of Canadians. Hampton 
crossed over the St. Lawrence at Montreal, and 
was also severely chastised for his boldness at 
Chateauguay, by Colonel De Salubury, and 
forced back to Plattsburg. Thus, upon the close 
of the campaign in 1813, the theatre of the war 
became transferred into the American territory ; 
where Niagara, their strongest fortress, and the 
important posts of Black Rock and Buffalo, were 
wrested from them by British valour and enter- 
prise, under the able administration of Sir George 
Prevost. 


The British forces, in the above conflicts, at 
no time exceeded 15,000 men. Of the American 
army we have no means of procuring a very ac- 
curate statement ; but one account, inserted in 
the' Quebec paper, November 19, 1813, gives it 
at upwards of 41,000 men. 

In January, 1814, Messrs. Bayard and Adams 
were appointed to conduct the negotiations for 
peace, proposed between England and the United 
States by the Russian Mediation. Mr. Henry 
Clay, Speaker of the House of Representatives, 
and Mr. Jonathan Russell, were subsequently 
added to the commission, Mr. Russell being also 
appointed Minister Plenipotentiary at the Court 
of Sweden. 


Table of Post-Offices, shewing the Distance from the Post-Office at Philadelphia to every other Post- 

Office here mentioned. 


Miles. 

Abbeville Court-house, S. C. - - - - 782 

Abbotstown, P. ---------103 

Abingdon, Ya. --------- 511 

Accomac Court-house, Ya. ----- 199 

Albany, N.Y. --------- 265 

Alexandria, Ya. - - - -- -- - 156 

Allen’s Fresh, Md. - -- -- -- - 203 

Amboy, N.J. - -- -- -- -- 74 

Amherst, N. II. - -- -- -- -- 384 

Andover, Ms. - - -- -- -- - 372 

Annapolis, Md. - -- -- -- -- 132 

Anson Court-house, N.C. - - - - - 583 

Averysborough, N.C. ------- 482 

Augusta, G. ----------763 

Baltimore, Md. - -- -- -- - 102 

Bairdstown, K. --------- 875 

Barnstable, Ms. - -- -- -- -- 423 

Bath, Me. - - - - - - - - - - 512 

Bath, N.Y. - -- -- -- -- - 248 

Bath, c.h. Ya. --------- 337 

Beaufort, S.C. - -- -- -- -- 836 

Bedford, P. - -- -- -- -- - 204 

Belfast, Me. - -- -- -- -- - 590 

Bel Air, Md. - -- -- -- -- - 86 

Benedicf, Md. - -- -- -- -- 191 

Bennington, Vt. - -- -- -- -- 302 

Bermuda Hundred, Ya. - -- -- - 302 

Berwick, Me. - - -- -- -- - 432 

Bethania, N. C. - -- -- -- -- 538 

Bethlehem, P. - -- -- -- -- 58 

Beverly, Ms. - - - - -- -- - 367 

Biddeford, Me. - -- -- -- .,451 


Mile?. 

Blackhorse, Md. - - -- -- -- 101 

Bladensburgh, Md. - -- -- -- - 140 

Bluehill, Me. - - - -- -- -- 623 

Booneton, N. J. - - - -- -- - 116 

Boston, Ms. - - - -- -- -- 347 

Bourbontown, K. -------- 749 

Bowlingreen, Ya. - -- -- -- - 230 

Brattleborough, Yt. - - - ----311 

Brewers, Me. - - -- -- -- - 745 

Bridgehampton, N.Y. - - - - - - 196 

Bridgetown east, N.J. - ----- 74 

Bridgetown west, N.J. - - - 57 

Bristol, R. I. - -- -- -- -- - 306 

Bristol, P. - -- -- -- -- - 20 

Brookfield, Ms. - -- -- -- -- 278 
Brookhaven, N.Y. - -- -- -- -161 

Brownsville, P. - -- -- -- -- 341 

Brunswick, Me. - -- -- -- -- 500 

Brunswick, New, N. J. - - - - - 60 

Burlington, Yt. - -- -- -- -- 429 
Butternutts, N.Y. - - - _ - 375 

Cabbin Point, Ya. - -- -- -- - 329 
Cabellsburg, Ya. - - -- -- -- 352 

Cambridge, S.C. - - - - - - - - 762 

Camden, Me. - -- -- -- -- -571 

Camden, S.C. - - ------- 643 

Canaan, Me. - -- -- -- -- - 577 

Canaan, C. - --------- 257 

Cantwell’s Bridge, D. - -- -- -- 52 

Carlisle, P. - -- -- -- -- - 125 

Cartersville, Ya. - - - -- -- - 323 

Centreville, Md. - - - - -- -- 98] 


126 


UNITED STATES. 


[Centre Harbour, N.H. - - - - - 

Catskill, N. Y. - - . 

~~ Castine, Me. ---------- 

Chambersburg, P. - -- -- -- - 
Chandler’s River, Me. ------ 

Chapel Hill, N.C. 

Chaptico, Md. - -------- 

Charlestown, N.H. - - - -- -- 

Charlestown, Md. -------- 

Charleston, S. C. - - - - - _ - 

Charlotte, c. h. Va. ------- 

Charlotte, c. h. N.C. - - 

Charlottesville, Va. - - ----- 

Chatham, c. h. N.C. - ------ 

Chenango, N.Y. - - ------ 

Cheraw, c. h. S. C, - -- -- -- - 

Cherry Valley, N. Y. 

Chester, N.H. --------- 

Chester, P. - -- -- -- -- - 

Chester, c. h. S. C. - - - - - - - - 

Chester Town, Md, - -- -- -- - 
Christiana, D. - -- -- -- -- 

Cincinnati, N.T. ~ ------- 

Ciaverack, N.Y. ------- 

Clermont, N. Y. --------- 

Clowes, D, ---------- 

Colchester, Va. - -- -- -- -- 
Columbia, Me. - - - - - 

Columbia, Va. --------- 

Columbia, S.C. --------- 

Conajohary, N.Y. - -- -- -- - 

Concord, N. H. - ------- 

Concord, Ms. --------- 

Cooperstown, N. Y. - ------ 

Coosawatchy, S. C. -------- 

Culpepper, Va. - -- -- -- -- 

Cumberland, Mid. -------- 

Cumberland, c. h. Va. - 

Dagsborougb, D. - ------- 

Danbury, C. - -- -- -- -- - 

Danville, K. - -- -- -- -- - 
Dedham, Ms. - - ------- 

Dighton, Ms. - - -- -- -- - 

Dover, N.H. - - ------- 

Dover, D. - - 

Do wningt on, P. - -- -- -- -- 

Duck Creek, D. - -- -- -- -- 

Duck Trap, Me. --------- 

Dumfries, Va. - - -- -- -- - 

Duplin, c. li. N. C. -------- 

Durham, N.H. - -- -- -- -- 

Dresden, Me. - - -- -- -- - 

Douty’s Falls, Me. -------- 


Miles. 

East-Greenwich, R. I. ----- - 306 

Easton, P. ---------- 70 

Easton, Md. - -- -- - - -- -118 

Edenton, N.C. - -- -- -- -- 440 

Edgartown, Ms. - -- -- 44 Q 

Edgefield, c. h. S.C. ------- 733 

Elberton, G. - -- -- -- -- - 859 

Elizabeth Town, N. J. - 80 

Elizabeth Town, N. C. ------- 547 

Elkton, Md. - -- -- -- -- 49 

Ephrata, P. - -- -- -- -- - 74 

Exeter, N.H. - - - - 402 

Fairfield, Me. - - -- -- -- - 553 

Fairfield, C. - joj 

Falmouth, Ms. 429 

Falmouth, Va. - -- -- -- -- 207 

Fayetteville, N. C. - -- -- -- - 507 

Fincastle, Va. 35 8 

Fishkill, N.Y. --------- 165 

Flemington, N. J. - -- -- -- - 53 

Frankfort, K. - - -- -- -- jqq 

Franklin, c. h. G. - -- -- -- - 834 

Frederica, D. - -- -- -- -- 88 

Fredericksburg, Va. - - -- -- - 208 

Fredericktown, Md. - - -- -- -148 

Freeport, Me. - -- -- -- -- 493 

Gallipolis, N. T. - - -- -- -- 559 

Geneva, N.Y. - -- -- -- -- 457 

Georgetown, C. 11. Md. 65 

Georgetown, Ptk. Md. - - - - - _ 148 

Georgetown, S. C. - -- -- -- - 681 

Georgetown, G. - 873 

Germanton, N.C. - -- -- -- - 528 

Gettisburg, P. - - - - 119 

Gloucester, Ms. - - -- -- -- 384 

Gloucester, c. h. Va. ------- 32 1 

Goldson’s, Va. - -- -- -- -- 355 

Goochland, c. h. Va. ------- 308 

Goldsborough, Me, ------- 657 

Goshen, N.Y. - -- -- -- -- 145 

Gray, Me. - - - - 489 

Greene, Me. - -- -- -- - --514 

Greenfield, Ms. - -- -- -- -- 291 

Greenbrier, c. h. Va. - - . . - _ _ 4 ]Q 

Greensborough, G. - -- -- -- 841 

Greensburg, P. - -- -- -- -- 272 

Greensville, T. - -- -- -- -- 577 

Greenville, N. C. - -- -- -- - 445 

Greenville, c.h. S. C. ------- 781 

Guilford, C. - -- -- -- -- - 201 

Hacketstown, N.J. - - 130] 


Miles. 

486 

233 

610 

157 

697 

472 

215 

341 

59 

763 

379 

617 

303 

584 

375 

591 

336 

396 

15 

736 

81 

37 

779 

231 

212 

108 

172 

688 

328 

678 

318 

420 

368 

348 

833 

253 

227 

330 

127 

171 

830 

321 

314 

426 

76 

33 

64 

578 

182 

566 

426 

540 

439 


UNIT 


fHagerstown, Md. - 

Halifax, N. C. --------- 

Halifax, c. h. Va. -------- 

Hallowell, c. h. Me. ------- 

Hallowell Hook, Me. ------- 

Hamburg, N. J. - -- -- -- - 

Hampton, Va. - -- -- -- -- 

Hancock, Md. --------- 

Hanover, N. H. - -- -- -- -- 

Hanover, Ms. - -- -- -- -- 

Hanover, P. - - - 

Hanover, c. h. Va. - -- -- -- - 

Hanover-Town, Va. ------- 

Harford, Md. - -- -- -- -- 

Harpersfield, N.Y. ------- 

Harrisburg, P. - -- -- -- -- 

Harris’s, Va. - -- -- -- -- - 

Harrodsburg - , K. - -- -- -- - 

Hartford, C. ------ --- 

Haverhill, N.H. -------- 

Haverhill,.. Ms. --------- 

Havre-de-Grace, Md. ------- 

Hertford, N.C. --------- 

Hicks’s Ford, Va. - -- -- -- - 

Hillsborough, N. C. ------- 

Hingham, Ms. --------- 

Hogtown, N.C. - -- -- -- - 

Holmes’s Hole, Ms. ------- 

Horntown, Va. - 

Hudson, N. Y. - - - ------ 

Huntington, Md. -------- 

Huntsville, N.C. - -- -- -- - 

Indian-Town, N.C. ------- 

Ipswich, Ms. - -- -- -- -- - 

Iredell, c. h. N.C. - - - 

Johnsonsburg, N.J. ------- 

Johnston, N. Y. - -- -- -- - 

Jonesborough, T. -------- 

Kanandaigua, N. Y. ------- 

Keene, N.H. - ------- 

Killing-worth, C. - -- -- -- - 

Kinderhook, N. Y. - -- -- -- - 

Kingston, (Esopus) N.Y. - 
Kinsale, Va. - -- -- -- -- - 

Kingston, N. C. - -- -- -- -- 
Knoxville, T. - -- -- -- -- 

Lancaster, Ms. --------- 

Lancaster, P. - -- -- -- -- 
Lancaster, c. h. Va. - _ - 


STATES. 127 

Miles. 

Lansingburg, N. Y. - -- -- -- 274 

Laurens, c. h. S. C. - - - - - - - - 755 

Laytons, Va. - -- -- -- -- 245 

Lebanon, P. - -- -- -- -- - 82 

Leesburg, Va. - -- -- -- -- 173 

Leesburg, N. C. - -- -- -- -- 510 

Leominster, Ms. - -- -- -- - 390 

Leonard-Town, Md. ------- 227 

Lewisburg, P. - -- -- -- --132 

Lexington, Va. - -- -- -- -- 322 

Lexington, K. - -- -- -- -- 769 

Liberty, Va. - -- -- -- -- - 393 

Lincolnton, N. C. - -- -- -- - 652 

Litchfield, C. --------- 207 

Little German Flats, N. Y. - - - - - 348 
Londonderry, N. H. - -- -- -- 403 
Louisburg, N.C. - -------415 

Louisville, K. - -- -- -- -- 913 

Louisville, G. - -- -- -- - 825 

Lumberton, N. C. - -- -- -- - 539 

Lower Marlboro’, Md. - -- -- -162 
Lynchburgh, Va. - -- -- -- -381 

Lynn, Ms. - -- -- -- -- - 361 

Machias, Me. - -- -- -- -- 705 

Manchester, Vt. - -- -- -- -- 324 

Marblehead, Ms. - -- -- -- - 372 

Marietta, N. T. - -- -- -- - 456 

Martinsburg, Va. - -- -- -- - 16g 

Marlborough, N.H. - - - - - - - 350 

Martinsville, Va. - -- -- -- - 478 

Martinville, N.C. - -- -- -- - 504 

Mecklenburg, Va. - -- -- -- - 395 

Mendon, Ms. - -- -- -- -- 295 

Middlebury, Vt. - -- -- -- - 392 

Middletown, C. - -- -- -- -- 208 

Middletown, D. - -- -- -- -- 49 

Middletown Point - -- -- -- - 93 

Milford, C. - -- -- -- -- - 173 

Milford, D. ---------- 95 

Millerstown, P. - -- -- -- -- 34 

Monmouth, Me. - -- -- -- -- 524 

Monmouth, c. h. N. J. - - - - - - - 64 

Montgomery, c. h. Md. ------ 15 g 

Montgomery, c. h. Va. ------ 408 

Montgomery, c. h. N. C. - - - - - - 607 

Moore, c. h. N. C. ------- - 547 

Moorefields, Va. - -- -- -- - 267 

Morgantown, Va. - -- -- -- - 203 

Morganton, N. C. - -- -- -- - 661 

Morristown, N.J.- - - - - - - - 108 

Morrisville, P. - -- -- -- -- 29 

Mount Tizrah, N.C. - -- -- - - 480 

Murfreesborough, N. C. ----- - 422] 


E D 

Miles. 

149 

384 

414 

539 

542 

121 

371 

179 

377 

375 

106 

255 

300 

77 

289 

107 

336 

820 

222 

412 

382 

65 

458 

356 

456 

369 

419 

438 

174 

227 

171 

553 

492 

377 

592 

98 

307 

551 

473 

344 

210 

244 

192 

305 

522 

652 

385 

66 

335 


128 


UNITED STATES. 


[Nantucket, Ms. - - - - - - - 

Narraguagus, Me. -------- 

Nash, c. h. N. C. -------- 

Nashville, T. - - - - - - - - 

Newark, N. J. --------- 

New-Bedford, Ms. -------- 

Newburn, N.C. - -- -- -- - 

Newburg, N.Y. - -- -- -- - 

Newbury, Vt. - -- -- - - -- 

New-Brunswick, N.J. - 

Newbury, c. h. S. C. - ------ 

N ewbury-Port, Ms. ------- 

Newcastle, Me. --------- 

Newcastle, D. - -- -- -- -- 

New-Germantown, N. J. ----- - 

New-Gloucester, Me. ------- 

New-Hartford. C. -------- 

New-H AVEN, C. -------- 

New Kent, c. h. Va. ------- 

New-Lebanon, N.Y. - -- -- -- 

New-London, C. - -- -- -- - 

New-London, Va. - -- -- -- - 

New-market, Ya. -------- 

New-Milford, C. - -- -- -- - 

New-Milford, Me. -------- 

Newport, R. I. - -- -- -- -- 

Newport, D. --------- 

Newport-Bridge, G. ------- 

Newtown, N.Y. - -- -- -- - 

New -York city, N. Y. ------ 

Nixonton, N. C. --------- 

Norfolk, Va. - -- -- -- -- 

Northampton, Ms. - -- -- -- - 

Northampton, c. h. Va. ------ 

Norridgeworth, Me. ------- 

Northumberland, P. ------- 

Northumberland, c. h. Va. - - - - - 

North-Yarmouth, Me. ------ 

Norwalk, C. - -- -- -- -- - 

Norwich, C. - -- -- -- -- - 

Nottingham, N. II. ------- 

Nottingham, Md. ------ . _ 

Old-Fort Schuyler, N. Y. - 
Old-Town, Md. --------- 

Onondaigua, N. Y. ------- 

Orangeburg, S. C. -------- 

Orange, c. h. Va. - - - - - - - - 

Orford, N. H. - -- -- -- -- 
Ouliout, N. Y. - ------ 

Owega, N.Y. - -- -- -- -- 
Oxford Ac. N. Y. - -- -- -- - 

Painted Post, N. Y. -------- 


Miles. 

Passamaquoddy, Me. ------- 728 

Peekskill, N. Y. -------- 145 

Pendleton, c. h. S. C. - - - - - - - 801 

Penobscot, or Castine, Me. ----- 606 

Peterborough, N. H. ------- 366 

Petersburg, P. - - - 1 13 

Petersburg, Va. - -- -- -- -- 303 

Petersburg, G. - -- -- -- -- 836 

Philadelphia, P. 

Pinkney ville, S. C. - -- -- -- -716 

Piscataway, Md. - -- -- -- -- 178 

Pittsburg, P. - -- -- -- -- 303 

Pittsfield, Ms. - - 299 

Pittsylvania, c. h. Va. - - - - - - - 448 
Pittston, Me. - -- -- -- -- 547 

Pittston, N. J. - -- -- -- -- 58 

Plumstead, P. --------- 36 

Plymouth, N. H. - -- -- -- - 445 

Plymouth, Ms. - -- -- -- -- 393 

Plymouth, N.C. - -- -- -- - 463 

Pomfret, C. ----- 264 

Portland, Me. - -- -- -- - 469 

Port-Royal, Va. - -- -- -- - 230 

Portsmouth, N. H. ------- 411 

Portsmouth, Va. - -- -- -- - 39 Q 

Port-Tobacco, Md. - -- -- -- -194 

Pottsgrove, P. - -- -- -- -- 37 

Poughkeepsie, N. Y. ------- 180 

Powhatan, c. h. Va. ------- 310 

Prince-Edward, c. h. Va. ------ 358 

Princess-Ann, Md. - -- -- -- - 178 

Princeton, N.J. - -- -- -- - 42 

Princeton, N. C. - -- -- -- -- 419 

Prospect, Me. --------- 602 

Providence, R. I. 291 

Queen-Ann’s, Md. - -- -- ---141 

Quincy, Ms. - -- -- -- -- - 360 

Raleigh, N.C. -------- 448 

Randolph, c.h. N.C. - 585 

Reading, P. - -- -- -- -- - 54 

Redhook, N. Y. - -- -- -- - 206 

Rhinebeck, N. Y. - -- -- -- - 198 

Richland, N. C. -------- 551 

Richmond, Va. - -- -- -- -- 278 

Richmond, c. h. Va. ------- 273 

Richmond, c. h. N. C. - - - - - - - 563 

Ridgefield, C. - -- -- -- -- 161 

Rockaway, N.J. - -- -- -- - 123 

Rockford, N.C. -------- 573 

Rockingham, c. h. Va. - - - - - - - 262 

Rockingham, c. h. N.C. ----- - 536 

Rocky-Mount, Va. - -- -- -- - 433] 


Miles. 

382 

673 

443 

1015 

86 

322 

501 

170 

417 

60 

723 

389 

535 

33 

73 

499 

242 

183 

308 

293 

237 

393 

242 

187 

538 

292 

31 

959 

250 

95 

468 

389 

270 

239 

587 

124 

317 

483 

149 

251 

437 

265 

364 

213 

422 

721 

273 

395 

325 

284 

395 

230 


UNITED STATES. 


129 


[Rome, N. Y. - - 
Rutland, Vt. - - 

Romney, Va. - - - 

Sagg-Harbour, N. Y. 
St. Leonard’s, Md. - 
St. Mary’s, G. - - 
St. Tammany’s, Va. 
Salem, Ms. - 
Salem, N. J. - - - 
Salem, N. C. - - - 
Salisbury, Md. - - 
Salisbury, N. C. 
Sampson, c. h. N. C. 
Sandwich, Ms. - - 

Sanford, Me. - - - 
Savannah, G. - - - 

Sawyer’s Ferry, N. C. 
Saybrook, C. - - 

Scotland Neck, N. C. 
Schenectady, N. Y. 
Scipio,N. Y. - - 
Sharpsburgh, Md. - 
Sheffield, Ms. - - 

Shepherdstown, Va. 
Shippensburg, P. 
Shrewsbury, N. J. - 
Smithfield, Va. - - 
Smithfield, N. C. 
Smithtown, N. Y. - • 

Snowhill, Md. - - 
Somerset, Ms. - - 

Southampton, c. h. Va. 
Sparta, N. J. - - - 

Spartan, c. h. S. C. - 
Springfield, Ms. 
Springfield, K. - - 

Stamford, C. - - - 

Statesburg, S. C. 
Staunton, Va. - - 

Stevensburg, Va. 
Stockbridge, Ms. 
Stonington, C. - - ■ 

Strasburg, Va. - - 
Stratford, C . - 
Suffield, C. - - - 

Suffolk, Va. - - - 

Sullivan, Me. - - 
Sumner, S. C. 

Sussex, c. h. N. J. - • 

Sun bury, P. - - - 

S unbury, G. - - - 

Sweedsborough, N, J. 
Sweet Springs, Va. 

VOL. V. 


Miles. Miles. 

376 Taneyton, Md. -------- 121 

359 Tappahannock, V. - -- -- -- - 263 

242 Tarborough, N. C. - -- -- -- - 420 

Taunton, Ms. --------- 312 

202 Thomaston, Me. - -- -- -- -- 564 
186 Todds, Va. - -- -- -- -- - 283 
1054 Tower Hill, R. I. -------- 282 

389 Trenton, Me. --------- 633 

365 Trenton, N. J. -------- SO 

37 Trenton, N. C -521 

531 Troy, N. Y. ---------- 271 

163 

567 Union Town, P. - -- -- -- - 327 

543 Union, N. Y. - -- -- -- -- 340 

411 Upper Marlborough, Md. ----- 162 

447 Urbanna, Va. - -- -- -- - 291 

925 

482 Vassalborough, Me. - .-----551 

219 Vergennes, Vt. - -- -- -- -- 407 

396 Vienna, Md. - -- - - -- -- - 150 

281 

461 Waldoborough, Me. ------- 545 

181 Wallingford, C. - -- -- -- -- 195 

257 Walpole, N. H. - - - - 330 

178 Wardsbridge, N. Y. - -- -- -- 156 

146 Warminster, Va. - -- -- -- - 332 

79 Warren, Me. - -- -- -- -- - 557 

364 Warren, R. I. --------- 302 

473 Warren, Va. ---------- 326 

147 Warrenton, N. C. - -- -- -- - 390 

158 Warwick, Md. - -- -- -- -- 57 

311 WASHINGTON city - - 144 

399 Washington, P. - -- -- -- -- 325 

117 Washington, K. - -- -- -- -- 709 

746 Washington, N. C. - - -- -- -- 460 

250 Washington, G. - -- -- -- -- 813 

729 Water bury, Me. - -- -- -- -- 456 

139 Wavnesborough, N. C. - -- -- - 498 
663 Waynesborough, G. - -- -- -- 800 

287 Wells, Me. - - , - 441 

200 Westerley, R. I. - -- -- -- -- 256 

249 Westfield, Ms. --------- 260 

251 West Liberty, Va. - -- -- -- - 348 

210 Westminster, Vt. - -- -- -- - 529 

169 Westmoreland, c. h. Va. ------ 289 

232 Weathersfield, C. -------- 218 

386 Wheeling, Fa. - -- -- -- -- 363 

645 Whitestown, N. Y. - 368 

Wilkes, N. C. --------- 611 

108 Wilkesbarre, P. -------- 118 

122 Williamsborough, N. C. - - - - - - 407 

974 Williamsburgh, N. Y. 288' 

20 Williamsburg, Va. -------- 338 

380 Williamsport, Md, - -- -- -- - 155 J 

s 


130 


UNITED 


Miles. 

[Williamston, N.C. ------- 444 

Wilmington, D. . 28 

Wilmington, N. C. - -- -- - 600 

Winchendon, Ms. - -- -- -- - 370 

Winchester, Va. 192 

Windham, C. - -- -- -- -- - 233 

Windsor, Vt. - -- -- -- -- 255 

Windsor, N. C. - -- -- -- -- 481 

Winnsborough, S. C. - -- -- -- 708 

Winslow, Me. - -- -- -- -- 559 

Winthorp, Me. - -- -- -- -- 529 

Winton, N.C. - -- -- -- -- 434 

Wiscasset, Me. - -- -- -- -- 525 

Woodbridge, N. J. - -- -- -- - 70 

Woodbury, N. J. - -- -- -- - 9 

Woodstock, Ya. - - - -- -- -- 222 

Woodstown, N. J. ------- - 26 

Worcester, Ms. - -- -- -- -- 299 

Worthington, Ms. - -- -- -- - 289 

M^ythe, c. h. Ya. - - - - - « - - 454 

Yarmouth, Ms. - -- -- -- -- 427 

Yonkers, N. Y. --------- 114 

York, Me. - -- -- -- -- -- 421 

York Town, Ya. - - -- -- -- - 350 

York, P. 88 


Explanation. 

Me. for Maine. 

N. H. New Hampshire. 

Vt. Vermont. 

Ms. Massachusetts. 

R. I. Rhode Island. 

C. Connecticut. 

N. Y. New York. 

N. J. New Jersey. 

P. Pennsylvania. 

N. T. North Western Territory. 

D. Delaware. 

Md. Maryland. 

Va. Virginia. 

K. Kentuky. 

N. C. North Carolina. 

T. Tennessee. 

S. C. South Carolina. 

G. Georgia. 

Ptk. Potowmack. 

C. R. Cross Roads, 

c. h. Court House. 

Post Office Regulations. 

RATES OF POSTAGE FOR SINGLE LETTERS. 

Miles. Cts. 

Any distance not exceeding - - - 30 6 

Over 30, and not exceeding - - - 60 8 


STATES. 

Over 60, and not exceeding - 

Miles. 

- - 100 

Cts. 

10 

Over 100 - - - 

ditto - - 

- - 150 

m 

Over 150 - - - 

ditto - - 

- - 200 

15 

Over 200 - - - 

ditto - - 

- - 250 

17 

Over 250 - - - 

ditto - - 

- - 350 

20 

Over 350 - - - 

ditto - - 

- - 450 

22 

Over 450 - - - 



25 


SHIP LETTERS 

Received by private ships, are rated at 4 cents 
each, and if they are forwarded by post, with the 
addition of the ordinary rates of land postage. 

Ship letters passing in packet-boats or vessels 
provided by the United States, are rated as 


follow : 

Cts. 

Single letters, at------- - 8 

Double, at--------- - 16 

Triple, or packets, at ------ 24 

RATES OF POSTAGE OF NEWS-PAPERS. 

Cts. 

Each paper carried not over 100 miles - 1 

Over 100 miles - -- -- -- - 

But if carried to any post-office in the 
State in which it is printed, whatever 
be the distance, the rate is - - - - 1 


MAGAZINES AND PAMPHLETS ARE RATED 
BY THE SHEET. 

Carried not over 50 miles, per sheet 

Over 50, and not over 100 - ditto 

Any greater distance - - - - 

OBSERVATIONS. 

When postages are charged too high, such as 
a single letter charged as double, an abatement 
of the postage will be made, if the letter or 
packet is opened in the presence of the post- 
master, or his letter-carrier, but not otherwise. 

Letters must be delivered at the offices of 
Boston, N. York, Philadelphia, and Baltimore, 
one hour before the time fixed for the departure 
of the mail, and at other offices half an hour, or 
they will lie until the next post. 

Letter carriers are employed at large post- 
towns, who deliver letters at the residence of in- 
dividuals ; they are entitled to two cents for 
each letter or packet which they deliver, in ad- 
dition to the postage. Any person may, how- 
ever, receive his letters at the post office, on 
giving the postmaster a written direction to 
that purpose. 

Postages of letters or packets may be paid in 
advance at the office where the letter is entered] 


Cts. 

1 

4 

2 


UNITED STATES. 


13l 


[to be conveyed by post, or they may be sent un- 
aid at the writer’s choice. Postages must always 
e paid before delivering of the letter. 

Postmasters are required to be very cautious 
in delivering letters, there being in some towns 
several persons of the same name; the directions 
should be particular in such cases. 

The direction should always mention the State, 
and generally the county in which the place is 
situated ; for there are places of the same name 
in several of the States, and in some States 
places of the same name in different counties. 
As in Pennsylvania there are three places called 
Hanover ; one in York County, where a post- 
office is kept ; one in Dauphin, and the other in 
Luzerne County. 

When a letter is destined to a place where no 
post office is kept, the nearest post-office should 
be mentioned. If the place is not on a post road, 
and it is wished that the postmaster should for- 
ward the letter by private conveyance, that 
wish should be expressed on the letter, and the 
postage should be paid at the office where the 
letter is entered. 

When letters are destined for Canada, or Nova 
Scotia, between which and the United States 
there is a vegular communication by post, the 
postage must be paid in advance at the office 
where the letter is entered, so far as Burlington ; 
Vermont in one instance, and Brewers Maine in 
the other instance. 

When letters are sent by post to be conveyed 
beyond sea, the postage must be paid as far as 
the post-office where the letters are intended to 
be shipped. The postmaster there will forward 
such letters bv the first conveyance. 

The post-office does not insure money or other 
things sent by post; it is always conveyed at 
the risk of the person who sends, or requires it 
to be sent. 

No stage owner, or driver, or common carrier, 
may carry letters on a post road, excepting only 
such letters as may be for the owner of such con- 
veyance, and relating to the same, or to the per- 
son to whom any package or bundle in such con- 
veyance is addressed. 

When letters are delivered by a post-rider, he 
is entitled to two cents for each letter, in addition 
to the postage. 

FREE LETTERS. 

The following persons have a right to frank 
their own letters, and receive those directed to 
them free of postage : the President and Vice 
President of the United States, Secretary of 


State, Secretary of the Treasury, Secretary at 
War, Postmaster General, Comptroller, Register 
and Auditor of the Treasury of the United States, 
Commissioner of the Revenue, Purveyor Ac- 
comptant of the War Office, and Assistant Post- 
master General ; the Members of the Senate and 
House of Representatives of the United States, 
and the Secretary of the Senate and Clerk of the 
House of Representatives, during their actual 
attendance on Congress, and 20 days after the 
close of the session, when their letters do not 
exceed two ounces in weight, and the deputy 
postmasters when their letters do not exceed half 
an ounce in weight. No person may frank other 
letters than his own. If letters are inclosed to 
either of the description of officers above named 
for a person who has not the privilege of frank- 
ing, he must return the letter to the post-office, 
marking upon the letter the place from whence it 
came, that the postmaster may charge postage 
thereon. 

The distances in the table are taken chiefly 
from the information of Congress, and of post- 
masters living on the routes, and it is presumed 
that they are pretty generally accurate. 

ABRAHAM BRADLEY, Junior, 
Clerk in the General Post Office, 
Philadelphia. 

Nov. 2, 1796. 

Note . — The distances are calculated by the 
post route on which the mails are usually car- 
ried. Some alterations have probably taken 
place as well in the number of the post-offices, 
as in the regulations, since the year 1796 ; but 
not such as materially to depreciate the value of 
this information. 

Tables of Coins , Exchange , fyc. 

The currencies of the British colonies in N. 
America have fluctuated and varied so much that 
they have differed greatly both as to time and 
place, seldom being the same in two different 
provinces at a time, and often changing value in 
the same place. In some of the provinces so 
great has been the depreciation, that 2s. sterling 
hath become equal to £ 1 nominal currency, or 
£1 sterling, equal to £10. At Boston, in N. 
England, the exchange ran on in a continual 
course of depreciation in the space of 47 years, 
in an irregular, progressive advance, from -£ 133 
currency for £100 sterling, to £ 1,100 currency 
for £100 sterling. A state of all the degrees 
of depreciation in the respective years, the va- 
riations or changes happened, from the year 
1702 to the year 1749, together with the value] 
s 2 


132 


UNITED STATES. 


[of silver, both bj the ounce and dollar, cor- 
responding- with the said depreciation, are set 
down in the following table. 


Years. 

Exchange. 

Oz. of Silver 
currency. 

Dollar 
sterlin g. 

1702 

133 

s. d. 

G 104 

s. d. 

4 6 

1705 

135 

7 0 

4 

64 

1713 

150 

8 0 

4 74 

1716 

175 

9 3 

4 7 

1717 

225 

12 0 

4 74 

1722 

270 

14 

0 

4 64 

1728 

340 

18 

0 

4 7 

1730 

380 

20 0 

4 74 

1737 

500 

26 

0 

4 

6 

1741 

550 

28 

0 

4 5 

1749 

1,100 

60 0 

4 84 


Their money having thus run on to £1,100 
currency for £100 sterling, or 11 for 1 , a stop 
was put to the further depreciation of the money 
of the province of Massachusetts Bay, in the 
year 1750, by a remittance in money sent over 
from England, to the amount of £183,000 ster- 
ling, to reimburse the expense that province 
had been at in the reduction of Cape Breton, in 
the French war. The money was mostly com- 
posed of Spanish dollars. The depreciated 
paper money, or province bills, were called in 
and paid off, at the rate of 455 . currency for each 
dollar, and the bills burnt, destroyed, and a law 
made by which the par of exchange was fixed at 
£ 1334 currency for £ 100 sterling, and the dol- 
lar at 65 . the same currency ; but, before the 
lapse of three years, the exchanges had become 
as unfavourable as ever. 

The currency of Rhode Island had run on in 
a depreciation from the year 1744 to the year 1759, 
from £450 to £2,300 currency for £100 ster- 
ling. 

The currencies of several of the Provinces 
have at times gone backwards and forwards in 
varying their exchanges with England. The pars 
of exchange, with the several provinces, began 
to be more settled about the year 1761, and were 
as follows : 

Boston, in N. England - - - 133 4 

N. York and E. Jersey - - - 175 or 

171 4 

Pennsylvania and W. Jersey - 165 or 

160 f 


Virginia ------- 125 

Maryland - -- -- --145 

N. Carolina ------ 145 

S. Carolina ------ 700 

Georgia - -- -- -- 100 

Jamaica ------- 140 

Barbadoes ------- 135 

Nevis and Montserrat - 175 


Antigua and St. Christopher - 165 

In Quebec, Montreal, Halifax, Nova Scotia, 
Annapolis, and the Bay of Fundy, the currencies 
might be fixed at 108, 109, or 1 10, when the 
dollar was made to pass for 5s. the pistole for 
18s. the English guinea for 22s. 6d., the johannes 
or 36s. piece for 38s. 6d., and themoidore for 29s. 
in their respective place. 

The course of exchange at N. York has varied 
within the present year, 1814, from 4 to 74 per 
cent, discount. 

FEDERAL MONEY. 

s. d. 

In New England and Virginia, a dollar is 6 0 

New Jersey - "A 

Pennsylvania - \ _ - 7 6 

Delaware - - t 

Maryland - - ) 

S. Carolina and Georgia ------48 

New York and N. Carolina ----80 

TABLE OF THE VALUE OF DOLLARS IN STER” 
LING, RECKONING THE DOLLAR AT 4s. 6d . 
ENGLISH MONEY. 


Dol. 

£• 

s. 

Dol. 

£• 

s. 

d. 

100,000 = 

22,500 

0 

200 = 

45 

0 

0 

50,000 

11,250 

0 

100 

22 

0 

10 

20,000 

4,500 

0 

50 

11 

5 

0 

10,000 

2,250 

0 

40 

9 

0 

0 

5,000 

1,125 

0 

30 

6 

15 

0 

4,000 

900 

0 

20 

4 

10 

0 

3,000 

675 

0 

10 

2 

5 

0 

2,000 

450 

0 

9 

2 

0 

6 

1,000 

225 

0 

8 

1 

16 

(i 

900 

202 

10 

7 

1 

11 


800 

180 

0 

6 

1 

7 

0 

700 

157 

10 

5 

1 

2 

6 

600 

135 

0 

4 

0 

18 

0 

500 

112 

10 

3 

0 

13 

6 

400 

90 

0 

2 

0 

9 

0 

300 

67 

10 

1 

0 

4 



UNITED STATES. 


133 


[table of the value of cents in sterling money. 


s. d. far. 

1 Cent, is equal to - - 0 0 2,16 

2 0 1 0,32 

3 - - - 0 1 2,48 

4 - - 0 2 0,64 

5 -------- 0 2 2,8 

6 - - - 0 3 0,96 

7 0 3 3,12 

8 -------- 0 4 1,28 

9 0 4 3,44 

10 - - 0 5 1,60 

11 -------- 0 5 3,76 

12 - - - 0 6 1,92 

13 -------- 0 7 0,08 

14 -------- 0 7 2,24 

13 -------- 0 8 0,40 

16 -------- 0 8 2,56 

17 -------- 0 9 0,72 

18 - - - 0 9 2,88 

19 - - 0 10 1,04 

20 - 0 10 3,20 

21 -------- 0 11 1,36 

22 -------- 0 11 3,52 

23 - 1 0 1,68 

24 - - - 1 0 3,84 

25 -------- 1 12, 

26 -------- 1 2 0,16 

27 - - - 1 2 2,32 

28 1 3 0,48 

29 - - 1 3 2,64 

30 1 4 0,8 

31 -------- 1 4 2,96 

32 -------- 1 5 1,12 

33 .-- 1 5 3,28 

34 - - - 1 6 1,44 

35 1 6 3,6 

36 - - - 1 7 1,76 

37 -------- 1 7 3,92 

38 -------- 1 8 2,08 

39 -------- 1 9 0,24 

40 -------- 1 9 2,40 

41 - 1 10 0,56 

42 ------- - 1 10 2,72 

43 -------- 1 11 0,88 

44 -------- 1 11 3,04 

45 - - - 2 0 1,20 

46 -------- 2 0 3,36 

47 -------- 2 1 1,52 

48 -------- 2 1 3,68 

49 - 2 2 1,84 

50 -------- 2 3 0, 


s. d. far. 

51 -------- 2 3 2,16 

52 - - 2 4 0,32 

53 - - 2 4 2,48 

54 ... 2 5 0,64 

55 -------- 2 5 2,80 

56 - - - 2 6 0,96 

57 -------- 2 6 3,12 

58 -------- 2 7 1,28 

59 -------- 2 7 3,44 

60 - - - 2 8 1,60 

61 -------- 2 8 3,76 

62 -------- 2 9 1,92 

63 -------- 2 10 0,08 

64 - - - 2 10 2,24 

65 -------- 2 11 0,40 

66 -------- 2 11 2,56 

67 -------- 3 0 0,72 

68 - - 3 0 2,88 

69 ---31 1,04 

70 3 1 3,20 

71 -------- 3 2 1,36 

72 -------- 3 2 3,52 

73 -------- 3 3 1,68 

74 -------- 3 3 3,84 

75 -------- 3 4 2, 

76 -------- 3 5 0,16 

77 -------- 3 5 2,32 

78 -------- 3 6 0,48 

79 -------- 3 6 2,64 

80 -------- 3 7 0,80 

81 -------- 3 7 2,96 

82 -------- 3 8 1,12 

83 -------- 3 8 3,28 

84 -------- 3 9 1,44 

85 - - - 3 9 3,60 

86 -------- 3 10 1,76 

87 -------- 3 10 3,92 

88 -------- 3 11 2,08 

89 -------- 4 0 0,24 

90 -------- 4 0 2,40 

91 -------- 4 1 0,56 

92 -------- 4 1 2,72 

93 -------- 4 2 0,88 

94 -------- 4 2 3,04 

95 -------- 4 3 1,20 

96 4 3 3,36 

97 -------- 4 4 1,52 

98 -------- 4 4 3,68 

99 -------- 4 5 1,84 

100 -------- 4 6] 


134 


UNITED STATES. 


[table op the value of cents in pence *, 

AS COMPUTED AT THE BANKS OF THE UNITED 
STATES AND NORTH AMERICA. 


Pence. 


Cents. 

Pence. 


Cents. 

Pence. 


1 „ 
Cents. 

Pence. 


n 

rD 

3 

1 


1 

24 


27 

47 

. 

52 

70 


78 

2 

- 

2 

25 

- 

28 

48 

- 

53 

71 

- 

79 

3 

- 

3 

26 

- 

29 

49 

- 

54 

72 

- 

80 

4 

- 

4 

27 

- 

30 

50 

- 

55 

73 

- 

81 

3 

- 

5 

28 

- 

31 

51 

- 

57 

74 

- 

82 

6 

. 

7 

29 

- 

32 

52 

- 

58 

75 

_ 

83 

7 

- 

8 

30 

_ 

33 

53 

- 

59 

76 

_ 

84 

8 

- 

9 

31 

- 

34 

54 

- 

60 

77 

- 

85 

9 

- 

10 

32 

- 

35 

55 

- 

61 

78 

- 

87 

10 

- 

11 

33 

- 

37 

56 

- 

62 

79 

_ 

88 

11 

- 

12 

34 

- 

38 

57 

- 

63 

80 

- 

89 

12 

- 

13 

35 

- 

39 

58 

- 

64 

81 


90 

13 

- 

14 

36 

- 

40 

59 

- 

65 

82 

- 

91 

14 

- 

15 

37 

- 

41 

60 

- 

67 

83 

- 

92 

15 

- 

17 

38 

- 

42 

61 

- 

68 

84 

- 

93 

16 

- 

18 

39 

- 

43 

62 

- 

69 

85 

- 

94 

17 

- 

19 

40 

- 

44 

63 

- 

70 

86 

- 

95 

18 

- 

20 

41 

- 

45 

64 

- 

71 

87 

- 

97 

19 

- 

21 

42 

- 

47 

65 

- 

72 

88 

- 

98 

20 

- 

22 

43 

- 

48 

66 

- 

73 

89 

- 

99 

21 

- 

23 

44 

- 

49 

67 

- 

74 

90 

_ 

100 

22 

- 

24 

45 

- 

50 

68 

- 

75 




23 

- 

25 

46 

- 

51 

69 

- 

77 





1-16 of a dollar. 

, 6 4 l 

cents 

1-8 

do. 

m 

do. 

1-4 

do. 

25 

do. 

1-2 

do. 

50 

do. 

1-2 

a pistareen, 

10 

do. 

1 pistareen, 

20 

do. 


* That is pence in currency, wherein one penny 
currency is equal to | of a penny sterling. 


TABLE OF THE VALUE OF THE GOLD COINS OF 
THE FOLLOWING COUNTRIES, AS ESTABLISHED 
BY ACT OF CONGRESS, PASSED FEBRUARY 9, 

1793, VIZ. 


Great 'Britain and Portugal. 

France, Spain, and the Domi- 
nions of Spain. 

Gr. 

Cts. 

Dwt. 

Dol. 

Cts. 

Gr 

Cts. 

Dwt. 

Dol. 

Cts. 

1 

3 

1 

0 

89 

1 

3 

1 

0 

87 

2 

7 

2 

1 

78 

2 

7 

2 

1 

75 

3 

11 

3 

2 

67 

3 

11 

3 

2 

63 

4 

14 

4 

3 

55 

4 

14 

4 

3 

50 

5 

18 

5 

4 

44 

5 

18 

5 

4 

38 

6 

22 

6 

5 

33 

6 

22 

6 

5 

25 

7 

25 

7 

6 

22 

7 

25 

7 

6 

13 

8 

29 

8 

7 

11 

8 

29 

8 

7 

1 

9 

33 

9 

8 

00 

9 

33 

9 

7 

88 

10 

37 

10 

8 

89 

10 

36 

10 

8 

76 

11 

40 

11 

9 

78 

11 

40 

11 

9 

63 

12 

44 

12 

10 

67 

12 

44 

12 

10 

51 

13 

48 

13 

11 

55 

13 

47 

13 

11 

39 

14 

51 

14 

12 

44 

14 

51 

14 

12 

26 

15 

55 

15 

13 

33 

15 

55 

15 

13 

14 

16 

59 

16 

14 

22 

16 

58 

16 

14 

1 

17 

63 

17 

15 

11 

17 

62 

17 

14 

89 

18 

67 

18 

16 

00 

18 

66 

18 

15 

76 

19 

70 

19 

16 

89 

19 

69 

19 

16 

64 

20 

74 

20 

17 

78 

20 

73 

20 

17 

52 

21 

78 

21 

18 

67 

21 

76 

21 

18 

39 

22 

81 

22 

19 

55 

22 

80 

22 

19 

27 

23 

85 

23 

20 

44 

23 

84 

23 

20 

14 

24 

89 

24 

21 

33 

24 

87 

24 

21 

21 


UNI 


UNI 


135 


[table of the weight and value of sundry coins, as they pass IN GREAT BRITAIN and 

THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA *. 


Names of Coins. 

Standard 

Weight. 

Sterling Mo- 
ney of Great 
Britain. 

Pennsylvania, 
New Jersey, 
Delaware, 
Maryland. 

New Hampshire, 
Massachusetts, 
Rhode Island, 
Con. Virginia. 

New York &amp; 
N. Carolina. 

S. Carolina &amp; 
Georgia. 


dw. 

gr- 

£. 

s. 

d. 

£. 

s. d. 

£. 

s. 

d. 

£. 

s. 

d. 

£. 

S . 

d. 

English Guineas - - - - 

5 

6 

1 

1 

0 

1 

15 0 

1 

8 

0 

1 

IT 

4 

1 

1 

9 

French ditto ------ 

5 

4 

1 

1 

0 

1 

14 6 

1 

7 

6 

1 

16 

0 

1 

1 

5 

English Crowns - - - - - 

19 

0 

0 

5 

0 

0 

8 4 

1 0 

6 

8 

0 

9 

0 

0 

5 

0 

French ditto ------ 

19 

0 

0 

5 

0 

0 

8 4 

0 

6 

8 

0 

9 

°r 

0 

5 

0 

English Sixpence - - - - 

1 

21 

0 

0 

6 

0 

0 10 

0 

0 

8 

0 

0 

10* 

0 

0 

6 ' 

Spanish Dollars - - - - - 

17 

6 

0 

4 

6 

0 

7 6 

0 

6 

0 

0 

8 

0 

0 

4 

8 

Johannes ------- 

18 

0 

3 

12 

0 

6 

0 0 

4 

16 

0 

6 

8 

0 

4 

0 

0 

Half-Johannes - - - - - 

9 

0 

1 

16 

0 

3 

0 0 

2 

8 

0 

3 

4 

0 

2 

0 

0 

French Pistoles - - - - - 

4 

4 

0 

16 

0 

1 

7 6 

1 

2 

0 

1 

8 

0 

0 

17 

6 

Spanish ditto ------ 

4 

6 

0 

16 

6 

1 

8 0 

1 

2 

0 

1 

9 

0 

0 

18 

0 

Doubloons ------ 

16 

21 

3 

6 

0 

5 

12 6 

4 

8 

0 

5 

16 

0 

3 

10 

0 

Moidores ------- 

6 

18 

1 

7 

0 

2 

5 0 

1 

16 

0 

2 

8 

0 

1 

8 

0 


* It will be useful to remember, 1st. that Pennsylvania currency is reduced to sterling, by multiplying by 3 and dividing by 5. 
£.100 sterling, making at par £.i66| Pennsylvania currency. That is, a merchant, when exchange is at par, will give a draft on 
Pennsylvania for £.16 6| on receiving £.100 sterling. 

2 . That New York currency is reduced to sterling, by multiplying by 9 and dividing by 16. A shilling, New York currency, is 
6A sterling. 

3. That New England and Virginia currency is reduced to sterling, by multiplying by 3 and dividing by 4. 

4. That S. Carolina and Georgia currency is reduced to sterling, by deducting 


UNDERHILL, a township of Vermont, Chit- 
tendon County, 12 miles e. of Colchester, and 
contains 65 inhabitants. 

[UNION, a county of S. Carolina, Pinckney 
district, containing’, in 1790, 7,693 inhabitants, 
of whom 6,430 were whites, and 1,215 slaves 
It sends two representatives and one senator 
to the State legislature. Chief town Pinckney- 
ville.] 

[Union, a rocky township in Tolland County, 
Connecticut, w. of Woodstock, and about i0 
miles n. e. of Tolland.] 

[Union, a township of the district of Maine, 
Lincoln County, containing, in 1790, 200 inha- 
bitants. In was incorporated in 1786.] 

[Union, a post town of the State of N . Y ork, 
Tioga County, on the n. side of Suspuehannah 
river, and w. of the mouth of the Chenango, 90 
miles s. e. by e. of Williamsburg, on Genesse 
river, 22 e. n. e. of Athens, or Tioga Point, 
56 s. w. of Cooperstown. In 1796, there were 


in the township 284 of the inhabitants qualified 
electors.] 

[Union River, or Plantation, No. 6, in the 
district of Maine, is situated in Hancock County, 
25 miles n. e. of Penobscot.] 

[Union River, in the county of Hancock, dis- 
trict of Maine, empties into Blue Hill Bay, on 
the e. side of Penobscot Bay. Long Island, in 
this Bay, is in lat. 44° 25' and long. 68° 16''.] 
[Union Town, a post town of Pennsylvania, 
Fayette County, on Redstone Creek. It contains 
a church, a stone gaol, and a brick court-house, 
and about 80 dwelling houses. Near it are two 
valuable merchant mills. It is the seat of the 
county courts, and is 14 miles s. by e. of Browns- 
ville, where Redstone Creek enters the Monon- 
gahela, 37 miles s. of Pittsburg, 18 n. e. of Mor- 
gantown in Virginia, and 212 w. of Philadel- 
phia.] 

[UNITAS, a village of N. Carolina, situated 
at the head of Gargal’s Creek.] 


136 


U P A 


UNITIMONI, a river of the province and 
government of Guayana or Nueva Andalucia, 
which rises at the beginning of the sierras of 
Parime; and, forming a curve to the w. enters 
the Maguiritaris. 

[UNITY, a settlement in Lincoln County, dis- 
trict of Maine, between the West Ponds, seven 
or eight miles w. of Sidney, opposite to Vassal- 
borough, and 15 miles n. w. of Hallowell. It 
lies on Sandy River, about 16 miles from its 
mouth.] 

[Unity, a township of New Hampshire, si- 
tuated in Cheshire County, a few miles n. e. of 
Charleston. It was incorporated in 1764, and 
contained, in 1796, 538 inhabitants.] 

[Unity Town, in Montgomery County, Mary- 
land, lies two or three miles from Patuxent 
River, 11 from Montgomery court-house, and 24 
n. of the city of Washington.] 

UNUCUMURI, a small river in the pro- 
vince and county of Las Amazonas, and in the 
Portuguese territory, which runs e. between the 
rivers Negro and Maranon, and enters the lake 
Unamaquema. 

UPA, a river of the province and government 
of Antioquia, in the new kingdom of Granada, 
which runs n., and turning immediately to the w. 
enters the grand river Magdalena. 

UPAMENA, a settlement of the jurisdiction 
of Santiago de las Atalayas, and government of 
San Juan de los Llanos, in the new kingdom of 
Granada. It is very reduced and poor, of a hot 
temperature, producing maize, yucas , plantains, 
and some cacao: it is close to the capital. 

A river of the province and captainship of 
Scara in Brazil, which runs n. and turning to n. 
n. e. enters the sea between Cape Corso and 
the river Hanaigara. 

UPANO, a river of the province and govern- 
ment of Quixos and Macas, in the kingdom of 
Quito, formed by the rivers Zuna, Volcano, and 
Abanico. It laves to the city of Macas ; and 
being afterwards united with others, forms the 
Morma. 

UPAR, or Upari, along and beautiful valley 
of the province and government of Santa Marta, 
in the new kingdom of Granada. It was dis- 
covered by Gonzalo Ximines de Puesada in 
1555 : it is traversed from n. to s. and fertilized 
by the river Cesar ; is of a hot temperature, and 
produces much sugar cane, and all kinds of pro- 
ductions, as well European as American : it is 
tolerably well peopled, and in the mountains of 
its vicinity are some mines of silver, copper, 
iron, and lead : it is more than 40 miles long 


U P R 

from n. to s., and more than 30 wide from e. 
to w. 

UPATA, a town of the province and govern- 
ment of Guayana or Nueva Andalucia; situate 
on the skirt of a mountain. 

Upata, a valley of the same province, on the 
side of the river Paragua, near the mouth by 
which it enters the Orinoco. 

[U PATCH AWAN AN, or Temisc amain, a 
Canadian settlement in N. America, in lat. 47° 
17' 30" n.] 

UPIA, a river of the province and government 
of San J uan de los Llanos, in the new kingdom 
of Granada, which rises in the mountains be- 
tween the city of Tunja and that of Santiago de 
las Atalayas, and enters the Meta. 

UPIEN1, a river of the province and captain- 
ship of Scara in Brazil, which rises from a lake, 
and enters the sea between the river Acuma and 
the Point of Arecifes. 

[UPPER ALLOWAYS Creek, in Salem 
County, New Jersey.] $ 

[UPPER BALD EAGLE, a township of Penn- 
sylvania, in Mifflin County.] 

[UPPER DISTRICT, a division of Georgia, 
which contains the counties of Montgomery, 
Washington, Hancock, Green, Franklin, Ogle- 
thorp, Elbert, Wilkes, Warren, Columbia, and 
Richmond.] 

[UPPER DUBLIN, a township of Pennsyl- 
vania, in Montgomery County.] 

[UPPER FREEHOLD, a township of New 
Jersey, Monmouth County, adjoining to Burling- 
ton and Middlesex Counties on the n. and s. w. 
and Freehold on the e. It contained in 1790. 
3442 inhabitants.] 

[UPPER GREAT MONADNOCK, in the 

township of Lemington, in the n. e. corner of 
Vermont, on Connecticut River.] 

[UPPER HANOVER, a township of Penn- 
sylvania, Montgomery Countv.] 

[UPPER MARLBOROUGH, a post-town of 
Maryland, 14 miles s. e. of Bladensburg, and 15 
n.e. of Piscataway.] 

[UPPER MILFORD, a township of Penn- 
sylvania, Northampton Countv.] 

[UPPER PENN’S NECK, a township of 
New Jersey, Salem County.] 

[UPPER SAURA, a place in N. Carolina, 
on Dan River, about 130 miles w. from Ha- 
lifax.] 

[UPPER SAVAGE Islands, in Hudson’s 
Bay. Lat. 62° 32' 30" n. Long. 70° 48 / a&gt;.] 
UPRIGHT, a cape on the s. coast of the 
Strait of Magellan, at the s. entrance of the third 


U R A 


137 


U R A 

Harrow channel, called Del Pasage, (of the Pas- 
sage.) 

[UPTON, a township of Massachusetts, Wor- 
cester County ; containing, in 1790, 900 inhabi- 
tants, dispersed on 13,000 acres of land, favour- 
able for orcharding, pasturage, and grass. It is 
w. of Sherburne, in Middlesex County, 15 miles 
s. e. of Worcester, and 38 s. w. of Boston.] 

UQUAIGUARA, a river of the same province 
and kingdom as the former, which enters the sea 
between thejUpanema and the Point of Val. 

UQUETA, a lake of the province and govern- 
ment of Cumana, formed by the waste waters of 
the Orinoco, in the part where the arms of this 
river are divided into various channels to enter 
the sea. 

UQUIREI, San Juan de la Laguna de, a 
settlement of the province and government of 
Venezuela, in the new kingdom of Granada. 

UQUITOA, San Antonio de, a settlement 
of the province and government of Sonora in 
Nueva Espaha; situate near a river, between the 
settlements of Addi and San Luis de Bacapa. 

URABA, a province of the new kingdom of Gra- 
nada, to the w. of that of Cartagena, and bounded 
by that of Darien. It extends along the coast of the 
N. Sea, and was discovered by Pedro de Heredia, 
in 1534. Its capital was San Sebastian de Bel- 
lavista, a city which is at the present day de- 
stroyed. It comprehends the province of Cali- 
donia where the Scotch established themselves ; is 
of a hot temperature, and of a moist soil, and 
covered with woods, being irrigated by the river 
Atrato or San Juan. The English of Jamaica 
come hither to trade with the Indians, and to 
carry back gold, of which there is an abundance. 
Its natives are very warlike, and use swords and 
fire arms, and have made the Spaniards afraid of 
them Avhenever these have attempted to invade 
their province. This they have endeavoured to 
do frequently, but without effect. These Indians 
are allies of the Dariens and of the English. 

Uraba, a great gulph of the same province, 
called also of Darien, formed by the cape San 
Sebastian to the e. and that of Tiburon to the w. 
discovered by Rodrigo Bastidas in 1502. Its ex- 
tent is 26 leagues from s. to n. and its width nine 
from e. to w. Its coast is full of sharp and inac- 
cessible shoals, and only towards the w. and s. 
are there any places fit for disembarking. Seve- 
ral rivers empty themselves into this gulph, but 
the largest is the Atrato or San Juan. Close to 
the &amp;). coast are many islands, one behind an- 
other, forming so many channels. It was for- 
merly much frequented by the French, but in 

vou. v. 


1764 it was abandoned by them, leaving to the 
English a free commerce with the natives. The 
city of San Sebastian de Bella-vista, of which no- 
thing but the name remains, was situate on its 
shore. Its best port is that called Nilcos. 

Uraba, an island of the S. Sea, in the bay or 
gulph of Panama, of the kingdom of Tierra 
Firme. It is small, and close to that of Taboga, 
towards the e. 

URABAES, a barbarous nation of Indians, 
descended from those of Darien, who dwell in the 
woods and forests of the province of Uraba. 
They are very warlike and dextrous in the use 
of swords and fire arms, which were given them 
by the English and French in exchange for gold. 
They are allies of the Dariens and implacable 
enemies to the Spaniards. 

URACAPU, a river of the province and go- 
vernment of Guayana or Nueva Andalucia, one 
of those that enter the Orinoco by the e. side. 

U RAC A YU, a settlement of the same pro- 
vince as the former river, in the country of the 
Quiriripas Indians. 

[URACHO, a river on the e. coast of S. Ame- 
rica, is 18 leagues w. n. w. of Caurora River.] 

[URAGUAY. See Uruguay.] 

URAMARCA, a settlement of the province 
and corregimiento of Andahuailas in Peru ; an- 
nexed to the curacy of the settlement of Chin- 
cheros. 

URAMEU, a settlement of the province and 
government of Guayana, in the part possessed by 
the Portuguese. 

URANA, a settlement of the province and go- 
vernment of Guayana, one of the missions that 
were held by the Jesuits in the province of 
Santa Fe ; situate on the shore of the Orinoco. 

[URANO, a river on the n. coast of S. Ame- 
rica, which enters the ocean abreast of the west- 
ernmost of the Peritas Islands, about three 
leagues w. of Coniana Bay. It only admits small 
boats and canoes. Otchier Bay is to the w, 
of it.] 

URAPICHLT, Santa Maria de, a settle- 
ment of the head settlement of the district of 
Arautzan, and alcaldia mayor of Valladolid, in 
the province and bishopric of Mechoacan. It 
contains 30 families of Indians, employed in the 
cultivation of seeds, cutting wood, and fabricat- 
ing earthenware and saddle-trees. 

URARCIIAES, a barbarous nation of In- 
dians, but little known, dwelling in the woods 
near the river Cayari, to the s . of the Maranon. 

URARINES, San Francisco Xavier de 
los, a settlement of the missions that were held 

T 


IJ R E 


URO 


138 


by the Jesuits, in the province and government 
of Mainas, in the kingdom of Quito ; situate on 
the shore of the Napo. 

URAVE, a river of the province and govern- 
ment of Honduras, which rises near the coast, 
runs n. and enters the sea between Cape Cama- 
ron and the Bay of Cartago. 

[URBANNA, a small post-town of Virginia, 
Middlesex County, on the s. w. side of Rappa- 
hannock River, 17 miles from Stingray Point, at 
the mouth of the river, 60 s.e. of Fredericks- 
burg, 53 e. by n. of Richmond, and 25 from Tap- 
pahannock. Wheat is shipped from this to Eu- 
rope, and Indian corn, &amp;c. to New England, 
Nova Scotia, and the W. Indies.] 

L B BA NO, a city of Middlesex County, in the 
province of Jersey, one of the United States of 
N. America, lying s.w. of the river Rappaha- 
nock. 

URCO, San Juan de, a mountain of the 
kingdom of Quito, in the corregimiento of the 
district of Las Cinco Leguas de la Capital. 

URCOS, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Quispicanchi in Peru, near 
which is found the lake into which the Indians 
are said to have thrown the great chain of gold 
made on the birth of Huascar, in the search of 
which much pains have been lost. It is thought 
that this lake is formed artificially, having con- 
ducts whereby to fill and empty under the earth, 
as it has always remained since the time of the 
conquest at one height. It is 500 yards long, 
and 300 wide. Its depth in the centre is 56 
yards ; it is situate in a plain or valley of the 
same name, wherein are to be seen the ruins of 
the great palace, in which the Inca, Yahuar 
Huacac, retired when despoiled by his son of the 
throne. 

URCUSA, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Lucanas in Peru ; annexed to 
the curacy of the settlement of Otoca. 

URCUQUI, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Otavalo, in the kingdom of 
Quito. In its district is a large estate, called 
Conaqui. 

URECHO, San Antonio de, a head settle- 
ment of the district and alcaldia mayor of Valla- 
dolid, in the province and bishopric of Mecho- 
acan. It is of a hot temperature, and one of 
those that suffered most severely in the epide- 
mic which raged at Matlazahua, whereby its po- 
pulation became reduced to the following estates: 
Parota, in which they make sugar, and which is 
one league in length, contains four families of 
Spaniards and 17 of Mulattoes ; Sanja contains 


nine ; Xongo, which is so near its capital as to 
be divided only by a river which irrigates it, 17; 
San Juan, at a league’s distance, 20 ; and that of 
San Pedro Tiripitio, with a small mill or engine 
close by it, 14 ; besides a few others, some 
leagues from the capital, Pasquaro. 

URES, a settlement of the province and go- 
vernment of Sonora in Nueva Espana ; situate 
on the shore of the river Sonora, between the 
settlements of San Xavier and Babiacora. 

[URFE, a river of Upper Canada, afterwards 
called Grand River, now The Ouse, which runs 
into Lake Erie.] 

URIDIALES, a small settlement or ward of 
the district and jurisdiction of Valladolid, in the 
province and bishopric of Mechoacan. 

URIPA, a settlement of the province and cor- 
regimiento of Andahuailas in Peru; 14 leagues 
from its capital. 

URIQUE, a settlement and real of silver 
mines, in the province and government of Ci- 
naloa. 

URIREO, a head settlement of the district 
and alcaldia mayor of De Zelaya in the province 
and bishopric of Mechoacan. It contains a con- 
vent of religious of S. Augustin, 907 families ol 
Indians, and some of Spaniards and Mustees. 

URITUQUASI, a settlement of the province 
and government of Popayan in the Nuevo Reyno 
de Granada, in the road which leads down from 
Santa Fe. 

URITUSINGA, a mountain of the province 
and corregimiento of Loxa in the kingdom of 
Quito, and in the territory of the Malacatos to 
the s. It is celebrated for its mountains abound- 
ing in bark, the best that is known, a preference 
being given to that gathered in the e. part of the 
same mountain. These woods grow upon the 
top of difficult rocks, so as to render the opera- 
tion of gathering the bark extremely hazardous. 
The mountain is also known by the name of Cor- 
dillera ofCaxanuma. 

URMIA I, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Paria in Peru, and of the arch- 
bishopric of Charcas ; annexed to the curacy of 
the settlement of Poopo. 

URMIRI, a settlement of the province and 
government of Potosi in Peru ; annexed to the 
curacy of the settlement of Salinas. 

URON, a river of the province and govern- 
ment of Darien and kingdom of Tierra Firme. 
It runs s. and then turns e. to enter the Pacific 
Sea. On its shores the Indians have many dwel- 
lings, as the territory is very fertile and de- 
lightful. 


U R U 

URSOLA, S. a settlement of the head settle- 
ment of the district of Quechula, and alcaldia 
mayor of Tepeaca in Nueva Espana. It contains 
two families of Mustees , and 50 of Indians, and 
is very close to its head settlement. 

URU, a river of the province and government 
of Guayana or Nueva Andalucia, which enters 
the Apure. 

UR (JANA, a settlement of the same province 
and government as the former, on the shore of 
the river Orinoco, on the e. side. It is one of 
the missions which were held by this river by the 
Jesuits, and is now under the charge of the Ca- 
puchin fathers. 

URUANI, a small river of the province and 
government of Cumana, which runs s. and enters 
the Cuyuni by the n. side. 

URUAPAN, San Francisco de, a head set- 
tlement of the district of the alcaldia mayor of 
Valladolid, in the province and bishopric of Me- 
choacan. It is of a mild temperature ; situate at 
the entrance of the sierra of Mechoacan. In its 
district are nine wards surrounding it, in which 
dwell 125 Indian families, besides 50 in the set- 
tlement itself; there are also of Spaniards, Mus- 
tees, and Mulattoes, about 200 others. The na- 
tives trade in seeds, the produce of the country, 
cattle, and cotton of which they make most beau- 
tiful woven stuffs ; in wax, honey, wrought cop- 
per, troughs, chests, and other articles of car- 
pentry. It has a convent of religious of St. 
Francis, and is 12 leagues s.w. of its capital. 

URUBAMBA, a province and corregimiento 
of the kingdom of Peru. It is only 3f leagues 
long, and two wide ; seven leagues distant from 
Cuzco. It was called ofYueay in the time of 
the Indians, and is now the marquisate of Oro- 
pesa. It has in its district various estates, which 
yield wheat, maize, and other vegetable produc- 
tions ; and in which there are some great salines, 
by which Cuzco is provided. The country is 
cheerful, pleasant, fertile, and abounding in many 
the most exquisite fruits. Through it runs the 
river Pilcomayo, which is crossed by two bridges 
of rushes, and in it are found many trout of deli- 
cate flavour. It contains different families of In- 
dians of noble origin but very poor ; and the 
number of the whole of the inhabitants should 
amount to 5000. The capital is the town of the 
same name, [on the shore of the river Quilla- 
bamba, or Urubamba, or Vilcabamba, to the n. of 
Cuzco, in lat. 13° 16' s. and long. 71° 3V re).] 

URUBAQUARA, a settlement of the pro- 
vince and country of Las Amazonas in the part 


URU 139 

possessed by the Portuguese, on the shore of the 
river of that name. 

Urubaquara, a river of this province, w hich 
rises in the territory of the Carpinas Indians, 
runs s. and enters the Amazonas, between those 
of Curupatuba and Puru. 

URUBU, S. Antonio de, a village and set- 
tlement of the Portuguese, in the province and 
captainship of Todos Santos and kingdom of Bra- 
zil ; on the shore of the grand river of San Fran- 
cisco. 

Urubu, another settlement, in the province 
and captainship of Sergipe del Rey in the same 
kingdom, also on the shore of the river San Fran- 
cisco, and near its mouth. 

Urubu, a river of the province and country 
of Las Amazonas, in the part possessed by the 
Portuguese. It runs to s.s.e. and loses itself in 
the great pool of w aters w hich is formed by dif- 
ferent arms of the Maranon in the territory of the 
Urabaquis Indians. 

URUCANGUA, a small river of the province 
and captainship of Rey in Brazil, which rises near 
the coast, runs e. and enters the sea by the side 
of the rocks of Santa Marta. 

URUGUAY, a province or extent of country 
of S. America; bounded n. by the province of 
Guaira in the government of Paraguay, s. by the 
mouth of the river La Plata, e. by the province 
and captainship of Rey in Brazil, and w. by the 
river Parana. Its length from n. e. to s. w. is 
somewhat more than 200 leagues, and its width 
from e. to w. about 130, although in some parts 
it be narrower. It is divided by the river of its 
name into e. and w. This rises in the mountains 
of the kingdom of Brazil, and runs for more than 
620 miles in a direct line with an extraordinary 
violence, making a terrible noise amongst the 
rocks, and in the winter season it swells to such 
a degree as to appear like a sea. 

This country was inhabited by the Cassapimi- 
nian Indians, and is, for the greater part, plain, 
but abounding in thick woods, in which are in- 
finite numbers of wild animals and birds, espe- 
cially parrots ; also, the llanuras were formerly 
thickly inhabited by ostriches, lions, dainos , and 
goats; and on both shores of the river there are 
large pastures, where breed innumerable herds of 
horses and w ild cow s. 

Uruguay, a large, abundant, and navigable 
river of the province and government of Para- 
guay. It rises in lat. 26° 30 ' s. and collecting 
various other streams, traverses a vast extent of 
country to s.e. [Its length, in a direct line from 
t 2 


140 


URU 


U S F 


its source to its mouth, being; more than 620 
miles and receiving the waters of the Papiri, Ibi- 
cuiti, Timbey, Tibiquari, Ibicapiuti, Negro, and 
others, as far as lat. 34° s. It enters the river 
La Plata, near Buenos Ayres, to the w. n. w. of 
the colony of Sacramento, which belonged to the 
Portuguese, being joined a little below this place 
by the immense tributary stream of the Parana, 
which serves also to swell the river La Plata.] 

Uruguay, another, a small river in the same 
province and government, which runs e. and also 
enters the Parana, near the grand river of Cu- 
rituba. 

URUGUAIFOSTA, a river of the province 
and captainship of San Pablo in Brazil, which 
runs n. n. w. and enters the Uruguay. 

URUGUAI-MERIN, a river of the same pro- 
vince and government as the former, which runs 
to the same rhumb not far from the former, and 
enters also the Uruguay. 

URUGUAI-PITA, a river of the province 
and government of Paraguay, which runs e. and 
enters, very abundant, into the Uruguay, oppo- 
site the mouth of the Pepiri guazu. 

URUICARASI, a settlement of the province 
and corregimiento of Chayanta or Charcas in 
Peru. 

URULONGA. See Uruncagua. 

URUMPE, a river of the province and coun- 
try of Las Amazonas, which rises between those 
of Madera and Anilore, and enters the former. 

URUNDEI YURU, a fort of the province 
and government of Paraguay, with a garrison of 
Spaniards to restrain the incursions of the Inlidel 
Indians. 

URUPARATE, a river of the province and 
country of Las Amazonas, one of those of which 
the waters are tributary to the Maranon : be- 
tween the Yume and the Curutate. 

URUPI, a small river of the same province 
and country as the former, and in the territory of 
the Portuguese, which runs e. and joins the Ma- 
ranon just at its entrance into the sea. 

URUPIRA, a river of the province and go- 
vernment of Guayana or Nueva Andalucia. It 
rises near the settlement of the missions of San 
Joseph de Otomayos, runs?®, and enters the Ori- 
noco close to the settlement of Nuestra Sehora 
de los Angeles. 

URUSSA, a small river of the province and 
country of Las Amazonas, which rises in the ter- 
ritory of the Mayorunas Indians, runs n. close to 
the Macobas, and enters the Maranon opposite 
the settlement of S. Carlos de Carachis. 


URUTA, a small river of the province and 
government of Guayana or Nueva Andalucia. 
It is formed by various streams in the country of 
the Paudacotos Indians, runs n. and turning" af- 
terwards its course to e. enters the Paragua. 

URUTPA, a small river of the same province 
and government as the former. It rises in the 
country of the Aehirigotos Indians, runs n. w. 
and enters the Caroni. 

USIACUSI, a settlement of the province and 
government of Cartagena in the Nuevo Reyno 
de Granada, on the shore of the channel which 
runs from the swamp of Turbaco into the sea. 

USICAYOS, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Carabaya in Peru, annexed to 
the curacy of the settlement of Caoza. 

USCHAICOCHA, a settlement of the province 
and corregimiento of Canta, in the same kingdom 
as the former ; annexed to the curacy of the set- 
tlement of Pari. 

USME, a settlement of the corregimiento of In- 
dians of Ubaque, in the Nuevo Reyno de Gra- 
nada. It is of a cold temperature, fertile in 
wheat, papas, barley and other productions of 
this climate ; has very few housekeepers and less 
Indians, although the inhabitants of the settle- 
ment of Tunzuelo, which has been extinguished, 
has been added to it : three leagues s. e. of Santa 
Fe. 

USPA-LLACTA, or UspalijAta, which, in 
the Chilian language, means land of ashes. It is 
a spot of the kingdom of Chile, in the territory of 
the city of Mendoza, celebrated for its rich gold 
mines, which are very abundant, and as especially 
are those of San Romualdo and of San Nicholas 
de Bari. 

[Uspa-ulacta, or Uspaluata, the name of 
one of the largest and richest silver mines in the 
kingdom of Chile, from whence the three sorts of 
ores are extracted ; one of these, the black ore, is 
held in particular estimation by the miners, and 
is so called from its matrix being of a dark colour. 
Those of them who are experienced, are scarcely 
ever deceived in this ore, and, whenever they 
strike upon a new vein, can nearly determine by 
the eye the quantity of silver which it will yield. 
This ore presents three very distinct varieties, 
though differing but little in appearance. The 
first, called negrillo , resembles the scoria of iron, 
and affords no apparent indication of silver. The 
second, the rossicloro , which is distinct from the 
red silver ore, and yields a red powder when 
filed ; it is very rich, although its external 
appearance is not promising. The third, the 


usu 

piombo-ronca, the richest of all, as it is mineral- 
ized with a very small quantity of sulphur ; it is 
much more easily separated than the others, 
which require a more laborious and complicated 
operation. This mine is situate upon the eastern 
mountains of that portion of the Andes, forming 
a part of the province of Aconcagua. On the top 
of these mountains is a large plain, called Uspol- 
lata, of more than 17 leagues in length and three 
in breadth ; it is watered by a pleasant river and 
covered with delightful groves ; the air is healthy 
and temperate, and the soil fertile. This plain 
serves as a base to another more elevated, called 
Faramillo, upon which the Andes of the first rank 
rise to such a height as to be seen distinctly at San 
Luis de la Punta, a distance of 120 leagues. The 
mine of Uspallata extends along the base of the 
eastern mountains of the plain of the same name, 
from latitude 33°, in a direct n. course, but the 
termination of it is unknown; for we have been 
assured, by persons who have followed it for 30 
leagues, that it continues to be equally abundant 
at that distance ; and there are those who assert 
that it is a ramification of the celebrated mine 
of Potosi. The principal vein is nine feet in 
breadth, but it branches out upon both sides into 
several that are smaller, which extend to the 
neighbouring mountains, and are said to exceed 
SO miles in length. This m ne is found to in- 
crease in richness in proportion to its depth. It 
was discovered in the year 1638, but although at 
first it furnished the strongest indication of its 
wealth, from want of labourers, or some other 
cause, it was neglected until 1763, but since that 
period has been constantly wrought with immense 
profit.] 

USPAS, a barbarous nation of Indians of the 
province and government of Mainas, in the king- 
dom of Quito, who inhabit the woods on the bor- 
ders of the Tigre. It was very numerous, but 
through the continual wars it has maintained, 
their numbers have been much diminished. 

LTSQU1L, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Guamachuco in Peru. 

USUMASINTLA, a river of the jurisdiction 
and alcaldia mayor of Tabasco in Nueva Espana. 
It rises in the country of the Lacandones Indians 
and enters the sea. 

USUPAMA, a river of the province and go- 
vernment of Guay ana, or Nueva Andalucia, 
which rises zo. of the river Caroni, runs e. and 
unites itself with the Cuyuni and Yuruari. 

Usupama, a sierra or cordillera of mountains of 
the same province and government, which runs 


UTQ 141 

s. e. nearly parallel with the Rinscote, enters the 
river Caroni and the Cuyuni. 

UTAC San Pedro de, a settlement of the 
province and corregimiento of Chachapoyas in 
Peru, annexed to the curacy of the settlement of 
Chuquibamba. 

UTATLAN, a settlement of the province and 
alcaldia mayor ofChiapa, in the kingdom of Gua- 
temala, and of the head settlement of the district 
of that of Comitlan. 

UTAWAS, a settlement of Indians of this na- 
tion in Canada, near the bay of Saguana, to the e. 
betw een that bay and the lake Huron. 

Utawas, another settlement in the same pro- 
vince, between the Lakes Erie and St. Clare, on 
the shore of the strait or arm by which these 
lakes are communicated. 

Utawas, a large and abundant river of the 
same province, which rises near the Lake Nipis- 
sing, runs e. and enters by two arms into the St. 
Lawrence, forming the island of Montreal. [This 
river divides Upper and Lower Canada, and, 
more properly speaking, falls into Jesus Lake, 
118 miles s. w. of Quebec. It receives the waters 
of Timmiskamain, 360 miles from its mouth ; 85 
miles above which is called Montreal River ] 

UTCAS, a settlement of the province and cor - 
regimiento of Caxatambo in Peru ; annexed to 
the curacy of the settlement of its capital. 

UTCH1VAO, a river of the province and 
government of La Guayana or Neuva Andalucia. 
It rises from the Lake Icupa, runs n. and enters 
the Paragua very near the entrance of this into 
the Caroni. 

UTEC, a settlement of the province and corre- 
gimiento of Lucanas in Peru ; annexed to the 
curacy of its capital. 

UTEN, a river of the kingdom of Chile, on 
the shore of which stands the city Imperial. It 
rises in the cordillera of the Andes, and runs w. 
until it enters the S. Sea. Some call it the Cauten. 
[It forms at its mouth a small bay, which is 66 
miles n. of the city of Valdivia, and 120 s. of the 
city of Conception, in lat. 38° 44 / a.] 

U'l'l LA, a small island of the N. Sea, near the 
coast of the province and government of Hondu- 
ras, opposite the mouth of the Comecuero. 

Utila, a small river of this province, which 
enters the sea. 

UTQUVU, a small river of the province and 
colony of Surinam, in the part of Guayana pos- 
pessed by the Dutch. It rises in the sierra of 
Rinocote, forms a semicirle, and enters the Ca» 
marin. 


142 


V A C 


VAC 


UTRECHT, a small settlement of tlie pro- 
vince of New York in the United States of N. 
America, n. w. of Long Island, three miles e. of 
Hendric, and eight n. w. of New York. [It has 
a Dutch church, and contained, in 1790, 562 in- 
habitants ; of whom 76 were electors, and 206 
were slaves.] 

UTUN-SULLA, anantient and small province 
of the kingdom of Peru, conquered and united bj 
the monarch Yahuar-huacac, an hereditary prince 
and son of Inca Roca, sixth emperor. 

UTZILA, San Felipe de, a settlement of 
the head settlement of the district of Chinantia, 
and alcaldia mayor of Cozamaloapan in Nueva 
Espana ; founded on a plain surrounded by 
craggy mountains, and watered by a river, which 
is an arm of the Alvarado. It contains 190 fami- 
lies of Indians, who live by the commerce of 
maize and cotton, which it produces in abun- 
dance, and which is sold in the jurisdiction of 
Teutila, by which it is bounded by the s. s. e. 
and many leagues e. of Mexico. 

UVINA, a large, beautiful, and fertile llanura 
of the province and corregimiento of lea in Peru. 
It is full of vines, olives, and all kinds of fruits, 
and is sufficiently peopled. 


[UXBRIDGE, a township of Massachusetts, 
Worcester county, 38 miles s. w. of Boston. It 
was taken from Mendon, and incorporated in 
1727, and Northbridge was afterwards taken 
from it. It contained in 1790, ISO dwelling- 
houses, and 1308 inhabitants. It is bounded s. 
by the state of Rhode Island. Not far from 
Shoe-log Pond, in the s. w. part of the town, 
there is an iron mine which is improved to con- 
siderable advantage.] 

[Uxbridge, in the e. riding of the county of 
York, Upper Canada, is to the n. and in the rear 
of Pickering.] 

UMAXAQUE, a settlement of the head settle- 
ment of the district and alcaldia mayor of Zayula 
in Nueva Espana. It contains 45 families of 
Indians, 15 of Muslees and Mulatoes, and is two 
leagues s. w. of its capital. 

UZAMACIN, a settlement of the head settle- 
ment of the district of Cinantla and alcaldia mayor 
of Cozamaloapan in Nueva Espana. It is of an 
hot and moist temperature, situate between two 
mountains, and inhabited by 30 families of In- 
dians who exercise themselves in the cultivation 
of cotton ; seven leagues s. of its head settlement 
and 50 from the capital. 


¥ 


Va, a river of the province and government of 
San Juan de los Llanos, in the Nuevo Reyno de 
Granada. It rises from a lake belonging to it of 
its name, and running e. after making many 
windings, enters the Guabiare. 

VACA, a small island of the N. Sea, one of 
the smaller Antilles ; three leagues distant from 
the island of St. Domingo; it is of a very fertile 
territory, has two or three very good ports, and 
admirably adapted for commerce with the Spa- 
nish coasts and with Guayana. It abounds 
greatly in cattle. [It is one of the Tortugas, or 
Florida Keys, to the e. of Bahia Honda ; the 
distance between them is four leagues, and the 
coast in its direction turns to the n. On the s. 
side of Cayo Vaca, about eight miles from the w. 
end, there are wells of fresh water. A thick 
range of isles go by this name. Bahia Honda is 
in lat. 24° 35 / w.] 

[Vaca, called also the Cow’s, or Neat’s, 


Tongue, a low point on the w. coast of Chile, 
in S. America, which bounds the Bay of Tonguey 
to the an] 

VACARIA, a settlement of the province and 
captainship of Rey in Brazil, at the source and on 
the shore of the river Anta. 

VACARIMA, a cordillera of the most lofty 
mountains in the province and government of 
Guayana, or Nueva Andalucia; which divides 
this province into s. or de Caribana, and into n, 
or de Paria. From these mountains rise many 
rivers, which run n. and repair to the Orinoco ; 
and others which run e. s. e. and enter the sea. 
These mountains run 120 leagues from n. e. to 
s. w., and in them dwell many Caribees Indians, 
besides a multitude of wild beasts and animals, 

VAC AS, a river of the province and govern- 
ment of Buenos Ayres, which runs s. near the 
Uruguay and parallel to it, and enters the Plata, 
opposite a single island at its entrance. 


V A G 


Vacas, another river in the province and king- 
dom of Guatemala. 

[VACCA, the same as Vac A, which see.] 
[VACHE, or Cow’s Island, lies on the s. 
coast of the s. peninsula of the island of St. 
Domingo, and is about 9 or 10 miles long, and in 
the broadest part three and a half, from n. to s. 
The w. point is six miles e. of Point Abacou ; and 
in lat. 18° 4' n. and long. 73° 37'®. It has a very 
good soil, with two or three tolerable ports, and 
lies very conveniently for trade with the Spanish 
colonies on the continent, and with Cayenne. 
The seamen call this Ash Island, a corruption 
from Vash, as it is pronounced.] 

[Vache et le Torreau, or Cow and Bull 
Rocks, on the s. coast of Newfoundland Island, 
are about a mile s. e. of Cape St. Mary, which is 
the point between the deep bay of Placentia on 
the w. and St. Mary’s Bay on the e. They are 
fair above water, but there are others near them 
which lurk under water.] 

Vache, Cul de Sac, a settlement and parish 
of the French in the island of Martinique ; a cu- 
racy of the Capuchin fathers ; situate on the 
shore of the great bay of the Cul de Sac Royal. 

VADELORGE, Bay of, in the island of Gua- 
dalupe, between the bay of Rocroi and the river 
Plesis. 

VADIRAGUATO, a small jurisdiction and 
alcaldia mayor of Nueva Espaha, and part of the 
province of Culiacan in the kingdom of Nueva 
Vizcaya, w. of the Sierra Madre , of a hot tempera- 
ture, mountainous and rough country, and con- 
taining some settlements of Indians, which were 
held by the Jesuits of the province of Cinaloa ; 
also different ranchos of Spaniards, who cultivate 
much sugar-cane. It is bounded e. by the pro- 
vince of Cinaloa, in the part which they call the 
Jurisdictions, on the high road. 

The capital is the settlement of its name, a re- 
duction of Indians made by the missionaries of 
the Jesuits ; the same is situate in the middle of 
the sierra , and on the shore of the river Piastla. 

VAES, a settlement of the province and go- 
vernment of Tucuman in Peru, near the river 
San Miguel. 

[Vae’s Island, Anthony, a small island on 
the e. coast of Brazil, in S. America. It lies to the 
of the sandy Receif, and opposite to it, which 
is joined to the continent by a bridge.] 

VAGUA, a large llanura of the province and 
government of Juan de Bracamoros in the king- 
dom of Quito. It is very fertile, and of an hot 
climate, but healthy, and abounding in wild 


V A L 143 

honey It was formerly well peopled with In- 
dians, but it at present contains only few. 

VAGUARE, a river of the province and go- 
vernment ofNeiva in the Nuevo Reyno de Gra- 
nada ; it runs nearly e. and enters the grand 
river Magdalena. 

VAISEAUX, a large island of the N. Sea, 
near the coast of Louisiana, between the mouths 
of the rivers Morilla and Mississippi ; it has a 
small port. 

VAL DE BENITO, a large fertile, and beau- 
tiful valley of the island of La Laxa in the king- 
dom of Chile, between the rivers Huaque and 
Culavi. 

VALDIVIA, a city and capital of the province 
and government of this name, in the kingdom of 
Chile ; founded by Pedro de Valdivia, the cele- 
brated conqueror, in 1552. It is situate on the 
shore of the river of the same denomination, on 
the top of a fertile and lofty plain, advantageously 
situate and well fortified. It serves as a garri- 
son for the confinement of criminals and delin- 
quents of the kingdom of Peru, and is not large. 
The Araucanos Indians burnt and destroyed it en- 
tirely in 1603 ; and the Dutch, commanded by Ad- 
miral Henry Brun, attempted to settle themselves 
in it in 1643, but did not succeed. In 1645, it was 
rebuilt and repeopled by the Colonel Don Alonso 
de Villanueva, by order of the Viceroy of Peru, 
the Marquis of Mancera, who fortified it at a 
great expence ; so that it became one of the 
finest places in all America. It has a good fort 
in the same river, well defended with four castles, 
of the names of Mancera, Niebla, Amargos, and 
Corral. In its territory are some very rich gold 
mines, which were formerly worked to great pro- 
fit, but now abandoned. The government of this 
city was independent of the Presidency of Chile, 
and subject only to the Viceroy of Lima ; but it 
was afterwards united to the former, on account 
of its great distance from the capital of Peru, and 
the difficulty of receiving necessary and quick 
advices. In 1737, the city suffered much by an 
earthquake, [and more lately by fire twice, by 
which the greater part of it has been destroyed. It 
is, however, still inhabited by some most illustrious 
families ; is 183 miles .9. from La Conception ; in 
lat. 39° 48' s. and long. 73° 27' 30" w. This city- 
declared its independence as early as August, 
1613. See Valparaiso, also for a further in- 
teresting account of its earlier history, see Chile, 
index to additional history respecting that coun- 
try, cap. iv.] 

The aforesaid river is one of the most cele 


3 14 


V A L 


V A L 


brated in tliat kingdom. It runs from the centre 
of it, dividing it into two parts, to enter the N. 
Sea by the n. side; and is so limpid, clear, and 
deep, that ships of the greatest burden come close 
up to the city, which is three leagues from its 
mouth, and are unladen by means merely of a 
plank. Its mouth is narrowed by two mountains; 
the one, which is the larger, on the n. part, called 
Bonifacio, and the other smaller on the s., called 
Gonzalo. A little higher up the river becomes 
still narrower, and this part is considered the 
key of the port aforesaid, and of various others. 
The same narrow pass is girt in by two moun- 
tains, so close as to be within two musket shot of 
each other, that on the s. part is called De los 
Manzanas, and the opposite, De Nieva. In leav- 
ing this strait, there is, on the s. side, the port 
Del Corral, which has this name from the shelter 
afforded it from the mountains of the main shore ; 
a large bay being thus formed, capable of con- 
taining an infinite number of ships. 

[The harbour of Valdivia is the safest, the 
strongest from its natural position, and the most 
capacious of any of the ports in the S. Sea. The 
island of Manzera, situate just in the mouth of 
the river, forms two passages, bordered by steep 
mountains, and strongly fortified. As this is a 
port of the most importance of any in the Pacific, 
a governor is always sent from Spain, who pos- 
sesses reputation as a military officer, and is 
under the immediate direction of the president of 
the kingdom. He has under his command a con- 
siderable number of troops, who are officered by 
the five castellans , or commanders of the castles, 
a serjeant major, a proveditor, an inspector, and 
several captains. For the pay of the soldiers 
36,000 crowns are annually sent hither from the 
royal treasury of Peru, and the provisions requi- 
site for their subsistence from the other ports of 
Chile. The Jesuits had formerly a college here ; 
there are besides some convents of Franciscans, 
and of the Brothers of Charity, with a royal hos- 
pital, and the parish church.] 

The fields and territories on the shores of this 
river are most fertile, and yield much wheat, 
pulse, and fruit, though the grapes here come to 
no perfection. The territory abounds in all 
kinds of cattle and birds, and in timber excellent 
for building ships ; and not less so in mines of 
gold, of as rich quality as that of the mines ofCa- 
rabaya in Peru, which is the best known. This 
river was discovered by Pedro de Valdivia, con- 
queror of Chile, who gave it his name. 

VALENCIA, a city of the province and go- 


vernment of Venezuela, in the Nueva Reyno de 
Granada ; founded by Alonzo Diaz Moreno, by 
order of the Governor Villacenda, in 1355, fana 
not in 1573, as is wrongly asserted by the Ex- 
Jesuit Coleti) in a beautiful llanura , half a league 
from the lake Tacarigua. It is small, of a hot 
temperature, but fertile, arid abounding in cacoa 
and cattle, in which its commerce consists, and 
which would have made it opulent but for the 
great sloth of its natives, and from the circum- 
stance of its having been sacked by pirates in 
1677. It is well built, and has a very good 
parish-church, and a convent of religious of St. 
Francis. It was the theatre of the cruelties 
which were perpetrated by the tyrant Lope de 
Aguirre. 

[The present population of this city, according 
to a census taken in 1801, is 6,548 souls ; but by 
other more correct calculations, it amounts to 
more than 8,000. The inhabitants are Creoles, 
and descendants from very ancient families, but 
there are a few Biscayans, and some settlers from 
the Canaries. 

The streets are broad, and are generally paved, 
the houses are without stories. The parish 
church, and a handsome square in which it 
stands, form the principal ornaments of the city. 
In 1804, a church was built in the e. extremity of 
the town, the expence being defrayed by the 
libei’ality of the settlers from the Canaries, and 
the alms of the faithful. It was dedicated to 
Our Lady of La Candelaria. The Franciscans 
had a convent of eight monks here, about 50 
years ago. 

What Albedo relates of the apathy of the in- 
habitants seems but too true ; they are reputed 
to be the most indolent people of the whole pro- 
vince ; nay, to such a degree did their sloth 
arrive, that, in order to prevent a famine, the 
governor was obliged to compel every person 
upon oath, and under a severe penalty, to collect 
for their individual use a certain specified quan- 
tity of provisions. Since this time the Valen- 
cians have become more industrious, and it is to 
be hoped that in time they will profit by the 
advantages which their city possesses. 

The distance hence to Puerto Cavello is 10 
leagues, the road is good, but another is now 
cutting, which will reduce the distance of the two 
places to only six leagues. 

All the produce of the interior, which is ship- 
ped at Puerto Cavallo, necessarily passes through 
Valencia, so that the city is exceedingly well 
supplied with provisions of every description. 


V A L 


145 


V A L 

[The vallies of Aragon, the jurisdictions of San 
Philippe, San Carlos, San Juan Baptiste del 
Fao, Tocuyo, and Baraquisimeto, cannot send 
their produce or their beasts to Puerto Cavello, 
but through this city. The inhabitants might 
consequently make their town the emporium of 
the whole province, which would be of as much 
benefit to the people of the interior as to them- 
selves. The Valencians are thought to possess 
capacity, but their dispositions are more adapted 
to the sciences than to agriculture. 

Valencia remained firm to the cause of Ferdi- 
nand up to the year 1810, when it was compelled 
to submit to Miranda, and shortly after, in the 
same year, became the seat of the New Congress 
of United States of Venezuela; who, by having 
fortunately for themselves, removed to this place, 
were thus delivered from the calamity of the 
dreadful earthquake, which happened at Caracas 
on April 19, 1810. It soon after became occu- 
pied by the Royalist party, and was afterwards 
delivered by capitulation, made by the Spanish 
General Blake, to Count Sachet, commander in 
chief of the imperial army of Aragon, January 
9, 1812. Its possession, being lost, was again 
disputed by Miranda, who, in this year, entered 
into a convention with Monteverde, the governor, 
and afterwards by Bolivar, the latter of whom 
entered the city on August 1, 1813, without the 
least opposition, it having been abandoned by 
the enemy. He found there an immense park of 
artillery, with a great quantity of ammunition 
and muskets. 

This city is 115 miles s.e. from the city of 
Coro, 77 5 . w. from that of Caracas, and 14 from 
Burburata, in lat. 10° 9' n. long. 68° 15 / w. Reau- 
mer’s thermometer is generally from 16° to 23°.] 

Valencia, another, a small city in the pro- 
vince and government of Maracaibo, in the same 
kingdom ; situate in one of the craggy sierras. 

Valencia, a settlement, called also Cerro 
de Tome, of the missions which were held by the 
religious of St. Francis, in the kingdom of Nuevo 
Mexico, in N. America. 

V alencia, a lake of the province and govern- 
ment of Venezuela in the Nuevo Reyno de Gra- 
nada, called by the Indians Tacarigita. The 
surrounding climate is temperate and wholesome, 
and the banks are fertile and picturesque. Oviedo, 
nearly a century ago, asserted the size of this 
lake to be 14 leagues long and 6 broad ; Cisneros, 
in 1764, affirmed it to be 18 or 20 leagues long 
and nearly 6 broad, and in the map of Venezuela, 
published in 1787, its dimensions were 10 Castel- 
iian leagues in length, and three and a half in 

vol. y. 


breadth. Authors have varied equally as to its 
situation and utility, but the true dimensions are, 
from n. e. to w. s. za. 24 miles, and in its broadest 
part it is nine. Its form is an oblong, it lies five 
miles from Valencia, and six from the sea, in a 
valley surrounded by mountains, excepting on 
the w. side. The mountains between it and the 
sea are inaccessible ; twenty rivers empty them- 
selves into this lake, from which circumstance, 
together with the attraction by which all bodies 
are evidently drawn from its extremities to its 
centre, it is supposed to have a subterraneous 
communication with the sea. 

On the eastern shore are five plantations of 
tobacco, belonging to the crown, and employing 
15,000 persons. The other banks are variously 
cultivated by individuals. 

By this lake is transported the produce which 
grows on its shores and on the banks of the neigh- 
bouring rivers. The navigation is far from easy, 
on account of the centrifugal attraction just 
mentioned, and the number of little islands, 
which are so scattered as to render it almost 
impossible to use a sail. One of the islands, Cara- 
tapona, has a small population, and a spring of 
water of much better quality than that of the lake. 

The silicus bagre and the blennius pholis lins , 
and what the Spaniards call guavina , are the 
only fish found here, but all these are in great 
plenty. There is also abundance of water-game, 
and various birds of exquisite plumage are 
to be found on the banks, as well as numerous 
lizards and other reptiles ; one sort of lizard, the 
iguana, the Spaniards and Indians are very fond of. 

VALENTIN, S. Bay of, on the w. coast of the 
Strait of Maire, between the Cape of Buen Su- 
ceso (Good Success) and the Port Mauricio. It 
lies open, and has a bad bottom. 

Valentin, a river which runs e. and enters 
the sea in the former bay. 

Valentin, a cape or point of land, of the e. 
coast of the Straits of Magellan, between the Bay 
of Papagayos and the Point of Boqueron. 

VALERO, San Francisco Xavier de, a 
town, capital and garrison of the Nuevo Reyno 
de Toledo in N. America, this name having been 
given it in honour to the Marquis of Valero, 
V iceroy of Nueva Espana, by whose order it was 
founded. 

[VALLADOLID, an intendancy of the king- 
dom of Nueva Espana. It was, according to 
the description of Humboldt, at the period of 
the Spanish conquest, made a part of the king- 
dom of Michuacan or Mechoacan, which ex- 
tended from the Rio de Zacatula to the port de] 
u 


146 


VALLADOLID. 


[la Navidad, and from the mountains of Xala 
and Colima to the river of Lerma, and the lake 
of Chapala. The capital of this kingdom of 
Mechoacan, which, like the republics of Tlaxcala, 
Huexocingo, and Cholula, was always inde- 
pendent of the Mexican empire, was Tzintzont- 
zan, a town situate on the banks of a lake, in- 
finitely picturesque, called the Lake of Patz- 
quaro, Tzintzontzan, which the Aztec inhabitants 
of Tenochtitlan called Huitzitzila, is now only a 
poor Indian village, though it still preserves the 
pompous title of city. 

The intendancy of Valladolid, vulgarly called 
in the country Mechoacan, is bounded on the n. 
by the Rio de Lerma, which farther e. takes the 
name of Rio Grande de Santiago. On the e. 
and n. e. it joins the intendancy of Mexico ; on 
the n. the intendancy of Guanaxuato ; and on 
the to. that of Guadalaxara. The greatest length 
of the province of Valladolid, from the port of 
Zacatula to the basaltic mountains of Palangeo, 
in a direction from s. s. e. to n. n. e. is 78 leagues. 
It is washed by the S. Sea for an extent of coast 
of more than 38 leagues. 

Situate on the w. declivity of the cordillera 
of Anahuac, intersected with hills and charming 
vallies, which exhibit to the eye of the traveller 
a very uncommon appearance under the torrid 
zone, that of extensive and well watered mea- 
dows, the province of Valladolid in general en- 
joys a mild and temperate climate, exceedingly 
conducive to the health of the inhabitants. It 
is only when we descend the table-land of Ario, 
and approach the coast that we find a climate in 
which the new colonists, and frequently even the 
indigenous, are subject to the scourge of inter- 
mittent and putrid fevers. 

The most elevated summit of the intendancy 
of Valladolid is the Pic de Tancitaro, to thee, of 
Tuspan. Humboldt complains that he could 
never see it near enough to take an exact mea- 
surement of it ; but there is no doubt that it is 
higher than the Volcan de Colina, and that it is 
more frequently covered with snow. To the e. 
of the Pic de Tancitaro, the Volcan de Jorullo 
(Xorillo, or Juruyo) was formed in the night of 
the 29th September, 1759. Bonpland, the fel- 
low traveller of the Baron, reached its crater on 
the 19th September, 1803. The great catastrophe 
in which this mountain rose from the earth, and 
by which a considerable extent of ground totally 
changed its appearance, is, perhaps, one of the 
most extraordinary physical revolutions in the 
annals of the history of our planet. Geology 


points out the parts of the ocean, where, at re- 
cent epoquas within the last 2,000 years, near the 
Azores, in the Egean sea, and to the s. of Ice- 
land, small volcanic islands have risen above the 
surface of the water; but it gives us no example 
of the formation, from the centre of a thousand 
small burning cones, of a mountain of scoria and 
ashes 517 metres, or 1,695 feet in height, com- 
paring it only with the level of the old adjoining 
plains in the interior of a continent 36 leagues 
distant from the coast, and more than 42 leagues 
from every other active volcano. This remark- 
able phenomenon was sung in hexameter verses 
by the Jesuit Father Raphael Landivar, a native 
of Guatemala. It is mentioned by the Abbe 
Clavigero in the ancient history of his country, 
Storia antica di Messico , vol. i. p. 42 ; and yet it 
has remained unknown to the mineralogists and 
naturalists of Europe, though it took place not 
more than 60 years ago, and within six days 
journey of the capital of Mexico, descending 
from the central table land towards the shores of 
the S. Sea. 

A vast plain extends from the hills of Agua- 
sarco to near the villages of Teipa and Petatlan, 
both equally celebrated for their fine plantations 
of cotton. This plain, between the Picachos 
del Mortero, the Cerros de las Cuevas, y de 
Cuiche, is only from 750 to 800 metres, or from 
2,460 to 2,624 feet, above the level of the sea. 
In the middle of a tract of ground in which 
porphyry with a base of griinstein predominates, 
basaltic cones appear, the summits of which are 
crowned with evergreen oaks of a laurel and 
olive foliage, intermingled with small palm-trees 
with flabelliform leaves. This beautiful vegeta- 
tion forms a singular contrast with the aridity of 
the plain, which was laid waste by volcanic 
fire. 

Till the middle of the 18th century, fields 
cultivated with sugar-cane and indigo, occupied 
the extent of ground between the two brooks, 
called Cuitamba and San Pedro. They were 
bounded by basaltic mountains, of which the 
structure seems to indicate that all this country, 
at a very remote period, had been already several 
times convulsed by volcanoes. These fields, 
watered by artificial means, belonged to the 
plantation (hacienda) of San Pedro de Xoullo, 
one of the greatest and richest of the country. 
In the month of June, 1759, a subterraneous 
noise was heard. Hollow noises of a most alarm- 
ing nature ( bramillos ), W'ere accompanied by 
frequent earthquakes, which succeeded one ano-] 


VALLADOLID. 


147 


[ther for from 50 to 60 days, to the great con- 
sternation of the inhabitants of the hacienda. 
From the beginning of September every thing 
seemed to announce the complete re-establish- 
ment of tranquillity, when in the night between 
the 28th and 29th, the horrible subterraneous 
noise recommenced. The affrighted Indians fled 
to the mountains of Aguasarco. A tract of 
ground from nine to 12 square English miles in 
extent, which goes by the name of Malpais, rose 
up in the shape of a bladder. The bounds of 
this convulsion are still distinguishable in the 
fractured strata. The Malpais near its edges is 
only 12 metres, or 39 feet, above the old level 
of the plain, called the Playas de Xorilio ; but 
the convexity of the ground thus thrown up in- 
creases progressively towards the centre to an 
elevation of 160 metres, or 524 feet. 

1 hose who witnessed this great catastrophe 
from the top of Aguasarco assert that flames were 
seen to issue forth for an extent of more than half 
a square league, that fragments of burning rocks 
were thrown up to prodigious heights, and that 
through a thick cloud of ashes, illumined by the 
volcanic fire, the softened surface of the earth 
was seen to swell up like an agitated sea. The 
rivers of Cuitamba and San Pedro precipitated 
themselves into the burning chasms. The de- 
composition of the water contributed to in- 
vigorate the flames, which were distinguishable 
at the city of Pascuaro, though situated on a 
very extensive table land 1,400 metres, or 4,592 
feet, elevated above the plains of las Playas de 
Xorilio. Eruptions of mud, and especially of 
strata of clay enveloping balls of decomposed 
basaltes in concentrical layers, appear to indicate 
that subterraneous water had no small share in 
producing this extraordinary revolution. Thou- 
sands of small cones, from two to three metres, or 
from 6.5 feet to 9.8 feet in height, called by the 
indigenes ovens (hornitos) issued forth from the 
Malpais. Although within the last 15 years, ac- 
cording to the testimony of the Indians, the heat 
of these volcanic ovens has suffered a great di- 
minution. Humbolt perceived the thermometer 
rise to 202 f. Fahrenheit, on being plunged into 
fissures which exhale an aqueous vapour. Each 
small cone is a fumorola, from which a thick va- 
pour ascends to the height of 10 or 15 metres. 
In many of them a subterraneous noise is heard, 
which appears to announce the proximity of a 
fluid in ebullition. 

In the midst of the ovens six large masses, 
elevated from 4 to 500 metres, from 312 to 
1,640 feet, each above the old level of the plains, 


sprung up from a chasm, of which the direction 
is from the n. n. e. to the s. s. e. This is the phe- 
nomenon of the Montenovo of Naples, several 
times repeated in a range of volcanic hills. The 
most elevated of these enormous masses, which 
bears some resemblance to the puys de l’Au- 
vergne, is the great Volcan de Xorilio. It is 
continually burning, and has thrown up from 
the n. side an immense quantity of scorified and 
basaltic lavas, containing fragments of primitive 
rocks. These great eruptions of the central 
volcano continued till the month of February, 
1760. In the following years they became gra- 
dually less frequent. The Indians, frightened 
at the horrible noises of the new volcano, aban- 
doned at first all the villages situated within 
seven or eight leagues distance of the playas de 
Jorullo. They became gradually, however, ac- 
customed to this terrific spectacle ; and having 
returned to their cottages, they advanced towards 
the mountains of Aguasarco and Santa Ines, to 
admire the streams of fire discharged from an 
infinity of great and small volcanic apertures. 
The roofs of the houses of Queretaro were then 
covered with ashes at a distance of more than 
48 leagues in a straight line from the scene of 
the explosion. Although the subterraneous fire 
now appears far from violent, and the Malpays 
and the great volcano begin to be covered with 
vegetables, the ambient air is heated to such a 
degree by the action of the small ovens ( hornitos ), 
that the thermometer at a great distance from 
the surface and in the shade rises as high as 109° 
of Fahrenheit. This fact appears to prove that 
there is no exaggeration in the accounts of se- 
veral old Indians, who affirm that for many years 
after the first eruption, the plains of Jorullo, 
even at a great distance from the scene of the 
explosion, were uninhabitable, from the excessive 
heat which prevailed in them. 

The traveller is still shown, near the Cerro 
de Santa Ines, the rivers of Cuitamba and San 
Pedro, of which the limpid waters formerly wa- 
tered the sugar-cane plantation of Don Andre 
Pimentel. These streams disappeared in the 
night of the 29th September, 1759 ; but at a dis- 
tance of 2,000 metres, or 6,561 feet, farther w. 
in the tract which was the theatre of the con- 
vulsion, two rivers are now seen bursting through 
the argilaceous vault of the hornitos , of the ap- 
pearance of mineral waters, in which the ther- 
mometer rises to 126°. 8 of Fahrenheit. The 
Indians continue to give them the names of San 
Pedro and Cuitambia, because in several parts 
of the Malpays great masses of water are heard] 


148 


VALLADOLID. 


[to run in a direction from e. to w. from the 
mountains of Santa Iiies towards the Hacienua 
(Estate) de la Presentacion. Near this habita- 
tion there is a brook, which disengages itself 
from the sulphureous hydrogen. It is more than 
seven metres in breadth, and is one of the most 
abundant hydro sulphureous springs ever seen. 

In the opinion of the Indians, these extraordi- 
nary transformations which we have been de- 
scribing, the surface of the earth raised up and 
burst by the volcanic fire, and the mountains of 
scoria and ashes heaped together, are the work 
of the Monks. An attribute of power, singu- 
larly great and extraordinary ; but the tradition 
is, that some Capuchin missionaries having come, 
in 1759, to preach at the plantation of San 
Pedro, and not having met with a favourable re- 
ception, they poured out an imprecation against 
the said plain, and prophesied that in the first 
place the plantation would be swallowed up by 
flames rising out of the earth, and that after- 
wards the ambient air would cool to such a 
degree that the neighbouring mountains would 
for ever remain covered with snow and ice. The 
former of these maledictions having already pro- 
duced such fatal effects, the lower Indians con- 
template in the increasing coolness of the vol- 
cano the sinister presage of a perpetual winter. 

The position of the new Volcan de Jorullo 
gives rise to a very curious geological observa- 
tion. In New Spain there is a parallel of great 
elevations, or a narrow zone contained between 
the 18° 59' and the 19° 12' oflat. in which all the 
summits of Anahuac which rise above the region 
of perpetual snow are situated. These summits 
are either volcanoes which still continue to burn, 
or mountains, which from their form as well as 
the nature of their rocks have in all probability 
formerly contained subterraneous fire. As we 
recede from the coast of the Atlantic, we find in 
a direction from e. to w. the Pic d’Orizaba, the 
two volcanoes of la Puebla, the Nevado de 
Toluca, the Pic de Tancitaro, and the V olcan de 
Colima. These great elevations, in place of 
forming the crest of the cordillera of Anahuac, 
and following its direction, which is from the 
s. e. to the n. w. are, on the contrary, placed on 
a line perpendicular to the axis of the great 
chain of mountains. It is undoubtedly worthy 
of observation, that in 1759 the new volcano of 
Xorillo was formed in the prolongation of that 
line, on the same parallel with the ancient Mexi- 
can volcanoes ! 

A single glance bestowed on Humboldt’s plan 
of the environs of Xorillo will prove that the 


six large masses rose out of the earth, in a line 
which runs through the plain from the Cerro de 
las Cuevas to the Picacho del Mortero ; and it is 
thus also that the bocche nove of Vesuvius are 
ranged along the prolongation of a chasm. Do 
not these analogies entitle us to suppose that 
there exists in this part of Mexico, at a great 
depth in the interior of the earth, a chasm in a 
direction from e. to w. for a length of 137 leagues, 
along which the volcanic fire bursting through 
the interior crust of the porphyritical rocks, has 
made its appearance at different epoquas from 
the Gulf of Mexico to the S. Sea ? Does this 
chasm extend to the small group of islands, called 
by M. Collnet the Archipelago of Revillagigedo, 
around which, in the same parallel with the 
Mexican volcanoes, pumice-stone has been seen 
floating ? Those naturalists who make a distinc- 
tion between the facts which are offered us by 
descriptive geology and theoretical reveries on 
the primitive state of our planet, must forgive 
these general observations on the general map of 
New Spain. Moreover, from the lake of Cuiseo, 
which is impregnated with muriate of soda, and 
which exhales sulfuretted hydrogen as far as the 
city of Valladolid, for an extent of 40 square 
leagues, there are a great quantity of hot wells, 
which generally contain only muriatic acid, 
without any vestiges of terreous sulfates or me- 
tallic salts. Such are mineral waters of Chu- 
candiro, (Juinche, San Sebastian, and San Juan 
Tararamco. 

The extent of the intendancy of Valladolid is 
one fifth less than that of Ireland, but its relative 
population is twice greater than that of Finland. 
In this province there are three cities (Valladolid, 
Tzintzontzan, and Pascuaro); three towns (Cita- 
quaro, Zamora, and Charo) ; 263 villages ; 205 
parishes ; and 326 farms. The imperfect enu- 
meration of 1793 gave a total population of 
289,314 souls, of whom 40,399 were male whites, 
and 39,081 female whites ; 61,352 male Indians, 
and 58,016 female Indians ; and 154 monks, 138 
nuns, and 293 individuals of the secular clergy. 

The Indians who inhabit the province of Val- 
ladolid form three races of different origin ; the 
Tarascos, celebrated in the 16th century for the 
gentleness of their manners, for their industry 
in the mechanical arts, and for the harmony of 
their language, abounding in vowels ; the Oto- 
mitos, a tribe yet very far behind in civilization, 
who speak a language full of nasal and guttural 
aspirations ; and the Chichimecos, who, like the 
Tlascaltecos, the Nt huatlacos, and the Aztecos, 
have preserved the Mexican language. All the] 


VALLADOLID. 


149 


[s. part of the intendancy of Valladolid is inha- 
bited by Indians. In the villages the only white 
figure to be met with is the curate, and he also is 
frequently an Indian or Mulatto. The benefices 
are so poor there that the bishop of Mechoacan 
has the greatest difficulty in procuring eccle- 
siastics to settle in a country where Spanish is 
almost never spoken, and where along the coast 
of the Great Ocean the priests, infected by the 
contagious miasmata of malignant fevers, fre- 
quently die before the expiration of seven or 
eight months. 

The population of the intendancy of Vallado- 
lid decreased in the years of scarcity of 1786 and 
1790 ; and it would have suffered still more if 
the benevolence of the bishop had not mani- 
fested itself in extraordinary sacrifices for the re- 
lief of the Indians. He voluntarily lost in a few 
months the sum of 230,000 francs, equal to 
9,584/. sterling, by purchasing 50,000 fanegas of 
maize, which he sold at a reduced price to keep 
the sordid avarice of several rich proprietors 
within bounds, who, during that epoqua of public 
calamities, endeavoured to take advantage of the 
misery of the people. 

The population of this intendancy amounted, 
by the census of 1803, to 376,400 souls ; and its 
extent of surface, in square leagues, was 3,446, 
thus giving 109 inhabitants to the square league. 

The most remarkable places of the province 
of Valladolid, are the following : Valladolid de 
Mechoacan, the capital; Pasquaro and Tzintz- 
ontzan ; and it contains the mines of Zitaquaro, 
Angangueo, Tlapuxahua, the Real del Oro, and 
Ynguaran.] 

V alladolid, a city and capital of the king- 
dom of Mechoacan, and of the above inten- 
dancy, in Nueva Espana ; a head of a bishop- 
ric, erected in 1536, and founded by Captain 
Christoval de Olid, on the middle of a valley ; 
from which word, being the appellation of its 
founder, it took the name of Valle de Olid, 
which has been corrupted into Valladolid, in 
imitation of that in Castilla : that spot was 
called the Guayangareo, in the idiom of the 
Tarascos Indians. It is in an extensive table- 
land, of a lofty plain, near two rivers, which rise 
in its vicinity ; the one, which is small, to the 
a', e. of the city, in the part called the Rincon ; 
and the other issuing from a lake to the w. and 
uniting itself with the former after it passes 
through the settlement, and then running in an 
abundant stream to fertilize the valley ; its waters 
yielding a good supply of trout and pexereyes , 
called by the Indians eharare . 


The city has little claims to beauty, and less 
to commerce, although it is large, as being very 
scattered. Its population is composed of 500 
families of Spaniards and Mustees ; and although 
it contains some Indians, yet do these chiefly 
have their abode in the wards. [Humboldt rates 
its present population at 18,000.] 

The cathedral, which was completed in 1738, 
is after the Tuscan order, and very handsome : 
belonging to it is the parish of Sagrario ; and, 
besides this, it has another parish, called of San 
Joseph; also the convents of religious, of St. 
Francis, which is a house of Noviciates ; of St. 
Augustin, Merced, the bare-footed Carmelites, 
an hospital of San Juan de Dios, and a college 
which belonged to the Jesuits; the monasteries 
of the Nuns of Santa Catalina, and of Capuchin 
Indian women; a college for poor female children, 
with the title of Santa Rosa, which was founded 
by the Bishop Don Francisco Pablo Matos Coro- 
nada ; and a college of studies destined for the 
children of the province, founded by the Bishop 
Don Vasco de Quiroga. 

[The elevation of Valladolid, above the level 
of the sea, is 1,950 metres, or 6,396 feet ; and 
yet at this moderate height, and under the 
19° 42 7 of lat. snow has been seen to fall in the 
streets of Valladolid. This sudden change of 
atmosphere, caused no doubt by a n. wind, is 
much more remarkable than the snow which fell 
in the streets of Mexico the night before the 
Jesuit fathers were carried off! The new aque- 
duct by which the town receives potable water 
was constructed at the expense of the last bishop, 
Fray Antonio deSan Miguel, and cost him nearly 
half a million of francs, or ^£20,835 : — 105 miles 
w.\n.w. of Mexico, in long. 100° 5V w. lat. 
19° 42' 30 " n. For an account of the present 
revolution, see Mexico ; also Vera Cruz.] 

Valladolid, another city, in the province 
and government of Yucatan, founded by Fran- 
cisco de Montejo, the younger, in 1543, in a place 
called Choaca ; and by the Indians, Chavachaa ; 
from whence it was translated in the following 
year, from the unhealthiness of the spot, to where 
it now stands. It is small, and of a hot tempera- 
ture ; has a very good parish church, an hospital 
with the name of Jesus Maria, and a convent of 
religious of St. Francis, which is a small distance 
without the city ; the rout to them being by a 
stone causeway, of about eight yards wide, and 
adorned on both sides by a beautiful poplar 
grove: — 30 miles w. of the Gulf of Honduras, 
170 s. w. ofTruxillo, and 65 s. e. of Merida. 

Valladolid, another, of the province and 


150 


V A L 


V A L 


government of J aen de Bracamoros, in the kingdom 
of Quito; founded by Juan de Salinas, in 1549, 
and not in 41, as asserts the ex- Jesuit Coleti. 
It is very small and poor, and rather a reduced 
settlement than a city : — 38 miles s. of Loxa, in 
w. long. 79° 143 lat. 4° 35' 30" s. 

V alladolid, another city, of the province and 
government of Honduras. See Comayagua. 

VALLE, San Juan del, a settlement of the 
province and corregimiento of Loxa in the king- 
dom of Quito. 

Valle, another settlement, with the dedica- 
tory title of San Pedro, in the same province and 
kingdom as the former. 

Valle, another with the dedicatory title of 
San Francisco, the head settlement of the district 
of the alcaldia mayor of Zultepec in Nueva Es- 
pana. It contains 89 families of Indians, who 
maintain themselves by the cultivation of wheat 
and maize, and is six leagues n. w. of its capital. 

Valle, another, with the dedicatory title of 
Santa Maria, in the province and corregimiento 
of Huanuco in Peru, 

Valle, another, with the dedicatory title of 
Santa Ana, in the head settlement of the district 
of Quiatoni, and alcaldia mayor of Teutitlan in 
Nueva Espana. It contains 62 families of In- 
dians, and is two leagues e. of its head settle- 
ment. 

Valle, another, of the province and corregi- 
miento ofTunja in the Nuevo Reyno de Gra- 
nada, in the serrania. 

Valle, another, of the province and govern- 
ment of Venezuela, and Nuevo Reyno de Gra- 
nada, of the district of the city of Caracas, in the 
5 . part. 

Valle, another, with the dedicatory title of 
Santa Cruz, in the province and corregimiento of 
Canete in Peru. 

Valle, another, with the dedicatory title of 
Nuestra Senora, of the missions which were held 
by the Jesuits in the province and government of 
San Juan de los Llanos, in the Nuevo Reyno 
de Granada, on the shore of the river Apure. 

Valle, a river in the province and govern- 
ment of Tucuman, which runs s. e. in the juris- 
diction of the city of Salta, and enters the Ber- 
mejo. 

Valle, a fort of the same province and go- 
vernment as the former river, built on its shore 
to restrain the Infidel Indians. 

Valle, a point of land, with the dedicatory 
title of Nuestra Senora del Valle, on the n. coast 
of the Straits of Magellan, between the Bay of 
Papagayos and the Point of Boqueron. 


Valle, Punta del, a point in the Island of 
Tortuga near St. Domingo. 

Valle Ameno, Santa Cruz de, a settle- 
ment of the missions which are held by the reli- 
gious of San Francisco, in the province of Apo- 
labamba and kingdom of Pgru. 

VALLEE, a bay of the coast of the river St. 
Lawrence in Nova Scotia, between the river 
Magdalen and another bay of the same name, 
but with the addition of Little, to distinguish it. 

VALLEJUELO, a small river of the island of 
St. Domingo, which rises in the valley of San 
J uan, runs n. and unites itself with that of Canas 
to enter the Artibonito. 

Vallejuelo, another river in the same 
island, which runs e. and enters the Neiva. 

VALLE-FERTIL, a settlement of the pro- 
vince and corregimiento of Cuyo in the kingdom 
of Chile. It has this name from the great fer- 
tility of the valley in which it is founded, is 
bounded by the jurisdiction of Rioxa in the pro- 
vince and government of Tucuman, and in its 
district are abundance of small parrots, and 
others still less, called caritas. 

VALLES, a jurisdiction and alcaldia mayor of 
Nueva Espana, bounded by those of Tampico, 
Guadalcazar, and Guejutla, the line of demarca- 
tion terminating e. by the province of Tampico, 
at the river of Tamice, which runs from n. to s. 
and by the n. by the tables of Castrejon, the 
same being the boundary between the Nuevo 
Reyno de Leon, and La Gran Tamaolipa. In 
these parts there were formerly some estates of 
Spaniards and missionaries, which are now de- 
sert through the hostilities of the barbarian Chi- 
chimecos ; although, through the natural ferti- 
lity of the country large herds of cattle are drove 
annually to its pastures, and attended by some 
militia companies. This jurisdiction is very ex- 
tensive, one of the best of the kingdom, and en- 
joying different temperatures, and abounding in 
maize and other seeds, and sugar-canes, of which 
they make loaf-sugar ; also in many of the settle- 
ments they fabricate loaf-sugar, bags of pita, and 
mats and baskets, with which a trade is carried 
on with the other provinces. 

Valles, the capital, is the town of the same 
name, founded on a beautiful plain, on the shore 
of a river flowing down from a lofty sierra. It 
is of a hot and moist temperature, contains 242 
families, the greater part of Spaniards, and the 
rest of Mustees and Mulattoes, who live, a great 
portion of the year, in the estates, and 75 of In- 
dians. It was formerly a curacy and doctrinal 
establishment of the religious of San Francisco 


V A L 


V A L 


151 


de la Custodia de Tampico, [and is 150 miles n. 
of Mexico, in lat. 21° 45' n. and long. 99° w . ] 
The other settlements of this district are the 


following : 
Tamoin, 

Soledad de las 

Tanquayalab, 

noas, 

Tanquian, 

Tampamolon, 

Aquismon, 

Santa Catalina 

Tamapache, 

Aztla, 

Tampasquin, 

Tancanhuiclii, 

Talacun, 

Xalcotan, 

La Laxa, 

Mecatlan, 

Talanxas, 

San Francisco, 

Coxcatlan, 

Matlapa, 

S. Martin de Tlal- 

Xilitla, 

chicuatla, 

Tamitas, 

Tampacan, 

San Miguel, 

Chapuluacan, 

Palma, 

Tamazunchale, 

Tanchanaco, 

T anzozob, 

Huehuetlan, 

Santa Maria, 

San Agustin 

Guayabos, 

Chaleo, 

San Antonio. 


YALLE-UMBROSO, a settlement of the pro- 
vince and government of Cinaloa, one of the mis- 
sions which were held by the Jesuits. 

[VALLEY-FORGE, a place on Schuylkill 
River, 15 miles from Philadelphia. Here Gene- 
ral Washington remained with his army, in huts, 
during the winter of 1777, after the British had 
taken possession of that city.] 

VALPARAISO, or Valparaisa, a city and 
capital of the province and government of this 
name in the kingdom of Chile; situate one part 
on the skirt of a mountain which lies to the n. e., 
and the other part on the top; so that it is di- 
vided into High and Low Town. It began to 
be peopled at the end of the last (16th) century, 
with the intention of carrying out from it wheat 
to Lima, as it produces much of this article, and 
of an excellent quality, and, in fact, the trade in 
it is now very great. 

It has a good parish-church, and two convents; 
the one of San Francisco, and the other of San 
Augustin ; also a college which belonged to the 
Jesuits, and now occupied by the religious of St. 
Domingo, and a house for exercises. Besides the 
town, which is situate to the s. of the bay, there 
is on the e. a llanura named Del Almendral, 
where there is a convent of La Merced and some 
population, and where it would have been better 
if the city had been built, were it not that this 
part is much exposed to inundations from the 
sea, and that the anchorage is towards the s. 


— Towards the e. there are some excavations 
made in the mountain to give greater extent of 
shore. 

The city is defended by three castles, the first 
called Castillo Viejo, at the entrance of the port, 
with a battery on a level with the water ; the 
second Castillo Grande, which is where the go- 
vernor resides ; and the third, which is on the 
top of a hill, can hinder an enemy from embark- 
ing in the Almendral. In this city there are 
many storehouses in which to deposit effects of 
the kingdom destined for Peru, as well as to 
house those coming from that kingdom. In fact 
all the commerce, which used to be carried on at 
the Port of Concepcion, has been transferred to 
this as being nearer. The time of the navigation 
is between the months of June and September, 
and in this period vessels make three voyages 
from Callao to Valparaiso, and this traffic keeps 
in continual employ the mule-droves of all the 
neighbouring settlements. In the winter-time, 
however, the masters of the store-houses alone re- 
main at Valparaiso, the rest of the people retir- 
ing to the estates in the country. The territory 
here abounds in all kinds of excellent fruit, espe- 
cially apples, which they call de quillota. The 
inhabitants are reputed to amount to 2000. V al- 
paraiso is chiefly to be noted for its capacious and 
excellent harbour, and for its commercial situa- 
tion, w r hereby it commands all the trade of Spain 
and Peru. 

[The revolution that has proceeded with such 
violence throughout the rest of the Spanish colo- 
nies, has been confined in the kingdom of Chile, 
for the most part, to differences between the par- 
ties of the natives of that presidency. The fact 
is, that the Spaniards have here little concern 
with the government, and have not been molested 
as not having interfered with the transactions 
that were taking place. It could hardly be other- 
wise than that Chile should thus become friendly 
to the insurgent cause; and we accordingly find 
that as early as August 1813, the Chilians at Val- 
divia, Concepcion, Valparaiso, and Coquimbo, 
had declared themselves independent, and had 
opened their ports to all nations. American fri- 
gates receive supplies from them, and an Ameri- 
can agent has been appointed to reside at the in- 
land town of Santiago. The British government 
is aware of this, and it is owing to their wise dis- 
positions, and the naval force now cruizing on 
that coast, that the American frigate the Essex 
has been just captured in leaving the port of Val- 
paraiso. This city is about 230 miles n.n.e. of 


V A S 


152 VAR 

Concepcion, in lat. 33° 2' 36" s. and long. 71° 

44' 30" a&gt;.] 

Valparaiso, a settlement of the head settle- 
ment of the district, and alcaldia mayor of Xerez 
in NuevaEspana. Eight leagues n.n.w. of its 
capital. 

VALTERIE, a settlement of the French in 
Canada, on the shore of the river St. Lawrence, 
near the settlement of St. Sulpice. 

VAL VERDE, a small city of the province and 
corregimienlo of lea in Peru, in a valley which is 
always green, fertile, pleasant, and abounding in 
vines ; with a good port, in lat. 11° s. long. 304° 
55' w. 

VAMBA, a settlement of the province and cor - 
rcgimiento of Quito in the district of Las Cinco 
Leguas, and w. of the capital. 

VANAMA, a lake of the province and country 
of Las Amazonas, or part of Guayana, possessed 
by the Portuguese. It is formed by a waste- 
water of the river Maracapuru, and enters the 
abundant stream of the Puru or Cuchivara. 

VANAMAQUEMA, another lake of the same 
province and territory as the above. It is formed 
by an arm of the river Maranon, or the channel 
by which this communicates with the great river 
Puru, or Cuchivara. 

[VANCOUVER, also Quadra, one of the 
largest islands of the n. w. coast of Ame- 
rica, close to Nootka. For further account, see 
Vol. iii. p. 220. of this work.] 

[Vancouver’s Fort, in Kentucky, stands at 
the junction of the two branches of Big Sandy 
River, 20 miles n. of Harmar’s Station.] 

[VAN DYKES, Jost and Little, two of the 
smaller Virgin Islands; situate to the n. w. of 
Tortola. Lat. 18° 28 / n. Long. 64° 46' w.~] 

[VANNSTOWN, in the country of the Che- 
rokees, lies on a branch of Alabama River.] 

VANGIIAM, a settlement of the island of 
Barbadoes, in the district of the parish of St. 
George. 

VAPISBE, a settlement of the province and 
government of Sonora in N. America. 

VARACA, an arm of the river Parime, or Pa- 
ravinanas, one of the four arms belonging to this 
river ; the third, and that by which it communi- 
cates with the Negro. 

V ARA IS, a barbarous nation of Indians who 
dwell in the vicinities of the lake of Los Xa- 
rayes, in the province and government of Para- 
guay ; bounded by the Xarayes Indians on the 
n. and the Gorgotoques on the s. w. 

VARANACO, a small river of the province 


and government of San Juan de los Llanos, in 
the Nuevo Reyno de Granada. It rises near the 
source of the Paucana, runs e. and enters the. 
Orinoco, opposite the rapid stream of the Cari- 
chana. 

VARARI, a small river of the province and 
country of Las Amazonas, in the part possessed 
by the Portuguese. It runs and enters the river 
Negro, close to the settlement of the missions 
called San Cayetano. 

VARCA, a large and abundant river of the 
province and government of Cayenne. It runs e. 
and enters the Atlantic Sea. On its shores are 
some beautiful plantations of sugar canes, of 
which is made excellent sugar. 

VARINAS, a settlement of the missions which 
were held by the Jesuits in the province and go- 
vernment of Quito ; situate between two lakes, 
and on the shore of a river which enters the Ma- 
ranon, at a small distance from its mouth. 

VARIQUIRA, or Variquiri, an island of 
the river Maranon, formed by two channels or 
arms of this river which run to enter the lake 
Arraba. 

Variquira, a settlement in the same island. 

VARIRIN, a river, called also De Palmera, 
in the province and captainship of Seara, and 
kingdom of Brazil. It rises from the mountains 
of the w. and enters the river Parava. In the 
woods on its borders inhabit many barbarous In- 
dians, who impede its navigation. 

VARUTA, a settlement of the province and 
government of Venezuela in the Nuevo Reyno 
de Granada ; near the coast, neai'ly to the s. of 
the city of Caracas, to the district of which it 
belongs, between the settlements of Parure and 
Palle. 

VAS, a hamlet of the province and captainship 
of Rio de Janeiro in Brazil, a very short dis- 
tance to the n. of Villa de Principe. It was vi- 
sited by Mawe, the mineralogist, in passing to 
Tejuco, in 1809. 

Vas Martin, an island of the Atlantic Sea, 
between the coast of Brazil and the island of 
Cafreria. It was given this name by its dis- 
coverer ; is desert and full of thick w'oods, and 
180 leagues from the Brazil coast, to the s.w. of 
the island of Picos, in lat. 20° s. 

Vas Anton, another island in the province 
and captainship of Pernambuco, in the same king- 
dom, between the city of Olinda and the settle- 
ment of La Candelaria. 

Vas Anton, a port of the same province and 
kingdom. 


V A Y 


V E G 


153 


[VASE, or Nase, River, Au, empties into 
the Mississippi from the n. e. three miles below 
4 the Great Rock, about 36 n. w. by n. of the 
mouth of the Ohio, and about the same distance 
n. w. of Fort Massac. It is navigable into the 
N. W. Territory about 60 miles including wind- 
ings, through a rich country abounding in exten- 
sive natural meadows and numberless herds of 
buffaloe, deer, &amp;c. It is about eight miles above 
Cape St. Antonio.] 

VASICA, a river of the province and govern- 
ment of Florida, which runs n. and enters the 
sea between the settlement of San Marcos and 
the river Vilches. 

[VASSALBOROUGH, a post-town of the 
district of Maine, in Lincoln County, on Kenne- 
beck River, half way between Hallowell and 
Winslow, 144 miles n. by e. of Boston. It was 
incorporated in 1771, and contained, in 1790, 
1240 inhabitants.] 

VATAPU, a settlement of the province and 
captainship of Para in Brazil, on the coast, oppo- 
site the islands of Quariana. 

VATEI, San Miguel del, a city of the pro- 
vince and government of Curnana; founded by 
the governor Don Juan de Urpin, on the shore 
of the river Unare, but in so unhealthy a spot 
that all the animals used to die as soon as they 
were born. This, and the intolerable plague of 
ants with which it was infested, caused all the 
inhabitants to desert it, and betake themselves to 
other settlements. 

VATIBAI, a small river of the province and 
government ofMainas, in the kingdom of Quito. 
It runs e. and then turning to n. e. enters the 
Napo, close to the settlement of La Soledad. 

VAUCLIN, a settlement and parish of the 
French in the island of Martinique, on the s.e. 
coast, behind the point of its name. 

Vauclin. This point is a cape or extremity 
of the s. e. coast, between the Cul de Sac Simon 
and the point of its name. 

[VAUGHAN Township, in the east-riding 
of the county of York, Upper Canada, lies on the 
w. side of Yonge-street, in the rear of and to the 
n. of the township of York.] 

[VAVAGQ, one of the Friendly Islands in the 
S. Pacific Ocean. It is about two days sail from 
Hapaee.] 

VAYA, an island of the river Orinoco, one of 
those which form the entrance of the Bay of 
Charaguanas with the point of Galera of the 
island of Trinidad. 

VAYAL-ASONES, a barbarous and ferocious 

VOL. V. 


nation of Indians of Brazil, who dwell near the 
source of the river Paral to the w. of the province 
of Puerto Seguro. They are allies of the nations 
of the Lobos, Aimures, Paries, and Motayas, 
and have frequently invaded the Portuguese ter- 
ritories. 

VAYES, a small island of the Lake of 
Unamarca, in the province and corregimiento of 
Peru. 

VAYMORES, a barbarous, cruel, and canni- 
bal nation of Indians of the kingdom of Brazil, 
who dwell in the woods and mountains of the w. 
part, between the provinces and captainships of 
Ilheos and Puerto Seguro. These Indians, united 
with some of other nations, have frequently de- 
stroyed the settlements and estates of the Portu- 
guese, with whom they are at continual war. 

VAZABARIS, a river of the province and 
captainship of Sergipe in Brazil. It rises near 
the coast, runs s.s.e. and enters the sea in the 
Bay of Sergipe. 

VAZEUSE, a small river of the province and 
government of Louisiana, which runs s. between 
the rivers Grande and the Tortoise, and enters 
the Missouri. 

[VEALTOWN, a village of New Jersey, near 
Baskenridge, about seven miles s.w. of Morris- 
town.] 

VEAU, Ance du, a settlement and parish of 
the French in the part which they possess in the 
island St. Domingo ; situate on the n. coast, at. 
one of the w. heads, between the great river Nipe 
and the Petit Trou. 

VEAUX, Pasture des, a river of the pro- 
vince and colony of Virginia in the county of 
Albermarle. 

Veaux. Some islands of the N. Sea, near the 
coast of Nova Scotia. They are four, small, and 
lying between those of Canards and Seal Bank. 

VEGA, a settlement of the jurisdiction of 
Honda, and government of Mariquita in the 
Nuevo Reyno de Granada. It is of a hot tem- 
perature, but very fertile and abounding in sugar 
canes, cotton, maize, pucas, and other produc- 
tions of this climate. It has 400 housekeepers 
who live very uncomfortably, as being much in- 
fested with mosquitoes, snakes, and other rep- 
tiles. Twelve leagues w. of Santa Fe, and the 
same from Honda. 

Vega, another settlement, with the dedicatory 
title of San Juan, a head settlement of the district, 
in the alcaldia mayor of Zelaya, of the province 
and bishopric of Mechoacan, and kingdom of 
NuevaEspana. It contains 415 families of In- 


x 


154 


VE L 


VEL 


\ dians, 20 of Spaniards, Mustees , and Mulattoes, 
and a convent of religious of San Francisco. 
Two leagues n. of its capital. 

Vega, another, of the province and govern- 
ment of Antioquia in the Nuevo Reyno de Gra- 
nada. 

Vega, another, of the province and govern- 
ment of Merida in the same kingdom ; situate in 
the road which leads down to Maracaibo. 

Vega, another settlement, called Real de la 
Vega, or Real de los Pozos, in the jurisdiction 
and alcaldia mayor of San Luis de Potosi, of the 
province and bishopric of Mechoacan. It con- 
tains 15 families of Spaniards, 36 of Mustees and 
Mulattoes, and 32 of Indians, who used to trade 
in the metals of the mines which are in its dis- 
trict. But these mines having filled with water 
and become useless, the natives have addicted 
themselves to the cultivation of seeds ; two 
leagues s. of its capital. 

[Vega, or Concepcion de la Vega Real, a 
town in the n. e. part of the Island of St. Domin- 
go, on the road from St. Domingo city to Daxa- 
bon. It is situate near the head of Yuna River, 
which empties into the Bay of Samana; 12 leagues 
n. w. by w. of Cotuy, and about 38 e. of Daxavon, 
or Daxabon. It stands on a beautiful plain 
among the mountains, on the very spot where 
Guarionex, cacique of the kingdom of Magua, 
had resided. In 1494, or 1495, the settlement of 
this town was begun by Columbus. Eight years 
after, it had become a city of importance, and 
sometimes during the year, there were 240,000 
crowns in gold minted at this place. It was 
almost destroyed by an earthquake in 1564.] 

[Vega, St. Jago de la. See Spanish 
Town.] 

VEGUETA, a settlement of the province and 
corregimienlo of Chancay in Peru ; annexed to 
the curacy of the settlement of Huahura. 

[VEJAS, or Morro de Vejas, a mount on 
the coast of Peru, about half a league from the 
Island of Lobos.] 

VELA, Cape of, a point or promontory on the 
coast of the province and government of Santa 
Marta and Nuevo Reyno de Granada; on the 
confines of the province of the Rio del Hacha, to 
the e. It is lofty, and full of woods, in which 
dwell some barbarian Indians. It was discovered 
by Alonso de Ojeda, who gave it this name, in 
1499. [It is nearly opposite to Cape Horn, in 
lat. 12° 13' n. long. 72° 12 / w. 

The harbour here and its environs are supposed 
to contain not less than 2000 inhabitants.] 


Vela, a shoal of rock of the N. Sea, near 
that of Comboi to the w. 

VELAS, Port of the, on the coast of the pro-^ 
vince and government of Costarica and kingdom 
of Guatemala, between the Cape of Santa Cata- 
lina and the Morro Hermoso. 

VELEZ, a city of the province and corregimi- 
ento of Tunja in the Nuevo Reyno de Granada; 
founded by Captain Martin Galiano, by order of 
Gonzalo Ximenez de Quesada, in the territory of 
the district of Ubaza, in 1539, near the river Sa- 
rabita, or Suarez, in a llanura at the foot of the 
mountains of Opon. It was the second town 
founded by the Spaniards in this kingdom, and 
was in a short time after transferred to the spot 
where it now stands, in the country of the Chipa- 
taes Indians. Its situation is inconvenient and 
disagreeable, being at the skirt of a mountain, 
where the soil is soft and muddy ; and the streets 
are so swampy as to be at times impassable, which 
inconvenience is greatly increased by their not 
being paved. The temperature, though hot, is 
rendered moderate by the frequency of the tem- 
pests, which are attended with much thunder and 
lightning. The waters are bad and unwholesome, 
so that the inhabitants drink in common, chicha. 

The surrounding district is extremely fertile in 
maize, of which it gathers two crops yearly ; 
and not less abundant in grapes, plantains, pome- 
granates, patif/as , uyamas , pines, curas , melons, 
figs, little pines, and many other fruits and woods 
of excellent quality; also in the woods are a 
multitude of birds. It has very fine and large 
breeds of mules and horses, with which it sup- 
pli es the other provinces ; and the quantity of 
sugar it makes is excessive, and not without 
many conserves and candies ; these, Avith its 
honey and brandy, forming the principal branch 
of its commerce, and with which if supplies Santa 
Fe, and nearly the whole kingdom. It produces 
also very much cotton of the best quality, of 
which they make good woven stuffs, highly 
esteemed in all parts. 

This city contains 2,500 inhabitants, a very 
handsome church, in which is venerated an image 
of Nueslra Senora de las Nieves, the patroness, 
the same being of exquisite sculpture ; another 
effigy of Jesus of Nazareth, and a Christ cruci- 
fied, which was found engraven upon stone with 
great beauty ; two convents, one of the religious 
of San Francisco, and the other of San Juan de 
Dios, so poor, that neither of them can maintain 
two individuals. It is close to a volcano, and has 
excellent mines of very rich gold, but which are 


YEN 


155 


V E N 

not worked for want of people ; [68 miles n. of 
Santa Fe, and 25 n. w. of Tunja, in lat. 5° 40' n. 
and long. 74° 6' zo.~\ 

[VELHAS Rio Das, a district of the province 
and captainship of Espiritu Santo in Brazil. It 
has for its capital the city of St. George, de- 
fended, as well as its port, by two forts. The 
cities belonging to this district are Cairu and 
Cumana. The bar before it is defended by a fort 
with four bastions ; it contains more than 20,000 
souls, and is extremely rich and fertile ; its prin- 
cipal trade consists in grain, with which it sup- 
plies Bahia, and other parts of Brazil.] 

Yeliias Rio Das, or De Las Viejas, a river 
of the same province and captainship . It rises on 
the skirt of the sierra of Yermeja, runs n. and 
enters the grand river of Francisco. 

Veehas, another river of the same kingdom, 
in the territory of the Guayazas Indians. It is 
small, runs w. and enters the Paranaiba. 

[VELICALA, a town on and near the head of 
the peninsula of California, near the coast of the 
N. Pacific Ocean, and n. from Anclote Point. 
Lat. about 20° 35 ' n. Long. 115° 5CK w.~\ 

YEN ADO, a settlement of the head settlement 
of the district and alcaldia mayor of Charcas, in 
Nueva Espana. It has a convent of the religious 
of St. Francis ; and, although its territory is full 
of silver mines, yet as this metal is not of a 
superior quality the same are not worked ; but 
the natives rather occupy themselves in agricul- 
ture, in breeding cattle, and particularly goats for 
slaughter ; five leagues s. w. of its capital. 

Venado, an island of the S. Sea, nearly close 
to the coast, in the province and government of 
Veragua and kingdom of Tierra Firme, at the 
back of the mountain of Puercos. 

VENADOS, Punta de, a point on the coast 
of the province and government of Cartagena 
and Nuevo Reyno de Granada, on a long strip of 
land formed by the mouths of the river Zinu, be- 
tween the points Piedras and Mestizos. 

VENADILLO, a settlement of the jurisdic- 
tion of the city of Tocaima and government of 
Mariquita in the Nuevo Reyno de Granada ; 
annexed to the curacy of the settlement of Am- 
bolaima. It is of a very hot temperature, and 
much infested with mosquitoes, garapatas, and 
snakes. It produces sugar-canes, maize, yucas , 
and plantains. Its name is derived from a tame 
stag, which the Indians had when it was con- 
quered by the Spaniards. In its district is a gold 
mine, which preserves the same title, and which 
produced great riches when it was worked ; four- 
teen leagues to s. w. of Santa Fe. 


YENANGO, a settlement of the province of 
Pensylvania in the United States. [See Fort 
Franklin.] 

YENBAQUI, a river of the province and go- 
vernment of Darien and kingdom of Tierra 
Firme. It rises in the mountains of the n. part, 
and runs into the sea in the great beach opposite 
the Mulata Isles. 

YEN ETA, Sierras de, a cordillera of very 
lofty mountains in the province and government 
of Cartagena and Nuevo Reyno de Granada, 
which serve as limits between this jurisdiction 
and that of Darien, belonging to the kingdom of 
Tierra Firme. 

VENEZUELA, a province and government 
of the Nuevo Reyno de Granada, in S. America; 
bounded e. by the province of Cumana, w. by that 
of Santa Marta, s. e. by the Nuevo Reyno de 
Granada, the river Orinoco serving as limits to 
the s., and the whole of its limits on the n. being 
washed by the ocean. It is 200 leagues long, 
from the Mountain of Unare to the Cape of 
la V ela, from e. to w., and in width 120 leagues. It 
enjoys different temperatures, and has in its dis- 
trict inaccessible mountains and extremely craggy 
sierras , lofty lands, and fertile vallies and plains. 
It abounds in pastures, in which are very large 
breeds of cattle of every species, particularly neat 
cattle and goats ; which have multiplied to such 
a degree in the jurisdictions of Maracaibo, Coro, 
Carora, and Tucuyo, that the inhabitants of the 
province have enriched themselves exceedingly in 
the commerce of hides and dressed leather. The 
horses are so good as to vie with the best of Anda- 
lucia or Chile, and the mules are in numbers suf- 
ficient to supply immense droves for the use of 
the whole province. 

This province is watered by many rivers which 
fertilize it, and as it enjoys, in its vast extent, 
several degrees of temperature, the productions 
are also various, and it accordingly abounds in 
wheat, maize, rice, cotton, tobacco, and sugar, of 
which it makes exquisite conserves, cacao in great 
quantities, this being the principal source of its 
wealth, and of which the crop exceeds annually 
130,000 bushels, growing in 61 vallies and estates; 
this article having been exported entirely on 
account of the Royal Company of Caracas, they 
having had the exclusive right of trade in the 
same, from their establishment in 1728, and until 
the right was redeemed by Charles III. in 1778 ; 
it also abounds in all kinds of fruits and pulse, as 
well European as those indigenous to America. 
The mountains yield precious and much esteemed 
sorts of wood, such as pomegranates, gateados of 
x 2 


156 


VENEZUELA. 


different colours, caobs , dividibes, guayacanes , 
Brazil wood, chacatanday , most beautiful for the 
variety of its colours, which are similar to those 
of the caray , and the cedar, which is so common 
as to be used for the most ordinary works. More- 
over there is scarcely one of these trees, but 
what has in its trunk a swarm of bees, yielding 
honey. It produces also vaynillas , more fragrant 
than those of Soconusco ; and in the jurisdiction 
of the city of Carora wild cochineal, as fine as 
that of Misteca in Nueva Espana, and which, if 
cultivated as it is there, would yield immense 
profit. The zarzaparilla and indigo are here so 
common as to be thought rather incumbrances 
than things of value. In the woods are different 
kinds of animals, lions, bears, dantas, deer, ba- 
quiras , rabbits, and tigers, the fiercest of any in 
America ; and it is observed, that these animals 
are more savage in proportion to the smallness 
of the spots on their skin. In the rivers are an 
infinite variety of fish, some common and others 
exquisite ; and on the coast is found abundance 
of salt, of which all profit, not only from the 
facility of collecting it, but from its being of a 
very superior flavour. The fields are enlivened 
with birds, equally enchanting by their song as 
their beautiful plumage, and the fowl which are 
eaten are of exquisitely delicate flavour ; and 
amongst these the most notable are the guacha- 
raca , paugi , uqunn or mountain hen, turtle dove, 
and partridge. It produces also simples of great 
estimation in medicine, such as canajistola , tama- 
rinds, china root, tacamujaca , an extraordinary 
remedy for the head ache, the balsam of Lurora, 
and the oil which they call of Maria or of Cu- 
mana, both this and the former being great anti- 
dotes for wounds. 

It has tin mines in different parts, which were 
discovered by Don Alonzo de Oviedo, an inhabi- 
tant of Barquisimeto ; and these were worked 
for a long time on account of the royal estates, 
and much metal were extracted from them and 
carried to Spain for the foundry of artillery. 
These mines were afterwards made over for 
40,000 dollars to Don Francisco Marin, native 
of Caracas, but who abandoned them, applying 
the utensils employed in them to other purposes. 
This province had likewise some very rich gold 
mines, which are not now worked ; either be- 
cause, the principal veins being consumed, the 
profit does not requite the expense ; or because 
the natives are inclined rather to the cultivation 
of cacao , whereby they become enriched with less 
hazard. Here are found crystals transparent, 
solid, and smooth, and a strata of so fine a blue 


as to vie with the ultramarine ; woods of different 
colours for dyes ; and lastly, it is to be observed, 
that there is in this province whatsoever can ad- 
duce to the comfort of life, without the necessity . 
of application to any of the neighbouring pro- 
vinces ; and it is equally certain that, were the 
inhabitants capable of turning to the best advan- 
tage its great natural resources, it would be the 
best supplied and richest province in all America. 

This country was discovered by Captain Olonzo 
de Ojeda, native of Cuenca, in 1490, and its con- 
quest was agreed upon with the Emperor Charles 
V. by the Weltzers, German merchants, in 
1526, and first undertaken by Ambrose Alfinger ; 
he being followed by George Spira and Nicholas 
Federman, who gave the name of Venezuela 
to the settlements of the Indians which they 
found on the lake of Maracaibo, from their re- 
semblance to the city of Venice; and this name 
was afterwards extended to the whole province. 
It was then inhabited by innumerable tribes of 
different nations, who, without acknowledging 
allegiance to any monarch, were in a state of 
vassalage to different caciques. But the changes 
of time and the continual withdrawing of the In- 
dians, in the early periods, for the space of more 
than 20 years, to the Leeward Islands and to 
other parts, have so diminished their numbers, 
that in the 82 remaining settlements scarcely any 
thing more than the memory of their former 
greatness remains : add to this the mortality 
which happened in 1580, through the introduction 
of the small-pox by a Portuguese vessel, which 
came with negroes from the coast of Guinea. 
The capital is the city of Santiago de Leon de 
Caracas. 


Catalogue of the cities, settlements, rivers, and 
nations of Indians of the province of Vene- 


zuela. 

Cities. 

Santiago de Leon de 
Caracas, 

Santa Ana de Coro, 
Nueva Zamora de 
Maracaibo, 
Truxillo, 

Tucuyo, 

Nueva Segovia de 
Barquisimeto, 
Nueva Valencia del 
Rey, 

Portillo de Carora, 
San Sebastian de los 
Reyes, 


Guanaguanare. 

Towns. 

S. Carlos de Austria, 
Pilar de Araure, 
Puerto de laGuaira, 
Calabozo, 

San Carlos, 

Cura, 

San Fernando, 
Hospino, 

San Jay me, 

Pao, 

Perija, 


VENEZUELA. 


Settlements. 

Acarigua, 

Acurigua, 

Acaboa, 

Achaguas, 

Agua Blanca, 

Agua Culebras, 
Ayamanes, 
Alpargarton, 
Altagracia de Puer- 
tos, 

Altagrracia de Ori- 
tuco, 

Altai, or Cerro Ne- 
gro*. 

Altamira, 

Antimano, 

Paraguana, 

Ancon, 

San Antonio, 

Los Angeles, 
Aregue, 

Aparicion, 

Araguita, 

Asserradero, 

Atamaica, 

Baruta, 

Barbacoas de Tu- 
cuyo, 

Barbacoas de San 
Sebastian, 
Burburata, 

Borojo, 

Bocono deGuanare, 
Bocare, 

Boca de Tinaco, 
Bombay, 

Burrero, 

Buria, 

Carayaca, 

Carvalleda, 

Cata, 

Cabria, 

Canizos, 

Capadare, 

Carorita, 

Carrizal, 

Carriagua, 

Capatarida, 

Casiqua, 

Carache, 

Caramacate, 

Capatnaparo, 

Canaguan, 

Cabrita, 


Canoabo, 

Cagua, 

Calvario, 

Camatagua, 

Cara, 

Caucagua, 

Capaya, 

Caruau, 

Cerrito de Santa 
Rosa, 

Co jo, 

Cocuede, 

Cocuizas, 

Cocorote, 

Cuyagua, 

Cumarebo, 

Cubiro, 

Cunaviche, 

Cua, or Marin, 
Cupira, 

Curiepe, 

Chacao, 

Chaguaramal, 

Chaguaramai, 

Charayave, 

Chivacoa, 

Choron, 

Chuao, 

San Diego de Carac- 
cas, 

San Diego de Va- 
lencia, 

Duaca, 

Escuque, 

San Francisco de 
Cara, 

Guaiguaza, 

Gnaibacoa, 

Guarico, 

Guanarito, 

Gunare Viejo, 
Guarda Tinajas, 
Guacara, 

Guay os, 

Guama, 

Guapo, 

Guatire, 

Guarenas, 

Guigue, 

Hueque, 

Humucaro alto, 
Humucaro baxo, 
Hortiz, 

Santa Ines, 

Iguana, 


Yaritagua, 

Ipire, 

Yare, 

Jacuira, 

Jajo, 

San Jacinto, 

Jobal, 

San Joseph, 

Jujure, 

Payana, 

San Lazaro, 
Lagunillas, 

Lezama, 

Santa Lucia, 

Macarao, 

Maiquetia, 

Macuito, 

Map u bares, 
Macuruca, 

Mapiare, 

Maraca, 

Maria, 

Mapon, 

San Mateo, 
Maracan, 

Macaira, 

Mamporal, 

Marasma, 

Mesa, 

Misoa, 

Mitare, 

S. Miguel de Trux- 
illo, 

Moron, 

Mopui, 

Moporo, 

Montalvan, 

Naiguata, 

San Nicolas, 
Niquitao, 

Ocumare of the 
coast, 

Ocumare del Tuy, 
Onoto, 

Orachiche, 

S. Rafael de Ori- 
tuco, 

Potanemo, 

Paraguana, 

Payara, 

Parapara, 

Panaquire, 

Petare, 

Pecaya, 

Pedregal, 


157 

San Pedro and Santa 
Maria, 

Piche, 

Puerto Cabello, 
Puertos de Altagra- 
cia, 

Punta de Piedros, 
Quara, 

Quebrada, 

Quibor, 

Rio del Tucuyo, 
Rio de Carora, 

Rio Seco, 

San Rafael de las 
Guasguas, 
Sanara, 

Sarare, 

Sabana de Ocumare, 
Siquisique, 

Siquisai, 

Sombrero, 

Tarmas, 

Taria, 

Tacata, 

Tacarigua, 

Santa Teresa, 
Tintini, 

Tinacoa, 

Timotes, 

Tinaco, 

Tinajillo, 

Tiznados, 

Tinajas, 

Tomocoro, 

Toztoz, 

Tucupido, 

T ucupio, 

Turmero, 

T uren, 

Trinidad, 

Valle de la Pasqua, 
Vega, 

Victoria, 

Urama, 

Zacarida, 

Ziruma. 

Nations of Indians . 
Alcoholades,, 
Chingotos, 

Core monos, 

Cuibas, 

Cuicas, 

Giraharas, 

Guaxiros, 


158 


VENEZUELA. 


Peritoes, 

Pocabuyes, 

Quiriquires, 

Zaparas. 

Rivers. 

Albarregas, 

Astillero, 

Blondo, 

Borante, 

Cama, 

Catacumbo, 

Culata, 

Cruz, 

Piedras, 

Hacarigua, 

Harinas, 

Mitare, 

Mototan, 

Nequitao, 

Oinare, 

Pauraute, 

Rubio, 

San Pedro, 
Sciba, 

Socui, 

Unare. 

Promontories. 

Blanquizales, 

Carvalleda, 


Coquibacoa, 

Gakra, 

Macolla, 

Pico, 

Revelada, 

Salinas, 

San Joseph, 
Vela. 

Ports. 

Guaira, 

Puerto Seco, 
Puerto Cabello, 
Burburata. 

Lakes. 

Cayama, 

Maracaibo, 

Montes, 

San Pedro. 

Islands. 

Oruba, 

Aves, 

Bonaire, 

Curazao, 

Palomas, 

Isleos, 

Monges, 

Orchilla, 

T ucuaque, 
Vigia. 


[The dreadful earthquake which happened in 
this province on Holy Thursday, April 19, 1810, 
whereby the greatest part of the city of Caracas 
was destroyed, with the annihilation of Vittoria, 
and with a great destruction at Puerto Caballo 
and at Leon, is in every body’s recollection ; it is 
our lamentable province to record the event. 
The loss of souls in that city has not been accu- 
rately ascertained, perhaps for political reasons ; 
but it was, doubtlessly, considerable. 

Mr. Depons tells us that the progress of Cara- 
cas has been materially retarded by the hostilities 
between Spain and England, which have subsisted 
with little intermission since 1796 ; but that, 
previous to such interruption, it was advancing 
rapidly in wealth and population. Mr. Depons 
reckons the number of inhabitants in Venezuela, 
in 1804, at 500,000 ; but, in 1787, they amounted, 
according to the Vigero Universal, t. 23, p. 109, 
to no more than 333,000. 

The representation of the United States of 
Venezuela was established in July, 1811, in the 
proportion of one for every 20,000 souls. Taking, 


therefore, the representatives at 50, (it was, in- 
deed, assumed at 100. See Section 111, Election 
of Senators, infra), it gives the population of 
those States, including the provinces of Marga- 
rita, Merida, Cumana, Varinas, Barcelona, Trux- 
illo, and Caracas, at 1,000,000 of souls. 

At an average of four years, from 1799 to 1803, 
the quantity of cacao exported, from hence and 
from Maracaybo, amounted to 145,000 fanegas. 

The legislature of Caracas, under the new re- 
gime in 1812, had passed two acts, the one enacting, 
that all foreigners without distinction who should 
introduce, into any ports of that State, specie, 
either in silver or gold, should be exempt from 
import duty ; and should only pay 6 per cent 
export duty, on the amount of the produce pur- 
chased with the silver so imported, and 8 per 
cent on those purchases made with the gold ; 
and that all individuals of the confederation 
should, in the first case, pay 4 per cent, and in 
the second 6 per cent ; and the other enacting, 
that all persons, and particularly foreign mer- 
chants, should be allowed to import, into any of 
the ports of the state of the Caracas, 12,000 
muskets, for which the importer of the first 4000 
should receive, at the rate of 30 dollars for each 
musket ; for the second 4000, at the rate of 25 
dollars each ; and for the last 4000, at the rate 
of 20 dollars each, the whole free from import 
duties, provided the said importation should take 
place within eight months from the date of publi- 
cation ; (May 13). 

For accounts of the trade of the above pro- 
vince, see Caracas. 

Further Additional Matter respecting the Kingdom 
of Venezuela. 

I. Revolution. 

I. Introduction and Outline — 2. Grievances com- 
plained of by the Venezuelans, in their Manifesto. 
— 3. Act of Independence, July 8, 1811, in con- 
sequence of Occurrences at Bayonne, April 19, 
1810.— 4. Articles comprehended in the Decla- 
ration of the Legislative Session, July 1, 1811. — 
5. Invitation to Settlers. 

II. Federal Constitution for the States 

of Venezuela. 

Preliminary. 

Cap. 1. Of Religion — in one section. 

2. Of the Legislative Power — in seven 
sections. J 


VENEZUELA. 


159 


[3. Of the Executive Power — in Jive sec- 
tions. 

4. Of the Judicial Power — in two sec- 

tions. 

5. Of the Provinces — in four sections. 

6. Revisal and Reform of the Constitu- 

tion— in one section. 

7. Sanction or Ratification of the Con- 

stitution — in one section. 

8. Rights of Man , which are to be ac- 

knowledged and respected , through- 
out the whole extent of the State — 
in four sections. 

9. Regulations and Dispositions of more 

general tenor — in one section. 

10. Conclusion. 

(N.B. The whole of the said constitution is 
comprised under 228 articles.) 

I. Revolution. 

1. Introduction and Outline. — The revolution 
of Venezuela has proceeded with far more hasty 
steps, in all the horrors of anarchy and bloodshed, 
than that of any other part of the Spanish colo- 
nies. The denouement of the distressful scenes 
are still hidden from our eyes, and the winding- 
up of events will claim the pen of some future 
historian. To record what has already happened, 
as far as our information will allow, is our pre- 
sent intention. Whatever may have been the 
partial light thrown upon the subject, by the 
scanty dissertations of the latest writers, it is still 
no easy task to discriminate, with accuracy and 
proper feelings, the whole picture that has been 
represented to our imagination. A world in 
arms against its antient and constituted autho- 
rities, is an event novel in the revolution of ages. 
An effect so uniform is only to be looked for by a 
cause as universal. Some discussion on this 
point has been already offered under the article 
Mexico, and a sufficiently accurate consideration 
of it will be found under other articles of this 
Work ; we shall therefore confine ourselves, for 
the present, to the local circumstances relating 
to the revolution of Venezuela. 

There is, however, one most material question 
that occurs in treating this subject, which is, whe- 
ther or not the Spanish settlements, at the time of 
the entry of the French into Spain, and of the dis- 
solution of the monarchy, required redress and a 
reform of government ; and next, whether they 
asked it, and were denied. The people were 
oppressed by the crown, and by monopolies; the 
commonalty and peasantry groaned under bur- 
densome and unreasonable restrictions, destruc- 


tive of all enterprise ; the laws did not inflict 
punishment on the guilty, nor afford protection 
to the innocent ; arbitrary acts were common ; 
the natives were debarred from a fair participa- 
tion in offices of trust and emolument; a system 
of government prevailed, disgraceful to the sta- 
tute books of Spain and the Indies, opposed to 
the common rights of mankind, and hostile to the 
dictates of truth and reason ; the Spanish Ameri- 
cans, in short, could be considered in no other 
state than in that of feudal vassalage to Spain. 
The Viceroys held in their own hands the execu- 
tive, legislative, and military powers ; and, as a 
proof how little the Spanish Americans shared in 
the offices of distinction in their own country, we 
find by the Censor Extraordinario, Cadiz, Janu- 
ary 26, 1812, the following is a statement of 
persons who have been in command there since 
its settlement : 

Europeans. Americans. 

Archbishops and Bishops - - - - 702 - - 278 
Viceroys - -- -- -- - — - - 166 - - 4 

Captains-general and Presidents 588 - - 14 

1456 296 


That repeated efforts were made for a reform 
of government, and to obtain the right of legis- 
lating locally for themselves in their own con- 
cerns, appears to be proved, not only by the 
applications of the respective American munici- 
palities and juntas, but also by the journals of 
the Cortes and their debates. The claims of the 
Americans were defined and laid before the 
Spanish government, in 11 propositions, on the 
16th November, 1810; they were repeated on 
the 31st December, and again on the 1st of Au- 
gust, 1811, in the well known Representacion de 
la Deputation Americana a las Cortes de Espaha , 
but were never attended to. A torpor seemed 
to have succeeded to distress, and to the violent 
convulsions of a calamitous revolution, which 
appeared to render the government deaf to the 
just cries and appeals of a well deserving moiety 
of the nation : there was wanting a healing and 
cementing principle of benevolence ; nor is there, 
up to the present day, a proper measure of re- 
dress or conciliation upon record. 

To the impartial mind, and to him who has 
carefully examined both sides of the question, it 
will be easily suggested, that the ideas which 
circulated in the settlements of the hopeless state 
of Spain, at the time the French entered Anda- 
lucia ; to which was added, the dread of falling in- 
to the hands of the same usurpers, were the chief] 


160 


VENEZUELA. 


[causes of the Americans resolving no longer to 
trust to the administration of their European 
governors, conceiving their own affairs more se- 
cure when confided to their own assemblies or 
juntas, whom they created after the manner of 
the provinces of Spain. That they had cause to 
suspect the whole of the viceroys and governors, 
has been proved by posterior events ; they all 
proclaimed the doctrine, that America ought to 
share the same fate as the Peninsula, and that 
when the one was conquered, the other was to 
submit; in short, the commanders abroad were 
prepared for this alternative, they had been pre- 
viously chosen by the Prince of Peace, and were 
ready to be moulded to the views on which he 
had acted. It was, therefore, unnatural and un- 
reasonable, after their own dear-bought ex- 
perience, for these distant colonies to have confi- 
dence in such chiefs ; nor was it prudent to leave 
themselves to the mercy of men, who had no 
other interest in the country than to prolong the 
continuation of their command, which had been 
secured to them by the French, and their Spanish 
partizans. 

The people of Venezuela were, in fact, resolved 
to administer their own concerns, and they con- 
sidered themselves justified in declaiming against 
any dependence on governors, who, they argued, 
were ready to deliver them up to the French, in 
pursuance of the orders of Joseph Napoleon. 
They made use of that right which the most en- 
lightened Spaniards have acknow ledged to exist, 
and Don Gaspar Jovellanos, in the famous opi- 
nion which he laid before the Central Junta, Oc- 
tober 7, 1808, expressly says, “ that when a 
people discovers the imminent danger of the 
society of which it is member, and knows that 
the administrators of the authority, who ought to 
govern and defend it, are suborned and enslaved, 
it naturally enters into the necessity of defending 
itself, and of consequence acquires an extraor- 
dinary and legitimate right of insurrection.” It 
would be unfair to argue that these were maxims 
only formed for the Spaniards of Europe, and 
that they did not extend to the Americans ; and 
thus far the revolutionists w ould appear to enjoy 
the good wishes of every man, who can duly ap- 
preciate the blessings of rational and natural 
emancipation. 

But the road to innovation is always danger- 
ous, and those who follow it seldom arrive at the 
direct object of their pursuit. The insurgents of 
Caracas (for it was in this city that the revolu- 
tionists made their first and firmest stand), soon 
became divided into two parties ; those who 


wished to acknowledge Ferdinand VII. for their 
king, and to govern themselves by the Spanish 
laws, under the auspices of a national congress, 
and those who, actuated by a decided hatred of 
the Spaniards, and the exaggerated ideas of 
liberty which they had acquired from the French 
republicans, were determined to make Venezuela 
an independent state, a truly democratic repub- 
lic. The moderate party was supported at first 
by public opinion, which, as we have already ob- 
served, was favourable to the mother-country; 
but the ill-judged attempts of the Spanish com- 
missioner, at Puerto Rico, to overthrow the re- 
volutionary government, and to support the re- 
fractory towns of Coro and Maracaybo against 
the rest of the province, had the worst possible 
consequences The insurgents, who were with- 
out military leaders, had been defeated by those 
of Coro, when General Miranda, who had hastened 
to Caracas on hearing of the [revolution, arrived 
at La Guaira. His talents and ambition were so 
much dreaded by the majority of the junta, that 
orders had been issued to prevent his landing in 
his native country ; but circumstances were now 
changed, and his partizans insinuated that he was 
the only person under whose guidance they could 
look for victory. Miranda behaved at first with 
great moderation, and waited until the meeting of 
the general congress, to which he contrived to get 
himself elected by a rather insignificant village 
of the province. The majority proved to be com- 
posed of republicans ; and few sittings had taken 
place when they declared themselves absolutely 
independent, and constituted a government which 
they called The United Provinces of Venezuela. 
All their proceedings from that period are tinged 
with what might be called a jacobinical hue. A 
declaration of the Rights of Alan was issued as 
the basis of the new political fabric, and the peo- 
ple were called on to be judges of the conduct 
of their government, while the gaols were crowded 
with persons merely suspected of being disaf- 
fected : nor was this all, for as a system of 
coercion naturally, though insensibly, leads to 
the most unrefrained exhibition of power, it was 
not long before the heads of many of the citi- 
zens were to be seen sticking upon poles at the 
gates of the city, as examples of the punish- 
ment that would await all such as dared to shew 
themselves inimical to the insurgent party. 
Scarcely had those horrors began to subside, and 
the government to be more settled after the sub- 
jugation of the refractory town of Valencia, 
by the troops of Miranda, when, on April 19, 
1810, a most dreadful earthquake reduced the] 


VENEZUELA. 


161 


ftlie capital to ruins. La Guaira met with the 
same fate. But the Congress, after the publica- 
tion of a constitution in which they very nearly 
copied that of the United States, had, fortu- 
nately for themselves, issued a decree for chang- 
ing their residence to Valencia, which they had 
appointed to be the federal town ; and thus it 
was that they escaped the calamity which de- 
stroyed so many thousands of their fellow citi- 
zens. But the Congress, though they might con- 
gratulate themselves on their personal safety, 
had much to apprehend on account of their 
cause. The extraordinary catastrophe did not 
fail to have a marked effect upon the people of 
S. America ; they immediately believed it to be 
a visible sign of the wrath of heaven, inflicted 
upon them for the dereliction of their allegiance ; 
but it served to give only a momentary check to 
the progress of the system of independence. 

Montverde, the Spanish general, did not fail 
to take every advantage of the distresses and 
fears of the Patriots on this melancholy occasion, 
and many of the latter began to enter into cor- 
respondence with the government of Puerto 
Rico, and also with the royal troops at Coro, 
commanded by Montverde in person. “ At this 
crisis (says the N. York Gazette) the wreck of 
the patriot army assembled, and the command 
was given to the Marquis Del Toro, who re- 
signed his commission. The command was then 
delegated to General Miranda, and the army re- 
inforced with men and arms. About this time 
Congress evacuated, and the royal army took 
possession of Valencia. 

u On the 6th July, Puerto Cavallo was taken 
by surprise. The loss of this important sea-port 
afforded a pretext to Miranda for surrendering, 
who entered into an armistice, which led to a 
private capitulation on the part of Miranda. 
The terms of Miranda’s surrender were only 
known to one or two of his particular friends. 

“ The patriots of Caracas, it is said, were dis- 
satisfied with his conduct. Every patriot re- 
mained persuaded to the last moment that Mi- 
randa had taken care of their safety ; but, on 
finding the result, they fled to La Guaira, to em- 
bark on board the vessels detained by Miranda’s 
embargo, which was expected to be repealed ; 
but on the capitulation being concluded, it was 
continued in the name of General Montverde. 

“ General Miranda arrived at La Guaira the 
30th J uly, and ordered the embargo to be raised, 
intending immediately to embark on board an 
English schooner, for Curasoa ; but the com- 
vol. v. 


mandant refused to do so, made him a prisoner, 
and confined him in a dungeon, upbraiding him 
as a betrayer ; and in this exigence declaring 
himself for Montverde.” 

Whether this declaration were actually made, 
we are not enabled to say, but we find Miranda 
shortly afterwards carried to Cadiz, as it was 
asserted by some, to undergo his trial ; and by 
others, to give information of the best means of 
subjecting the colonies to the mother country. 
He was afterwards taken back to America, 
where he was kept in confinement, but treated 
with leniency in proportion as the success of the 
patriots had become more or less evident. 

The affairs of the latter began, shortly after 
the above misfortunes, to brighten under another 
leader, by name Bolivar. Early in the year 
1813, the town of La Guiara, together with the 
public property, to the value of 200,000 dollars, 
was retaken by the insurgents ; and on the 2d 
September, Bolivar took possession of Valencia, 
obliging Montverde to fly to Puerto Cabello. 
The practice of putting to death all the Eu- 
ropeans arriving at Venezuela now became ge- 
neral, and the public documents began to be 
signed “ The Third of Independence, and first 
of War without Quarter !” Indeed, during the 
whole of the year 1813 and later, the result of 
the engagements between Bolivar and Mont- 
verde, were in favour of the former. It would 
be tedious, and our documents are not suffici- 
ently copious, to allow us to enter into a regular 
detail of the minute transactions that have taken 
place during that period ; but, according to 
late accounts, we find that Montverde, in con- 
sequence of a wound he had received, had re- 
signed the command of the troops in Venezuela, 
pro tempore , to Colonel Solomon, and that the 
king’s cause had become daily more and more 
unpopular. This success was not lasting ; for 
shortly afterwards the insurgent army, of 1,500 
men, were defeated near Vittoria, by the royal- 
ists, and 500 of the independents deserted their 
standard, and fired to the royalists, when they 
were killed. 

At this time an embargo had existed at La 
Guaira. So rigidly w as it enforced by the in- 
dependents, that the sails and rudders of all the 
vessels had been taken ashore, to prevent the 
possibility of any of them getting to sea. The 
cruelties with which the war is carried on is 
nearly unparalleled in history ; and we almost fear 
to state them on our naked assertion. The fol- 
lowing- extract of a letter fromCura^oa, No vein-] 
Y 


162 


VENEZUELA. 


[her 4, 1814, affords, we fear, too true a picture 
of present events. 

“ I have just come over from the Main, and 
am sorry to say, that the fine province of Vene- 
zuela seems fast verging to a state like that of 
St. Domingo. In the valley of Santa Lucia and 
Santa Theresa, 29 whites have been put to death, 
mostly women and children, in the name of Fer- 
dinand VII. whilst to windward similar atroci- 
ties have been perpetrated for ‘ La Patna.’ In 
La Guaira 14 Spaniards were shot on the most 
frivolous and improbable pretences, without a 
murmur ; but when some black soldiers were to 
be flogged, their comrades interfered and rescued 
them ; and this dangerous breach of discipline 
passed unpunished. Will it be believed that 
women have taken an active part in the horrible 
proceedings carried on, and have scourged the 
ladies of the royalist party in the most cruel and 
indecent manner ? Every thing, in short, an- 
nounces an approaching struggle, wherein every 
species of cruelty will be exercised, and the dif- 
ferent shades of colour in the skin will supersede 
the necessity of all other external distinctions. 
The negro officers have already the finest horses, 
mules, and arms, and speak with a freedom which 
even a white creole dare not use without running 
the risk of becoming; the inhabitant of a jail. 
Before quitting La Guaira I was witness to a 
scene which made a deep impression on my mind, 
and indeed which never whilst I live can be 
erased from it. The Spaniards had so long and 
so confidently talked of reinforcements arriving 
from Cadiz, that they were no longer credited, 
and the matter began to be treated as a jest by 
the patriots. At length, on the 12th September, 
a squadron, consisting of a frigate and six 
transports, full of troops, made its appearance 
in the offing. Immediately all was in motion, 
and every thing was prepared to deceive them, 
should they be ignorant of the real state of af- 
fairs, or to give them a warm reception, should 
they attempt to force a landing. It was not, 
however, till noon the next day that the ships 
drew near, and the headmost were already within 
the reach of the batteries, when they suddenly 
stood off the land and lay to. It was then evi- 
dent that they were suspicious that all was not 
right, although the royal standard was displayed 
on the fort above the town. After a short time 
a boat was seen approaching the shore, and mea- 
sures were immediately taken to deceive those 
who were in her ; the tri-coloured was replaced 
by the red cockade; the picture of Ferdinand 


was again hung up at Government House ; the 
populace were instructed to hail their approach 
by loud acclamations ; and to crown all, the 
former commandant of the town, Colonel Mar- 
mal, was taken out of his dungeon, and threat- 
ened with instant death unless he turned traitor, 
and consented still to act the part of commandant 
for the King. The plan was well laid, and suc- 
ceeded at first beyond all expectation. After 
various parleys, the second in command, with a 
guard of 10 or 12 men, landed with all the dis- 
patches and letters, and directly afterwards the 
frigate and all the transports came to anchor di- 
rectly under the batteries. No one now dreamed 
that it was possible to escape, and our only con- 
cern was wbat could be done with so many pri- 
soners. This, however, gave the patriots little 
concern, as they told me they supposed it would 
be easy to get them landed in small parties, and 
then disposed of by massacreing the whole. My 
feelings were now wound up to the highest pitch 
of anxiety. The consummate ignorance of the 
artillery men saved the lives of perhaps of 2,000 
men. Ribas, mistrusting the answer that was sent 
to one of his messengers to the frigate, ordered the 
firing to commence, as it did immediately ; 60 
pieces of heavy artillery playing on the frigate 
alone. She instantly cut her cables, and stood 
off followed by all her convoy, yet the breeze 
was so light, that it can be only attributed to the 
ignorance of the gunners that every vessel was 
not sunk. Upwards of an hour and a quarter 
elapsed, during all which time a furious can- 
nonade was kept up without the frigate deigning 
to return a single shot. What is singular, not a 
spar was seen from the shore to be carried away, 
nor was a single English schooner touched by 
their ill-directed shot. Yet some damage must 
have been done, as the frigate, when out of gun- 
shot, was seen to heel, and have carpenters busy 
in plugging holes in her side. The whole loss, 
I have since been informed, was about 40 men.” 

Such being the present, unsettled, and pre- 
carious state of affairs in these regions, we shall 
not indulge ourselves in speculation on their final 
results, but hasten to record, for future ages, 
such documents as were issued by the insur- 
gents, either in exculpation of their proceed- 
ings, or in testimony of the incentives to insur- 
rection, alleged by themselves to have been ex- 
perienced from the year 1807, up to their abso- 
lute declaration of independence. 

Of these important documents, the first we have 
to record is the famous manifesto of J uly 30,] 


163 


VENEZUELA. 


[1811, of which we shall give a literal and com- 
plete translation ; since, although there be un- 
questionably objections to the severe party spirit 
with which it was indited, any mutilation of it 
would, in point of authenticity, through which 
it bears its peculiar claim to our preferment, 
render it useless and unsatisfactory. 

N. B. The other documents will be given, as 
by the Index, at the head of the new matter 
comprehended in this article. 

2. Grievances complained of by the Venezuelans , 
in their Manifesto. 

1 MANIFESTO made to the World by the Confederation of 
Venezuela, in South America, of the reasons on which she has 
founded her absolute independence of Spain, and of every other 
Foreign Power. Done and ordered to be published by the 
General Congress of the United States . — Nunc quid sit agen- 
dum considerate.’ 

4 Spanish America, condemned for more than 
three centuries, to have no other existence than to 
serve to increase the political preponderance of 
Spain, without the least influence or participa- 
tion in her greatness; would eventually have ar- 
rived by the order of the events, in which she 
has no other part than sufferance, to be the sure 
sacrifice and victim of that same disorder, cor- 
ruption, and conquest, which have disorganized 
the nation that first conquered her; if the in- 
stinct of self-security had not dictated to the 
Americans, that the moment of acting- had ar- 
rived, and that it was time to reap the fruits of 
300 years of inaction and patience. 

4 If the discovery of the new world was one of 
the most interesting occurrences to the human 
race, no less so will be the regeneration of this 
same world, degraded from that period by op- 
pression and servitude. America, raising her- 
self from the dust, and freed of her chains, yet 
without passing through the political gradations 
of other nations, will, in her turn, triumph over 
the whole world, without inundating it in blood, 
without enslaving or brutifying it. A revolution 
the most useful to the human race, will be that 
of America, when constituted and governed by 
her own self, she shall open her arms to receive 
the people of Europe ; those who are trampled 
upon by policy, fleeing from the ills of war, and 
persecuted by the fury of the passions. In 
search of peace and tranquillity, the inhabitants 
of the other hemisphere will then cross the 
ocean, not with the perfidy of the heroes of the 
16th century ; but, as friends, and not as tyrants; 


as men in need, not as lords ; not to destroy, but 
to build ; not as tigers, but as men, who horror- 
struck with our former misfortunes, and self- 
taught by their own, will not convert their reason 
into a malignant spirit, nor wish that our annals 
be again those of blood and wretchedness. Then 
shall navigation, geography, astronomy, industry, 
and trade, perfected by the discovery of America, 
though ruinous to her, be converted into so many 
means to accelerate, consolidate, and perfect the 
felicity of both worlds. 

4 This is not a flattering dream but an homage, 
made by reason to providence. It was written 
in her ineffable designs, that one-half of the 
human race should not groan under the tyranny 
of the other, nor could it be supposed that the 
great fiat of the world’s dissolution could arrive 
before one part of its creatures had enjoyed all 
their inherent rights. Every thing has been long 
preparing for this epoch of felicity and consola- 
tion. In Europe, the shock and fermentation of 
opinions, the inversion and contempt of the laws, 
the profanation of the bonds that hold together 
states, the luxury of courts, the sterility of the 
fields, the cessation of industry, the triumph of 
vice, and the oppression of virtue ; whilst in 
America, the increase of population, of foreign 
wants dependant on her, the development of 
agriculture in a new and vigorous soil, the germ 
of industry under a beneficent clime, the ele- 
ments of science under a privileged organiza- 
tion, the means of a rich and prosperous trade, 
and the robustness of a political adelescence, 
all, all accelerated the progress of evil in one 
w orld, and that of good in the other. 

4 Such was the advantageous alternative, that 
enslaved America presented on the other side the 
ocean, to her mistress Spain, when cast down by 
the weight of every evil, and undermined by 
every destructive principle of society, she called 
upon her to ease her of her chains, that she 
might fly to her succour. Unfortunately preju- 
dice triumphed ; the genius of evil and of dis- 
order seized on the governments ; goaded pride 
usurped the seat of cool prudence, ambition 
triumphed over liberality, and substituting de- 
ceit and perfidy for generosity and good faith, 
they turned against us those very arms which we 
ourselves used at the time, when impelled by our 
fidelity and plain dealing, we taught Spain her- 
self the way of resisting her enemies, under the 
banners of a presumptive king, unfit to reign, 
and without other titles than the generous com- 
passion of the people, and his own misfortunes.] 


364 


VENEZUELA. 


/ Venezuela was the first to pledge to Spain, 
the generous aid which she considered as a ne- 
cessary homage : Venezuela was the first in her 
affliction, to pour the consoling balm of friend- 
ship and fraternity into her wounds : Venezuela 
was the first to know the disorders that threat- 
ened the destruction of Spain : she was the first 
to provide for her own safety, without breaking 
the bonds that held her to the mother country : 
the first to perceive the effects of her ambitious 
ingratitude : she was the first on whom war was 
made by her brethren : and she is the first to 
recover her independence and civil dignity in the 
new world. In order to justify this measure of 
necessity and justice, she considers it a duty in- 
cumbent on her, to present to the universe, the 
reasons which have urged her to the same, that 
her honour and principles may not be doubted 
or endangered, when she comes to fill the high 
rank which providence restores to her. 

c All those who are aware of our resolution, 
likewise know what has been our fate previous 
to the late inversion of things, which alone dis- 
solved our engagements with Spain, even granted 
that these were legal and equitable. It were 
superfluous to present afresh to impartial Eu- 
rope, the misfortunes and vexations she herself 
has so often lamented, at a time that we our- 
selves w ere not allowed to do so ; neither is it 
necessary to aver the injustice of our dependance 
and degradation, when every nation has viewed 
as an insult to political equity, that Spain, un- 
peopled, corrupted, and sunk in a state of in- 
action and sloth by a despotic government, 
should have exclusively usurped from the indus- 
try and activity of the rest of the continent, the 
precious and incalculable resources of a world, 
constituted in the fief and monoply of a small 
portion of the other. 

The interest of Europe cannot clash with the 
liberty of a quarter of the globe, that now shews 
itself to the felicity of the other three ; yet a 
mere Peninsula is found to oppose the interests of 
its government to those of its nation, in order to 
raise the old hemisphere against the new one, 
since the impossibility of oppressing it any 
longer is now discovered. In opposition to these 
endeavours, more fatal to our tranquillity than 
to our prosperity, it is, that we are about to dis- 
play the causes which operated on our conduct, 
from the 15th July, 1808, and the acts that have 
wrested from us the resolutions of the 19th 
April, 1810, and of the 5th July, 1811; which 
three epochs will form the first period of the 


glories of regenerated Venezuela, when the im - 
partial pen of history shall record the first lines 
of the political existence of S. America. 

‘ Testified as were in our minifests and public 
papers, almost all the reasons that influenced 
our resolution as well as our designs ; and all 
the just and decorous means w hich we have em- 
ployed to realize them : it might be supposed, 
that the exact and impartial comparison of our 
conduct with that of the governments of Spain, 
in these latter times, would of itself suffice to 
justify not only our moderation, not only our 
measures of security, not only our independence, 
but even also the declaration of an irreconcilable 
enmity against those who directly or indirectly 
have contributed to the unnatural system now 
adopted against us. Nothing in truth should we 
have to do if good faith had been the spring of 
action, used by the party of oppression against 
liberty ; but as the last analysis of our misfor- 
tunes, we cannot extricate ourselves from the 
condition of slaves, w ithout being branded with 
the calumny of being ingrates, rebels, and un- 
thankful. Let those therefore listen and judge 
us, who have no part in our misfortunes, and who 
are now desirous of having none in our disputes, 
in order not to augment the prejudices of our 
enemies ; and let them not lose sight of the 
solemn act of our just, necessary, and modest 
emancipation. 

£ Caracas learnt the scandalous scenes that 
passed in El Escurial and Aranjuez, at a time 
that she already perceived what were her rights, 
and the state in which these were placed by 
those great occurrences ; but the habit of obe- 
dience on the one hand, the apathy produced 
by despotism on the other ; and, in short, fidelity 
and good faith were at the moment superior to 
every combination : and after the dispatches of 
Murat, the kingly substitute to Joseph Napoleon, 
had reached the capital, the authorities did not 
even waver respecting their reception, it was not 
possible for the people to think of any thing else 
than of being faithful, consistent, anil generous, 
without foreseeing the ills to which this noble 
and gallant conduct would expose them. With- 
out any other view than that of honour, Vene- 
zuela refused to follow the opinion of the lead- 
ing men of Spain, some of whom in support of 
the orders of the French Regent of the king- 
dom, exacted from us allegiance to the new 
king: others declaring and publishing, that Spain 
had received a new existence since the abandon- 
ment of her authorities, since the cessions o£| 


VENEZUELA, 


165 


(the Bourbons, and the introduction of the new 
dynasty ; that they had recovered their absolute 
independence and liberty, and that they offered 
this example to the Americans, that they might 
recover the same rights there proclaimed ; but 
as soon as the first step we had taken for our 
security, had convinced the Central J unta that 
there was in us something more than habits and 
prejudices, they began to vary the language of 
liberality and sincerity ; they perfidiously adopted 
the talisman of Ferdinand, at first invented by 
good faith ; they suppressed, but with cunning 
and sweetness, the plain and legal project of Ca- 
racas in 1808 to form a junta, and to imitate the 
representative conduct of the governments of 
Spain, and they began to set on foot a new spe- 
cies of despotism, under the factitious name of a 
king, acknowledged only from a principle of 
generosity, and destined to effect our ill and 
disaster, by those who had usurped the sovereign 
power. 

4 Fresh governors and judges, initiated in the 
new system projected against America, decided 
to sustain it at our expense, and provided with 
instructions for even the last political change 
that might occur in the other hemisphere, were 
the consequences resulting from the surprise, 
which our unheard-of and unexpected generosity 
caused to the Central Junta. Ambiguity, arti- 
fice, and disorder, were all the springs set in 
motion by this tottering and short-lived admini- 
stration : as they saw their empire exposed, it 
was evident they wished to gain in one day, what 
had enriched their ancestors in many years ; and 
as their authority was backed by that of their 
parasites, all their endeavours were directed to 
uphold each other, under the shadow of our illu- 
sion and good faith. No statute contrary to 
these plans was valid and effective, and every 
measure that favoured the new order of political 
freemasonry, was to have the force of law, how- 
ever opposed to the principles of justice and 
equity. After the declaration of the Captain- 
general Emparan, made to the Audiencia , that in 
Caracas there was no other law nor will but his 
own ; and this fully manifested in several arbi- 
trary acts and excesses, such as placing on the 
seat of the oidor, the fiscal in civil and criminal 
cases ; intercepting and opening the dispatches 
sent to the Central Junta, by Don Pedro Gon- 
sales Ortega ; sending out of those provinces this 
same functionary, as well as Captain Don Fran- 
cisco Rodriguez, and the assessor of the board of 
trade, Don Miguel Joze Sanz, all embarked for 
Cadiz and Puerto Rico 5 as well as condemning 


to the labour of the public works, without either 
form or appearance of trial, a considerable mul- 
titude of good men, snatched from their homes 
under the pretence of vagrants ; revoking and 
suspending the resolutions of the Audiencia , when 
not conformable to his caprice and absolute will : 
after naming a recorder without the consent of 
the municipal body, creating and causing the 
assessor to be received without title or authority, 
after supporting his ignorance and pride to the 
utmost lengths : after many scandalous disputes 
between the Audiencia and the municipal body, 
and after all the law characters being reconciled 
to these despots, in order that they might be 
more secure and inexpugnable against us, it was 
agreed to organize and carry into effect, under 
the shadow of fallacy, the projects of espionage 
and ambiguity. 

4 Of all this there remains authentic testimony 
in our archives ; notwithstanding the vigilance 
with which these were examined by the friends 
of the late authorities, there exists in Cumana an 
order of the Spanish government to excite dis- 
cord amongst the nobles and relations of the 
American families. There are besides, many 
written and well-known documents of corruption, 
gambling and libertinism, promoted by Guevara, 
to demoralize the country ; and no one can ever 
forget the collusions and subornings publicly 
used by the oidores, and proved in the place of 
their residence. 

4 Under these auspices the defeats and misfor- 
tunes of the Spanish armies were concealed ; 
pompous and imaginary triumphs over the F rench, 
in the Peninsula and on the Danube, were forged 
and announced ; they caused the streets to be 
illuminated; gunpowder was wasted; the bells 
chimed ; and religion was prostituted by Te 
Deums, and acts of thanks being sung, as if to 
insult Providence in the perpetuity of our evils. 
In order to leave us no time to analize our own 
fate, or discover the snares laid for us, conspira- 
cies were invented, parties and factions were 
imagined, every one was calumniated who did 
not consent to be initiated in the mysteries of 
perfidy; fleets and emissaries from the French 
were figured, as being in our seas and amongst 
us : our relations with the neighbouring- colonies 
were circumscribed and restricted; our trade 
was newly fettered ; and the whole, to the end 
of keeping us in a state of continual agitation, 
that we might not fix our attention on our real 
interests. 

4 Our forbearance once alarmed, and our vigi- 
lance awakened, we began to lose confidence in] 


166 


VENEZUELA. 


[the governments of Spain and their agents; 
through the veil of their intrigues and machina- 
tions, we discovered the horrid futurity that 
threatened us : the genius of truth, raised above 
the dense atmosphere of oppression and calumny, 
pointed out to us with the finger of impartiality, 
the true fate of Spain, the disorders of her go- 
vernment, the energy of her inhabitants, the for- 
midable power of her enemies, and the ground- 
less hopes of her salvation Shut up in our own 
houses, surrounded by spies, threatened by in- 
famy and banishment, scarcely were we able to 
bewail our own situation, or to do more than 
secretly to complain against our vigilant and 
cunning enemies. The consonance of our blended 
sighs, exhaled in the moments of bitterness and 
oppression, at length gave uniformity to our 
sentiments, and united our opinions. Shut up 
within the walls of our own houses, and debarred 
from all communication with our fellow-citizens, 
scarcely was there one individual of Caracas, who 
did not think, that the moment of being for ever 
free had arrived, or else that, of irrevocably 
sanctioning a new and horrid slavery. 

4 Every one began to discover the nullity of 
the acts of Bayonne, the invalidity of the rights 
of Ferdinand, and of all the Bourbons who were 
parties to the said stipulations ; the ignominy 
with which they had delivered up as slaves, those, 
who had placed them on the throne, in opposition 
to the pretensions of the house of Austria ; the 
connivance of the intrusive mandataries of Spain, 
to the plans of the new dynasty ; the fate that 
these same plans prepared for America, and the 
necessity of taking some resolve, that might shield 
the new world from the calamities that were 
about to result from its relations with the old 
one. All saw their treasures buried in the un- 
fathomable abyss of the disorders of the Penin- 
sula, they wept for the blood of Americans spilt 
in the same struggle with that of the enemies of 
America ; in order to sustain the slavery of their 
own country, notwithstanding the vigilance of 
their tyrants, they saw into the interior of Spain 
herself, where they beheld nothing but disorder, 
corruption, factions, defeats, misfortunes, trea- 
cheries, dispersed armies, whole provinces in the 
power of the enemy, the ready phalanxes of the 
latter, and at the head of all, a weak and tumul- 
tuary government, formed out of such rare ele- 
ments. 

4 Such was the general and uniform impression 
noticed on the faces of all the people of Vene- 
zuela by the agents of oppression, sent out to 
support, at every hazard, the infamous cause of 


their constituents ; every word produced a pro- 
scription, every discourse cost banishment to its 
author, and every effort or attempt to do the 
same in America, as had been done in Spain, if it 
did not cause the blood of Americans to flow, it 
was at least sufficient for the ruin, infamy, and 
desolation of many families, as may be seen by 
the act of proscription of several officers of dis- 
tinction, and citizens of rank and probity, decreed 
March 20, 1810, by Emparan. Such a wrong 
calculation could not fail to multiply the convul- 
sions, to augment, by means of them, the popular 
re-action, to prepare the combustible, and dispose 
it in such a manner, that with the least spark it 
would create a blaze, that would consume and 
even efface every vestige of so hard and melan- 
choly a condition. Spain, needy and desolate, 
her fate dependent on the generosity of America, 
and almost in the act of being blotted out from 
the list of nations, appeared as if transported 
back to the 16th and 17th ages, she again began 
to conquer America, witli arms more terrible 
than iron or lead ; every day gave rise to a new 
proof of the fate that awaited us ; such a one as 
would place us in the sad alternative of being 
sold to a foreign power, or obliged for ever to 
groan under a fresh and irrevocable servitude ; 
whilst we alone were expectant on the happy 
moment, that might give impulse to our opinion, 
and unite our strength to express and to sus- 
tain it. 

4 Amidst the sighs and imprecations of general 
exasperation, the irruption of the French into 
Andalucia, the dissolution of the Central Junta, 
brought about by the effects of public execration, 
and the abortive institution of another Protean 
government, under the name of Regency, reached 
our ears. This was announced under ideas more 
liberal, and on perceiving the efforts of the Ame- 
ricans to avail themselves of the vices and nulli- 
ties of so rare a government, they endeavoured 
to strengthen the illusion by brilliant promises, 
by theories barren of reform, and by announcing 
to us that our fate was no longer in the hands of 
viceroys, ministers, or governors; at the same 
time, that all these agents received the most strict 
orders to watch over our conduct, over our opi- 
nions, and not to suffer these to exceed the limits, 
traced by the eloquence that gilded over the 
chains, prepared in the captious and cunning let- 
ter of emancipation. 

4 At any other period whatever this would 
have sufficed to deceive the Americans; but the 
Junta of Seville, as well as the Central one, had 
already done too much in order to take the ban-] 


VENEZUELA. 


167 


[dage from our eyes ; and what was then com- 
bined, meditated, and polished, to subject us 
again with phrases and hyperboles, only served 
to redouble our vigilance, to collect our opinions, 
and to form a firm and unshaken resolution to 
perish, rather than to remain any longer the vic- 
tims of cabal and perfidy. The eve of that day, 
on which religion celebrates the most august 
mystery of the redemption of the human race, 
was that designated by Providence to be the 
commencement of the political redemption of 
America. On Holy Thursday, April 19, 1810, 
it was, that the Colossus of despotism was cast 
down in Venezuela, the empire of the laws pro- 
claimed, and the tyrants expelled, with all the 
felicity, moderation, and tranquillity, that they 
themselves have confessed ; so much so, as even 
to have filled with admiration and friendship for 
us, the rest of the impartial world. 

i Who but would have thought that a nation 
recovering its rights, and freeing itself from its 
oppressors, in its blind fury, would have broken 
down every barrier that might place it directly 
or indirectly within the reach of the influence of 
those very governments, that had hitherto sus- 
tained its misfortunes and oppression. Vene- 
zuela, faithful to her promises, does no more 
than insure her own security in order to comply 
with them ; and if with one strong and generous 
hand, she deposed the agents of her misery and 
her slavery, with the other, she placed the name 
of Ferdinand VII. at the head of her new govern- 
ment, swore to maintain his rights, promised to 
acknowledge the unity and integrity of the Spa- 
nish nation, opened her arms to her European 
brethren, offered them an asylum in their mis- 
fortunes and calamities, equally hated the ene- 
mies of the Spanish name, sought the generous 
alliance of England, and prepared to take part in 
the felicity or misfortune of the nation from whom 
she could and ought to have eternally separated. 

‘ But it was not this that the Regency exacted 
from us. When the latter declared us free in the 
theory of their plans, they subjected us in prac- 
tice to a small and insignificant representation, 
believing that those to w hom nothing was due, 
would be content to receive whatever was granted 
to them by their masters. Under a calculation 
so liberal, the Regency was desirous of keeping- 
up our illusion, to pay us with words, promises, 
and inscriptions for our long slavery, and for the 
blood and treasure we had expended in Spain. 

F ully were we aware how little we had to expect 
from the policy and the intrusive agents of Fer- 
dinand ; we were not ignorant that if we were 


not to be dependent on viceroys, ministers, and 
governors, with greater reason we could not be 
subject either to a king, a captive and without 
the rights of authority, nor to a government null 
and illegitimate, nor to a nation incapable of 
holding sway over another, nor to a peninsular 
corner of Europe, nearly wholly occupied by a 
foreign force. Nevertheless, desirous of effect- 
ing our own freedom, by the means of generosity, 
moderation, and civism, we acknowledged the 
imaginary rights of the son of Maria Louisa, we 
respected the misfortunes of the nation, and giving- 
official notice to the same Regency we disowned, 
we offered not to separate from Spain as long as 
she maintained a legal government, established 
by the will of the nation, and in which America 
had that part given to her, required by justice, 
necessity, and the political importance of her ter- 
ritory. 

‘ If the 300 years of our former servitude have 
not sufficed to authorize our emancipation, there 
would be sufficient cause in the conduct of the 
governments, which arrogated to themselves the 
sovereignty of a conquered nation, which never 
could have any property in America, declared an 
integral part of the same, whilst they attempted 
again to involve it in conquest. If the governors 
of Spain had been paid by her enemies, they 
could not have done more against the felicity of 
the nation, bound in its close union and good 
correspondence with America. With the great- 
est contempt of our importance, and of the justice 
of our claims, when they could not deny us the 
appearance of a representation, they subjected 
it to the despotic influence of their agents over 
the municipalities to whom the election was com- 
mitted ; and whilst in Spain, at the same time 
that they allowed even for the provinces in pos- 
session of the French, as well as the Canaries 
and Balearic islands, a representative for each 
50,000 souls, freely elected by the people ; in 
America, scarcely a 1,000,000 sufficed to have 
the right of one representative, named by the 
Viceroy or Captain-general, under the signature 
of the municipality. 

‘ At the same time that we, strong in the testi- 
mony of our own justice, and the moderation of 
our proceedings, hoped, that if the reasons we 
alleged to the Regency to convince them of the 
necessity of our resolution did not triumph ; at 
least, that the generous dispositions with which 
we offered not to become the enemy of our op- 
pressed and unfortunate brethren would be suc- 
cessful, dispositions which the new government 
of Caracas was desirous should not be limited to] 


168 


VENEZUEL A. 


[barren phrases ; and the imprejudiced and im- 
partial world will know, that Venezuela has 
passed all that time, which intervened between 
April 19, 1810, to July 5, 1811, in a bitter and 
painful alternative of acts of ingratitude, insults, 
and hostilities on the part of Spain, and of gene- 
rosity, moderation, and forbearance on ours. 
This period is the most interesting of the history 
of our revolution, so much so, that its events 
present a contrast so favourable to our cause, 
that it cannot have failed to gain over for us the 
impartial judgment of those nations, that have no 
interest to disparage our efforts. 

‘ Previous to the result of our political trans- 
formation, every day we received fresh motives, 
sufficiently strong, for each to have caused us to 
do what we have done, after three ages of misery 
and degradation. In every vessel that arrived 
from Spain, new agents came out to strengthen 
with fresh instructions, those who sustained the 
cause of ambition and perfidy. For the very 
same purpose, refusal was sent out for the offi- 
cers and other Europeans to return to Spain, 
notwithstanding they asked it to fight against the 
French; fresh orders were issued, April SO, 1810, 
for the schools to be closed, to the end that, 
under the pretence of attending only to the war, 
both Spain and America might be sunk deeper 
into a state of ignorance, it ivas ordained that 
rights and premiums should not be heard of, and 
that nothing was to be done, but sending to 
Spain money, American men, provisions, colonial 
productions, submission, and obedience. 

( The public prints were filled with nothing 
but triumphs, victories, donations, and acknow- 
ledgments, wrested by despotism from the peo- 
ple, who were not yet informed of our resolution ; 
and, under the most severe threats of punish- 
ment, a political inquisition, with all its horrors, 
was established against those who should read, 
possess, or receive other papers, not only foreign 
but even Spanish, that were not out of the Re- 
gency’s manufacture. Contrary to the very 
orders, previously issued to deceive the country, 
every bound was overleaped in the selection of 
ultramarine functionaries, whose merit alone 
consisted in having sworn to maintain the system 
contrived by the Regency ; in the most scanda- 
lous and barefaced manner the order which fa- 
voured our trade, and encouraged our agricul- 
ture, was declared null, condemned to be burnt, 
and its authors and promoters proscribed ; aid of 
every kind was exacted from us, without any 
account of its destination or expenditure being 
sent to us ; in contempt of every shadow of pub- 


lic faith, and without any exception whatever, all 
correspondence from these countries was ordered 
to be opened; an excess unknown even under 
the despotism of Godoy, and only adopted to 
cause the espionage over America to be more ty- 
rannical. In short, the plans plotted to perpe- 
tuate our servitude, now began practically to be 
realised. 

s In the mean time Venezuela, free, and mis- 
tress of herself, of nothing thought less than to 
imitate the detestable conduct of the Regency and 
its agents ; content with having secured her fate 
against the ambition of an intrusive and illegiti- 
mate government, and shielded it against plans 
too dark and complicated, was satisfied in shew- 
ing, by positive acts, her desire of peace, friend- 
ship, correspondence, and co-operation with her 
European brothers. All those who were amongst 
us, were considered as such, and two-thirds of 
the political, civil, and military employments, 
both of the high and middle classes, remained, or 
were placed in the hands of Europeans, without 
any further precaution, but with a sincerity and 
good faith, that nearly proved fatal to our in- 
terests. 

£ Our chests were generously opened, to aid 
with every luxury, to the end, that our tyrants 
in their passage from us, might enjoy every 
convenience and profusion ; the captains of the 
packets, Carmen, Fortuna, and Araucana, were 
received into our ports, and assisted with money, 
to enable them to proceed on their voyage, and 
fulfil their respective commissions ; and even the 
disrespect and crimes of the commander of the 
Fortuna, were referred to the judgment of the 
Spanish government. Notwithstanding the go- 
vernmental J unta of Caracas, manifested the 
reasons of precaution, which obliged them not to 
expose to the voracity of the government the 
public funds, which were destined to succour the 
nation, they exhorted and left room for the ge- 
nerosity of the people, to use their fortunes con- 
formably to the impulse of their own sensibility, 
by publishing in the newspapers the mournful 
manifest, in which the Regency pourtrayed the 
agonizing state of the nation, in order to implore 
aid ; at the same time, that they represented it 
vigorous, organised, and triumphant in the pub- 
lic prints, destined to deceive us. The commis- 
sioners of the Regency bound to Quito, Santa 
Fe, and Peru, were hospitably received, treated 
as friends, and their pecuniary wants supplied to 
their own satisfaction. — But we lose time, in thus 
analysing the dark and cunning conduct of our 
enemies, as all their endeavours have not sufficed] 


VENEZUELA. 


169 


[to warp the imperious and triumphing- impres- 
sion of ours. 

‘ The arrogant mandataries of our country, 
were not, however, the only ones, authorised to 
support the horrid plot of their constituents ; the 
same uniform and universal mission, was brought 
out by all those who inundated America, from 
the sad and ominous reigns of the Junta of Se- 
ville, the central one, and the Regency ; and 
under the system of political freemasonry, founded 
on the Machiavelic pact, they all accorded in mu- 
tually substituting, replacing, and assisting each 
other, in the plans combined against the felicity 
and political existence of the New World. The 
island of Puerto Rico, was immediately made the 
haunt of all the agents of the Regency, the place 
of equipment for all the expeditions, the head- 
quarters of all the anti-American forces, the 
workshop of all the impostures, calumnies, tri- 
umphs, and threats of the Regents ; the refuge 
of all the wicked, the rendezvous port of a new 
set of Filibustiers, in order that there might not 
be wanting any of the calamities of the 16th 
century, to the new conquest of America, in the 
19th. The Americans of Puerto Rico, oppressed 
by the bayonets, cannons, fetters, and gibbets 
which surrounded the bashaw Melendez, and his 
satellites, had to add to their own evils and mis- 
fortunes, the painful necessity of contributing to 
ours. Such is the fate of the Americans, con- 
demned not only to be galley slaves, but to be 
the drivers of each other. 

‘ The conduct observed by Spain to America, is 
harder and more insulting, when compared with 
that she appears to exercise with regard to 
France. It is well known, that the new dynasty, 
still resisted by part of the nation, has had de- 
cided partizans in many of those, who considered 
themselves the first national dignitaries, for their 
rank, offices, talents, and knowledge, amongst 
whom might be recounted Morla, Azanza, Ofa- 
rill, Urquijo, Mazarredo, and many others of 
every class and profession ; but still there has 
not appeared one of those who so much desire 
the liberty, independence, and regeneration of 
the Peninsula, who has raised his voice in favour 
of the American provinces. These, therefore, 
adopting the same principles of fidelity and na- 
tional integrity, have of their own accord, been 
ambitious of preserving themselves independent 
of such intrusive, illegitimate, weak, and tumul- 
tuary governments, as have been all those, which 
have hitherto called themselves the agents of the 
king, or representatives of the nation. It is 
vexing to see so much liberality, so muchcivism, 

VOL. v. 


and so much disinterest in the Cortes, with re- 
gard to Spain, disorganised, exhausted, and 
nearly conquered; and at the same time, so 
much meanness, so much suspicion, prejudice, 
and pride, towards America ; tranquil, faithful, 
generous, decided to aid her brethren ; when it is 
she alone who can give reality, (in the most es- 
sential point at least) to the theoretical and bril- 
liant plans, which make the Spanish congress so 
exalted. How many treasons, surrenders, assas- 
sinations, perfidies, and convulsions, have not 
appeared in the revolution of Spain ; these have 
passed by as the inseparable misfortunes of cir- 
cumstances, yet not one of the provinces sur- 
rendered, or satisfied with the dominion of the 
French, has been treated like Yenezuela; their 
conduct must however have been analysed and 
characterised according to reasons, motives, and 
circumstances that dictated it ; this must have 
been judged in conformity to the rights of war, 
and the sentiments of the nation must have been 
pronounced according to the statements laid be- 
fore it ; but not one of them has yet been de- 
clared traitorous, in rebellion, and unnaturalised, 
as was Venezuela; for none of them has been 
created a public commission of diplomatic muti- 
neers, to arm Spaniard against Spaniard, to fan 
the flame of civil war, and to burn and dilapidate 
all that cannot be held in the name of Ferdinand 
the Seventh. America alone is condemned to 
endure the unheard of condition of being warred 
upon, destroyed, and enslaved, with the very 
aids she destined for the liberty and common fe- 
licity of the nation of which she was led to be- 
lieve, for a few moments, that she constituted 
part. 

£ It appears that the independence of Ame- 
rica, creates more irritation to Spain, than the 
foreign oppression that threatens her; for against 
her are, preferably employed, measures that have 
not even been used against the very provinces 
that have proclaimed the new king. The incen- 
diary and turbulent talent of a minister of the 
council of the Indies, could not have a more dig- 
nified employment, than that of again conquering 
Venezuela, with the same arms as those of the 
Alfingers and the Weslers, (the first tyrants of 
Venezuela, authorised by Charles V. and the 
promoters of civil war amongst its primitive in- 
habitants), in the name of a king placed on the 
throne, against the pretensions of the family of 
him who let out these provinces to the German 
factors. Under this name, all the sluices of ini- 
quity are opened upon us, and the horrors of the 
conquest are renew ed, the remembrance of which] 
z 


170 


VENEZUELA. 


[we had generously endeavoured to blot out from 
our posterity ; under this name we are treated 
with more severity than those who abandoned it 
before we did; and under this name it is at- 
tempted to continue the system of Spanish domi- 
nion in America, which has been held as a poli- 
tical phenomenon, even in the times of the, rea- 
lity, energy, and vigour of the Spanish monarchy. 
And can there be found any law that obliges us 
to preserve it, and to sutler in its name the tor- 
rent of distresses heaped upon us by those who 
call themselves its agents in the peninsula ? By 
their means, this very name obtained the trea- 
sure, the obedience and acknowledgement of Ame- 
rica; and by means of their flagitious conduct 
afterwards, in the exercise of their powers, the 
name of Ferdinand has lost every consideration 
amongst us, and consequently ought to be aban- 
doned for ever. — Ex qua persona quis lucrum 
capit, ejus factum prcestare tenetur. 

4 The tyrant ofBorriquen, (the primitive name 
of the island of Puerto Rico), not content with 
creating himself into a sovereign, to declare war 
against us, and with insulting and calumniating 
us in his flimsy, mean, and flattering prints ; not 
satisfied with constituting himself into the gra- 
tuitous jail-keeper of the emissaries of peace and 
confederation, sent to him by his comrade Mi- 
yares, from the castle of Zaparas de Maracaibo ; 
because they overturned the plans he had re- 
ceived and accepted from the Regency and the 
new king of Spain, in exchange for the captain- 
generalship of Venezuela, purchased at a cheap 
rate from the Regents ; not considering such su- 
perior merit sufficienty rewarded with the honour 
of faithfully serving his king, in the most bare- 
faced manner plundered more than 100,000 dol- 
lars of the public funds, belonging to Caracas, 
that had been embarked on board the ship Fer- 
dinand the Seventh, in order to purchase stores 
and military clothing in London, where the in- 
surance was effected, and in order that his insult 
might be the more complete, he alledged that 
the Spanish government might waste and mis- 
apply them, that England might appropriate 
them to herself, disowning our resolution ; so that 
in no place they could, or ought to be more se- 
cure than in his hands, negociated by means of 
his partners in trade, as in fact they were in Phi- 
ladelphia, adding, that account of the capital 
thereof was to he given in when Puerto Rico 
had conquered Venezuela, when the latter should 
deliver herself up to the Regency, or when Fer- 
dinand VII. should return to reign in Spain. 
—Such were the periods, it appears, that the 


governor of Puerto Rico imposed upon himself, 
to render in account of so atrocious and scanda- 
lous a depredation ; but this is not all that this 
worthy agent of the Regency has done in favour 
of the designs of his constituents. 

4 Notwithstanding so much insult, robbery, 
and ingratitude, Venezuela maintained her reso- 
lution not to vary the principles she had traced 
out for her conduct, the sublime act of her na- 
tional representation was proclaimed in the name 
of Ferdinand VII. under his fantastical authority, 
all the acts of our government and administra- 
tion were sustained, though they required no 
other origin than the people who had constituted 
them ; by the laws and regulations of Spain was 
judged a horrible and sanguinary conspiracy of 
the Europeans, which were even infringed to 
save their lives, in order that the philanthropic 
memory of our revolution might not be stained 
with the blood of our perfidious brethren ; under 
the name of Ferdinand, and by the interposition 
of the bonds of fraternity and patriotism, endea- 
vours were made to inform and reduce the im- 
perious mandataries of Coro and Maracaibo, who 
perfidiously kept separated from our interests our 
brethren of the west ; under the auspices of re- 
ciprocal interest, we triumphed over the oppres- 
sive acts of Barcelona, and under the same we 
will reconquer Guayana, twice snatched from our 
confederation, as was Maracaibo, against the ge- 
neral wishes of its inhabitants. 

4 It would have seemed that nothing was now 
left to be done for the reconciliation of Spain, or 
for the entire and absolute separation of America 
from such a system of generosity, equally as ruin- 
ous and calamitous, as contemptible and ungrate- 
ful ; but Venezuela was desirous of draining 
every means left within her reach, in order that 
justice and necessity should leave her no other 
safe alternative than that of independence, which 
ought to have been declared from July 15, 1808, 
or from April 19, 1810. After appealing to sen- 
sibility, and not to vengeance, in the horrid 
scenes that occurred at Quito, Pore, and La Paz ; 
after beholding our own cause supported by the 
uniformity of opinions in Buenos Ayres, Santa 
Fe, the Floridas, Mexico, Guatemala, and Chili ; 
after obtaining an indirect guarantee on the part 
of England ; after hearing our conduct applauded 
by impartial men in Europe ; after seeing the 
same principles triumph from the Orinoco, as far 
as El Magdalena ; and from Cape Codera, as far 
as the Andes ; we have still to endure fresh in- 
sults, before we fly to the painful extreme of 
breaking with our brethren for ever.] 


VENEZUELA. 


171 


Caracas, without having done more than imi- 
tate many of the provinces of Spain ; and used 
the same rights which the Council of Regency 
declared in her favour, as well as that of all 
America; without having had in this conduct 
other designs than those inspired by the supreme 
law of necessity not to be involved in an un- 
known fate, and to relieve the Regents of the 
trouble of attending to the government of coun- 
tries, as well extensive as remote, at the same 
time that they protested that they would attend 
to nothing but the war; without having torn 
asunder her unity and political integrity with 
Spain ; without having disowned, as was possible 
and proper, the lame rights of Ferdinand ; far 
from applauding for convenience, if not from 
sentiments of generosity, so just, necessary, and 
modest a resolution, and without answering even, 
or submitting to the judgment of the nation our 
complaints and claims, is declared in a state of 
war, her inhabitants are proclaimed rebels, and 
unnaturalised; every communication is cut off 
with her brethren ; England is deprived of her 
trade, the excesses of Melendez are approved, 
and he is authorised to commit whatever his ma- 
lignity of heart may suggest to him, however op- 
posed to reason and justice, as is proved by the 
order of September 4, 1810, unheard of for its 
enormity, even amongst the despots of Constan- 
tinople or Indostan ; and not to deviate in the 
least from the plots of the conquest, a new enco- 
mendero is sent out under the name of a paci- 
ficator, who, with more prerogatives than the 
conquerors and settlers themselves was to take 
his post in Puerto Rico, and thence to threaten, 
rob, pirate, deceive, excite civil disturbances, and 
all in the name of Ferdinand VII. 

i Till then the progress of the system of sub- 
version, anarchy, and depredation, which the Re- 
gency proposed to itself on hearing of the move- 
ments of Caracas, had been but slow, but the 
principal focus of the civil war being transferred 
nearer to us, the subaltern agents acquired more 
strength ; the flames of the passions were multi- 
plied, as well as the efforts of the parties directed 
by the chiefs hired by Cortavarria and Melendez. 
Hence originated the incendiary energy acquired 
by the ephemeral sedition of the west ; hence the 
discord newly fanned by Miyares, rendered vain 
and arrogant by the imaginary and promised 
captain-generalship of Venezuela ; hence the 
American blood, in spite of ourselves, spilt on 
the sands of Coro ; lienee the robberies and as- 
sassinations committed on our coasts by the 
pirates of the Regency ; hence that miserable 


blockable, intended to seduce and disaffect our 
shore settlements ; hence the insults committed 
on the English flag ; hence the falling off of our 
trade ; hence the conspiracies of the vallies of 
Aragua and Cumana ; hence the horrid perfidy in 
Guyana, and the insulting deportation of its 
leading characters to the Moorish dungeons of 
Puerto Rico, dungeons constructed like those of 
Tunis and Algiers : hence the generous and im- 
partial offices of reconciliation, sincerely inter- 
posed by a representative of the British govern- 
ment in the Antilles, and rejected by the pseudo- 
pacificator, (the official dispatch of Admiral 
Cochrane in the Secretary of State’s office); hence, 
in short, all the evils, all the atrocities, and all 
the crimes, which are, and ever will be, insepa- 
rable to the names of Cortavarria and Melendez 
in Venezuela, and which have impelled her go- 
vernment to go beyond what was proposed, when 
it took upon itself the fate of those who honoured 
it with their confidence. 

i The mission of Cortavarria, in the 19th cen- 
tury, and the state of Spain who decreed it, com- 
pared with America, against whom it is directed, 
evinces, to what an extreme the illusion of am- 
bition blinds those who, on the depravation of 
the people, found all the origin of their autho- 
rity. This act alone sufficed to authorise our 
conduct. The spirit of Charles V. the memory 
of Cortes and Pizarro, and the manes of Monte- 
zuma and Atahualpa, are involuntarily repro- 
duced to our imagination, when we see the ade~ 
la?itados, pesquisidores , and encomendoros, offices 
peculiar to the first settlement of America, re- 
newed in a country, which having endured 300 
years of submission and sacrifices, had promised 
to continue in allegiance on the only condition 
of being free, in order that the circumstances of 
slavery might not blemish the merit of fidelity. 
The scandalous plenitude of power confided to a 
man, authorised by an intrusive and illegitimate 
government, that under the insulting name of 
pacificator, he might depotise, excite, rob, and, 
to crown the insult, that he might offer pardon 
to a people, noble, innocent, tranquil, generous, 
and masters of their own rights ; could only be 
credited in the impotent delirium of a govern- 
ment that tyrannises over a nation disorganised 
and stunned by the horrid tempest that overtakes 
her; but as the ills of this disorder, and the abuses 
of such an usurpation might be considered as not 
imputable to Ferdinand, already acknowledged 
in Venezuela, at the same time that he was un- 
able to remedy so much insult, such excesses, 
and so much violence committed in his name, we] 
z 2 


172 


VENEZUELA. 


[consider it necessary to remount to the origin of 
these same rights, that we may then descend to 
the nullity and invalidity of the generous oath by 
which we conditionally acknowledged him; not- 
withstanding we have, in spite of ourselves, to 
violate the spontaneous silence we had imposed 
upon us, respecting every thing that was anterior 
to the transactions of El Escurial and Aranjuez. 

‘ It is an evident fact, that America does not 
belong to the territory of Spain, and it is more- 
over also true, that the rights which the Bour- 
bons, justly or unjustly, had to it, notwithstand- 
ing they were hereditary, could not be disposed 
of without the consent of the people, and parti- 
cularly of those of America, who, on the election 
between the French and Austrian dynasties, 
might have done in the 17th century what they 
have now done in the 19th. The bull of Alex- 
ander VI. and the just titles which the house of 
Austria alledged in the American code, had no 
other origin than the right of conquest, partially 
ceded to the conquerors and settlers, for the aid 
they had rendered to the crown in order to ex- 
tend its dominion in America. Without taking 
into consideration the depopulation of the coun- 
try, the extermination of the natives, and the 
emigration which the supposed mother country 
sustained, it appears, that when the fury of con- 
quest had ceased ; when the thirst for gold was 
satisfied ; when the continental equilibrium was 
declared in favour of Spain, by the advantageous 
acquisition of America ; the feudal government 
destroyed and rooted up from the time of the 
reign of the Bourbons in Spain, and every right 
extinct that did not originate in the new conces- 
sions or mandates of the prince, the conquerors 
and settlers then became absolved of theirs. As 
soon as the lameness and invalidity of the rights 
arrogated to themselves by the Bourbons is de- 
monstrated; the titles by which the Americans, 
descendants of the conquerors, possessed these 
countries, revive ; not in detriment to the natives 
and primitive proprietors, but to equalise them 
in the enjoyment of liberty, property, and inde- 
pendence, which they always held by a right 
stronger than that of the Bourbons, or of any 
others to whom they may have ceded America, 
without the consent of the Americans, its natural 
owners. 

£ That America does not belong to the terri- 
tory of Spain, is a principle of natural, and a law 
of positive right. No title, just or unjust, which 
exists of her slavery, can apply to the Spaniards 
of Europe; and all the liberality of Alexan- 
der VI. could not do more than declare the Aus- 


trian kings promoters of the faith, in order to 
find out for them a preternatural right, whereby 
to make them lords of America. Neither the 
pre-eminence of the parent state, nor the prero- 
gative of the mother country, could at any time 
ground the origin of lordship on the part of 
Spain. The first was lost, from the time that 
the monarch, acknowledged by the Americans, 
left the country and renonnced his rights, and 
the second always amounted to nothing more 
than a scandalous abuse of words ; as was that of 
calling our slavery, felicity ; that of saying the 
fiscals were the protectors of the Indians ; and 
that the sons of Americans were divested of every 
right and civil dignity. By the mere act of men 
passing from one country to another to settle it, 
those who do not leave their homes, acquire no 
property, nor do they expose themselves to the 
hardships inseparable to emigration. Those who 
conquer and obtain possession of a country by 
means of their labour, industry, cultivation, and 
connection with the natives thereof, are they who 
have a preferable right to preserve it, and trans- 
mit it to their posterity born therein ; for if the 
country where one is born, were considered as 
an origin of sovereignty or a title of acquisition, 
the general will of nations, and the fate of the 
human race, would then be rivited to the soil, in 
like manner as are the trees, mountains, rivers, 
and lakes. 

4 Neither could it ever be considered as a title 
of property to the rest of a nation, for one part 
thereof to have past over to another country to 
settle it ; for by a right of this nature, Spain 
herself would belong to the Phoenicians, their de- 
scendants, or to the Carfhagenians, wherever 
they may be found ; even the whole of the na- 
tions of Europe would have to change their 
abodes to make room and re-establish so singu- 
lar a territorial right ; home would then become 
as precarious as are the wants and caprices of 
men. The moral abuse of the maternity of 
Spain, with regard to America, is still more in- 
significant, for it is well known, that in the natu- 
ral order of things, it is the duty of the father to 
emancipate his son, as soon as getting out of his 
minority, he is able to use his strength and rea- 
son to provide for his own subsistence ; and also, 
that it is the duty of the son to emancipate him- 
self, whenever the cruelt y or extravagance of the 
father or tutor endanger his well-being, or ex- 
pose his patrimony to be the prey of a miser or 
an usurper. Under these principles, let a com- 
parison be made of the 300 years of our filiation 
to Spain ; and even when it should be provedj 


VENEZUELA. 


173 


[that she was our mother, it would still remain 
to be proved, that we are jet her minors or 
pupils. 

‘ At any period, when Spain has entertained 
any doubt of the rights of the Bourbons, or of 
any other dynasty, the only source, and that not 
very clear, of the Spanish dominion in America ; 
it appeared as if the Americans were excluded 
from alledging any reasons that might destroy 
such claims, doubtful from their very origin ; but 
as Venezuela may be hereafter reproached for 
the conditional oath by which the representative 
body that now declares its independence of every 
other foreign power, previously acknowledged 
Ferdinand VII. — this same august body feels 
anxious that no handle should be left for the 
Scruples of conscience, for the illusions of igno- 
rance, and for the malice of wounded ambition, 
whereby to discredit, calumniate, and weaken a 
resolution, taken with a maturity and delibera- 
tion suitable to its magnitude and importance. 

‘ It is well known, that the promissory oath 
in question, is no more than an accessory bond, 
which always pre-supposes the validity and legi- 
timacy of the contract ratified by the same. 
When in the contract there is no vice which may 
render it null and illegitimate, it is, that we be- 
lieve that God, invoked by an oath, will not then 
refuse to witness and guarantee the fulfilment of 
our promises, because the obligation to comply 
with them is founded on an evident maxim of 
the natural law instituted by the divine author. 
God can at no time guarantee any thing that is 
not binding in the natural order of things, nor 
can it be supposed he will accept of any con- 
tract, opposed to those very laws he himself has 
established for the felicity of the human race. It 
would be to insult his wisdom, to believe that 
he is capable of listening to our vows, when we 
implore his divine concurrence to a contract that 
clashes with our own liberty, the only origin of 
the morality of our actions ; such a supposition 
would indicate, that God had an interest in mul- 
tiplying our duties, in prejudice to natural li- 
berty, by means of such agreements. Even when 
the oath were to add any new obligation to that 
of the contract thereby confirmed, the nullity of 
the one would at all times be inseparable to the 
nullity of the other ; and if he who violates a 
sworn contract is criminal and worthy of punish- 
ment, it is because he has violated good faith, 
the only bond of society; without the perjury 
doing more than serving to increase the crime 
and to aggravate the punishment. That natural 


law which obliges us to fulfil our promises, and 
that divine one which forbids us to invoke the 
name of God in vain, do not in any manner alter 
the nature of the obligations contracted under 
the simultaneous and inseparable effects of both 
laws ; so that the infraction of the one, supposes 
the infraction of the other. For our own good 
we call on God to witness our promises, and 
when we believe that he can guarantee them and 
avenge their violation, it is alone because the 
contract has nothing in itself capable of rendering 
it invalid, illicit, unworthy of, or contrary to, 
the eternal justice of the Supreme Arbiter, to 
whom we submit it. Under these principles it 
is that we are to analyse the conditional oath by 
which the Congress of Venezuela has promised 
to preserve the rights legally held by Ferdi- 
nand VII. without attributing to it any other, 
which, being contrary to the liberty of the people, 
would of consequence invalidate the contract and 
annul the oath. 

‘ We have at length seen, that impelled by the 
conduct of the governments of Spain, the people 
of Venezuela became sensible of the circumstances 
by which the tolerated rights of Ferdinand VII. 
were rendered void in consequence of the trans- 
actions of El Escurial and Aranjuez ; as well as 
those of all his house, by the cessions and abdi- 
cations made at Bayonne ; and from the demon- 
stration of this truth, follows, as a corollary, the 
invalidity of an oath, which, besides being con- 
ditional, could not subsist beyond the contract to 
which it was added, as an accessory bond. To 
preserve the rights of Ferdinand, was all that 
Caracas promised on April 19, at a time she was 
ignorant he had lost them, — Judicio caret jura- 
mentum incantum. Div. tom. 22. p. 89. art. 3. 
Si vero sit quidem possibile fieri ; sed fieri non de- 
beat. , vel quia est per se malum , v el quia est boni 
impeditivum , tunc juramento deest justitia , et ideo 
non est serxandum. — Quest, cit art. 7. Even if 
Ferdinand retained them, with regard to Spain, 
it remains to be proved, whether, by virtue of 
the same, he was able to cede America to another 
dvnasty, without her own consent. The advices, 
which in spite of the oppression and cunning of 
the intrusive governments of Spain, Venezuela 
was enabled to obtain of the conduct of the Bour- 
bons, and the fatal effects the same was about to 
entail on America, have constituted a body of ir- 
refragable proofs, evincing, that as Ferdinand 
no longer retained any rights, the preservation 
thereof, which Venezuela promised, as well as 
the oath by which she confirmed this promise,! 


174 


VENEZUELA. 


[consequently are, and ought to be done away, 
Jurabis in veritate , et in judicio, et in justicia . — 
Jerem. cap. 4. Of the first part of the position, 
the nullity of the second becomes a legitimate 
consequence. 

4 But neither the Escurial, Aranjeuz, or Bayona, 
were the first theatres of the transactions which 
deprived the Bourbons of their rights to Ame- 
rica. Already in Basil, (by the treaty made on 
July 15, 1795, and by which Godoy obtained 
the title of Prince of Peace), and in the court of 
Spain, the fundamental laws of the Spanish 
dominion in these countries, had been broken 
through. Charles IV. contrary to one of them, 
ceded the island of St. Domingo to France, — (See 
Recopil de Indias, law i. tit. 1.) and disposed of 
Louisiana to the same foreign power, which un- 
heard of, and scandalous infractions, authorised 
the Americans, against whom they were com- 
mitted, as well as the whole of the Columbian 
people, to separate from the obedience and lay 
aside the oath, by which they had bound them- 
selves to the crown of Castile, in like manner as 
they were entitled to protest against the eminent 
danger which threatened the integrity of the mo- 
narchy in both worlds, by the introduction of 
French troops into Spain, previous to the trans- 
actions of Bayona ; invited there, no doubt, by 
one of the Bourbon factions, in order to usui'p 
the national sovereignty in favour of an intruder, 
a foreigner, or a traitor ; but as these events are 
prior to the period we have fixed for our discus- 
sion, we will return to treat of those which have 
authorised our conduct, since the year 1808. 

4 Every one is aware of the occurrences which 
happened at the Escurial, in 1807, but perhaps 
every one is not acquainted with the natural 
effects of these events. It is not our intention 
here to enter into the discovery of the origin of 
the discord that existed in the family of Charles IV. 
let England and France attribute it to them- 
selves, both governments have their accusers and 
defenders ; neither is it to our purpose to notice 
the marriage agreed on between Ferdinand and 
the daughter-in-law of Buonaparte, the peace of 
Tilsit, the conferences at Erfuhrt, the secret 
treaty of St. Cloud, and the emigration of the 
house of Braganza to the Brazils. What most 
materially concerns us is, that by the transac- 
tions of El Escurial, Ferdinand VII. was declared 
a traitor against his father, Charles IV. A 
hundred pens, and a hundred presses, published 
at the same time in both worlds his perfidy, and 
the pardon which at his prayer, was granted to 


him by his father ; but this pardon as an attri- 
bute of the sovereignty and of paternal autho- 
rity, only absolved the son from corporal punish- 
ment ; the king his father, had no power to free 
him from the infamy and inability which the 
constitutional laws of Spain impose on the traitor, 
not only to hinder him from obtaining the royal 
dignity, but even the lowest office or civil em- 
ployment. Ferdinand, therefore, never could be 
king of Spain, or of the Indies. 

4 To this condition the heir of the crown re- 
mained reduced, till the month of March, 1808, 
when, whilst the court was at Aranjuez, the pro- 
ject frustrated at the Escurial was converted 
into insurrection and open mutiny, by the friends 
of Ferdinand. The public exasperation against 
the ministry of Godoy, served as a pretext to 
the faction of Ferdinand, and as a plea indirectly 
to convert into the good of the nation, what 
was perhaps calculated under other designs. 
The fact of using force against his father ; his 
not rather recurring to supplication and con- 
vincing arguments ; his having excited mutiny 
on the part of the people ; his having assembled 
them in front of the palace in order to surprise 
it, to insult the minister, and force the king to 
abdicate his crown ; far from giving him any 
title to it ; only tended to increase his crime, to 
aggravate his treachery, and complete his inabi- 
lity to ascend the throne, vacated by means of 
violence, perfidy, and factions. Charles IV. out- 
raged, disobeyed, and threatened with force, had 
no other alternative left him, suitable to his de- 
corum, and favourable to his vengeance, than to 
emigrate to France, to implore the protection of 
Buonaparte, in favour of his offended royal dig- 
nity. Under the nullity of the abdications of 
Aranjuez, all the Bourbons assemble in Bayona, 
carried there against the will of the people, to 
whose safety they preferred their own particular 
resentments; the Emperor of the French took 
advantage of them, and when he held under his 
controul, and within his influence, the whole 
family of Ferdinand, as well as several of the 
first Spanish dignitaries and substitutes for de- 
puties in the Cortes; he caused the son to restore 
the crown to his father, and the latter then to 
make it over to him the Emperor, in order that 
he might afterwards confer it on his brother 
Joseph Napoleon. 

4 Venezuela was ignorant of all this, or at least 
only knew it partially, when the emissaries of 
the new king reached Caracas. The innocence 
of Ferdinand, compared with the insolence and] 


VENEZUELA. 


175 


[despotism of the favourite Godoy, impelled and 
directed her conduct, when the local authorities 
wavered on the 15th of July, 1808; and being 
left to choose between the alternative of deli- 
vering herself up to a foreign power, or of re- 
maining faithful to a king, who appeared unfor- 
tunate and persecuted, the ignorance of events 
triumphed over the true interests of the country, 
and Ferdinand was acknowledged, under a belief 
that, by this means, the unity of the nation being 
maintained, she would be saved from the threat- 
ened oppression, and a king be ransomed, of 
whose virtues, wisdom, and rights, we were 
falsely prepossessed. But less was requisite to 
oppress us, on the part of those who relied on 
our good faith. Ferdinand, disqualified and un- 
able to obtain the crown; previously announced 
by the leaders of Spain as dispossed of his rights 
to the succession ; incapable of governing in 
America, held in bondage, and under the in- 
fluence of a foreign power ; from that time, be- 
came by illusion, a legitimate but unfortunate 
prince ; it was feigned a duty to acknowledge 
him ; as many as had the audacity to call them- 
selves such, became his self-created heirs and re- 
presentatives, and taking advantage of the innate 
fidelity of the Spaniards of both worlds, and 
forming themselves into intrusive governments, 
they appropriated to themselves the sovereignty 
of the people, in the name of a chimerical king, 
began to exercise new tyrannies, and, in a word, 
the commercial Junto of Cadiz sought to extend 
her control over the whole of Spanish America. 

4 Such have been the antecedents and conse- 
quences of an oath, which, dictated by candour 
and generosity, and conditionally maintained by 
good faith, is now brought against us, in order 
to perpetuate those evils which the dear-bought 
experience of three years has proved to be inse- 
parable to so fatal and ruinous an engagement. 
Taught, as we are, by a series of evils, insults, 
hardships, and ingratitude, during an interval 
from the 15th of J uly, 1808, until the 5th of July, 
1811, and such as we have already fully mani- 
fested ; it becomes full time that we should 
abandon a talisman invented by ignorance, and 
adopted by a misguided fidelity, for ever since it 
has existed, it has not failed to heap upon 
us all the evils attendant on an ambiguous state, 
and on suspicion and discord. The rights of 
Ferdinand, and the legitimate representation of 
them on the part of the intrusive governments 
of Spain, fidelity and the obligations of compas- 
sion and gratitude on ours, are the two favourite 
springs alternately played to sustain our illu- 


sion, to devour our substance, prolong our de- 
gradation, multiply our evils, and to prepare us 
ignominiously to receive that passive fate, pre- 
pared for us by those who have dealt with us so 
kindly for three centuries. Ferdinand the Seventh 
is the universal watch word for tyranny in Spain, 
as well as America. 

4 No sooner was that vigilant and suspicious 
fear, produced amongst us by the contradictory 
acts, the arts and falsehoods of the strange and 
short-lived governments, which have succeeded 
one another in Spain, since the Junta of Seville, 
there made known, than they recurred to a system 
of apparent liberality towards us, in order to 
cover with flowers the very snare we had not 
perceived whilst shrowded by the veil of candour, 
at length rent asunder by mistrust. For this 
purpose, were accelerated and tumultuously as- 
sembled the Cortes, so desired by the nation, yet 
opposed by the commercial government of Cadiz, 
but which were at length considered necessary, 
in order to restrain the torrent of liberty and 
justice, which in every quarter burst the mounds 
of oppression and iniquity in the new world : 
still it was supposed that the habit of obedience, 
submission, and dependence, would, in us, be su- 
perior to the conviction, which, at so great an 
expense, we had just obtained. It appears in- 
credible by what kind of deception, fatal to Spain, 
it is believed, that the part of the nation which 
passes the ocean, or is born under the tropics, 
acquires a constitution suitable to servitude, and 
incapable of ceding to the efforts of liberty. As 
notorious to the world, as they are fatal, are the 
effects of this strong rooted prejudice, at length 
converted into the good of America. Perhaps 
without it, Spain would not have lost the rank 
of a nation, and America, in obtaining this bles- 
ing, would not have had to have passed through 
the bitter ordeal of a civil war, more ominous 
still for its promoters, than for ourselves. 

4 Our public prints have already sufficiently well 
manifested the defects, under which the Cortes 
laboured respecting America, and the illegal and 
insulting measures by them adopted, to give us 
therein a representation which we could not but 
oppose, even though we were, as the Regency 
had loudly boasted us to be, integral parts of 
the nation, and had no other complaints to 
allege against their government, than the scan- 
dalous usurpation of our rights, at a moment 
they most required our aid. They will have 
been informed, no doubt, of the reasonings we 
used with their perfidious envoy, Montenegro, at 
a time that the former missions being frustrated,] 


176 


v- 


VENEZ 

[the great shipments of newspapers, filled with 
triumphs, reforms, heroic acts, and lamentations, 
being rendered useless, and the inefficacy of 
blockades, pacificators, squadrons, and expedi- 
tions, made known; it was thought necessary to 
dazzle the self love of the Americans, by seating 
near the throne of the Cortes, members whom 
the latter had never named, nor who could be 
chosen by those who created them into their sub- 
stitutes, as in like manner they did others for the 
provinces in possession of the French, submitting 
to and alleging themselves content with their 
dominion. In case this puerile measure, of 
which Spain has been prolific, should not have 
had its due effect, the envoy was directed, (and 
an American and a native of Caracas, in order 
to add to the illusion, was for this, purpose se- 
lected ), that in case the energy of the countrv, 
now defined rebellion, should prevail against 
perfidy to which the name of fraternity was 
given, he was to add fuel to the flame of the pas- 
sions, already kindled in Coro and Maracaibo, 
and that discord, again raising her serpent head, 
might lead the herald of the Cortes by the hand 
under the standard of rebellion, through those 
deceived districts of Venezuela, that had not 
been able to triumph over their tyrants. 

‘ New artifices were still forged, in order that 
duplicity and cunning might prepare the road 
to the sanguinary armies of the chiefs of Coro, 
Maracaibo, and Puerto Rico ; and when the 
Cortes were convinced that the conduct of Ferdi- 
nand, his bonds of affinity with the Emperor of 
the French, and the influence of the latter over 
all the Bourbons already placed under his tute- 
lage, began to weaken the insidious impressions, 
which fidelity, sustained by illusion, had pro- 
duced in the Americans ; preventatives were 
placed, in order to stop the flame thus enkindled, 
and limit it to what was yet necessary for their 
vast, complicated, and remote designs. For this 
purpose was written the eloquent manifest which 
the Cortes aimed, on the 9th of January, 1811, 
against America, worded in a style worthy of a 
better object, but under the brilliancy of diction, 
the back ground of the perspective, designed to 
deceive us, was discovered. Fearing that we 
should be beforehand to protest against the whole 
of these nullities, they began to calculate on what 
was already known, not to risque what was yet 
hidden. The misfortunes of Ferdinand were the 
pretexts that had obtained for his pseudo-repre- 
sentatives, the treasures, submission, and slavery 
of America, after the events of Bayonne ; and 
Ferdinand seduced, deceived, and prostituted to 


UELA. 

the designs of the Emperor of the French, is 
now the last resource to which they fly, to extin- 
guish the flames of liberty, which Venezuela 
had kindled in the South Continent. In one of our 
periodical works (Vide Mercurio Venezolano, for 
Feb. 1811) we have discovered the true spirit of 
the manifest in question, reduced to the follow- 
ing reasoning, which may be considered as an 
exact commentary : — “ America is threatened to 
become the victim of a foreign power, or to con- 
tinue to be our slave ; but in order to recover 
her rights, and throw off all dependency what- 
ever, she has considered it necessary not vio- 
lently to break the ties which held her bound to 
this country. Ferdinand has been the signal of 
re-union which the new world has adopted, and 
we have followed ; he is suspected of connivance 
with the Emperor of the French, and if we give 
ourselves up blindly to acknowledge him, we 
afford the Americans a pretext for believing us 
still his representatives, and openly denying us 
this character, and as these designs already 
begin to be understood in some parts of America, 
let us previously manifest our intention, not to 
acknowledge Ferdinand but under certain condi- 
tions ; these will never be carried into effect, and 
whilst Ferdinand neither in fact, or right, is our 
king, we shall be enabled to reign over America, 
which country so much coveted by us, and so 
difficult to maintain in slavery, will not then so 
easily slip through our fingers.” These expres- 
sions are supposed to be uttered by a Spaniard, 
and are illustrative of the opinions agitated in 
the Cortes respecting the allegiance to Fer- 
dinand. 

e The above resplendent appearance of libe- 
rality, is now the real and visible spring of the 
complicated machine destined to stir up and 
excite commotions in America ; at the same time, 
that within the walls of the Cortes, justice to us 
is overlooked, our efforts are eluded, our reso- 
lutions contemned, our enemies upheld, the 
voices of our imaginary representatives sup- 
pressed, the inquisition is renewed against them, 
at the same time that the liberty of the press is 
proclaimed, and it is controversially discussed, 
whether the Regency could or not declare us 
free, and an integral part of the nation. (Vide 
El Conciso, The Diarios of Cadiz, and all the 
papers that came from Spain). When an Ameri- 
can, worthy of that name, raises his voice against 
the abuses of the Regency, in Puerto Rico : en- 
deavours are made to silence his just, energetic, 
and imperious claims, which distinguish him 
from the satellites of despotism, and by means of] 


VENEZUELA. 


177 


[a decree, short, canning, and insignificant, they 
strive to get out of the conflict of justice against 
iniquity. Melendez, named king of Puerto Rico 
by the Regency, by a decree of the Cortes is left 
with the equivalent investiture of governor, sy- 
nonymous names in America ; because it now 
appeared too monstrous to have two kings, in a 
small island of the Spanish Antilles. Corta- 
varria alone was sufficient to elude the effects of 
a decree, only dictated by an involuntary senti- 
ment of decency. Thus it happened, that when 
the investiture, granted by the Regency to Me- 
lendez was declared iniquitous, arbitrary, and ty- 
rannical, and a revocation was extended to all the 
countries of America, then situated as was Puerto 
Rico, nothing was said of the plenipotentiary 
Cortavarria, authorized by the same Regency 
against Venezuela, with powers, the most un- 
common and scandalous, ever remembered in the 
annals of organical despotism. 

1 It was after this decree of the Cortes, that the 
effects of that discord, promoted, sustained, and 
aimed from the fatal observatory of Puerto Rico, 
were more severely felt ; it was after this de- 
cree, that the fishermen and coasters were in- 
humanly assassinated in Ocumare, by the pirates 
of Cortavarria ; after the publication of the same, 
Cumana and Barcelona were blockaded, threat- 
ened, and summoned; a new and sanguinary 
conspiracy, against Venezuela, was plotted and 
organized, by a vile emissary, who perfidiously 
entered the pacific bosom of his country, in order 
to devour it ; deceptions were successively prac- 
tised on the most innocent and laborious classes 
of the imported colonists of Venezuela, principally 
emigrants from the Canary Islands, employed in 
tillage, remarkable for their sobriety and indus- 
try ; and in spite of our endeavours, the chief 
instigators were led to the block, as a sacrifice 
to justice and tranquillity. By the suggestions 
of the Pacificator of the Cortes, and posterior 
to their said decree, the political unity of our 
constitution was interrupted in Valencia; at- 
tempts were in vain made to seduce other cities 
of the interior; a false summons was sent to 
Carora by the factious leaders of the west, in or- 
der that on the same day Venezuela might be 
deluged in blood, and sunk in affliction and deso- 
lation ; and be hostilely assaulted from every 
point within the reach of the conspirators, who 
were scattered amongst us by the same govern- 
ment, which issued the decree in favour of Puerto 
Rico and of all America. The name of Fer- 
dinand VII. is the pretext under which the new 
world is about to be laid waste, if the example 

VOL. v. 


of Venezuela does not henceforward cause the 
banners of an unshaken and decided liberty, to 
be distinguished from those of a malicious and 
dissembled fidelity. 

4 The bitter duty of vindicating ourselves 
would still carry us further, if we did not dread 
splitting on the same rocks as the government of 
Spain, by substituting resentment for justice ; at 
the same time that we can charge her with three 
centuries of injuries, backed by three years of 
lawful, generous, and philanthropic efforts, in 
vain expended to obtain what it was never in our 
power to dispose of. Had gall and poison been 
the chief agents of this our solemn, true, and 
candid manifest, we should have began by de- 
stroying the rights of Ferdinand, in consequence 
of the illegitimacy of his origin, declared by his 
mother in Bayonne, and published in the French 
and Spanish papers ; we should have proved the 
personal defects of Ferdinand, his ineptitude to 
reign, his weak and degraded conduct in the 
Cortes of Bayonne, his inefficient and insignifi- 
cant education, and the futile securities he of- 
fered for the realization of the gigantic hopes of 
the governments of Spain, hopes that had no 
other origin than the illusion of America, nor any 
other support than the political interest of Eng- 
land, much opposed to the rights of the Bourbons. 
The public opinion of Spain, and the experience of 
the revolution of the kingdom, furnish us with 
sufficient proofs of the conduct of the mother, and 
the qualities of the son, without recurring to 
the manifest of minister Azanza, published after 
the transactions of Bayona, and the secret me- 
moirs of Maria Louisa ; but decency is the guide 
of our conduct, to her we are ready to sacrifice 
our best reasons. Sufficient has already been 
alleged to prove the justice, necessity, and utility 
of our resolution, to the support of which^no- 
thing is wanting but the examples by which we 
will strive to justify our independence. 

4 It were necessary for the partizans of sla- 
very in the new world, either to destroy or to 
falsify history, that unchangeable monument of 
the rights and usurpations of the human race, 
before they could maintain that America was not 
liable to the same changes that all other nations 
have experienced. Even when the rights of the 
Bourbons had been incontestable, and indelible 
the oath, which we have proved not to exist ; the 
injustice, force, and deceit, with which the same 
was snatched from us, would suffice to render it 
void and of no effect, as soon as it was discovered 
to be opposed to our liberty, grievous to our 
rights, prejudicial to our interests, and fatal to] 

\ \ 


178 


VENEZUELA. 


[our tranquillity. Such is the nature of the oath 
made to the conquerors, and to their heirs, at the 
same time that the crown holds them in oppres- 
sion by means of that same additional strength 
it obtained by the resources or’ their conquest. 
In this manner it was, that Spain herself reco- 
vered her rights after she had sworn allegiance 
to the Carthaginians, Romans, Goths, Arabs, 
and almost to the French; nevertheless she yet 
disowns the rights of America, no longer to de- 
pend on any nation from the time she is capable 
of throwing off its yoke, and following the ex- 
ample both of Spain, and of other nations. It 
would be superfluous to remind our enemies of 
what they already know, and in what they have 
themselves founded the sacred right of their own 
liberty and independence ; epochs so memorable, 
that they were worthy of not being tarnished 
with the slavery of the greatest part of the na- 
tion, situated on the other side of the ocean. 
But unfortunately, it is not they alone whom it 
is requisite to convince by palpable examples, 
of the justice and common resemblance our in- 
dependence bears with that of all other nations 
which had lost, and again recovered it. The il- 
lusions of slavery, kept alive by the candour of 
the Americans, and sustained by the most crimi- 
nal abuse that can be made by superstition of 
the established belief and religion, which one 
would suppose were only dictated for the liberty, 
felicity, and salvation of the people, namely, by 
the excommunications denounced against the 
people of Caracas for changing their govern- 
ment, renders it necessary to tranquillize the de- 
ceived piety of some, to instruct their unwary 
ignorance, and stimulate their apathy, that had 
slumbered since the unusual tranquillity of the 
new order of things; it is, in short, time to in- 
culcate, that governments never had, nor can 
have, any other duration than the utility and 
felicity of the human race, that kings are not of 
any privileged nature, nor of an order superior 
to other men ; that their authority emanates from 
the will of the people, directed and supported 
by the Providence of God, who leaves our ac- 
tions to our own free-will ; that his omnipotence 
does not interfere in favour of this or that form 
of government, and that neither religion, or its 
ministers, can anathematize the efforts of a nation 
struggling to be free and independent in the 
political order of things, and resolved to depend 
only on God, and on his vicar, in a moral and 
religious sense. 

4 The very people of God governed by himself, 
and directed by such miracles, portentous signs 


and favours, as perhaps will never again be re- 
peated, offer a proof of the rights of insurrection 
on the part of the people, sufficiently satisfactory 
to the orthodox piety of the friends of public 
order. The Israelites, subject to Pharaoh, and 
bound to his obedience by force, collect round 
Moses, and under bis direction triumph over 
their enemies, and recover their independence, 
without either God, or his chief prophet and 
legislator Moses, blaming them for their con- 
duct, or subjecting them to the least malediction 
or anathema. This same people being afterwards 
subjected by the forces of Nebuchadnezzar the 
First, under the direction of Holofernes, God 
himself sends Judith to obtain their independ- 
ence, by the death of the Babylonian General. 
Under Antiochus Epiphanes, Mathathias and his 
sons raised the standard of independence, and 
God blessed and aided Iris efforts till he obtained 
the entire liberty of his people, against the op- 
pression of that same impious king and his suc- 
cessors (Machab. lib. 1. cap. 2.) Not only 
against the foreign kings who oppressed them, 
did the Israelites make use of the right of in- 
surrection, by breaking through the obedience 
to which they were bound by force ; but even 
against those Whom God had given them in their 
own country, and of their own nation, do we be- 
hold them claim this imprescriptible right, when- 
ever their liberty and their advantage required 
it, or when the sacred character of those pacts, 
by which God himself bound them to those he 
chose as their governors, had been profaned. 
David obtains the allegiance of the Israelites in 
favour of his dynasty, and his son Solomon ra- 
tified it in favour of his posterity ; but scarcely 
was this king dead, who had oppressed his sub- 
jects by exactions and contributions to support 
the splendor of his court, and the luxury and 
sumptuousness of his pleasures, than the tribes 
of Judah and Benjamin alone acknowledged his 
son, and the other 10, availing themselves of 
their rights, recover their political independence, 
and in exercise thereof deposit their sovereignty 
in Jeroboam, son of Nabath. The momentaneous 
and passing hardships of the reign of Solomon, 
sufficed for the Israelites to annul their obe- 
dience sworn to his line, and to place another on 
the throne, without waiting for God to tell them, 
that their fate no longer depended on the kings 
of Judah, nor on the ministers, priests, or chiefs 
of Solomon. And shall the Christian people of 
Venezuela be still in a worse plight, and after 
being declared free by the government of Spain, 
after 300 years of captivity, exactions, hard-] 


VENEZUELA. 


179 


[ships, and in justice, shall they not be allowed to 
do what the God of Israel, whom they equally 
adore, formerly permitted to his people, without 
being spurned, and without vengeance being de- 
precated upon them ? It is his divine hand that 
guides our conduct, and to his eternal judgments 
our resolution shall be submitted. 

‘ If the independence of the Hebrew people 
was not a sin against the written law, that of a 
Christian people cannot be such against the law 
of grace. At no time has the Apostolical see ex- 
communicated any nation that has risen up 
against the tyranny of those kings or govern- 
ments which had violated the social compact. 
TheS wiss, Dutch, French, and North Americans, 
proclaimed their independence, overturned their 
constitution, and varied their forms of govern- 
ment, without having incurred any other spi- 
ritual censures than those which "the church 
might have fulminated for the infringements on 
the belief, discipline, or piety, but without their 
being connected with political measures, or al- 
luding to the civil transactions of the people. 
The Swiss were bound by oath to Germany ; as 
were also the Dutch to Spain; the French to 
Louis XYI. and the Americans to George III., 
yet neither they, nor the other princes who fa- 
voured their independence, were excommuni- 
cated by the Pope. The grandfather of Ferdi- 
nand VII. one of the most pious and catholic 
kings that ever filled the throne of Spain, toge- 
ther with his nephew Louis XVI. protected the 
independence of North America, without dread- 
ing ecclesiastical censures, or the anger of hea- 
ven ; and now that the order of events more 
justly places it within the reach of South Ame- 
rica, those who call themselves the authorized 
agents of his grandson, wish to abuse that same 
religion, so much respected even by Charles III. 
in order to prolong the most atrocious and un- 
heard of usurpations. Just, omnipotent, and 
merciful God ! Till when will fanaticism dispute 
the empire of that sacred religion, which thou 
sent to the uncorrupted regions of America, for 
thy glory and her felicity ? 

‘ 1 he events which have accumulated in Eu- 
rope, to terminate the servitude of America, 
have, beyond doubt, entered into the high de- 
signs of Providence. Placed at a transatlantic 
distance ot 2,000 leagues, we have done nothing, 
in the three years which have elapsed since we 
ought to be free and independent, till the period 
when we resolved to be so, than pass through 
the bitter trials of stratagems, conspiracies, in- 
sults, hostilities, and depredations, on the part 


of that same nation whom we invite to partake 
of the goods of our regeneration, and for whose 
felicity we wished to open the gates of the new 
world, heretofore closed to all communication 
with the old one ; now w asted and inflamed by 
war, hunger, and desolation. Three distinct 
oligarchies have declared war against us, have 
contemned our claims, have excited civil dis- 
sensions amongst us, have sown the seeds of 
discord and mistrust in our great family, have 
plotted three horrible conspiracies against our 
liberty, have interrupted our trade, have sup- 
pressed our agriculture, have traduced our con- 
duct, and have sought to raise against us an 
Europian power, by vainly imploring its aid to 
oppress us. The same flag, the same language, 
the same religion, and the same laws, have, till 
now', confounded the party of liberty with that of 
tyranny ; Ferdinand VII. as liberator, has been 
opposed to Ferdinand VII. as oppressor; and if 
we had not resolved to abandon a name, at the 
same time synonymous with crime and virtue, 
America would at length be enslaved by the 
same force that is wielded for the independence 
of Spain. 

‘ Such has been the nature of the imperious 
impulse of conviction, tending to open our eyes, 
and to impel Venezuela eternally to separate 
from a name so ominous and so fatal. By it, 
placed in the irrevocable alternative of being 
the slave or the enemy of her brethren, she has 
preferred purchasing her own freedom, at the 
expense of friendship, without obstructing the 
means of that reconciliation she desired. Rea- 
sons the most powerful, interests the most sa- 
cred, meditations the most serious, considerations 
the most profound, long discussions, contested 
debates, combinations well analized, imperious 
events, most urgent dangers, and the public opi- 
nion, clearly pronounced and firmly sustained, 
have been the precursors of that solemn decla- 
ration, made on the 5th of J uly, by the General 
Congress of Venezuela, of the absolute inde- 
pendence of this part of South America ; an act, 
sighed for and applauded by the people of the 
capital, sanctioned by the powers of the Confe- 
deration, acknowledged by the representatives of 
the provinces, sworn to and propitiously hailed 
by the chief of the church of Venezuela, and to 
be maintained with the lives, fortunes, and ho- 
nours of all the citizens. 

£ Free men, companions of our fate ! Ye who 
have known how to divest your hearts of fear or 
of hope ; direct, from the elevation on which 
your virtues have placed you, an impartial and] 
a a 2 


180 


VENEZUELA. 


[disinterested look, on the portrait which Vene- 
zuela has just traced out for you. She consti- 
tutes you the arbitrators of her differences with 
Spain, and judges of her new destinies. If you 
have been affected by our evils, and are interested 
in our felicity, unite with us your efforts, that the 
artifices of ambition may not any longer triumph 
over liberality and justice. To you belong the 
offices of conviction towards Spain, which an 
unfortunate rivality places beyond the reach of 
America. Contain the giddiness which has seized 
upon her governments ; point out to them the 
reciprocal benefits of our regeneration ; unfold to 
them the soothing prospect which they are debar- 
ed from beholding in America, by the monopoly 
that has hardened their hearts ; tell them what 
threatens them in Europe, and what they may ex- 
pect in the New World, tranquil, uncorrupted, 
and already crowned with all the benedictions of 
liberty ; swear to them, in short, in our name, 
that Venezuela awaits her brethren with open 
arms to share her happiness with them, without 
asking any other sacrifice than that of prejudice, 
pride and ambition, which have, for three ages, 
produced the united misery of both countries. 

Juan Antonio Rodriguez Dominguez, Pres. 

Francisco Isnardy, Secretary. 

Federal Palace of Caracas, 

July 30, 1811. 

4 3. Act of Independence. 

4 In the Name of the All-powerful God, 

4 We the Representatives of the United Pro- 
vinces of Caracas, Cumana, Varinas, Margarita, 
Barcelona, Merida, and Truxillo, forming the 
American Confederation of Venezuela, in the S. 
Continent, in Congress assembled, considering the 
full and absolute possession of our rights, which 
we recovered justly and legally from April 19, 
1810, in consequence of the occurrences in Bay- 
onne, and the occupation of the Spanish throne 
by conquest, and the succession of a new dynasty, 
constituted w ithout our consent ; are desirous, 
before we make use of those rights, of which we 
have been deprived by force for more than three 
ages, but now restored to us by the political order 
of human events, to make known to the world 
the reasons which have emanated from these 
same occurrences, and which authorize us in the 
free use we are now about to make of our own 
sovereignty. 

4 We do not wish, nevertheless, to begin by 
alleging the rights inherent in every conquered 
country, to recover its state of property and inde- 
pendence ; we genei’ously forget the long series 


of ills, injuries, and privations, which the sail 
right of conquest has indistinctly caused to all 
the descendants of the discoverers, conquerors, 
and settlers of these countries, plunged into a 
worse state by the very same cause that ought to 
have favoured them ; and, drawing a veil over 
the 300 years of Spanish dominion in America, 
we will now only present to view the authentic 
and well-known facts, which ought to have 
wrested from one world the right over the other, 
by the inversion, disorder, and conquest, that 
have already dissolved the Spanish nation. 

4 This disorder has increased the ills of America, 
by rendering void its claims and remonstrances, 
enabling the governors of Spain to insult and 
oppress this part of the nation, and thus leaving 
it without the succour and guarantee of the 
laws. 

4 It is contrary to order, impossible to the go- 
vernment of Spain, and fatal to the welfare of 
America, that the latter, possessed of a range of 
country infinitely more extensive, and a popula- 
tion incomparably more numerous, should de- 
pend and be subject to a peninsular corner of the 
European continent. 

4 The cessions and abdications at Bayonne, the 
revolutions of the Escurial and Aranjuez, and 
the orders of the royal substitute, the Duke of 
Berg, sent to America, suffice to give virtue to 
the rights, which till then the Americans had 
sacrificed to the unity and integrity of the Spanish 
nation. 

4 Venezuela was the first to acknowledge, and 
generously to preserve, this integrity ; not to 
abandon the cause of its brothers, as long as the 
same retained the least hope of salvation. 

4 America w r as called into new existence, since 
she could, and ought, to take upon herself the 
charge of her own fate and preservation ; as 
Spain might acknowledge, or not, the rights of a 
king, who had preferred his own existence to the 
dignity of the nation over which he governed. 

4 All the Bourbons concurred with the invalid 
stipulations of Bayonne, abandoning the country 
of Spain, against the will of the people ; — they 
violated, disdained, and trampled on the sacred 
duty they had contracted with the Spaniards of 
both worlds, when with their blood and treasure 
they had placed them on the throne, in despite of 
the house of Austria. By such a conduct they 
were left disqualified and incapable of governing 
a free people, whom they delivered up like a flock 
of slaves. 

4 The intrusive governments that arrogated to 
themselves the national representation, took ad-] 


VENEZUELA. 


vantage of the dispositions which the good faith, 
istance, oppression, and ignorance created in the 
Americans against the new dynasty that had 
entered Spain by means of force ; and, contrary 
to their own principles, they sustained amongst 
us the illusion in favour of Ferdinand, in order to 
devour and harass us with impunity ; at most, 
they promised to us liberty, equality, and fra- 
ternity, conveyed in pompous discourses and 
studied phrases, for the purpose of covering the 
snare laid by a cunning, useless, and degrading 
representation. 

4 As soon as they were dissolved, and had sub- 
stituted and destroyed amongst themselves the 
various forms of the government of Spain ; and 
as soon as the imperious law of necessity had 
dictated to Venezuela the urgency of preserving 
itself, in order to guard and maintain the rights 
of her king, and to offer an asylum to her Euro- 
pean brethren against the ills that threatened 
them ; their former conduct was divulged : they 
varied their principles, and gave the appellations 
of insurrection, perfidy, and ingratitude, to the 
same acts that had served as models for the 
governments of Spain ; because then was closed 
to them the gate to the monoply of administra- 
tion which they meant to perpetuate under the 
name of an imaginary king. 

4 Notwithstandingour protests, our moderation, 
generosity, and the inviolability of our principles, 
contrary to the wishes of our brethren in Europe, 
we were declared in a state of rebellion ; we 
were blockaded ; war was declared against us ; 
agents were sent amongst us, to excite us one 
against the other, endeavouring to take away our 
credit with the other nations of Europe, by 
imploring their assistance to oppress us. 

4 Without taking the leastnotice of our reasons, 
without presenting them to the impartial judg- 
ment of the world, and without any other judges 
than our own enemies, we are condemned to a 
mournful excommunication from our brethren ; 
and, to add contempt to calumny, empowered 
agents are named for us, against our own express 
will, that in their Cortes they may arbitrarily dis- 
pose of our interests, under the influence and 
force of our enemies. 

4 In order to crush and suppress the effects of our 
representation, when they were obliged to grant 
it to us, we were submitted to a paltry and dimi- 
nutive scale ; and the form of election was sub- 
jected to the passive voice of the municipal 
bodies, degraded by the despotism of the gover- 
nors ; which amounted rather to an insult to our 
plain dealing and good faith, than as an acknow- 


181 

ledgment of our incontestable political impor- 
tance. 

4 Always deaf to the cries of justice on our part, 
the governments of Spain have endeavoured to 
discredit all our efforts, by declaring as criminal 
and stamping with infamy, and rewarding with 
the scaffold and confiscation, every attempt, which 
at different periods some Americans have made, 
for the felicity of their country ; as was that 
which lately our own security dictated to us, that 
we might not be driven into a state of disorder 
which we foresaw, and hurried to that horrid 
fate which we are about to remove for ever from 
us. By means of such atrocious policy they have 
succeded in making our brethren insensible to 
our misfortunes ; in arming them against us ; in 
erasing from their bosoms the sweet impressions 
of friendship, of consanguinity, and converting 
into enemies a part of our own great family. 

4 At a time that we, faithful to our promises, 
were sacrificing our security and civil dignity, 
not to abandon the rights which we generously 
preserved to Ferdinand of Bourbon, we have seen 
that, to the relations of force which bound him to 
the Emperor of the French, he has added the ties 
of blood and friendship, (by having, as it was 
supposed, married a relation of Buonaparte,) in 
consequence of which, even the governments of 
Spain have already declared their resolution only 
to acknowledge him conditionally. 

4 In this mournful alternative we have remained 
three years, in a state of political indecision and 
ambiguity, so fatal and dangerous, that this alone 
would suffice to authorize the resolution, which 
the faith of our promises and the bonds of fra- 
ternity had caused us to defer, till necessity has 
obliged us to go beyond what we at first proposed, 
impelled by the hostile and unnatural conduct of 
the governments of Spain, which have disbur- 
dened us of our conditional oath, -by which cir- 
cumstance we are called to the august represen- 
tation we now exercise. 

4 But we, who glory in grounding our proceed- 
ings on better principles, and not wishing to 
establish our felicity on the misfortunes of our 
fellow-beings, do consider and declare as friends, 
companions of our fate, and participators of our 
felicity, those who, united to us by the ties of 
blood, language, and religion, have suffered the 
same evils in the anterior order of things, pro- 
vided they acknowledge our absolute indepen- 
dence of the ^ime, and of any other foreign 
power whatever ; that they aid us to sustain it 
with their lives, fortune, and sentiments ; declar- 
ing and acknowledging them (a6 well as to every] 


V E N E Z U E L A. 


{'other nation,) in war enemies, and in peace 
friends, brothers, and co-patriots. 

4 In consequence of all these solid, public, and 
incontestable reasons of policy, which so power- 
fully urge the necessity of recovering our natural 
dignity, restored to us by the order of events ; 
and in compliance with the imprescriptible rights 
enjoyed by nations, to destroy every pact, agree- 
ment, or association, which does not answer the 
purposes for which governments were established ; 
we believe that we cannot, nor ought not, to pre- 
serve the bonds which hitherto kept us united to 
the government of Spain ; and that, like all the 
other nations of the world, we are free, and 
authorized not to depend on any other authority 
than our own, and to take amongst the powers of 
the earth the place of equality which the Supreme 
Being and Nature assign to us, and to which we 
are called by the succession of human events, and 
urged by our own good and utility. 

4 Notwitstanding we are aware of the difficulties 
that attend, and the obligations imposed upon us, 
by the rank we are about to take in the political 
order of the world ; as well as the powerful in- 
fluence of forms and habitudes, to which unfortu- 
nately we have been accustomed ; we at the same 
time know, that the shameful submission to them, 
when we can throw them off, would be still more 
ignominious for us, and more fatal to our pos- 
terity, than our long and painful slavery; and 
that it now becomes an indispensable duty to 
provide for own preservation, security, and feli- 
city, by essentially varying all the forms of our 
former constitution. 

4 In consequence whereof, considering, by the 
reasons thus alleged, that we have satisfied the 
respect which we owe to the opinions of the 
human race, and the dignity of other nations, in 
the number of whom we are about to enter, and 
on whose communication and friendship we rely : 
We, the representatives of the United Provinces 
of Venezuela, calling on the Supreme Being to 
witness the justice of our proceedings and the 
rectitude of our intentions, do implore his divine 
and celestial help ; and ratifying, at the moment 
in which we are born to the dignity which his 
Providence restores to us, the desire we have of 
living and dying free, and of believing and de- 
fending the holy Catholic and Apostolic Religion 
of Jesus Christ. — We, in the name and by the 
will and authority which we hold from the vir- 
tuous people of Venezuela, DO therefore declare 
solemnly to the world, that its United Provinces 
are, and ought to be, from this day, by act and 
right, Free, Sovereign, and Independent States; 


and that they are absolved from every submission 
and dependence on the throne of Spain, or on 
those who do, or may call themselves its agents 
and representatives ; and that a free and inde- 
pendent state, thus constituted, has full power to 
take that form of government which may be con- 
formable to the general will of the people, to de- 
clare war, make peace, form alliances, regulate 
treaties of commerce, limits, and navigation ; 
and to do and transact every act, in like manner 
as other free and independent states. And that 
this, our solemn declaration, may be held valid, 
firm, and durable, we hereby mutually bind each 
province to the other, and pledge our lives, for- 
tunes, and the sacred tie of our national honour. 
Done in the Federal Palace of Caracas ; signed 
by our own hands, sealed with the great Pro- 
visional Seal of the Confederation, and counter- 
signed by the Secretary of Congress, this 5th day 
of July, 1811, the first of our independence. — For 
the Province of Caracas, Isidoro Antonio Lopez 
Mendez, deputy of the City of Caracas. — Juan 
German Roscio, for the district of the Town of 
Calabozo. — Felipe Fermin Paul, for the district 
of San Sebastian. — Francisco Xavier Uztariz, 
for the district of San Sebastian. — Nicolas De 
Castro, deputy for Caracas. — Juan Antonio Ro- 
driguez Dominguez, president, and deputy for 
Nutrias in Barinas. — Luis Ignacio Mendoza, vice 
president, deputy of Obispos in Barinas. — Fer- 
nando de Penal ver, deputy for Valencia. — Ga- 
briel Perez de Pagola, deputy of Ospino. — Salva- 
dor Delgado, deputy for Nirgua. — The Marquis 
del Toro, deputy for the City of Tocuyo. — Juan 
Antonio Dias Argote, deputy for the Town of 
Cura. — Gabriel de Ponte, deputy for Caracas. — 
Juan Joze Maya, deputy of San Felipe. — Luis 
Joze de Cazorla, deputy of Valencia. — Dr. Joze 
Vicente Unda, deputy of Guanare. — Francisco 
Xavier Yanes, deputy of Araure. — Fernando 
Toro, deputy of Caracas. — Martin Tovar Ponte, 
deputy of San Sebastian. — Juan Toro, deputy of 
Valencia. — Jose Angel de Alamo, deputy for 
Baraquisimeto. — Francisco Hernandez, deputy 
for San Carlos. — Lino De Clemente, deputy of 
Caracas.-— For the Province of Cumana, Fran- 
cisco Xavier de Mayz, deputy for the capital. — 
Joze Gabriel de Alcala, deputy for ditto. — Juan 
Bermudez, deputy for the South. — Mariano de la 
Cova, deputy for the North. — For Barcelona, 
Francisco Miranda, deputy of Pao. — Francisco 
Policarpo Ortiz, deputy for San Diego. — For 
Barinas, Juan Nepomuceno de Quintana, deputy 
for Achaguas. — Ignacio Fernandez, deputy for 
the capital ofBarinas. — Ignacio Ramon Rriceho,] 


VENEZUELA. 


183 


[representative of Pedraza.— - Joze de Satay Bus- 
sy, deputy for San Fernando de Apure. — Joze 
Luis Crabrera, deputy for Guanarito. — Ramon 
Ignacio Mendez, deputy for Guasdualito. — Ma- 
nuel Palacio, deputy for Mijagual. — For Marga- 
rita, Manuel Placido Maneyro. — For Merida, 
Antonio Nicolas Briceno, deputy for Merida. — 
Manuel Vincente de Maya, deputy for La Grita. 
— For Truxillo, Juan Pablo Pacheco. — For the 
Town of Aragua, in the Province of Barcelona, 
Joze Maria Ramirez. (Seal.) Legalised. — 
Francisco Isnardy, Secretary. 

* 

4 Decree of the Supreme Executive Power. 

Federal Palace of Caracas, July 8, 1811. 

4 For the Confederation of Venezuela, the Execu- 
tive Power ordains, that the antecedent Act be 
published, executed, and authorized by the Seal 
of the State and Confederation. 

Christoval de Mendoza, president, 

Juan de Escalona, 

Baltazur Padron, 

Miguel Jose Sanz, secretary of state. 

Carlos Machado, chancellor, 

Joze Thomas Santana, secretary of decrees. 
(L. S.) 

4 4 . Articles comprehended in the Declaration of the 
Legislative Session , July 1, 1811. 

Art. XXV. 

4 All foreigners of whatever nation, will be re- 
ceived in the province of Caracas. 

XXVI. 

4 The persons and properties of foreigners, shall 
enjoy the same security as those of the other 
citizens, provided they acknowledge the sove- 
reignty and independence, and respect the catho- 
lic religion, the only one in this country. 

XXVII. 

4 The foreigners who reside in the province of 
Caracas, being naturalized, and having the neces- 
sary property, shall enjoy all the rig-hts of citi- 
zens., 

5. Invitation to Settlers. 

‘ The immense quantity of lands in the province 
of Caracas, the abundance of perpetual streams 
which fertilize them, the diversity of productions 
and their richness, offer to the industrious man 
the greatest advantages in agriculture. The 
geographical situation of a great extent of coast 
opposite the Antilles and other islands, the great 
consumption of the States of Venezuela, con- 
federated with tho^e of Cundinamarca or Santa- 
Fe, open and facilitate a commerce the most 


advantageous in the universe. The peaceable 
character of the inhabitants ; the mildness of their 
behaviour, the regard they shew to foreigners; 
and lastly, the mildness of the climate, it being a 
perpetual spring, invite persons to settle in the 
province of Caracas, as cultivators, artisans, or 
merchants. The government interested in pro- 
tecting all, will give lands to any person who 
may wish to cultivate them : and will secure, in 
their respective professions, all those who dedi- 
cate themselves to commerce, industry, and the 
arts ; it will alone prosecute and expel the tur- 
bulent and the idle, who apply themselves to 
disturbing the tranquillity and peace of those who 
live occupied. The industrious and peaceable 
man will enjoy in Venezuela the protection of 
government and the estimation of the people. 

4 And it is also to be observed, that notwith- 
standing the importation of negroes is prohibited 
in Venezuela, this does not include the foreigners 
who may come with their slaves, to make agri- 
cultural establishments, or to pursue any art or 
profession useful and advantageous to the state. 

Michael Joseph Sanz, 

Secretary of State. 

4 II. FEDERAL CONSTITUTION, 

For the States of Venezuela, 

4 Made by the Representatives for Margarita , Me- 
rida , Cumana , Varinas, Barcelona , Truxillo , 
and Caracas , in General Congress assembled. 

4 In the Name of the All-powerful God, 

4 We the people of the States of Venezuela, 
acting from our own soverignty, and anxious to 
establish amongsC ourselves the best possible 
administration of justice, to provide for the gene- 
ral good, to secure the tranquillity of the interior, 
to make provision in common for our exterior 
defence, to sustain our political liberty and inde- 
pendence, to preserve pure and untouched, the 
sacred religion of our ancestors, to secure and 
perpetuate to our posterity the enjoyment of 
these goods, and to mutually bind ourselves toge- 
ther, by the most unalterable union and sincere 
friendship, have resolved solemnly to confederate 
together, in order to form and establish the follow- 
ing constitution, by which the said States are in 
future to be governed and administered. 

4 Preliminary Basis of the Federate Compact, which 
is to constitute the general authority of the Con- 
federation. 

4 Every province, whose individual sovereignty] 


184 


VENEZUELA. 


[shall not have been expressly delegated by the 
Federal Compact to the general authority of the 
Confederation, shall at the same time that it com- 
poses the same confederation, preserve its own 
sovereignty, liberty, and independence ; and in 
the exercise thereof shall have the exclusive 
right of regulating its own territorial government 
and administration, under such laws as it shall 
deem tit, provided they are not such as are com- 
prehended in this constitution, and are not op- 
posed or prejudicial to the Federate Compacts, 
thereby established. The same rights shall be 
enjoyed by all those districts which by division of 
the present union, or by posterior aggregation 
thereto, shall hereafter form part of this confede- 
ration, whenever the general Congress assembled 
shall declare them entitled to such representa- 
tion, or they obtain the same by that means, or 
form, which the latter may establish for similar 
cases, when not assembled. 

‘ To render effective the mutual guarantee 
and security entered into by the States amongst 
themselves, to preserve their civil liberty, their 
political independence, and their religious wor- 
ship, is the first and most sacred of the powers of 
the confederation, in whom exclusively resides 
the national representation. By the same it is 
charged with all foreign relations — with the com- 
mon and general defence of the Confederate 
States — with the preservation of public peace, 
from internal commotions or exterior attacks — 
the regulating of exterior trade, and of the States 
amongst themselves — the raising and maintaining 
armies, whenever they may be necessary to pre- 
serve the liberty, integrity, and independence of 
the nation — to build and equip vessels of war — 
to make and confirm treaties and alliances with 
other nations — to declare war and make peace — 
to impose the necessary taxes for these purposes, 
or to adopt other measures that may tend to the 
security, tranquillity, and common felicity, toge- 
ther with the full and absolute power to enact 
general laws for the union, to judge and to cause 
to be fulfilled, whatever by the same may be re- 
solved and decreed. 

4 The exercise of this authority confided to the 
confederation, can at no time be united in its 
different functions. The supreme power is to be 
divided into legislative, executive, and judicial, 
and confided to distinct bodies, independent of 
each other, as well as in their respective facul- 
ties. The persons who may be named to exer- 
cise them, shall inviolably subject themselves to 
the manner and rules, which in this constitution 


may be prescribed to them, for the administration 
and fulfilment of their charges. 

4 CHAP. I . — Of Religion. 

4 1. The Catholic, Apostolic, and Roman reli- 
gion, is also that of the State, and the only and 
exclusive one of the inhabitants of Venezuela. 
Its protection, conservation, purity, and inviola- 
bility, shall be one of the first duties of the 
national representation, who shall not, at any 
time, allow within the limits of the confedera- 
tion, any public or private worship or doctrine, 
contrary to that of Jesus Christ. 

4 2. The relations, which in consequence of the 
new political order, are to be entered upon be- 
tween Venezuela and the apostolical see, shall 
also be vested in the confederation, as well as 
those which may be agitated with the present 
diocesan prelates, in the mean time that direct 
intercourse cannot be had with the pontifical 
authority. 

4 CHAP. II . — Of the Legislative Power. 

4 Sec. I. — Divisions, Limits, and Functions 
of this Power. 

4 3. The General Congress of Venezuela shall 
be divided into a House of Representatives and a 
Senate, to which two bodies is confided all the 
legislative power, established by the present con- 
stitution. 

4 4. In either of them any law may originate, 
and each respectively may propose to the other 
amendments, alterations, or additions, or refuse 
its consent to the law proposed, by an absolute 
negative. 

4 5. The laws relating to contributions, taxes, 
and imposts, are excepted from this law. These 
can only originate in the House of Representa- 
tives, the ordinary right of adding thereto, alter- 
ing or refusing them, being left to the Senate. 

4 6. When the proposal of a law or a bill has 
been admitted, conformably to the rules of debate 
prescribed to themselves by the two houses, it 
shall undergo three different discussions in dis- 
tinct sessions, with the interval of a day at least 
between each, without which it shall not be law- 
ful to pass the house. 

4 7. Urgent bills are excepted from these forms, 
but in order that this point may be established, 
the urgency is to be discussed and previously de- 
clared in each of the two houses. 

4 8. No bill rejected by one of them can be re- 
peated till after the lapse of one year, but others 
may be made containing part of those rejected.] 


VENEZUELA. 


185 


[‘ 9. No project, law, or bill, constitutionally 
accepted, discussed, and passed in both Houses, 
shall be considered as a law of the State, till it 
has been presented to the Executive body, and by 
it signed. If the latter should withhold its assent, 
the projected bill, with such amendments as the 
Executive may suggest, shall be returned to the 
House where it originated, wherein due note shall 
be taken of such amendments on the journals, 
they proceeding afresh to examine the case, which 
if again approved by a plurality of two thirds, 
the same shall, under similar forms, pass on to 
the other House, wherein the same approbation 
being obtained, the bill from that instant shall 
have the full force of a law. In all these cases, 
the votes of the Houses shall be expressed by yea 
and nay, and a register kept of the names of those 
who voted for or against the bill. 

4 10. If the Executive should not return the bill 
to the House whence it originated, in the term of 
ten days after its receipt, exclusive of holidays, 
the same shall have the full force of law, and 
shall be constitutionally promulgated as such : 
but if, in consequence of summons, suspension, or 
recess of Congress, the bill cannot have been 
returned before the period fixed, it shall remain 
without effect, unless the Executive Power shall 
resolve on approving the same, without any alter- 
ations or additions ; but in case these should be 
added, the bill, together with the additions 
thereto, shall be laid before the Houses in the 
next session subsequent to the period expired. 

4 11. All other resolutions, decrees, opinions, 
and acts of both Houses, (excepting those of sum- 
mons) shall likewise be referred to the Executive 
Power in order to receive its assent, before they 
can be carried into full effect. In case the latter 
should refuse such assent, they shall again pass 
through the forms prescribed for the enaction of 
laws, and being in like manner newly confirmed, 
they are to be carried into execution. The laws, 
decrees, opinions, acts, and resolutions, which 
may be held as urgent, are also to be subject to 
this rule, but the Executive Power is in this case, 
to state its objections respecting the urgency, as 
well as the substance of any law, within the space 
of two days after its receipt, in default of which, 
the same shall be considered as approved by it. 

4 12. The form of the draft or sketch under 
which the laws, acts, decrees, and resolutions are 
to pass from one house to the other, as well as to 
the Executive, shall be a preamble therein con- 
tained, with a minute of the day of the session on 
which the subject was discussed in each house, 
the date of the respective resolutions, a state- 

vol. v. 


rnent of the urgency in case there is any, as well 
as an exposition of the reasons and foundations 
which have given rise to the resolution. When- 
ever any of these requisites are omitted, the act 
shall be returned within two days to the House 
wherein the omission has been noted, or to that 
where the same originated, if it has occurred in 
both. 

4 13. These requisites shall not accompany the 
law in its promulgation. The act shall be drawn 
out in a clear, simple, precise, and uniform man- 
ner, without any thing more than a plain head- 
ing, explanatory of its contents, with the name of 
the law, act, or decree, the dispositive part of the 
same law being preceded by the following words, 
44 The Senate and House of Representatives of 
the United States of Venezuela, in Congress 
assembled, have decreed, &amp;c.” then is to follow 
the decretive part of the same. These forms can 
be varied, if circumstances and the assent of the 
provinces that may hereafter be annexed to this 
confederation, should make it requisite. 

4 Sect. II. — Election of the House of 
Representatives. 

4 14. Those who compose the House of Re- 
presentatives are to be named by the popular 
electors of each province, to serve in this charge 
during the space of four years ; and the total 
number respectively shall lie renewed every two 
years, in the proportion of one half, without any 
being allowed to be re-elected immediately. 

4 15. No one can be elected under the age of 
25, and if he has not been for five years, imme- 
diately previous to his election, a citizen of the 
Confederation of Venezuela, nor unless he enjoys 
property of some nature therein. 

4 16. The requisite of previous residence above 
required for the representatives, does not ex- 
clude those who may have been absent in the 
service of the State, nor those who may have 
been abroad under permission of the govern- 
ment, on their own affairs, if their absence has 
not exceeded three years, nor the natives of Ve- 
nezuela, who, having been out of the country 
before, had returned, and were present at the 
declaration of absolute independence, and have 
acknowledged and sworn to the same. 

4 17. The population of the provinces shall de- 
termine the number of the representatives be- 
longing to each, at the rate of one for each 20,000 
souls of all classes, sexes, and ages. For the 
present, the civil census lately made shall serve 
for the calculation ; but, in future, the same shall 
be renewed every five years, and if, after the] 

B B 


186 


VENEZUELA. 


[divisions of 20,000 have been made, there should 
result any residue exceeding- 10,000, a represen- 
tative shall be elected for the same. 

4 18. This proportion of one for every 20,000, 
shall remain as the law for the representation, 
till the number of the representatives reaches 
70, when, notwithstanding- the population may 
have increased, the number shall nevertheless 
not be enlarged, but the proportion shall be 
raised, till a representative shall be found to cor- 
respond to each 30,000 souls. In this state is 
the proportion of one for every 30,000 to con- 
tinue, till the number of representatives reaches 
100, and then, as in the former case, the propor- 
tion shall be raised to 40,000 for one, till the 
number, by the progressive increase of popula- 
tion, has reached 200, in which case it shall be 
regulated in such manner, that the rule of pro- 
portion does not give more than one for each 
50,000 souls. 

4 19. When, in consequence of death, resigna- 
tion, or any other cause, the seat of a representa- 
tive shall be vacated, it shall be filled by the 
person who, in the last election, had obtained 
the second majority of votes, and he shall be 
considered as elected to serve during all the 
time that remained for the first ; and if he should 
have served less than a year, it shall not be held 
as an obstacle to his obtaining a seat at the next 
election. 

4 20. The elections shall be conducted with the 
same uniformity throughout the whole territory 
of the Confederation, and in the following manner. 

4 21. The first day of November of every two 
years, the voters shall collect in all the parishes 
of the State, in order to choose freely and volun- 
tarily the parochial electors, who are to name 
the representative or representatives, which, for 
the next two succeeding years, correspond to 
the province. 

4 22. Each 1000 souls, or each parish, notwith- 
standing it does not reach that amount of popu- 
lation, shall have one elector, and the nomination 
of these being effected, the parochial meeting 
shall be dissolved, and the electors shall, without 
fail, be collected, November 15, in the city or 
chief town of the district, in order there to name 
the representatives. 

4 23. The results of the electoral meetings shall 
be immediately referred, for the present, to the 
provincial government, and when this is popu- 
larly reformed, to the President of the Senate, or 
of the first House of the Legislative Body of the 
same, which in every province is to be in session 
at the beginning of December. 


4 24. The chief of the present government, or 
the President of the Senate, when this is esta- 
blished, shall open, in the presence of the pro- 
vincial legislature for that purpose assembled, 
the results of the polls which may have been for- 
warded from the districts, in order to count the 
votes. Those shall be considered as elected to 
serve as representatives, who may have united 
in themselves the greatest number of the electors 
chosen, and, in case the majorities should be 
equal between two or more persons, the legisla- 
ture shall choose between them ; but, if no one 
should be found to have received half of the votes, 
the legislature shall then choose amongst those 
who may have the greatest number, a third or 
double quantity of representatives more than 
necessary to serve for the province, in order 
again to make amongst them the definitive choice. 
For this election any kind of majority may suffice, 
by adding to the votes of the legislature those 
which each may have obtained from the electoral 
meetings of the chief towns. In case of a parity 
of votes in the definitive election of the legisla- 
ture, the vote of the President shall decide. 

4 25. In the meantime that the legislatures of 
the provinces are not organized constitutionally 
and with uniformity, their present governments 
are to proceed in the regulations above specified, 
by assembling in a place determined, all their 
members in union with those of the municipali- 
ties of the capital, and 12 persons of known 
property, previously elected by the said muni- 
cipalities. 

4 26. Every freeman shall have the right of 
voting in the parochial meetings, if to this quality 
he adds that of being a citizen of Venezuela, and 
resident in the parish or town where he votes : 
further, if he is aged 21 years and unmarried, 
and if married and settled, even if he should be 
under that age, and possessed of a free property 
to the value of 600 dollars in the chief towns of 
the province when unmarried, and of 400 dollars 
married, although the same belongs to the wife, 
or of 400 in the other towns in the first case, and 
200 in the second. Also, if he holds any office 
or public testimony of the exercise of any science, 
or liberal and mechanic art, or if he is the owner 
of or renter of seed lands, or cattle, provided the 
produce amounts to the respective sums stipu- 
lated for married and single persons. 

4 27. Those excluded from this right are the 
lunatic, deaf and dumb, bankrupts, debtors to 
public property after the expiration of the periods 
fixed for payment, foreigners, persons without 
fixed residence, public and notorious vagrants,] 


VENEZUELA. 


137 


[persons who may have been subject toany infamy 
not wiped away by law, those under criminal 
prosecution, and married persons not cohabiting 
with their wives without legal motives. 

&lt; 28. Besides the above stated qualities requisite 
for the parish voters, those wlio are entitled to 
vote in the electoral meetings, are to be residents 
of the district where they give suffrage, and to 
possess a free property to the value of 6000 dol- 
lars in the capital of Caracas, if unmarried ; and 
of 4000 if married, which amount of property in 
the other capitals, cities, and towns, shall be 4000 
for unmarried persons, and 3000 for those mar- 
ried. 

4 29. The same rights are also granted to public 
functionaries enjoying salaries from the State, 
provided these are equal to 300 dollars per year ; 
all such shall vote in the parochial meetings, and 
in the electoral ones if their salaries reach 1000. 
All such are nevertheless disqualified from being- 
members of the Houses of Representatives and 
Senate, as long as they retain the exercise of 
their functions, and enjoy their respective sala- 
ries during the time of their representation. 

4 30. It is the exclusive and sole right of the 
respective municipalities to convene, in confor- 
mity to the constitution, primary and electoral 
meetings, and all others which may be resolved 
on by the government of each province. 

‘31. Any one of its members, a judge, or a dis- 
tinguished personage in the towns, can by them 
be authorized to preside in, and to close the pa- 
rochial meetings, but electoral meetings shall be 
presided by a justice of the peace, and the acts 
thereof shall be legalized by the municipal 
notary. 

4 32. If there should be any omission on the 
part of the municipalities to convene these 
meetings in due time, the citizens can, in that 
case, assemble on the days assigned by tfie con- 
stitution for that purpose, and do what the muni- 
cipality has not done; but with order, tranquillity, 
and moderation : they are moreover authorized 
to communicate the results of the meetings after 
their dissolution, to the respective provincial 
governments. 

4 33. The use of this faculty, as well on the 
part of the municipalities as on that of the citi- 
zens, excepting- in the cases and times fixed by 
the constitution, shall be held as a transgression 
against the public security, and a treason against 
the laws of the State ; nor shall the functions of 
these meetings exceed the nomination of electors, 
that of representatives to the General Congress, 
or to the respective provincial legislature, nor 


shall they be allowed to transact any other busi- 
ness that is not assigned them by the consti- 
tution. 

4 34. The qualifications of property shall be 
left in charge of the respective municipalities, 
who shall, at ail times, keep a civil register of 
the citizens authorized to vote in the parochial 
meetings, as well as of those capable of being 
returned as electors for the district, under the 
form that may be established by the respective 
provincial constitutions. 

4 35. The want at present experienced of a civil 
register, ordained by the above article, in order 
to establish the qualifications of the citizens, may 
be supplied by an authority conferred by the 
municipal bodies on those they may name to pre- 
side in the primary or parochial meetings, esta- 
blishing a census in each parish, founded on the 
late one drawn up for the present Congress, or it 
may be done by the ecclesiastical body autho- 
rized by the curate or his deputy, together with 
four respectable citizens, housekeepers and land- 
holders in the same town, who, under oath, shall 
testily that those comprehended in the list, pos- 
sess the qualities requisite for voters or for 
electors. 

4 36. The total population of the parish being 
by this means established, the number of electors 
that may correspond to the same will be ascer- 
tained ; a list is also to be made out of the citi- 
zens found therein with the right of vote, as well 
as another of those who may be qualified to serve 
as electors at the meetings held for that pur- 
pose. 

4 37. These three lists are to be carried by the 
commissioner to the primary or parochial meet- 
ings, that the voters, in conformity thereto, may 
proceed to name out of the last list the elector 
or electors corresponding to that parish. 

4 38. This being done, the whole shall be laid 
before the municipal body by the commissioner, 
that the same may serve to form a provincial 
civil register, in the meantime, and till Congress 
shall establish another form. 

4 39. The parochial and electoral elections shall 
be public, as becomes a free and virtuous people, 
and conducted in the following manner. 

4 40. The primary electors or parish voters shall 
carry their written or verbal votes, in person, to 
the magistrate of the district, or to the judge who 
may be named within the term of eight days 
from that on which the polling is opened, and on 
November 1, the votes shall be added up in pre- 
sence of the said judge, and six respectable per- 
sons of the parish, and a statement of the votes] 
b n 2 


188 


VENEZUELA. 


[and results be fixed on the doors of the parish 
church. 

4 41. In the electoral meetings each elector shall 
give his vote on a signed ticket, or verbally to 
the President of the meeting, who shall cause the 
same to be entered down on the list by the Se- 
cretary, in presence of two witnesses. The votes 
being thus privately collected, the additions 
thereof shall be made in public, and a list in 
alphabetical order made out, when the votes shall 
be read aloud, with the names of each elector. 

4 42. The doubts or difficulties that may arise 
in the primary or electoral meetings respecting 
qualifications or forms, in the first shall be de- 
cided by the President and his associate judges, 
and in the second by the meeting itself; but from 
both there can be a definitive appeal to the pro- 
vincial legislature, without, in the meantime, 
the effect of the respective elections being sus- 
pended. 

4 43. The House of Representatives on opening 
the session shall elect, for the time of its dura- 
tion, a President and Vice-President out of its 
own members, who can be changed in case of 
prorogation or extraordinary summons : it shall 
also name out of the House a Secretary and the 
other officers it may judge necessary to perform 
the various duties ; it being, in like manner, 
authorized to fix the salaries and emoluments 
which the said functionaries are to receive. 

4 44. All persons employed under the Confede- 
ration are subject to the inspection of the House 
of Representatives in the discharge of their 
duties ; and by the same they are to be accused 
before the Senate in all cases of treason, collu- 
sion, or malversation ; and the latter shall admit, 
hear, examine, and judge such accusations, with- 
out their being able to be submitted to their 
judgment through any other organ than that of 
the said House, to whom exclusively this right 
belongs. 

4 Sect. III. — Election of Senators. 

4 43. The Senate of the Confederation shall, for 
the present, be composed of a number of indi- 
viduals, whose proportion shall not exceed a 
third, and shall not be less than a fifth part of 
the number of representatives ; that is, when the 
latter exceed 100, their proportion shall then be 
between the fourth and fifth part, and when 200, 
between that of a fifth and sixth. 

4 46. This calculation at present indicates, that, 
for each province, there is to be one senator for 
every 20,000 souls of ail conditions, classes, and 
ages, according to the census of the country now 


in force ; but each province shall nevertheless 
name one, although its population does not reach 
the amount specified ; as ivell as the others, 
which after deducting the quota or quotas of 
70,000, may have left a residuum of 30,000 souls. 

4 47. The time limited for the functions of a 
senator shall be six years, and every two years 
the body shall be renewed, in the proportion of 
two-thirds ; this change devolving in the first 
instance on those provinces which may have sent 
up the greatest number, and thus successively, 
in such manner that none exceed the six years to 
which they are limited. 

4 48. The first election, and those which may 
be made in the successive years in rotation, shall 
be conducted by the provincial legislature, in the 
manner which they themselves may prescribe, 
but with the following conditions. 

4 49. The Senator elect shall be aged 30 years, 
have been 10 years a citizen and resident in the 
territory of Venezuela immediately preceding 
his election, with the exception stated in article 
16, and he shall possess therein a clear property 
worth 6000 dollars. 

4 50. The Senate shall elect out of the House 
a Secretary and the other functionaries required, 
and shall be allowed to assign salaries, advance- 
ment, and emoluments for them, as well as a 
President and Vice-President, as stated in article 
43, for the House of Representatives. 

4 51. When by death, resignation, or any 
other cause, the place of a Senator should be 
vacated, and this during the recess of the pro- 
vincial legislature, to whom it belongs to fill up 
the vacancy, the executive power of the same 
shall be authorized to name a temporary sub- 
stitute to serve till the next meeting of the legis- 
lature, when a fresh member shall be provided. 

4 Sect. IV. — Functions and Faculties of 
the Senate. 

4 52. The Senate has all the natural and inci- 
dental power belonging to a court of justice, to 
admit, hear, judge, and sentence any of the prin- 
cipal functionaries in the service of the Confede- 
ration, who may have been accused by the House, 
of Representatives, of felony, misbehaviour, 
usurpation, or corruption in the use of their 
functions, abiding therein by the evidence pro- 
duced, and according to justice in such proceed- 
ings, having previously taken a special oath on 
the Holy Evangelists before the case is opened. 

4 53. The Senate has also power to judge and 
sentence any other of the inferior functionaries, 
when, having taken cognizance of their defaults] 


VENEZUELA. 


189 


[or crimes, there has been noted any omission on 
the part of their chiefs to do it, but the accusa- 
tion must, in the first instance, proceed from the 
lower House. 

&lt; 54. They shall immediately transmit a legal 
copy of the indictment to the accused, fixing a 
period and place for his appearance and to make 
answer ; such minister or commissioner being- 
used for this purpose, as the House may judge 
proper, and consideration being also had to the 
distance at which the accused may reside, and the 
nature of the judgment he is about to undergo. 

4 55. As soon as the citation and summons of 
the Senate to the accused have been made, and 
he has by virtue thereof appeared, the witnesses 
he may bring forward shall be freely heard, and 
the proofs examined, as well as the defence he 
may make, either personally or by council; but 
if by default or omission he should fail to appear, 
the Senate shall then proceed to examine the 
charges and proofs there may be against him, 
and shall pronounce judgment as valid and effec- 
tive, as if the accused had appeared and answered 
to his indictment. 

4 56. In these cases, if there is no counsellor 
in the body of the Senate, the latter is in that 
case to call in one of the members of the high 
Court of Justice to direct the proceedings, or any 
other counsellor of respectability who may pos- 
sess their confidence ; but to any such in the 
matter, a consultive voice only is to be granted. 

4 57. In order that judgments pronounced by 
the Senate, in such cases, should have their due 
effect and validity, there shall necessarily be a 
concurrence of two-third parts of the votes of the 
Senators, of whom there shall be present a suffi- 
cient number to render the session constitu- 
tional. 

4 58. These judgments shall have no other 
effect than to deprive the accused of his place, in 
consequence of the facts that may be established 
by the examination, declaring him incapable of 
again receiving any honourable or lucrative 
charge under the Confederation ; but without 
this exempting him from being ulteriorly prose- 
cuted, judged, and sentenced by the competent 
courts of justice. 

4 Sect. V. — Economical and Prerogative 
Functions common to both Houses. 

4 59. The qualifications for elections, the re- 
quisites, and admission of their respective mem- 
bers, shall devolve as a particular privilege on 
each House, as well as the solution of any doubts 
that may arise respecting the same. In the same 


manner they are authorized to fix what number 
of members present may render the session con- 
stitutional, and form a quorum ; and, in all cases, 
the number met, notwithstanding it is the small- 
est, may compel those who have not joined, under 
the penalties they may think fit to establish. 

4 60. The President of each House shall 
always be the channel through which all these 
coactive measures are executed, as well as all 
other extraordinary summons that circumstances 
may require. 

4 61. The mode of proceeding in both Houses 
in their sessions, debates, and resolutions shall 
be established by themselves, and under such 
rules they are authorized to punish any of their 
members who may infringe them, or who may 
in any other manner incur blame, or make him- 
self liable to the penalties agreed on, even to the 
expelling him from amongst themselves, when- 
ever (the two-third parts of the whole members 
being present) it should be so unanimously de- 
cided by two-thirds of those in session. 

4 62 . Both Houses shall enjoy the exclusive 
right of police within the places of their own 
sessions, and they shall have at their immediate 
orders a national guard, capable of maintaining 
the decorum of their representation, quiet, order, 
and the freedom of their resolutions. 

4 63 . In the exercise of this right they may 
also punish with arrest, not to exceed SO days, 
any individual whatever, who, in a disorderly 
manner or out of contempt, should behave dis- 
respectfully in their presence, or threaten in any 
manner to do any act against the House, or the 
person or property of any of the members during 
the session, or in going to or coming from the 
same, for any thing they may have said or done 
in the debates, or who may hinder or disturb 
their deliberations, or obstruct or detain the 
officers or functionaries of the Houses in the 
execution of their orders ; who may assault or 
detain any witness or person cited and waited for 
by either of the Houses, or who may set at liberty 
any person detained by them, knowing and fully 
convinced they were such. 

4 64. The proceedings of each House shall be 
formally entered on daily registers, on which 
shall be transcribed the debates and resolutions ; 
those shall be published, which are not intended 
to be kept secret, according to the opinion of 
each House ; and whenever it is claimed by a 
fifth part of the numbers present, the names of 
each individual, as they have voted on any motion 
or resolution, are to be expressed at full length. 

4 65. Neither of the Houses, whilst in session,] 


190 


VENEZUELA. 


shall be allowed to adjourn for more than three 
ays, without the consent of the other, nor be 
summoned or cited to meet in any other place 
than that destined for the meeting of both, with- 
out the same consent being previously obtained. 

4 66. The representative members, as well as 
the Senators, shall receive for their services that 
remuneration which the law may assign them out 
of the public funds of the Confederation, allow- 
ances being also granted by Congress, for the 
time and distance of coming from their homes to 
the place of session, as well as for returning when 
the House breaks up. 

( Sect. VI.— Time, Place, and Duration of 
the Legislative Sessions of both Houses. 

‘ 67. On January 15, in every year, the Con- 
gress shall be opened in the Federal city, (origi- 
nally Caracas, now Valencia), which is fixed by 
a particular law, and which can never be the 
capital of any province, and its sessions shall not 
exceed the ordinary term of one month ; but if it 
should be thought necessary extraordinarily to 
prorogue the House, an express resolution is to 
precede naming a definitive period, which is not 
to exceed a month ; when another prorogation 
may take place in the same manner ; and, if be- 
fore any of these periods the business brought 
before the House is finished, the session may 
then be ended. 

c 68. During the sessions, the Houses may be 
dissolved and summoned for another time and 
place, expressly and previously fixed upon ; and 
the Executive Power shall have no other inter- 
vention in these resolutions, excepting that of 
naming, in case of disagreement between the 
Houses, respecting the time and place, a term 
that does not exceed the greatest period agitated 
in the disputes for assembling in the same place. 

( 69. The personal immunity of the Repre- 
sentatives of the People and Senators, in every 
case, excepting such as are specified in Article 
61, and those of treason and disturbance of the 
public peace, is confined to their not being liable 
to arrest, during the time they hold their Legis- 
lative functions, and that which they may expend 
in going to or coming from their homes to attend 
the sittings, and their not being answerable for 
their sentiments and opinions, but in the House 
where the same have been expressed. 

6 70. None of them, during the time for which 
they have been elected, and, notwithstanding 
they are not in the immediate exercise of their 
functions, shall be allowed to accept of any office 
or civil charge that may have been created or 


increased in salary, or attended with remune- 
ration, during the time of their legislative au- 
thority. 

i Sect. VII. — Special Attributes of the 
Legislative Power. 

‘ 71. The Congress shall have full power and 
authority to raise and maintain armies for the 
common defence, and to diminish them as may 
be deemed necessary ; to build, equip, and main- 
tain a national navy ; to form regulations and 
laws for the government ; administration and 
discipline of the said land and sea forces ; to call 
out the militia of all the provinces, or part of 
them, when the execution of the laws of the 
union, and the necessity of repressing insurrec- 
tions and repelling invasions, may make it re- 
quisite ; to regulate the organization, arming, 
and discipline of the said militia, as well as the 
government and administration of that part 
thereof, employed in the service of the State ; 
the nomination of the respective officers being 
left to the provinces, to be done in the manner 
prescribed by their particular constitutions, as 
well as the power of directing, assembling, and 
teaching the discipline ordained by Congress — 
to establish and collect all kinds of taxes, duties, 
and contributions, that may be necessary to main- 
tain armies and squadrons, whenever the defence, 
common security, and general good of the State 
may require it ; provided that the said contribu- 
tions are uniformly imposed and levied through- 
out the whole Confederation — to contract debts 
by means of loans of money on the credit of the 
State — to regulate trade with foreign nations, 
determining the proportions of contributions to 
be exacted from the commercial bodies, as well 
as the repayment or expenditure of the proceeds 
of the same, in cases of need, and also to regulate 
the trade of the provinces between themselves — 
to dispose, in an absolute manner, of the mono- 
poly of raw and prepared tobacco, ( mo y cliimo ) 
import and export duties, and to regulate and 
direct the expenditure and the collection of the 
revenue that is to enter into the national trea- 
sury, as a privileged income belonging to the 
Confederation, and the most proper to serve for 
its defence and common security — to coin and 
stamp money — determine its value, as well as 
that of foreign monies ; introduce paper money, 
if necessary, and to fix uniformly the weights and 
measures throughout the whole extent of the 
Confederation ; to regulate and establish posts, 
and general mails throughout the State, and 
assign the expenses of postage, as well as to] 


VENEZUELA. 


[trace the main roads, leaving to the charge and 
resolutions of the provinces the cross roads, ne- 
cessary for the communication of the inland towns 
and general conveyances — to declare war and 
make peace, to grant at all times letters of 
marque and reprisal, to establish regulations for 
captures by sea and land, as well to examine and 
decide on their legality, as to determine in what 
manner they are to be divided and laid out — to 
make laws respecting the manner of judging and 
punishing piracies, and all crimes committed on 
the high seas, against the rights of nations — to 
institute inferior tribunals, to take cognizance of 
all matters belonging to the Confederation, 
throughout the whole of the State, under the 
authority and jurisdiction of the Supreme Court 
of Justice, and to name the subaltern agents of 
the Executive power, in those parts not expressed 
in this Constitution — to establish a permanent 
and uniform manner of naturalization, in all the 
provinces of the union, as well as bankrupt laws 
— to make laws for the punishment of forgers of 
public deeds, and of the current money of the 
State — to exercise an exclusive right of legis- 
lating in all cases, respecting all kinds of matters, 
relating to legislative, federal, or provincial con- 
cerns, in that place where, by consent of the 
Representatives of the people, who at present 
compose, or may be hereafter united to the Con- 
federation, it may be determined ultimately to 
fix the residence of the Federal government, to 
examine all the laws which may be made by 
provincial Legislatures, and to state whether 
they are, or are not opposed to the authority of 
the Confederation, and to make all the laws and 
regulations which may be necessary and proper, 
to carry into execution the preceding power, as 
well as all the others granted by this Constitu- 
tion, to the government of the United States. 

4 CHAP. III. — Of the Executive Power. 

4 Sect. I. — Of its Nature, Qualities, and 
Duration. 

4 72. The Executive constitutional power shall 
reside in the Federal city, lodged in three indi- 
viduals popularly elected, and those who are thus 
chosen are to have the following qualities. 

4 7 3. They shall have been born on the Co- 
lumbian Continent, or in the islands formerly 
designated Spanish America, and they shall have 
resided in the territory of the union 10 years, 
immediately preceding their election, with the 
exceptions stipulated in Art. 16, respecting the 


191 

residence requisite for Representatives, and they 
shall be possessed of some free property. 

4 74. Natives of Spain and of the Canary 
Islands, are not excluded from this election, 
provided they were in Venezuela at the time of 
declaring her political independence ; that they 
acknowledged, swore allegiance thereto, and 
helped to sustain it, and who are besides, pos- 
sessed of the property, and can prove the num- 
ber of years of residence prescribed in the above 
article. 

4 75. The duration of their functions shall be 
for four years, at the expiration of which the 
three individuals composing the Executive Power, 
shall be replaced in the same manner they were 
elected. 

4 Sect. II. — Election of the Executive 
Pow ER. 

4 76. As soon as the electoral meetings have 
assembled, on November 15, every four years, 
as stipulated by Art. 22, for the nomination of 
Representatives, and that this has been effected, 
the following day, the same electors shall pro- 
ceed to give their votes in writing, or verbally, 
for the persons who are to compose the Federal 
Executive Power. 

4 77. Each elector shall name three persons, 
of whom one at least shall be a resident of an- 
other province, and not of that in which he 
votes. 

4 78. The voting being ended, and the exami- 
nation and results thereof being calculated, and 
publicly read, in the same manner as in the elec- 
tion of the Representatives, the lists shall then 
be made out, particularising the persons who may 
have voted for the members of the Executive 
Power, with a statement of the number of votes 
each has obtained. 

4 79. These lists shall be signed, and certified 
by the President, Electors, and Secretary of the 
respective meetings, and shall be then remitted, 
inclosed and sealed, to the President for the time 
being of the Senate of the Confederation. 

4 80. When he has received the same, he shall 
open the whole of them in the presence of the 
Senate, and of the House of Representatives, 
who shall be assembled together to count the 
votes. 

4 81. Those persons who may have received 
the greatest number of votes to be members of 
the Executive Power, shall be considered as 
elected, if that same number constitutes the three! 


192 


VENEZUEL A. 


[majorities, of the total of the electors present in 
the whole meetings of the State, but if no person 
shall have leceived this decided majority, the 
nine persons shall then be taken, who may have 
obtained the greatest number of votes, of whom 
by ballot, the House of Representatives shall 
choose three to compose the Executive Power, 
and those shall be held as duly elected, w ho have 
in their favour a majority of one half of the mem- 
bers of the House present at the election. 

4 82. If no one has obtained this majority, the 
Secretary shall choose by ballot three of the six 
persons who may have obtained most votes in 
the House, and those shall be considered as 
elected who may have got most votes in the Se- 
nate. All these operations of the Houses shall 
be complied with in all cases in which either one, 
two, or the whole three may not have obtained 
an absolute majority, but in the first and second 
instance, a double or triple number is to be chosen 
to that designated for the whole three, and so in 
proportion. 

4 83. A descendant in a direct line, brothers, 
an uncle, nephew, cousins, and those allied to 
each other by affinity in the above mentioned 
degrees, cannot at the same time be members of 
the Executive Power; and in case of the election 
of two relations in the degrees above stated, he 
shall be excluded who has obtained the lowest 
number of votes, and in case of an equality, lots 
shall decide the exclusion. 

4 84. In summing up the votes of both Houses, 
the person who shall have obtained the majority 
next to the three requisite to form the Executive 
Power, shall be considered as elected as a sub- 
stitute in case of absence, sickness, death, resig- 
nation, or removal of any of the members, and if 
two should obtain a parity of votes, the House 
shall cast lots which is to serve in the above 
cases. 

4 85. When for the causes above stated, any 
of the members of the Executive Power should 
be wanting, and the substitution as stipulated in 
the above article should take place, it shall be 
understood that he is legally elected as substi- 
tute, who has obtained in the elections the next 
majority of votes, which shall be equally valid 
for those who may follow, in case of successive 
vacancies. 

4 Sect. III. — Attributes of the Executive 
Power. 

4 86. The Executive Power throughout the 
whole Confederation, shall have the supreme 


command of the land and sea force, and of 
the national militia when in the service of the 
State. 

4 87. It is authorized to ask, and all the prin- 
cipal officers of the State in every branch are ob- 
liged to give, every information the former may 
require, in writing or verbally, relating generally 
to the good administration of the State, and to 
the discharge of the respective trusts lodged w ith 
the public functionaries of every class. 

4 88. In favour of, and in behalf of humanity, 
it shall have power to pardon and mitigate the 
punishment, notwithstanding it be capital, of 
State crimes, but not in others ; but previously 
consulting the judicial power, who is to be made 
acquainted with the motives of political conveni- 
ence, Avhich induce the Executive to do it; and 
the pardon or change of punishment are only to 
take place, when the same are in conformity to 
the opinions of the judges who have sat on the 
trial. 

4 89. Only in cases of evident and notorious 
injustice, such as may be attended with irrepara- 
ble injury, is the Executive allowed to reject 
and over-rule the opinion of the Judicial power; 
but when the former is persuaded that these opi- 
nions are contrary to law, the objections are to 
be stated by way of consultation to the Senate 
when assembled, or to the Commissioners, which 
the latter may, at its recess, have left authorized 
to act in similar cases. 

4 90. The Senate or its delegates in these con- 
sultations shall be as judges, and pronounce 
thereon definitively, declaring whether or not 
the negative of the Executive is to counteract 
the fulfilment of the sentence, which in the latter 
case is to be immediately executed ; and in the 
first it is to be referred back to Judiciary, who 
with the addition of two members elected by the 
Senate, or by their commission, is to reconsider 
the case, and reform the said sentence. 

4 91. But if the sentence shall have followed 
an accusation made by the House of Representa- 
tives, the Executive Power in that case can only 
suspend it till the next meeting of Congress, to 
whom then alone belongs the pardon or the re- 
laxation of the punishment. 

4 92. When any urgent advantage or the pub- 
lic security demands it ; the Executive may de- 
cree and publish general indults during the re- 
cess of Congress. 

4 93. By previous notice being given, and by 
the counsel and consent of the Senate, sanctioned 
by the vote of tw o-third parts of the senators, as-] 


VENEZUELA. 


I 93 


[sembled in sufficient number to form a constitu- 
tional sitting, the Executive may enter into trea- 
ties and negociations with other powers and 
states not belonging- to this Confederation. 

4 94. Under the same conditions and requi- 
sites, it is also authorised to name ambassadors, 
envoys, consuls, ministers, judges of the high 
court of justice, and all the other officers and 
functionaries in the government of the State, 
who may not be expressly indicated in the con- 
stitution, or by some established law, or by one 
that may in future be established by Congress. 

4 95. By particular laws, the latter may relieve 
the Executive and the Senate of the troublesome 
task of nominating- the whole of the subaltern 
officers of government, by confiding this charge 
only to the Executive, to the courts of justice, or 
to the heads of the different branches of adminis- 
tration, as may appear most convenient. 

4 96. The Executive Power must likewise 
first obtain the advice, counsel and consent of 
the Senate, in order to grant military grades, 
and other honourable remunerations, compati- 
ble with the nature of government, notwithstand- 
ing they are to reward warlike acts, or important 
services, and if these compensations are pecu- 
niary, the consent of the House of Representa- 
tives must be previously given. 

4 97. But during the recess of the Senate, the 
Executive Power is authorised to fill the offices 
that may become vacant, granting them as it were 
by commission, till the next session, if the Senate 
does not assemble before that period. 

4 98. '1 he Executive Power is authorised by 
itself, to elect and name the persons who are to 
serve in the State offices, which the Legislative 
Power may have considered necessary for the 
dispatch of all the branches of the Federal Go- 
vernment ; as well as to nominate the clerks and 
functionaries for the same, provided they are 
citizens belonging to the Confederation, but if 
not, it is to consult and follow the opinion and 
resolution of the Senate in such appointments. 

4 99. As a consequence of this faculty, it can 
also remove them from their situations when it 
may think proper, but if such removal does not 
take place in consequence of faults and misde- 
meanours, but from a want of talent and ability, 
or from any other defect, not incompatible with 
their innocence and integrity, it ought then to 
recommend the former merit of these functiona- 
ries to Congress, that they may be remunerated 
and competently indemnified with other situa- 
tions in the service of the nation. 

VOL. v. 


4 Sect. IV. — Duties of the Executive 
Power. 

4 100. The Executive Power, in conformity 
to the laws and resolutions which on various oc- 
casions may be communicated to it by Congress, 
will provide by every means within the reach of 
its authority, for the interior and exterior secu- 
rity of the State, directing for this purpose pro- 
clamations to the towns of the interior, as well 
as notifications, orders, and whatever may be 
thought necessary. 

4 101. Notwithstanding by a consequence of 
these principles, the Executive is authorised to 
undertake a defensive war, in order to repel any 
sudden attack ; it cannot continue the same with- 
out the consent of Congress, which shall be as- 
sembled, if not then sitting, and without this pre- 
vious consent, the former has not power to wage 
war out of the territory of the Confederation. 

4 102. Every year it shall lay before both 
Houses of Congress, a particular statement of the 
situation of the country, with regard to revenue, 
expences and resources, pointing out the reforms 
that ought to be made in the branches of public 
administration, as well as every thing- else that 
ought to come under the consideration of the two 
Houses, but without presenting the projected 
forms of a law, drawn up and worded as such. 

4 103. It shall also be held at all times bound 
to lay before the Houses, the accounts, informa- 
tion and explanations, which the latter may re- 
quire, reserving only those which for the moment 
are not to be published ; and in similar cases the 
Executive may withhold from the knowledge of 
the House of Representatives, those secret trea- 
ties or negociations it may have entered into with 
the advice, counsel and consent of the Senate. 

4 104. In all extraordinary occurrences the 
Executive is to convene Congress, or at least 
one of the Houses, and in case of any difference 
between them respecting the period of their sum- 
mons, it can then fix the time of assembling, as 
stipulated in A rt. 68. 

4 105. It shall be one of its principal duties to 
watch over the exact, faithful, and inviolable exe- 
cution of the laws, and for this as w ell as every 
other measure devolving on its authority, it may 
delegate the same to the officers and functionaries 
of the State, the most suitable to fulfil so im- 
portant an obligation. 

4 106. For the same purposes, and in con- 
formity to the manner which may be prescribed 
by Congress, the Executive Power may commis- 
sion agents or delegates near the tribunals and] 

e c 


194 


VENEZUELA. 


[courts of justice, to remonstrate with them re- 
specting the observance of the legal forms, and 
the exact application of the laws, before the suits 
are closed ; communicating to Congress the re- 
forms that may be considered necessary, from the 
reports of these commissioners. 

4 107 The Executive Power, as chief of the 
State, shall be authorised to receive in its name, 
the ambassadors, envoys, and public ministers of 
foreign nations. 

4 Sect. V. — General Dispositions rela- 
tive to the Executive Power. 

4 108. The provincial Executive Powers, or 
the chiefs charged with the government of the 
provinces, shall in each be the natural and im- 
mediate agents of the Federal Executive Power, 
respecting every thing that by the general Con- 
gress has not been particularly given in charge 
to the officers employed in the navy, army, and 
the branches of the national finance in the ports 
or principal places of the provinces. 

4 109. As soon as ever the Executive Power, 
or any one of the members thereof, shall be ac- 
cused before the Senate, and convicted of trea- 
son, venality or usurpation; they shall be imme- 
diately divested of their functions, and subjected 
to the consequences of the judgment, stipulated 
in Art. 58. 

CHAP. IV. — Of the Judicial Power. 

4 Sect. I. — Nature, Election, and Dura- 
tion of this Power. 

4 110. The Judicial Power of the Confedera- 
tion shall be lodged in a Supreme Court of Jus- 
tice, resident in the federal city, and in the other 
inferior tribunals and judicatures, which Congress 
may establish, for the present, in the territory of 
the union. 

4 111. The ministers of the Supreme Court of 
Justice, and those of the inferior ones, shall be 
named by the Executive Power, in the manner 
prescribed in Art. 94. 

4 112. The Congress shall point out and deter- 
mine the number of ministers, who are to com- 
pose the Courts of J ustice, provided those elected 
be of the age of 30 years for the Supreme Court, 
and 25 for the others, and that they possess the 
qualities of residence, respectability, probity, and 
are lawyers received in the State. 

4 113. The whole of them shall preserve their 
offices till their bad conduct may render them in- 
capable of retaining them. 

4 1 14. At fixed periods, determined by law, they 


shall receive for this service, the salaries that 
may be assigned them ; and which cannot in any 
manner be diminished, as long as they fulfil their 
respective functions. 

4 Sect. II. — Attributes of the Judicial 
Power. 

4 115. The Judicial Power of the Confedera- 
tion shall be circumscribed to the matters con- 
fided thereto by the latter ; viz. all the litigious 
civil or criminal questions which may arise from 
the contents of this Constitution — the treaties 
and negociations carried into effect under its au- 
thority — every thing concerning ambassadors, 
ministers, and consuls — matters belonging to the 
Admiralty and maritime jurisdiction— -the differ- 
ences in which the Federal State may have, or 
form part — those which may arise between two 
or more provinces — between a province and one 
or more citizens of another — between citizens of 
the same province, who may dispute lands granted 
by different provinces — between one province, or 
citizens thereof, and other States, citizens, or 
foreign vassals. 

4 116. In these cases, the Supreme Court of 
Justice shall exercise its authority by appeal, 
according to the rules and exceptions prescribed 
by Congress, but in those in which a province 
bears an interested part, the same shall in that 
case exercise its own original and exclusive au- 
thority. 

4 117. All the ordinary criminal cases, which 
may not belong to the right of accusation granted 
to the House of Representatives by the 44th 
article, shall be tried by juries, as soon as this 
criminal system of legislation may be established 
in Venezuela; the proceedings whereof shall 
take place in the same province in which the 
crime was committed ; but when it has occurred 
out of the limits of the Confederation, and is 
against the law of nations, the Congress, by a par- 
ticular law, shall determine the place in which the 
trial is to take place. 

4 118. The Supreme Court of Justice shall have 
the exclusive right of examining, approving, and 
granting diplomas to all the attornies of the Con- 
federation, who may have proved under the testi- 
mony of their respective governments, that they 
have performed the necessary courses of studies ; 
and those who may in this manner obtain them, 
shall be authorized to practise throughout the 
whole of the same, even where there may be 
colleges of lawyers, whose exclusive privileges to 
practise are hereby annulled ; and they shall alsoj 


VENEZUELA. 


[have the right of being elected to any of the 
offices and commissions belonging to their pro- 
fession, the above titles being previously pre- 
sented to the executive power of the union, be- 
fore the said right is exercised, in order to re- 
ceive the necessary warrant ; which form shall 
also be observed by those lawyers who having- 
been received out of Venezuela, may there wish 
to practise their profession. 

CHAP. V . — Of the Provinces. 

Sec. I. — Limits of the Authority of each. 

4 119. No particular province shall be allowed 
to exercise any act which may belong to the attri- 
butes granted to Congress, and to the Executive 
Power of the Confederation ; nor to make any 
law that may affect the general contracts of the 
same. 

4 120. Consequently, neither two nor more 
provinces shall be allowed to form alliances, or 
confederations amongst themselves; nor to con- 
clude particular agreements without the consent 
of Congress, and in order to obtain the same, they 
are to specify thereto the object, terms, and dura- 
tion of all such agreements, or particular con- 
ventions. 

4 121. Neither can they without the same 
requisites and consent of Congress, raise or main- 
tain troops, or vessels of war in time of peace, 
nor set on foot or conclude contracts, stipulations, 
or agreements with any foreign power. 

4 122. It shall not be lawful for them, without 
the same previous requisites and consent, to 
establish tonnage, import and export duties, on 
foreign trade in their respective ports, or on the 
interior and coasting trade ; for it is the duty of 
the general law r s of the union, to endeavour to 
render the same uniform in the freedom of every 
kind of restraints, that may affect the prosperity 
of each. 

4 123. Without the same requisites and con- 
sent, it shall not be lawful for them to undertake 
any war that is not purely defensive, and in case 
of a sudden attack, imminent danger, or the cer- 
tain dread of some assault ; giving immediate 
notice to the Federal Government of all similar 
occurrences, in order that it may make timely 
provision against the same. 

4 124. In order that the particular laws of the 
provinces, may in no wise counteract those 
enacted by the Confederation, they shall at all 
times be previously submitted to the judgment of 
the Congress, before they have their full force 
and effect in their respective departments ; it 
being however lawful to carry them into execu- 


195 

tion, in the mean time that they are revised by 
Congress. 

Sec. II. — Reciprocal Correspondence be- 
tween each. 

4 125. All public acts of every kind, as well as 
judicial sentences, sanctioned by the authorities, 
magistrates, and judges of one province, shall re- 
ceive full credit and belief in all the others, in 
conformity to the general laws which Congress 
may establish for the uniform and invariable 
effects which are to accompany similar docu- 
ments. 

4 126. Every freeman of one province, who 
may not be known as a vagrant, or marked by 
some public criminality, shall in all the others, 
enjoy all the rights of a free citizen thereof ; 
and the inhabitants of one shall have free ingress 
and egress from the rest, and shall enjoy therein 
all the advantages and benefits of their industry, 
commerce, and tuition, subjecting themselves to 
the laws, imposts, and restrictions of the district 
in which they may be ; provided that these same 
laws are not oppo.sed to the transfer of any 
property, introduced into one province, for any 
of the others, the owners thereof may wish. 

4 127. The provinces, at the requisition of the 
respective Executive Powers, shall reciprocally 
deliver up to each other, all persons accused of 
state crimes, robbery, murder, or other capital 
offences, who may have taken refuge therein, that 
they may be tried by the provincial authority to 
whom the same belongs. 

Sec. III. — Successive increase of the Con- 
federation. 

4 128. As soon as the province of Coro, Mara- 
caibo, and Guayana, from the oppression under 
which they now labour, are able and desirous of 
being united to the confederation, they shall be 
admitted to the same, without the forced separa- 
tion, in which in spite of themselves and us, they 
have been kept, making any difference in the 
principles of equality, justice, and fraternity, 
which they shall enjoy from that time, the same 
as the other provinces of the union. 

4 129. In like manner, and under the same 
principles, shall be admitted and incorporated, 
any other of the provinces of the Columbian con- 
tinent, (before Spanish America) which may be 
desirous of uniting therewith, under the necessary 
conditions and guarantees, in order to strengthen 
the union by the addition and connexion of their 
integral parts. 

4 130. Notwithstanding the cognizance, exami- j 
c c 2 


VENEZUELA. 


S90 

[nation, and determination of these matters, or any 
others that may have any relation thereto, ex- 
clusively belongs to the authority of Congress, 
during the time of its recess, the Executive Power 
is authorized to promote and do every thing that 
may contribute to the progress of the union, 
under the regulations which may be prescribed by 
Congress. 

4 13 1. It also exclusively belongs to the latter 
to regulate the formation or establishment of new 
provinces in the Confederation, whether it be by 
a division of the territory of one, or by the union 
of two or more, or of parts of any of them ; but 
the establishment thereof shall not be considered 
as definitively settled, till the accord and consent 
of the Congress is obtained, as well as of the pro- 
vinces interested in the annexation or division. 

4 132, Congress shall also have the power to 
dispose of all lands and property belonging to 
the State, under the laws, regulations, and ordi- 
nances which it may form for the same ; provided 
that no part of the constitution is altered or 
interpreted so as to injure the general rights 
of the Union, or the particular ones of the pro- 
vinces. 

Sec. IV. — Mutual Guarantee of the Pro- 
vinces TO EACH OTHER. 

4 133. The government of the union secures 
and guarantees to the provinces, the form of that 
repulilican government which each may adopt 
for the administration of its domestic concerns ; 
but without approving of any provincial constitu- 
tion which may be opposed to the liberal and 
free principles of representation herein contained, 
and without at any time consenting that any 
other form of government be established through- 
out the whole of the confederation, 

4 134. It also confirms to the said provinces, 
their reciprocal liberty and independence, in that 
part of their sovereignty which they have reserved 
to themselves ; and, when just and necessary, it 
will protect and aid each one of them against all 
invasions or domestic violence, with the plenitude 
of power and force which may be confided to it, 
for the preservation of the general peace and 
security, whenever the same may be required of 
it by the Provincial Legislature, or by the Execu- 
tive Power, in case the former is not assembled 
and cannot be convened. 

CHAP. VI. — Revised and Reform of the Constitu- 
tion. 

4 135. In all cases wherein two-thirds of each 
of the Houses of Congress, or of the Provincial 


Legislatures, shall propose, and originally and 
reciprocally approve, of any reforms or altera- 
tions which they may consider necessary to this 
constitution, the same shall then be held as valid, 
and thenceforward form part thereof. 

4 136. Whether the reform originates with 
the Congress or with the Legislatures, the arti- 
cles submitted to a reform shall remain in their 
full force and vigour, till one of the bodies 
authorized to that effect, shall have approved of 
and sanctioned the alteration proposed by the 
other, in the manner prescribed in the preceding 
article. 

CHAP. VII. — Sanction or Ratif cation of the Con- 
stitution. 

4 137. The people of each province, by means 
of particular meetings, expressly convened for 
the purpose, or through the organ of their dis- 
trict electors, conclusively authorized to that 
effect, or by the voice of their parochial voters, 
who may have formed the primary meetings for 
the election of representatives, shall solemnly 
express their free and spontaneous will, to accept, 
reject, or to modify the whole or part of this con- 
stitution. 

4 138. The present constitution, in order to 
receive their approbation, being read to the cor- 
porations each provincial government may have 
caused to be formed, in conformity to the pre- 
ceding article ; the same being obtained, together 
with the modifications and alterations which may 
occur by a plurality of votes, the observance 
thereof shall be solemnly sworn ; and within the 
third day, they shall proceed to name their re- 
spective functionaries to fill the powers created 
by the national representation, which choice shall 
in all cases be made by the electors already 
pointed out. 

4 139. The results of both operations shall, by 
the respective municipalities, be communicated 
to the government of the corresponding province, 
in order that the same being laid before Con- 
gress, when assembled, the latter may decide 
thereon. 

4 140. The provinces which may be newly in- 
corporated to the confederation, shall, at a pro- 
per time, comply with these formalities ; and not- 
withstanding they may not for the present, urged 
by powerful and insuperable causes, have fulfilled 
the same, it shall not nevertheless be an obstacle 
against future annexation, whenever their govern- 
ments may demand the same, by commissioners 
or delegates to Congress, when assembled, or to 
the Executive Power, during its recess.] 


VENEZUELA. 


197 


[CHAP. VIII. — Bights of Man , which are to be 

acknowledged and respected throughout the whole 

extent of the State. 

Sec. I. — Sovereignty op the People. 

4 141. After men have been constituted into 
society, they have renounced that unlimited and 
licentious liberty to which they were easily led 
by their passions, it being- only adapted to a 
savage state. The establishment of society pre- 
supposes the renunciation of these fatal rights, 
the acquisition of others more sweet and pa- 
cific, as well as a subjection to certain mutual 
duties. 

4 142. The social compact secures to each in- 
dividual the enjoyment and possession of his pro- 
perty, without detriment to the right which others 
may have to theirs. 

4 143. A society of men united under the same 
laws, customs, and government, form a sove- 
reignty. 

4 144. The sovereignty of a country, or the 
supreme power of regulating and equitably di- 
recting the interests of the community, therefore 
essentially, and originally, resides in the general 
mass of its inhabitants, and is exercised by means 
of their empowered agents or representatives, 
named and established in conformity to the con- 
stitution. 

4 145. No individual, no family, no portion or 
reunion of citizens, no particular corporation, no 
town, city, or district, shall attribute to itself 
the sovereignty of the society, which imprescrip- 
tible, unalienable, and indivisible in its essence 
and origin ; and no person whatever shall exer- 
cise any public function of government, unless he 
has obtained it by the constitution. 

4 146. The magistrates and officers of govern- 
ment, invested with any species of authority, 
either in the Legislative, Executive, or Judicial 
departments, are of consequence, mere agents and 
representatives of the people in the functions they 
exercise, and are at all times responsible to them 
for their public conduct, through the legal and 
constitutional channels. 

4 147. Every citizen, without distinction, has a 
right to the public employments, in the manner 
and under the forms and conditions prescribed by 
law ; the same not being the exclusive property 
&lt;of any particular class of men ; and no man, cor- 
poration, or society of men, shall have any other 
title, whereby to obtain advantages or particular 
considerations, distinct from others, in the choice 
of offices, which may constitute a public career, 
excepting those which may arise from services 
to the State. 


4 148. These same titles being however in no 
wise hereditary by nature, or transmissible to the 
sons, descendants, or to other relations by blood, 
the idea of a man being born a magistrate, legis- 
lator, judge, soldier, or functionary of any kind, 
is absurd, and contrary to nature. 

4 149. The law is the free expression of the 
general will, or of the majority of the citizens, 
indicated through the organ of their Represen- 
tatives legally constituted. It is also founded 
on justice and common utility, and is to protect 
public and individual liberty against oppression 
and violence. 

4 150. All acts exercised against any person, 
out of the cases and contrary to the forms which 
the law determines, are iniquitous ; and if by the 
same they usurp the constitutional authority or 
the liberty of the people, they shall be deemed 
tyrannical. 

4 Sect. II. — Rights op Man in Society. 

4 151. The object of society, is the felicity of 
all ; and governments have been instituted to 
secure man in the same, by protecting the ame- 
lioration of his physical and moral faculties, in- 
creasing the sphere of his enjoyments, and obtain- 
ing for him, the most just, and honest exercise of 
his rights. 

4 152. These rights are, liberty, equality, right 
of property and security. 

4 153. Liberty is the faculty of doing every 
thing that does not injure the rights of other 
individuals, or the body of society, whose limits 
can only be determined by the law, for otherwise 
they would become arbitrary, and ruinous to 
liberty itself. 

4 154. Equality consists, in that the law is the 
same for all citizens ; it is what punishes and what 
protects ; it neither knows the distinction of birth, 
nor the inheritance of power. 

4 155. Property, is the right which each enjoys 
of disposing of the goods which he may have 
obtained by his labour and industry. 

4 156. Security, exists in the guarantee and 
protection which society gives to each of its mem- 
bers, with regard to the preservation of their per- 
sons, rights, and properties. 

4 157. It shall not be lawful to hinder any 
thing not prohibited by law, and no one shall 
be obliged to do any thing, that is not thereby 
prescribed. 

4 158. Neither can the citizens be recriminated, 
accused, held in custody, nor detained, excepting 
in the cases and manner determined by law ; and 
he who may incite, solicit, issue, subscribe, exe- • 


198 


VENEZUELA. 


[cute, or cause to be executed, arbitrary orders or 
acts, shall be punished ; but every citizen who 
may be called upon, or apprehended by virtue of 
the law, ought instantly to obey, for he becomes 
culpable by resistance. 

4 159. Every person shall be presumed inno- 
cent, till he has been declared guilty in conformity 
to the laws ; and if in the mean time it should be 
thought necessary to secure him personally, all 
severity that may not be essentially necessary to 
this end, is to be suppressed. 

4 160. No person shall be judged, or con- 
demned, to the sufferance of any punishment in 
criminal matters, till after he has been legally 
heard. Every one in similar cases, shall have 
the right of demanding the motive of the accusa- 
tion attempted against him, and to have know- 
ledge of its nature ; to be confronted against his 
accusers and opponent witnesses ; to produce 
others in his favour, as well as every other proof 
that may be favourable to his cause, within 
proper periods, either by means of himself, by 
powers, or by an attorney of his own choice ; but 
no person shall be compelled or forced in any 
cause, to give testimony against himself, nor 
against direct or collateral relations to the fourth 
civil grade of consanguinity, and the second of 
affinity. 

4 161. Congress shall, with all possible brevity, 
establish by law and at full length, the trial by 
juries, for criminal and civil cases to which the 
same is commonly applied by other nations ; 
together with all the forms of proceeding therein ; 
and it shall, at the same time, make the declara- 
tions belonging to this place, in favour of liberty 
and personal security, that they may form part of 
this Constitution, and be observed throughout the 
whole State. 

4 162. Every person has the right of being 
secure of not suffering any seai’ch, inquest, exa- 
mination, or irregular and unlawful seizure of his 
person, house, or property ; and any order of a 
magistrate to examine suspicious places, (without 
the probability of some grievous act requiring 
the same) and not expressly designating the 
said places ; or for the seizure of one or more 
persons, or their property, without naming the 
same, and indicating the motives of such proce- 
dure, together with the previous testimony and 
sworn deposition of creditable persons, shall be 
held as contrary to the above right, dangerous to 
liberty, and unlawful to issue. 

c 163. The house of every citizen is an inviola- 
ble sanctuary. No one has any right to enter 
therein, excepting in cases of fire, inundation, or 


on aid being demanded therefrom ; or when any 
criminal proceedings take place in conformity to 
the laws, and under responsibility of the Con- 
stitutional authorities which may have issued 
the decrees. Domiciliary searches and civil exe- 
cutions can only take place during day, by virtue 
of the law, and with respect to the person and 
objects expressly named in the act ordaining 
such search or execution. 

4 164. When, by public authority, similar acts 
are granted, the same shall be limited to the 
person and objects, expressly pointed in the de- 
cree, ordaining the said search and execution ; 
which shall not, however, be extended to the 
inquest and examination of individual papers ; 
these shall be held inviolable, in like manner as 
the epistolary correspondences of all citizens, 
which it shall not be lawful for any authority to 
intercept, nor shall the same be valid in a court 
of justice, unless produced by the person to 
whom they have been forwarded by their author, 
but never by a third person, or when obtained by 
the reprobated means of interception. Crimes 
of high treason against the State are, however, 
excepted ; as well as forgery and others, which 
may be committed by writing ; in which cases, 
the search, examination, and seizure of any such 
documents, shall take place according to the dis- 
positions of the law. 

4 165. Every individual of society holding the 
right to be protected by the same in the enjoy- 
ment of his life, liberty, and property, according 
to the laws, is of consequence bound to contri- 
bute on his part to the expenses of this protec- 
tion, and to lend his personal services, or an 
equivalent for the same, whenever it may be ne- 
cessary ; but no person shall be deprived of the 
smallest portion of his property, nor can the 
same be applied to public uses without his own 
consent, or that of the legislative bodies repre- 
senting the people ; and when any public neces- 
sity, legally proved, should require that the pro- 
perty of any citizen be applied to similar uses, 
he is to receive therefore a just indemnity. 

4 166. No subsidy, charge, impost, tax, or 
contribution, can be established or levied, under 
any pretext whatever, without the consent of 
the people expressed through the organ of their 
representatives. All contributions have for ob- 
ject the general utility, and the citizens have the 
right of watching over their expenditure, and to 
cause account thereof to be laid before them, 
through the same channel. 

4 167. No kind of labour, culture, industry, or 
trade, shall be prohibited to the citizens, ex-] 


y E N E Z U E L’A. 


109 


[cepting those which at present form the sub- 
sistence of the State, but which shall hereafter 
be opened when Congress may judge it useful 
and conducive to the public cause. 

4 168. The liberty of each citizen claiming his 
rights before the depositai'ies of the public au- 
thority, with due moderation and respect, can in 
no case be hindered or withheld. All, on the 
contrary, ought to find a ready and sure remedy, 
in conformity to the laws, for the injuries and 
damages they may sustain in their persons, pro- 
perties, honour, and good opinion. 

4 169. All foreigners, of whatever nation they 
may be of, shall be received into the State. 
Their persons and properties shall enjoy the 
same security as those of the other citizens, pro- 
vided they respect the catholic religion, the only 
one tolerated ; that they acknowledge the inde- 
pendence of this country, its sovereignty, and 
the authorities constituted by the general will of 
the inhabitants. 

4 170. No law, criminal or civil, shall have a 
retroactive effect, and any that may be enacted, 
in order to judge and punish acts committed be- 
fore the existence of the same, shall be held as 
unjust, oppressive, and incompatible with the 
fundamental principles of a free government. 

4 171. It shall never be lawful to demand ex- 
cessive securities, nor shall pecuniary fines be 
exacted, disproportioned to the crimes, or per- 
sons be condemned to cruel, ridiculous, or un- 
usual punishments. Sanguinary laws ought to 
be diminished, as their frequent application is 
injurious to the State, and not less unjust than 
impolitic ; for the true object of punishments is 
to correct, rather than destroy the human race. 

4 172. All treatment that may render more 
grievous the punishment determined by law, shall 
be held as a crime. 

4 173. The use of the torture is for ever abo- 
lished. 

4 174. Every person who may be legally de- 
tained, or held in custody, shall be set free as 
soon as he has given sufficient security ; except- 
ing in the cases in which there are evident proofs, 
or great presumption of capital crimes. If the 
arrest arises from debt, and there is no evident 
proof, or great presumption of fraud, the pri- 
soner shall not be detained as soon as his property 
has been delivered up to his creditors, in confor- 
mity to the laws. 

4 175. No sentence pronounced for treason 
against the State, or for any other crime, shall 
entail infamy on the children or descendants of 
the criminal. 


4 176. No citizen of the provinces of the State, 
excepting those employed in the army, navy, or 
militia, then in actual service, shall be subjected 
to military law, nor suffer punishments inflicted 
by the same. 

4 177. Soldiers in time of peace, shall not be 
allowed to quarter themselves, nor take up 
lodgings, in the houses of private citizens, with- 
out the consent of the owners ; nor in time of 
war, but by order of the civil magistrates, con- 
formably to the laws. 

4 178. A well-regulated and’ trained militia, 
composed of the citizens, is the most proper and 
natural defence, as well as the most secure, to a 
free State. For this reason it shall not be lawful 
in time of peace, to keep up an establishment of 
regulars, greater than is absolutely necessary for 
the security of the country, by the consent of 
Congress. 

4 179. Neither shall it be unlawful for the ci- 
tizens to have and carry legal arms, such as are 
permitted for their own defence; and the military 
power shall, in all cases, maintain a strict sub- 
ordination to the civil authority, and be directed 
by the same. 

4 180. No personal privileges or immunities 
shall be allowed, the nature of the matter shall 
alone determine the magistrates who take cog- 
nizance thereof : and the functionaries of every 
class, in the cases which do not touch their pro- 
fession and employment, shall be subject to the 
ordinary magistrates and tribunals, the same as 
the other citizens. 

4 181. The right of manifesting all ideas by 
means of the press, shall be free ; but any per- 
son who may exercise the same, shall be answer- 
able to the laws, if he attacks and disturbs by 
his opinions the public tranquillity, the belief, 
Christian morality, or the property, honour, and 
good opinion of any citizen. 

4 182. The provincial Legislatures shall have 
the right of petitioning Congress, and it shall 
not be unlawful for the inhabitants to assemble, 
orderly and quietly, in their respective parishes, 
in order to consult and treat respecting their 
own concerns, to give instructions to their Re- 
presentatives in Congress, or in the province, or 
to direct petitions to one or other of the Legista 
tive bodies, respecting the reform 
or ills, they may suffer in their affairs. 

4 183. For cases of this nature, a previous 
petition ought necessarily to be made out, signed 
by the heads of families, and other respectable 
persons of the parish, to at least the number of 
six, praying the respective municipality, that the] 


of grievances 


200 


VENEZUELA. 


[meeting- may take place,' and the latter shall de- 
termine the day, and commission a magistrate, 
or some other respectable person of the parish, 
to preside in the meeting ; which being closed, 
and the act drawn up, he shall remit the same 
to the municipality, in order to forward it to its 
destination. 

4 184. Voting citizens or electors, are alone 
allowed to concur in these meetings, and the 
legislatures are not absolutely obliged to accede 
to these petitions, but to take them into consi- 
deration, in order to proceed in their functions, 
in the manner which may appear most conform- 
able to the general good. 

4 185. The power of suspending the laws, or 
of stopping their execution, shall at no time be 
exercised, excepting by the respective Legisla- 
tures, or by some authority emanating from them 
for those particular cases only, which they may 
have expressly foreseen, to be exceptions to what 
is enacted by the Constitution ; and all suspen- 
sions and olistruction to the execution thereof, 
which may take place without the consent of the 
Representatives of the people, shall be repelled 
as an infringement on their rights. 

4 186. The Legislative Power shall, in the 
mean time, act in all cases respecting which the 
Constitution may have been silent, and oppor- 
tunely provide for the same ; incorporating 
therein the additions or reforms, which it may 
have thought necessary to make in the Consti- 
tution. 

4 187. The right of the people to participate 
in the Legislature, is the best security and the 
firmest foundation of a free government : in con- 
sequence whereof it is necessary for the elec- 
tions to be free and frequent, and that the citi- 
zens who may possess the qualifications of a 
moderate property, and who are besides desirous 
to promote the good of the community, should 
have the right of voting and electing the mem- 
bers of the Legislature, at fixed periods, and 
not too long, as is enacted by the Constitution. 

4 188. A too long continuation in office on 
the part of the principal functionaries of the 
Executive Power, is dangerous to liberty ; and 
this circumstance powerfully calls for a periodical 
rotation, between the members of the said de- 
partment, in order to secure the same. 

4 189. The three essential departments of go- 
vernments, viz. the legislative, executive, and 
judicial, must necessarily be kept as distinct and 
independent of each other as the nature of a 
free government requires, and as much as is con- 
sistent with the great chain of connection, which 


binds together the whole fabric of the Constitu^ 
tion, by an indissoluble tie of friendship and 
union. 

4 190. The emigration from one province to 
another shall be perfectly free. 

4 191. Governments have been instituted for 
the common felicity, for the protection and se- 
curity of the people forming the same, and not 
for the benefit, honour, or private interest of 
any one person, family, or of any one particular 
class of men, who only constitute part of the 
community. The best of all governments is 
that which is the most proper to produce the 
greatest proportion of good, and of happiness, 
and is less exposed to the danger of bad admi- 
nistration ; therefore as many times as a govern- 
ment may be found incapable of answering these 
ends, or that the majority of the nation is op- 
posed to the same, it has undoubtedly an un- 
alienable and imprescriptible right of abolishing, 
changing, or reforming it in the manner which 
may be conceived most conducive to the public 
good. In order to obtain this indispensible ma- 
jority, without any injury to justice and to ge- 
neral liberty, the Constitution presents and 
ordains the most reasonable, just, and regular 
means in the chapter of the revisal thereof, and 
the provinces will adopt other similar or equiva- 
lent ones in their respective Constitutions. 

4 Sect. III. — Duties of Man in Society. 

4 192. The declaration of rights contains the 
obligations of the Legislators, but the preserva- 
tion of society demands, that those who constitute 
the same, equally know and fulfil theirs. 

4 193. The rights of others, become the moral 
limits of ours, and the ground work of our duties 
relatively to the rest of the individuals forming 
the social body. They are founded on two 
principles, which nature has imprinted on the 
hearts of all ; viz. 1st, Do thou to others at all 
times , all the good thou wouldest wish to receive 
from them. 2dly, Do not thou to another , what 
thou wouldest not wish done to thee. 

4 194. It is the duty of every individual in so- 
ciety to live in obedience to the laws, to obey and 
respect the magistrates and constituted autho- 
rites, who are his own organs ; to maintain the 
liberty and the equality of rights; to contribute 
to the public expenses, and to serve his country 
when requisite, making for the same the sacrifice 
of his property, and of his life, should it be ne- 
cessary. 

4 195. No one is a good man, or a good citi- 
zen, who does not faithfully and religiously ob-] 


VENEZUELA. 


20! 


[serve the laws ; and if he is not also a good son, 
a good brother, a good friend, a good husband, 
and a good father of his family. 

4 196. Any person who openly breaks through 
the laws, or who, without openly violating, 
eludes them by cunning and artful and culpable 
subterfuges, is an enemy to society, transgresses 
against the interests of all, and renders himself 
unworthy of the public benevolence and esteem. 

4 Sec. IV. — Duties of the Social Body. 

4 197. Society secures to the individuals com- 
posing the same, the enjoyment of their lives, 
liberties, and properties, as well as all other 
natural rights ; and in this consists the social 
guarantee resulting from the united concurrence 
of the members of the body, deposited in the 
national sovereignty. 

4 198. Governments being instituted for the 
good and common felicity of all persons, society 
is bound to give aid to the indigent and unfor- 
tunate, as well as instruction to all needful ci- 
tizens. 

4 199. In order to guard against every trans- 
gression that may arise from the high powers con- 
fided to us , we declare , that each and every one of 
the things constituted in the above declaration 
of rights, are exempt and beyond the reach of 
the general power invested in government , and 
being contained in, and founded on, the indistruc- 
tible and sacred principles of nature , every law 
contrary to the same which may be enacted by the 
Federal Legislature, or by the Provinces , shall be 
absolutely null, and of no effect. 

CHAP. IX. — Regulations and Dispositions of 
more general Tenor. 

4 200. As that class of citizens, hitherto deno- 
minated Indians, has not till now reaped the 
advantage of certain laws which the Spanish 
monarchy dictated in their favour, in conse- 
quence of the functionaries of the government 
having forgotten their execution, and as the basis 
of the system of government, which Venezuela 
has adopted in this Constitution, is no other than 
that of justice and equality, the provincial govern- 
ments are hereby most particularly enjoined, that 
in like manner as they are to apply their cares and 
endeavours, in order to obtain the instruction of 
all the inhabitants of the State, to provide for 
them schools, academies, and colleges, where all 
may learn the principles of religion, of sound 
morality, of policy, of science, and of the useful 
and necessary arts, such as are conducive to the 
maintainance and prosperity of the people ; that 

VOL. v. 


they in like manner endeavour by every possible 
means to draw to the same houses of tuition the 
said citizen natives, to cause them to comprehend 
the intimate union by which they are bound to 
the rest of the citizens, to teach them that they 
merit the same considerations from government, 
to inculcate to them the rights which they enjoy, 
by the simple act of their being men equal to all 
others of the same kind ; to the end, that by this 
means, they may be raised from the abject and 
ignorant state in which they have been kept by 
the ancient order of things, and that they may 
no longer remain isolated and fearful of dealing 
with other men ; it being hereby prohibited for 
them henceforward to be employed against their 
own will, in the service of the curates of their 
parishes, or of any other person ; they being 
also allowed to divide and lay out the grounds 
granted to them, and of which they hold posses- 
sion ; that the same may be proportionably par- 
celled out amongst the fathers of families of each 
town, for their own uses and purposes, and in 
conformity to the regulations which may be esta- 
blished by the provincial Governments. 

4 201. Consequently, hereby are revoked, and 
rendered null and void, all the laws which under 
the former Government granted to the natives 
certain tribunals, protectors, and the privilege 
of their always being considered as minors, 
which privileges, though apparently directed to 
protect, have nevertheless been extremely inju- 
rious to them, as experience has proved. 

4 202. The vile traffic of slaves, prohibited by 
decree of the Supreme Junta of Caracas, on the 
14th of July, 1810, is hereby solemnly and con- 
stitutionally abolished in the whole territory of 
the Union, without it being lawful in any manner 
to import slaves of any kind, for the purposes of 
mercantile speculation. 

4 203. In the same manner are revoked and 
annulled, in every sense, the ancient laws which 
imposed a civil degradation on that part of the 
free population of Venezuela, hitherto known 
under the denomination of persons of colour ; 
these shall all remain in the possession of their 
natural and civil rank, and be restored to the 
imprescriptible rights belonging to them, in like 
manner as the rest of the citizens. 

4 204. All titles granted by the former govern- 
ments are extinguished ; and neither Congress, 
nor the Provincial Legislatures, shall grant any 
others, either of nobility, honours, or hereditary 
distinctions ; nor create offices or places of any 
nature, whose salaries or emoluments last longer 
than the good conduct of those who till them.] 

D D 


202 


VENEZUELA. 


[‘ 205. Any person who may hold any office of 
confidence or honour, under the authority of the 
State, shall not be allowed to accept any present, 
title, or emolument, from any king’, prince, or 
foreign power, without the consent of Congress. 

‘ 206. The President and members of the 
Executive, Senators and Representatives, the 
military, and all civil functionaries, before they 
enter on the exercise of their functions, shall 
take oaths of fidelity to the State, and swear to 
maintain and defend the Constitution, to fulfil 
well and faithfully the duties of their offices, and 
to protect and preserve pure and untouched in 
this country the Catholic, Apostolic, and Roman 
religion, which they themselves profess. 

‘ 207. The Executive Power shall have the 
oath administered by the President of the Senate, 
in presence of the two Houses ; and the Senators 
and Representatives, by the President for the time 
being of the Executive, and in the presence of the 
other two individuals composing the same. 

4 208. Congress shall determine the form of 
the oath, and by whom it is to be administered, 
to the officers and functionaries of the Confe- 
deration. 

4 209. The inhabitants of each province shall 
be allowed to revoke the nomination of their 
Delegates to Congress, or any one of them, at 
any time of the year, as well as to send there 
others, in the place of the first, for the time left 
them to serve. 

4 210. The means of ascertaining the general 
will of the people, respecting these revocations, 
shall be through the exclusive and peculiar chan- 
nel of the Provincial Legislatures, and in con- 
formity to what may be established by their 
respective Constitutions 

4 211. It is prohibited for all citizens to assist 
at the parochial and electoral meetings, pre- 
scribed by the Constitution, with arms, as well as 
at the peaceable meetings mentioned in article 182, 
and the following one, under the penalty of losing 
for 10 years, the right of voting, or assisting at 
the same. , 

4 212. Any person who may have been legally 
convicted of having purchased or sold votes in 
the said meetings, or of having obtained the 
election of any person, by means of threats, in- 
trigue, artifices, or any kind of seduction, shall 
be excluded from the said meetings, and from the 
exercise of all public functions for the space of 
20 years ; and in case of the same occurring a 
second time, the exclusion shall be for ever ; 
both being published throughout the chief dis- 
trict, by means of a proclamation of the muni- 


cipality, which shall also circulate in the public 
papers. 

4 213. Neither the parish voters, or the dis- 
trict electors, shall be allowed to receive any 
recompence from the State, for attending these 
meetings, in order to exercise therein what is 
prescribed by the Constitution ; notwithstanding 
it may sometimes be necessary to expend some 
days to finish what mav occur. 

4 214. The citizens shall alone be allowed to 
exercise their political rights in the parish and 
district meetings, and in the cases and manner 
prescribed by the Constitution. 

4 215. No individual, or any particular society, 
shall be allowed to lay petitions before the con- 
stituted authorities, in the name of the people ; 
and much less to arrogate to themselves the 
title of sovereign people ; and the citizen or citi- 
zens, who may transgress against this article, 
by disregarding the respect and veneration due 
to the representation and voice of the people, 
which can only be expressed by the general will, 
or through the organ of their legitimate Repre- 
sentatives in the Legislatures, shall be prosecut- 
ed, taken into custody, and judged according to 
the laws. 

4 216. All assemblage of armed persons under 
whatever pretext they may be collected, unless 
by the authority of the constituted authorities, is 
an offence against the public security, and is to 
be immediately dispersed by means of force ; and 
all assemblage of persons unarmed, which has 
not the same legal origin, shall, in the first in- 
stance, be dissolved by verbal orders, and if 
necessary, it shall be dispersed by force of arms 
in case of resistance, or great obstinacy. 

4 217. The President and Members of the 
Executive Power, as well as the Senators, Re- 
presentatives, and all other Functionaries of the 
Confederation, shall receive their respective 
salaries out of the treasury of the union. 

4 218. No quantity of money in silver, gold, 
paper, or any other equivalent form, shall be 
taken out of the same, excepting for the purposes 
and payments ordained by law: and the Congress 
shall, annually, publish a statement and regular 
account of the receipts and expenditure of the 
public monies, for the information of all, as soon 
as the Executive has carried into effect what is 
stipulated by Art. 102. 

4 219. No capitation tax, or any direct impost, 
shall be levied on the persons of the citizens, but 
in conformity to the quantity of population con- 
tained in each province, and according to the 
census which Congress will ordain to be taken] 


VENEZUELA. 


[every five years, throughout the whole extent of 
the State. 

4 220. No preference shall be given to the 
ports of one province over those of another, either 
by any regulations of trade or finance ; nor shall 
privileges or exclusive rights be granted to 
trading companies, or societies of industry ; nor 
shall any restrictions be laid on the freedom of 
trade, or on the pursuits of agriculture and in- 
dustry, excepting what are expressly stipulated 
by the Constitution. 

4 221. All prohibitive laws respecting similar 
matters, whenever circumstances may render the 
same necessary, shall be held as purely and 
essentially provisional ; and, in order that the 
same may have effect more than one year, it shall 
be requisite to renew them with all the necessary 
formalities at the end of that period, and in like 
manner successively. 

4 222. In the meantime that Congress has not 
established a permanent form of naturalization 
for foreigners, the same shall obtain the right of 
citizens, as well as the power of voting, electing, 
and taking a seat in the House of the national 
Representatives, if, having declared their inten- 
tion to establish themselves in the country before 
a municipality, and caused their names to be 
inscribed on the civil registers thereof, and hav- 
ing also renounced their right of citizenship to 
their own country, they have acquired the domi- 
ciliary rights and residence within the State, 
during the period of seven years, and have be- 
sides fulfilled the other conditions prescribed by 
the Constitution, in order to exercise the func- 
tions above stated. 

4 22 3. In all public acts the Columbian Era 
shall be used, and, in order to avoid all mistakes 
into calculations, in comparing this period with 
the common Christian Era, generally used by 
civilized countries, the former shall date from 
January 1, of the year of our Lord, 1811, which 
shall be the first of our Independence. 

4 224. Congress shall be authorized, by means 
of timely regulations, to provide for all parts of 
this Constitution, which cannot be immediately 
carried into execution, and, in a general manner, 
in order to avoid the injuries and inconveniences 
which might otherwise result to the State. 

4 225. Any person, who being in any province 
should violate the laws, shall be judged, in con- 
formity thereto, by its provincial magistrates ; 
but if he should transgress against those of the 
union, he shall be judged, in conformity to the 
same, by the functionaries of the Confederation ; 
nnd, in order that it may not be necessary to 


'20, i 

have tribunals belonging to the Confederation 
in every place, and that the persons compre- 
hended in these cases may not be taken out of 
their places of residence, Congress shall deter- 
mine by law the said tribunals, and the forms 
under which they shall issue commissions to 
examine and judge all cases in the respective 
provinces. 

4 226. No person, within the Confederation of 
Venezuela, shall enjoy any other title or address 
than that of citizen, the only denomination of all 
the free persons composing the nation ; but the 
Houses of Representatives, the Executive Power, 
and the Supreme Court of Justice, by all citizens 
shall be addressed under the same names, with 
the addition of Honourable for the first, Res- 
for the second, and Upright for the 

4 227. The present Constitution, the laws that 
in consequence thereof may be enacted for its 
execution, as well as all the treaties which may 
be carried into effect under the government of 
the union, shall be held as the supreme law of 
the State, throughout the whole extent of the 
Confederation ; and the authorities and inhabi- 
tants of the provinces shall be bound to obey, 
and religiously to observe the same, without fail 
or pretext ; but the laws, which may be enacted 
in opposition thereto, shall be considered as with- 
out effect, unless they have passed through the 
forms requisite for a just and legal revisal and 
sanction. 

4 228. In the meantime, and till the formation 
of a civil and criminal code is carried into effect, 
as decreed by the Supreme Congress, March 8, ult. 
adapted to the form of government established 
in Venezuela, it is hereby declared, that the 
code, by which we have hitherto been governed, 
shall retain its due and full force and vigour, in 
all the points and matters which directly or in- 
directly may not be opposed to what is established 
by this Constitution. 

229. Conclusion . — And whereas the Supreme 
Legislator of the universe, has been pleased to 
inspire into our hearts the most mutual and sin- 
cere friendship and union, as well amongst our- 
selves as with the rest of the inhabitants of the 
Columbian continent, who may wish to associate 
with us in order to defend our religion, our 
natural sovereignty, and our independence ; 
therefore We, the said people of Venezuela, hav- 
ing freely ordained the preceding Constitution, 
containing the regulations, principles, and ob- 
jects of our Confederation and perpetual alliance; 
and calling upon the same divinity to witness the] 
dd2 


pectable 

third. 


204 


VENEZUELA. 


[sincerity of our intentions, and imploring his 
powerful aid to secure to us for ever the blessings 
of liberty, and the imprescriptible rights we have 
from his generous benificence obtained ; do mu- 
tually bind ourselves and engage, to observe and 
inviolably to fulfil, all and each of the things 
therein contained, from the time the same is 
ratified, in the manner stipulated therein ; pro- 
testing nevertheless to alter, and at any time to 
change these said resolutions, whenever, and in 
conformity to the majority of the people of Co- 
lumbia, united in a national body for the defence 
and preservation of their liberty and political 
independence, the same may be desired ; modi- 
fying, correcting, and suiting the same oppor- 
tunely according to a plurality, and our own 
common consent, in every thing which may have 
a direct tendency to the general interests of the 
said people, and as agreed upon through the 
organ of their legal Representatives, assembled 
in the General Congress of Columbia, or of any 
considerable part thereof, and sanctioned by its 
Constituents ; constituting ourselves, in the 
meantime, in this union, all and each one of the 
provinces concurring to form the same, guaran- 
tees each one to the other, of the integrity of our 
respective territories and essential rights, with 
our lives, our fortunes, and our honour ; and we 
confide and recommend the inviolability and 
conservation of this Constitution to the fidelity 
of the legislative bodies, of the executive 
powers, judges, and functionaries of the union, 
and of the provinces, as well as to the vigilance 
and virtues of all fathers of families, mothers, 
wives, and citizens of the State. 

4 Done in the Federal Palace of Caracas, De- 
cember 21, in the year of our Lord, 1811, 
and the first of our Independence. 

Juan Toro, President. 

Isidoro Antonio Lopez Mendez. 

Juan Joze de Maya. 

Nicolas de Castro. 

Lino de Clemente. 

Joze Maria Ramirez. 

Domingo de Alvarado. 

Manuel Placido Maneyro. 

Mariano de la Cova. 

Francisco Xavier de Maiz. 

Antonio Nicolas Brizeno. 

Francisco X. Yanes. 

Manuel Palacio. 

Joze de Sata y Bussy. 

Joze Ignacio Brizeno. 

Joze Gabriel de Alcala. 


Bartolome Blandin. 

Francisco Policarpo Ortiz 

Martin Tovar. 

Pelipe Fermin Paul. 

Joze Luis Cabrera. 

Francisco Hernandez. 

Francisco del Toro. 

Joze Angel de Alamo. 

Gabriel Perez de Pagola. 

Francisco X. Ustariz. 

Juan German Roscio. 

Fernando Penalver. 

4 Under the objections stated at the end of this 
act, No. 2, I sign this Constitution. 

Francisco de Miranda, Vice-President. 

4 I subscribe to the whole, with the exception 
of Art. 180 ; renewing my protest made on the 
5th instant. 

Juan Nepomuceno Quintana. 

4 I subscribe to the whole, with the exception 
of Art. 180, which relates to the abolition of the 
personal immunity of the Clergy, respecting 
which I have solemnly protested, which act is to 
be inserted at the end of this Constitution. 

Manuel Vicente Maya. 

4 I subscribe, under the same exceptions, as 
Senor Maya, and under the accompanying pro- 
test delivered this day. 

Luis Joze Cazorla. 

4 I subscribe to the whole of the Constitution, 
with the exception of the article respecting im- 
munities. 

Luis Joze de Rivas y Tovar. 

4 Under my protest as made on the 16th instant. 

Salvador Delgado. 

4 I subscribe to the whole, with the exception 
of the article which annuls immunities. 

Joze Vicente Unda. 

4 I subscribe to the present Constitution, with 
the exception of Art. 180, and in conformity to 
my protest made on the 5th instant, annexed to 
this Constitution, and in similar terms to those 
of Senor Quintana. 

Luis Ignacio Mendoza. 

4 I subscribe to the whole of what is sanctioned 
in this Constitution, excepting the article which 
treats of the ecclesiastical immunity, and in con- 
formity to the protest made on the 5th instant. 

Juan Antonio Diaz Argote. 

Francisco Isnardi, Secretary. 

4 III. Table of Latitude and Longitude of the 

most important places in this province. — 

N. B. For the sake of uniformity and compa-1 


V E R 


V E R 


205 


[rison, this, with many others, will be found at 

the end of the general preface.] 

[VENTA, a small hamlet or inn of the pro- 
vince and government of Venezuela, well known 
upon the road, as being about half-way between 
Caracas and the Port. It is situate at the height 
of about 3600 English feet above the level of the 
sea, at which elevation the heat is never op- 
pressive.] 

Venta, de en Medio, a settlement of the 
province and corregimiento of Paria, in Peru^. of 
the archbishopric of Charcas, annexed to the 
curacy of the settlement of Poopo. 

Venta, Morro de, a lofty mountain on the 
coast of the province and government of Carta- 
gena and Nuevo Reyno de Granada, between 
the capital and the point of Zamba. 

[Venta, de Cruz, a town on the isthmus of 
Darien and Tierra Firme. Here the Spanish 
merchandise, from Panama to Porto Bello, is 
embarked on the river Chagre ] 

VENTAMILLA, a settlement of the province 
and corregimiento of Sicasica, in Peru, 19 leagues 
from its capital. 

VENTILLA, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of La Paz, in Peru ; s. s. e. of the 
capital. 

[VENTO, Sierra, on the n. coast of S. Ame- 
rica, are mountains so named, behind the land 
called Punta de Del Rio, opposite to Tortugas 
Island.] 

VENTUAVI, an abundant river of the pro- 
vince and government of Guayana, or Nueva 
Andalucia. It rises in the sierra of Maygualida, 
runs w. and, then turning to the s., enters by a 
very wide mouth into the Orinoco, opposite the 
fort of St. Barbara, after having collected the 
waters of various other rivers ; [its mouth is in 
n. lat. 4° 20'.] 

VENTURA, a river of the province and 
government of Buenos Ayres, which runs w. and 
enters the Jazegua. 

[VENUS, Point, in Otaheite Island, in the 
S. Pacific Ocean, is the e. point of Matavai or 
Port Royal Bay, and n. point of the island. S. 
lat. 17° 29'. w. long. 149° 36.] 

VERA, a province of the government of Para- 
guay, towards the e. part; discovered by Alvar 
Nunez, who gave it this name, in 1541. It is 
bounded s by the river Plata, and n. by that of 
the Parana ; is of a very good climate, and ex- 
tremely fertile territory, and was inhabited by 
Armiros and Guaranies, Indians, who were cruel, 
ferocious, and cannibals ; but who are almost all 
reduced to the faith and to a civilized life, with 


immense labours and fatigues by the Jesuits, 
who established amongst them a well-organized 
republic. See articles Paraguay and G#aira. 

[VERA CRUZ, a province of Nueva Espaha, 
situated under the burning sun of the tropics, 
extends along the Mexican gulf, from the Rio 
Baraderas (or De los Lagartos) to the great river 
ofPanuco, which rises in the metalliferous moun- 
tains of San Luis Potosi. Hence this intendancy 
includes a very considerable part of the e. coast 
of New Spain. Its length, as computed by Hum- 
boldt, from the Bay of Terminos near the Island 
of Carmen to the small port of Tampico, is 210 
leagues, while its breadth is only in general from 
25 to 28 leagues. It is bounded on the e. by the 
peninsula of Merida, on the w. by the intendan- 
cies of Oaxaca, Puebla, and Mexico, and on the 
n. by the colony of New Santander. 

There are few regions in the new continent 
where the traveller is more struck with the as- 
semblage of the most opposite climates. All the 
w. part of the intendancy of Vera Cruz forms the 
declivity of the cordilleras of Anahuac. In the 
space of a day the inhabitants descend from the 
regions of eternal snow to the plains in the vici- 
nity of the sea, where the most suffocating heat 
prevails. The admirable order with which dif- 
ferent tribes of vegetables rise above one another 
by strata, as it were, is no where more percepti- 
ble than in ascending from the port of V era Cruz 
to the table-land of Perote. We see there the 
physiognomy of the country, the aspect of the 
sky, the form of plants, the figures of animals, 
the manners of the inhabitants, and the kind of 
cultivation followed by them, assuming a dif- 
ferent appearance at every step of our progress. 

As we ascend, nature appears gradually less 
animated, the beauty of the vegetable forms di- 
minishes, the shoots become less succulent, and 
the flowers less coloured. The aspect of the 
Mexican oak quiets the alarms of travellers 
newly landed at VeraCruz. Its presence demon- 
strates to him that he has left behind the zone so 
justly dreaded by the people of the n., under 
which the yellow fever exercises its ravages in 
New Spain. This inferior limit of oaks warns 
the colonist who inhabits the central table-land 
how far he may descend towards the coast, with- 
out dread of the mortal disease of the vomito . — - 
Forests of liquid-amber, near Xalapa, announce 
by the freshness of their verdure that this is the 
elevation at which the clouds suspended over the 
ocean come in contact with the basaltic summits 
of the cordillera. A little higher, near La Ban- 
derilla, the nutritive fruit of the banana-tree] 


VERA CRUZ. 


*206 

[comes no longer to maturity. In this foggy and 
cold region, therefore, want spurs on the Indian 
to labour, and excites his industry. At the height 
of San Miguel, pines begin to mingle with the 
oaks, which are found by the traveller as high as 
the elevated plains of Perote, where he beholds 
the delightful aspect of fields sown with wheat. 
Eight hundred metres higher the coldness of the 
climate will no longer admit of the vegetation of 
oaks ; and pines alone there cover the rocks, 
whose summits enter the zone of eternal snow. 
Thus in a few hours the naturalist in this mira- 
culous country ascends the whole scale of vege- 
tation from the heliconia and the banana plant, 
whose glossy leaves swell out into extraordinary 
dimensions, to the stunted parenchyma of the 
resinous trees ! 

The province of Vera Cruz is enriched by na- 
ture with the most precious productions. At the 
foot of the cordillera , in the ever green forests of 
Papantla, Nautla, and S. Andre Tuxtla, grows 
the epidendrum vanilla, of which the odoriferous 
fruit is employed for perfuming chocolate. The 
beautiful convolvulus jalapae grows near the In- 
dian villages of Colipa and Misantla, of which the 
tuberose root furnishes the jalap, one of the most 
energetic and beneficent purgatives. The myrtle 
(myrtus pimenta), of which the grain forms an 
agreeable spice, well known in trade by the name 
o ipimienta de tabasco , is produced in the forests 
which extend towards the river of Baraderas, in 
the e. part of the intendancy of Vera Cruz. The 
cocoa of Acayucan would be in request if the na- 
tives were to apply themselves more assiduously 
to the cultivation of cocoa-trees. On the e. and 
s. declivites of the Pic d’Orizaba, in the vallies 
which extend towards the small town of Cordoba, 
tobacco of an excellent quality is cultivated, 
which yields an annual revenue to the crown of 
more than 18,000,000 of francs, 750,000/. sterl- 
ing. The similax, of which the root is the true 
sasaparilla, grows in the humid and umbrageous 
ravins of the cordillera. The cotton of the coast 
of Vera Cruz is celebrated for its fineness and 
whiteness. The sugar-cane yields nearly as 
much sugar as in the Island of Cuba, and more 
than in the plantations of St. Domingo. 

This intendancy alone would keep alive the 
commerce of the port of Vera Cruz, if the num- 
ber of colonists was greater, and if their laziness, 
the effect of the bounty of nature, and the faci- 
lity of providing without effort for the most 
urgent wants of life, did not impede the progress 
of industry. The old population of Mexico was 
concentrated in the interior of the country on the 


table-land. The Mexican tribes who, according to 
Humboldt, uere supposed to have come from the 
n. countries, gave the preference in their migra- 
tions to the ridges of the corddleras , because they 
found on them a climate analogous to that of then- 
native country. N o doubt, on the first arrival of the 
Spaniards on the coast of Chalchiuhcuecan (Vera 
Cruz), all the country from the river of Papaloa- 
pan (Alvarado to Huaxteca an), was better in- 
habited and better cultivated than it now is. — 
IlQwever, the conquerors found as they ascended 
the table-land the villages closer together, the 
fields divided into smaller portions, and the peo- 
ple more polished. The Spaniards, who ima- 
gined they founded new cities when they gave 
European names to Aztec cities, followed the 
traces of the indigenous civilization. They had 
very powerful motives for inhabiting the table- 
land of Anahuac. They dreaded the heat and 
the diseases which prevail in the plains. The 
search after the precious metals, the cultivation 
of European grain and fruit, the analogy of the 
climate with that of the Castilles, and many other 
causes of a similar description, all concurred to 
fix them on the ridge of the cordillera. So long 
as the encomenderos , abusing the rights which 
they derived from the laws, treated the Indians 
as slaves, a great number of them were transported 
from the regions of the coast to the table land in 
the interior, either to work in the mines, or 
merely that they might be near the habitation of 
their masters. For two centuries the trade in 
indigo, sugar, and cotton, was next to nothing. 
The whites could by no means be induced to 
settle in the plains, where the true Indian 
climate prevails; and one would say that the 
Europeans came under the tropics merely to in- 
habit the temperate zone. 

Since the great increase in the consumption of 
sugar, and since the new continent has come to 
furnish many of the productions formerly pro- 
cured only in Asia and Africa, the plains (tierras 
calientes ) afford, no doubt, a greater inducement 
to colonization. Hence, sugar and cotton plan- 
tations have been multiplying in the province of 
Vera Cruz, especially since the fatal events at 
St. Domingo, which have given a great stimulus 
to industry in the Spanish colonies. However, 
the progress hitherto has not been very remark- 
able on the Mexican coast. It will require cen- 
turies to re-people these deserts. Spaces of 
many square leagues are now only occupied by 
two or three huts (hattos de ganado), around 
which stray herds of half wild cattle. A small 
number of powerful families who live on the cen-] 


VERA CRUZ. 


207 


[tral table-land possess the greatest part of the 
shores of the intendancies of Vera Cruz and San 
Luis Potosi. No agrarian law forces these rich 
proprietors to sell their mai/orazgos, if the^ per- 
sist in refusing to bring the immense territories 
which belong to them under cultivation. They 
harass their farmers, and turn them away at 
pleasure. 

To this evil, which is common to the coast of 
the Gulf of Mexico, with Andalucia and a great 
art of Spain, other causes of depopulation must 
e added. The militia of the intendancy of Vera 
Cruz is much too numerous for a country so 
thinly inhabited. This service oppresses the la- 
bourer. He flees from the coast to avoid being- 
compelled to enter into the corps of the lanceros 
and the milicianos. The levies for sailors to the 
royal navy are also too frequently repeated, and 
executed in too arbitrary a manner. Hitherto 
the government has neglected every means for 
increasing the population of this desert coast. — 
From this state of things results a great want of 
hands, and a scarcity of provisions, singular 
enough in a country of such great fertility. The 
wages of an ordinary workman at Vera Cruz are 
from five to six francs (4s. 2d. to 5s.) per day. 
A master mason, and every man who follows a 
particular trade, gains from 15 to 20 francs per 
day, that is to say, three times as much as on the 
central table-land. 

The intendancy of Vera Cruz contains within 
its limits two Colossal summits, of which the one, 
the Volcan d’Orizaba, is, after the Popocatepetl, 
the most elevated mountain of New Spain. The 
summit of this truncated cone is inclined to the 
s. e. by which means the crater is visible at a 
great distance, even from the city of Xalapa. — 
The other summit, the Coffre de Perote, accord- 
ing to Humboldt’s measurement, is nearly 400 
metres higher than the Pic of Teneriffe, which is 
1,312 feet. It serves for signal to the sailors 
who put in at Vera Cruz. Humboldt, consider- 
ing this circumstance to render the determina- 
tion of its astronomical position of great import- 
ance, observed circum-meridian altitudes of the 
sun on the Coffre itself. A thick bed of pumice- 
stone environs this porphyritical mountain. No- 
thing at the summit announces a crater ; but the 
currents of lava observable between the small 
villages of Las Vigas and Hoya appear to be the 
effects of a very old lateral explosion. The small 
Volcan de Tuxtla, joining the Sierra de San 
Martin, is situated four leagues from the coast, 
s.e. from the port of Vera Cruz, near the In- 
dian village of Santiago de Tuxtla. It is conse- 


quently out of the line forming the parallel of 
the burning volcanoes of Mexico. Its last erup- 
tion, which was very considerable, took place on 
March 2, 1793. The roofs of the houses at 
Oaxaca, Vera Cruz, and Perote, were then 
covered with volcanic ashes. At Perote, which 
is 57 leagues in a straight line distant from the 
volcano of Tuxtla, the subterraneous noises re- 
sembled heavy discharges of artillery. This dis- 
tance is greater than that from Naples to Rome; 
and yet Vesuvius is not even heard beyond 
Gaeta. 

In the n. part of the intendancy of Vera Cruz, 
a), from the mouth of the Rio Tecolutla, at two 
leagues distance from the great Indian village of 
Papantla, we meet with a pyramidal edifice of 
great antiquity. The pyramid of Papanta re- 
mained unknown to the first conquerors. It is 
situated in the midst of a thick forest, called 
Tajin in the Totonac language. The Indians 
concealed this monument, the object of an an- 
cient veneration, for centuries from the Spa- 
niards ; and it was only discovered accidentally 
by some hunters about 30 years ago. This pyra- 
mid of Papantla was visited by M. Dupe, a cap- 
tain in the service of the king of Spain, an ob- 
server of great modesty and learning, who has 
long employed himself in curious researches re- 
garding the idols and architecture of the Mexi- 
cans. He examined carefully the cut of the 
stones of which it is constructed; and he made a 
drawing of the hieroglyphics with which these 
enormous stones are covered. It is to be wished 
that he would publish the description of this in- 
teresting monument. The figure published in 
1788, in the Gazette of Mexico , is extremely im- 
perfect. 

The pyramid of Papantla is not constructed of 
bricks or clay mixed with white stones, and faced 
with a wall of amygdaloid, like the pyramids of 
Cholula and Teotihuacan: the only materials 
employed are immense stones of a porphyritical 
shape. Mortar is distinguishable in the seams. 
The edifice, however, is not so remarkable for its 
size as for its symmetry, the polish of the stones, 
and the great regularity of their cut. The base 
of the pyramid is an exact square, each side 
being 25 metres, or 82 feet, in length. t he per- 
pendicular height appears not to be more than 
from 16 to 20 metres, or from 52 to 65 feet. — 
This monument, like all the Mexican teocallis, is 
composed of several stages. Six are still distin- 
guishable, and a seventh appears to be concealed 
by the vegetation with which the sides of the 
pyramid are covered. A great stair of 57 steps] 


*208 


VERA CRUZ. 


[conducts to the truncated top of the teocalli, 
where the human victims were sacrificed. On 
each side of the great stair is a small stair. The 
facing of the stories is adorned with hierogly- 
phics, in which serpents and crocodiles carved in 
relievo are discernible. Each story contains a 
great number of square niches symmetrically dis- 
tributed. In the first story we reckon 24 on 
each side, in the second 20, and in the third 16. 
The number of these niches in the body of the 
pyramid is 366, and there are 12 in the stair 
towards the e. The Abbe Marquez supposes 
that this number of 378 niches has some allusion 
to a calendar of the Mexicans ; and he even be- 
lieves that in each of them one of the 20 figures 
was repeated, which in the hieroglyphical lan- 
guage of the Toulecs served as a symbol for 
marking the days of the common year, and the 
intercalated days at the end of the cycles. The 
year being composed of 18 months, of which each 
had 20 days, there would then be 360 days, to 
which, agreeably to the Egyptian practice, five 
complementary days were added, called nemon- 
temi. The intercalation took place every 52 
years, by adding 13 days to the cycle, which 
gives 360-1-5-1-13=378, simple signs, or com- 
posed of the days of the civil calendar, which 
was called compohualilhuitl, or tonalpohualli , to 
distinguish it from the comilhuitlapohuallfctli, or 
ritual calendar used by the priests for indicating 
the return of sacrifices. It would be too great a 
digression to attempt here to examine the hypo- 
thesis of the Abbe Marquez, which has a resem- 
blance to the astronomical explantions given by 
a celebrated historian of the number of apart- 
ments and steps found in the great Egyptian 
labyrinth. 

The intendancy of Vera Cruz has no metallic 
mines of any importance. The mines of Zome- 
lahuacan, near Jalacingo, are almost abandoned. 
— Its population amounted in 1803, to 156,000 
souls. The extent of surface in square leagues 
is computed at 4,141, thus giving 38 inhabitants 
to the square league. 

The most remarkable cities of this province 
are, — 

Vera Cruz, the capital, Cordoba, 

Xalapa, Orizaba, 

Perote, Tlacotlalpan.] 

Vera Cruz, a city and capital of the govern- 
ment of this name, in the kingdom of Nueva 
Espana; founded by Hernan Cortes, on the 
coast of the N. Sea ; with a port much frequented 
by vessels from Europe and different parts of 
\merica; and by which the whole trade of that 


kingdom is carried on. The city is small, but 
handsome, with streets intersecting each other in 
straight lines, e. and w. and n. and s. It has a 
magnificent parish church, and seven convents, 
one of the religious of St. Domingo, another of 
La Merced, another of S. Augustin, and a college 
which belonged to the Jesuits ; two hospitals, 
the one of San Juan de Dios, and the other of the 
order of La Caridad, with the title of S. Hipolito. 
It is well fortified, with a good wall, which has 
eight bulwarks, defending the port and the mole, 
which was begun to be built by the Viceroy, Don 
Antonio de Mendoza. The port is, however, 
nothing but a kind of road, formed by an island, 
in which vessels lie much exposed. Without the 
Avails of the city is a vice-parish, with the title of 
Santo Christo del Buen Viage, and another tem- 
ple dedicated to its patron and tutelar, St. Sebas- 
tian ; where also is founded the hospital of con- 
valescence of the religious Bethlemites. 

This city is of a hot and unhealthy tempera- 
ture ; but abounding in all sorts of vegetable pro- 
ductions, as well European as those of Nueva 
Espana ; the same being the main branches of its 
commerce. It was translated to the part in 
Avhich it stands, at a little distance from its former 
situation, by order of the Viceroy, the Count of 
Monterry, for the sake of a better port. Here 
are four companies of militia, consisting of the 
inhabitants, two of Mulattoes, and two of Free 
Negroes ; each company consists of 100 men, 
and on them devolves the duty of defending the 
principal place in the town. Besides these, 
there are three companies of dragoons, of regular 
troops, and in the neighbouring ranchos , or small 
farms, 800 other men are enlisted, who are armed 
with lances, and appear Avhenever the firing of a 
cannon gives them notice that they are wanted. 
The city is Avell defended, and furnished with plenty 
of good artillery. On the land side is a gate, 
called Puerta Nueva, and which is only opened 
Avhen the viceroys make their entry ; there is also 
another gate, called the Mexican, as by this the 
traffic and commerce is carried on ; and towards 
the sea is the gate of the Quay (Muella), and 
three others with the names of La Caleta, La 
Atarazana, and Del Pescado. 

On the island which forms the port is the castle 
of S. Juan de Ulua, large and well furnished 
with 120 cannons and 3 mortars ; as also a hand- 
some and modern built battery, by the which are 
defended the two channels, the one to the n. the 
other to the s. e. The pirate Lorenzillo took and 
sacked this city in 1682 : 176 miles from Mexico, 
to the e. in long. 96° S' 35 " w. lat. 19° IP 33" n. 


VERA 


CRUZ. 


209 


The settlements of its district are, 

Medellin, Tacotalpa, 

Alvarado, Talixcoyan, 

Cotaxtla. 

[INDEX TO THE ADDITIONAL INFORMATION 
RESPECTING THE ClTY OF VeRA CrUZ. 

1. History and General Statistics. — 2. Commerce. 

— 3. Revolution. 

1. History and General Statistics. — The city of 
Vera Cruz, the residence of the intendant, is pro- 
perly designated by Humboldt as the centre of 
European andW. Indian commerce. The city is 
beautifully and regularly built, and inhabited by 
well-in formed merchants, active and zealous for 
the good of their country. The interior police 
has been much improved during these few years. 
The district in which Vera Cruz is situated was 
formerly called Chalcbiuhcuecan. The island on 
which the fortress of San Juan de Ulua was con- 
structed at an enormous expense (according to 
vulgar tradition at an expense of 200,000,000 
francs, or £.8,534,000 sterling,) was visited by 
Juan de Grixalva in 1518. He gave it the name 
of Ulua, because having found the remains of two 
unfortunate victims who had been sacrificed there 
(according to a custom prevalent on several of 
the small islands aromjd the port of Vera Cruz, 
and especially on that, the dread of navigators, 
still bearing the name of Isla de Sacrificios,) and 
having asked the natives why they sacrificed men, 
they answered that it was by orders o: the kings 
of Acolhua or Mexico. The Spaniards, who 
had Indians of Yucatan for interpreters, mis- 
took the answer, and believed Ulua to be the 
name of the island. It is to similar mistakes that 
Peru, the coast of Paria, and several other pro- 
vinces, owe their present names. The city of 
Vera Cruz is frequently called Vera Cruz Nueva, 
to distinguish it from Vera Cruz Vieja, situated 
near the mouth of the Rio Antigua, considered 
by all the historians as the first colony founded 
by Cortez. The falsity of this opinion has been 
proved by the Abbe Clavigero. The city was 
began in 1519, and, called Villarica, or La Villa 
Rica de la Vera Cruz, was situate at three leagues 
distance from Cempoalla, the head town of the 
Totonacs, near the small port of Chiahuitzla, 
which we can with difficulty recognize in Ro- 
bertson’s work under the name of Quiabislan. 
Three years afterwards la Villa Rica was de- 
serted, and the Spaniards founded another city 
to the south, which has preserved the name of 
la Antigua. It is believed in the country that 

VOL. v. 


this second colony was again abandoned on 
account of the vomito , which at that period cut off 
more than two-thirds of the Europeans, who 
landed in the hot season. The viceroy, Count de 
Monterey, who governed Mexico at the end of the 
sixteenth century, ordered the foundations of the 
Nueva Vera Cruz, or present city, to be laid 
opposite the island of San Juan d’Ulua in the 
district of Calchiuhcuecan, in the very place 
where Cortez first landed, on April 21, 1519. 
This third city of Vera Cruz received its privi- 
leges of city only under Philip III. in 1615. It 
is situate in an arid plain, destitute of running 
water, on which the north winds, which blow with 
impetuosity from October till April, have formed 
hills of moving sand. These dow ns (meganos de 
arena ) change their form and situation every year. 
They are from 8 to 12 metres, or from 26 to 38 
feet, in height, and contribute very much by the 
reverberation of the sun’s rays, and the high 
temperature which they acquire during the sum- 
mer months, to increase the suffocating heat of 
the air of Vera Cruz. Between the city and the 
Aroyo Gavilan, in the midst of the downs, are 
marshy grounds covered with mangles and other 
brushwood. The stagnant water of the Baxio or 
shoal de la Tembladera, and the small lakes of 
l’Hormiga, el Rancho de la Hortaliza, and Arjo- 
na, occasion intermittent fevers among the natives. 
It is not improbable that it is also not one of the 
least important among the fatal causes of the 
black sickness ( vomito prieto ) . 

All the edifices of Vera Cruz are constructed 
of materials drawn from the bottom of the ocean, 
the stony habitations of the madrepores (piedras 
de mucara ) ; for no rock is to be found in the en- 
virons of the city. The secondary formations, 
which repose on the porphyry of i’Encero, and 
which appear only near Acazonica, a farm of the 
Jesuits, celebrated for its quarries of beautifully 
foliated gypsum, are covered with sand. Water 
is found on digging the sandy soil of Vera Cruz 
at the depth of a metre, or 9.8 feet ; but this 
water proceeds from the filtration of the marshes 
formed in the downs. It is rain water, which has 
been in contact with the roots of vegetables ; and 
is of a very bad quality, and only used for wash- 
ing. The lower people, (and the fact is impor- 
tant for the medical topography of Vera Cruz) 
are obliged to have recourse to the water of a 
ditch (zanja) which comes from the meganos , and 
is somewhat better than the well water, or that 
of the brook of Tenoya. People in easy circum- 
stances, however, drink rain water collected in 
cisterns, of which the construction is extremely] 

E E 


210 


VERA CRUZ. 


[improper, with the exception of the beautiful 
cisterns (algibes) of the castle of San Juan 
d’Ulua, of which the very pure and wholesome 
water is only distributed to those in the military. 
This want of good potable water has been for 
centuries looked upon as one of the numerous 
causes of the diseases of the inhabitants. In 1704 
a project was formed for conducting part of the 
fine river Xamapa to the port of Vera Cruz. 
King Philip V. sent a French engineer to examine 
the ground. The engineer, discontented, no 
doubt, with his stay in a country so hot and dis- 
agreeable to live in, declared the execution of 
the project impossible. In 1756 the debates 
were renewed among the engineers, the munici- 
pality, the governor, the viceroy’s assessor and 
the fiscal. Hitherto there has been spent in visits 
of persons of skill and judicial expenses (for every 
thing becomes a law-suit in the Spanish colonies !) 
the sum of 2,250,000 francs, or £ 93,757 sterling. 
Before surveying the ground, a dike or embank- 
ment has been formed 1100 metres (3608 feet) 
above the village of Xamapa, at an expense of 

1.500.000 francs, or £.62,505 sterling, which is 
now nearly half destroyed. The government has 
levied for these 12 years on the inhabitants a 
duty on flour, which brings in annually more than 

150.000 francs, or £.6 250 sterling. A stone 
aqueduct ( atarxea ) capable of furnishing a sec- 
tion of water of 116 square centimetres, or 1798 
square inches, is already constructed for a length 
of more than 900 metres, (2952 feet), and yet, 
notwithstanding all these expenses, and the farago 
of memoirs and informes heaped up in the 
archives, the waters of the Rio Xamapa are still 
more than 23,000 metres (75,459 feet) distant 
from the town of Vera Cruz. In 1795 they ended 
with what they ought to have began. A sur- 
vey was made of the ground, and it was found 
that the mean body of the Xamapa was 8m. 33, 
(27.32 feet) (10 Mexican varas, and 22i inches) 
above the level of the streets of Vera Cruz. It 
was found that the great dike ought to have been 
placed at Medellin, and that through ignorance 
it was constructed not only in a point of too great 
elevation, but also 7500 metres (or 24,605 feet) 
farther from the port than the necessary fall for 
conveying the water demanded. In the present 
state of things, the construction of the aqueduct 
from the Rio Xamapa to Vera Cruz is esti- 
mated at 5 or 6,000,000 francs, (or £.208,350 to 
£•250,020.) In a country abounding with im- 
mense metallic wealth it is not the greatness of 
the sum which frightens the government. The 
project is put off because it has been lately calcu- 


lated that 10 public cisterns, placed without the 
precincts of the city, would not altogether cost 
more than 700,000 francs, (£.29,169 sterling,) 
and would be sufficient fora population of 16,000 
souls, if each cistern of water contained a volume 
of water of 670 cubic metres, or 23,661 cubic 
feet. “ Why ?” it is said in the report to the 
viceroy, “ why go so far to seek what nature 
affords at hand ? Why not profit by the regular 
and abundant rains, which, according to the 
accurate experiments ofColonel Costanzo, furnish 
three times more water than what falls in France 
and Germany?” The habitual population of 
Vera Cruz, without including the militia and sea- 
faring people, is 16,000. 

2. Commerce . — The goods that were exported 
principally from Holland, England, France, with 
some fineries from Italy, have usually paid enor- 
mous duties in Spain, and when they arrived at their 
destination at Vera Cruz, fresh ones were exacted, 
so that the articles doubled in value before they 
came to the retailer. Again, the exports from 
thence being small, cash was the principal means 
of procuring them, so that the advantage was 
double against Spain, and in favour of the foreign 
merchant. The following pro forma will serve 
to shew at what price the consumer laid in his 
necessaries, and will at the same time form a con- 
trast of trade direct from England. 

Pro Forma. 

Calculated in English Money. 

For £.100 value of British manufactures, pur- 
chased in Great Britain, and sent out to Cadiz 
in British ships ; and again exported to Spanish 
America in Spanish ships. 


First cost in Great Britain ----- 100 

Shipping, charges, freight, and insurance to 
Cadiz - -- -- -- -- -- 5 

War duty on the exportation 1 

Duty paid on importation into Cadiz - - 15 

Importer’s profit in Cadiz ----- 20 

Duty paid in Cadiz on re-shipment to Ame- 
rica ----------- - 10 

Freight and insurance from Cadiz to Ame- 
rica ------------20 


First cost and charges out to America - - 171 

Spanish exporter’s profit on arrival out in 
America 

Frequently 200 per cent. ; but say one half 
thereof -----------171 


Paid by the purchaser in Spanish America 342] 


VERA CRUZ. 


211 


Pro forma. 

Calculated in English Money. 

For £.100 value of British manufactures, sent 
out immediately from Great Britain by British 
merchants, in British ships, to Spanish America. 

£■ 

First cost - -- -- -- -- -- 100 

War duty paid on the exportation - - - 4 

Shipping charges and freight out - - - 10 

Insurance out, if by an armed ship - - - 6 

First cost and charges out to America - - 120 

British exporter’s profit at 100 per cent, 
thereon - -- -- -- -- -- 120 

Paid by the purchaser in Spanish America 240 
Cheaper to the purchaser in Spanish America 102 


342 


The exorbitant price of goods, which the wearer 
or consumer could not brook, created a spirit of 
contraband, which again turned out in favour of 
the foreigner, who principally sold for cash, and 
the neighbouring English and neutral islands 
reaped the benefit. 

The difficulty with which Toyal grants in the 
early times necessary to form a shipment to 
Spanish America were obtained, and these speci- 
fying it to be from the port of Seville, to which 
also the returns were to be made, operated long 
as a stumbling-block to all exertions and enter- 
prises in commercial relations from the mother 
country to her colonies, and gave the neighbour- 
ing Dutch the advantages of the trade ; an alien- 
ation which the great vigilance of their multiplied 
custom-house officers could not counteract. By 
this irregular channel the advantages were en- 
tirely lost to government. 

In 1728, a company of Biscayan merchants 
proposed to the king a plan of hindering, at their 
own expense, the contraband trade that was 
carried on with the Dutch, more particularly in 
the province of Venezuela, and those confining, 
if in return they should be allowed the exclusive 
right of supplying the same with goods and other 
necessaries, and of thence exporting the produc- 
tions. The proposition was acceded to, and the 
company instituted. By their charter, they are 
called the Company of Guipuscoa, from the name 
of that province in the n. of Spain, where the 
plan originated, and the members chiefly resided. 

They were allowed the ports of Biscay to make 


shipments out ; were provided with cruisers and 
regular letters of marque, but their returns were 
confined to Cadiz, where agents were placed. 
By their stipulations, contraband goods, captured 
by them, could be sold in Caracas ; and cocoa 
taken in the same way, they were privileged to 
send to Vera Cruz, where this article from its great 
consumption, has frequently, during war time, 
been in as great demand and at as high prices as 
in Spain. 

Their rights and privileges were extensive, 
and it was specified to be no degradation for the 
nobility to have shares in it. The obligation to 
supply the country, and to suppress illicit trade, 
was the only counterbalance. It answered, how- 
ever, but one purpose, which was, to hinder 
cocoa (being a bulky article) from going to a 
foreign market, but Spain being previously sup- 
plied with this article of her own growth, the 
price soon became lowered to one half. The com- 
pany’s charter was afterwards modified, so as not 
to put the colonist so much in their power, and in 
1778, was entirely taken away by opening the 
trade to all nations, and by increasing the num- 
ber of ports of entry. 

Direct commerce, however, lingered from the 
many shackles under which it was kept, and from 
the rivalship of neutrals; for the mother country 
sent out (what she could barely afford) little 
more than dried fruits, coarse earthenware, and 
hardware, iron, Catalan brandies and wines, oil, 
coarse silks from Barcelona, pickled tunny fish (a 
great Spanish luxury) and such like inconsider- 
able articles. German and English goods still 
continued to come through their old devious 
channels. 

This confined direct trade varied much, accord- 
ing to the vicissitudes of war or peace. During 
the late wars, it was principally limited to small 
vessels called faluccas, that went out with Spanish 
paper, used in enveloping tobacco for smoking, 
which may be considered as one of the greatest 
luxuries of the Spanish American, who often 
bought it at 40 dollars per ream ; and it would 
be worth while, should Spain cease to supply this 
article, principally made in Barcelona, to adopt 
its manufacture in England, as it exclusively suits 
the smoker, from its containing no pernicious 
empyreumatic oil, nor any sizing or indigo. To 
this article they added uncoloured brandies, and 
quicksilver, for the use of the mines. If they got 
out safe, they returned with cocoa in bulk, which 
they laid in at 13 dollars, and sold on arriving at 
112. These were, however, small adventures] 
f. e 2 


*212 


VERA CRUZ. 


[that bore not the character of trade, but that of a 
lottery, like which also, they were undertaken in 
shares, and insurance excluded. 

The ports of entry, on their augmentation, 
were divided into two classes, viz. mayores and 
minores. Ships from Spain could only arrive in 
the former, where they paid the whole royal and 
municipal duties, as established by the tarifs of 
customs, and in these ports shipments to the se- 
cond class originated, where they only paid the 
municipal duties. 

The system of Spanish custom is complicated, 
not generally understood by the English mer- 
chant, and may deserve some detail. Shipments 
direct from Spain, of national goods, pay equal 
to 9| per cent, on entry, and when of foreign 
manufactures, on landing in Spain, 15 per cent, 
and on being re-shipped 10; on arriving out, 
they again pay the royal duty of 7 per cent, be- 
sides municipal and other duties, which altogether 
amount to about 45 per cent, the total of which 
must be paid before the merchant can vend his 
articles, for lie is not allowed to bond them ; so 
that the price at which the consumer is to pur- 
chase may be easily calculated, when freight, 
charges, and profits are added. 

Articles of export, for the consumption of 
their own manufactures at home, such as cochi- 
neal, indigo, cotton, and dye-woods, are subject 
to moderate duties; but when destined to a foreign 
market, bear heavy imposts, a regulation intended 
to encourage their own manufactures, from which 
great benefit cannot have been derived, since 
one of their best statists has remarked, that 
8,000,000 of the inhabitants are clothed in foreign 
goods. 

The Llama, Vicuna, and sheep’s wools, are 
duty-free when shipped to Spain, but bear heavy 
export duties when sent to a foreign nation. The 
first, being most inferior, pays 8 per cent, ad va- 
lorem : the second double, besides an addition of 
two dollars per lOOibs. : and the latter 33~, ac- 
cording to the royal regulations of 1800. 

The sheep’s wool of Spanish America, that has 
been neglected in a strange way for want of en- 
couragement, might become one of their most 
valuable exports ; for the plains and grazing 
pastures of the kingdom of Mexico particularly, 
may, in point of flocks, be compared with those 
for which Spain w as so lately famous. This wool 
has scarcely been considered as an object of com- 
mercial utility, and the sheep generally goes 
unheeded and unshorn. They manufacture, in- 
deed, a few coarse blankets, called mantas and 


fresadas, but there are no depots to collect, pre- 
pare, and pack it in its raw state to any quantity. 
Even deer skins, that might be collected, are in a 
great measure unnoticed, besides a variety of 
other resources which want only encouragement 
to make them staple articles ; and in the eye of 
the economist, the productions of these regions 
seem for the most part best suited to the wants of 
a manufacturing country, and peculiarly to invite 
its trade. 

The difficulty of access to those statements that 
are only in the hands of government and their 
officers, renders it impossible to give any exact 
and general scale of the annual amount of trade 
from Spain to Spanish America, and even were 
that difficulty overcome, the interruptions, and 
the prevalence of smuggling during the late war, 
would defeat any attempt to form a correct state- 
ment. Nor are we, in this particular, assisted 
by Laborde's View of Spain , as his tables of 
revenue relating to America, do not extend be- 
yond 1788 ; though he tells us, that in 1792, the 
aggregate export trade to that country, amounted 
to ^0.2,812,500, which must clash materially with 
the subsequent statement relating to the fair of 
Xalapa. 

With regard to the port of Laguira alone, and 
this will serve to assist in estimating the trade of 
the rest, it is stated, on the authority of Mr. 
Walton, that the value of goods that passed 
through the custom-house in the year 1796, (the 
most neutral period which Spain has enjoyed for 
some years,) was as follows : 

Hard Hollars. 

Of Spanish or free articles - - - 932,881 

Offoreign goods re-manufactured and 

prepared in Spain, such as calicoes 

of foreign fabric, printed there only 753,442 
Of entirely foreign goods - - - - 1,429,487 


3,115,810 


equal to ^0.701,057 sterling, which left to the 
government, in duties, about 300,000 dollars. 

As we have before observed, it is not possible 
to form any calculation of the annual contraband 
trade carried on, on these same coasts ; but it 
may safely be said to amount to triple that of the 
regular importations. Hence, it is evident, that 
the proportion offoreign goods, regular and con- 
traband, introduced into the Spanish colonies 
greatly exceeds that of the national articles of 
trade. The Spaniards have always given a pre- 
ference to German and Silesian piece-goods,] 


VERA 


CRUZ. 


213 


[from their being oflinen, but now, they get habi- 
tuated to wear cotton, which bids fair to supply 
the present privation of the former articles, by 
the substitution of English goods. Ticklenbcrgs 
and checks form the clothing of slaves, and com- 
mon people ; and Britamias , estopillas , creas a la 
Morlaix , platillas, and such like, that of the better 
sort. The imitations of these goods, in quality, 
shape, marks, and packing, now adopted in the 
Scotch and English manufactures, answer very 
well ; they do not altogether deceive the Spa- 
niards, who are excellent judges of goods, but 
serve the purposes, whilst the real ones are not 
attainable, and till they are capable of being 
brought to a more perfect resemblance, which 
would give them a great additional value. 

There exists, in addition to the above, a trifling- 
trade, principally of dried and jerked meats, 
country cheese, garlic, pottery, &amp;c. carried on 
between the main and the neighbouring Spanish 
islands. 

The main affords annually, about 12,000 mules 
to the different islands, that are valued at 25 
dollars per head. Few horned cattle are now 
shipped, but hides form a large proportion of 
nearly every cargo, and in the province of Cara- 
cas, and those confining, may be reckoned at 
100,000 per annum ; but La Plata could furnish 
more, better, and at a cheaper rate. 

The planting of coffee is now becoming more 
in vogue, perhaps its small consumption in Spain, 
has hitherto kept it back. Cotton might be car- 
ried to an amazing advancement, if encourage- 
ment and machinery for cleaning it were intro- 
duced, and a local inspection established, to give 
greater care and reliance on its preparation and 
packing. 

The estimates of produce, shipped in the year 
1801, in vessels furnished with English passes 
from Puerto Cavello, which had generally 100 
small ones employed in that way, are as follows ; 
but the amount of cash sent to procure goods, 
and the articles shipped clandestinely on the coast, 
are equal to a great deal more. 


Indigo ------ 100.000 lbs. 

Cotton ------ 250,000 do. 

Cocoa ------ 40,000 fanegas. 

Hides ------ 70,000 do. 

Coffee ------ 20,000 lbs. 

Copper ------ 28,000 do. 

Horses ------ 500 do. 

Mules ------ 5,000 do. 


With some gums, drugs, dye-woods, &amp;c. The 
exports of sugar is asserted by Humboldt to 


amount annually to more than 500,000 arrobas ; 
whilst all the vaynilla consumed in Europe comes 
from hence and Oaxaca. He reckons the value 
of the latter at upwards of I&gt;.75,000 per annum. 
(See EspAxVNA Nueva, index to the additional 
matter respecting. 

The policy of the British nation, in affording 
passes to Spanish vessels, which gave them per- 
fect security on those seas, had, in addition to the 
good effect of turning their trade to their own 
advantage, the double one, of increasing an in- 
tercourse which has given rise to a reciprocity of 
commercial relations, and of convincing the Spa- 
niards, that the English were sensible, that the 
war then waging, w as more the effect of political 
necessity than of inclination. 

The surplus of produce, particularly the bulky 
part, even cocoa, that is under the most express 
restrictions and prohibitions, for the last years of 
war, has circulated through the United States, 
and from thence found its way to Europe ; and 
the high prices at which this article has been 
kept in Spain, have fully paid the increase of 
charges, which must naturally originate from 
such a circuitous route ; for, as we have before 
remarked, the running vessels have been incon- 
siderable. 

The following were the means by which the 
clandestine intercourse with British islands, under 
passes granted by the governors, was carried on. 
The Spanish vessels cleared out for Guadeloupe, 
Martinique, and St. Domingo, then in possession 
of their allies, and when they returned, produced 
false clearances and fabricated papers by way of 
form ; and the ease with which these were ob- 
tained in the islands, would appear astonishing to 
one who is not acquainted with colonial dealings. 
A passport to any part, or ships’ papers of any 
nation, may be obtained for a trifle, in Cura- 
coa particularly, which have deceived, and would 
deceive, the most scrutinizing cruiser at sea. 
Thus the clearances in the Spanish custom-houses 
are made nearly all for islands, to which there 
never existed a trade of the smallest nature ; 
and so interesting was this species of commerce to 
the country, in giving vent to their produce and 
obtaining in return cloaths, that notwithstanding 
the severe decrees against it, which owed their 
origin to the jealousy and influence of the French, 
it was never interfered with ; nay, the officers 
charged with the execution of them, shared often 
in its profits. 

The fast sailing schooners thus employed, were 
generally pilot boats built in Virginia, and sent] 


214 


VERA CRUZ. 


[out for sale ; but very superior boats are con- 
structed in many ports on the main, particularly 
Maracaibo, which from the excellency of their 
timber, last three times as long as any other. 

The indigo of the provinces of Caracas, Vene- 
zuela, &amp;c. is only eight per cent, in value below 
that of Guatemala ; but the least encouragement 
would soon double the amount produced on the 
whole main. The tobacco, being hitherto in the 
monopoly of the crown, whose prices are not so 
encouraging as if there was a competition in 
trade, is not carried for that reason to any great 
extent of cultivation ; good authorities, however, 
quote the value of what is grown on the main, 
annually, at the government prices, to extend to 
3,000,000 of dollars ; and the Dutch, who have 
always been considered as the best judges of this 
article, give it a double estimation to that grown 
in North America, and place it next to that of 
Cuba. 

The trade to Asia by the South Sea from 
Acapulco was estimated at 10,000,000 of dollars, 
which were sent to purchase muslins, printed 
goods, silks, spices, and perfumes ; and through 
this channel the kingdom of Mexico and other 
provinces were supplied. Since the late years of 
war, however, necessity has driven them to use 
European goods for ornamental apparel ; these 
have circulated by the way of Vera Cruz, whither 
they have been sent from the United States and 
English islands ; nor would it be difficult to re- 
tain this consumption in the same channel, or 
rather give it a direct one in case of commercial 
regulations being established, if our manufac- 
turers would attend to the outre taste of the 
Spaniards in that country, and our shippers of 
goods be more discriminate in their assortments. 
The supplying of this quarter might also be made 
an interesting branch to the trade of the East India 
Company. 

Among the great undertakings that yet remain 
to be accomplished for the benefit of mankind, as 
the great medium of the circulation of wealth, is, 
the opening a navigation with the South Sea by 
means of a canal across the isthmus of Panama. 
When we consider the obstacles that have been 
overcome in uniting the trade of two small towns 
in England, and how much nature has been 
brought to a level by the industry of man, the 
magnitude of this effort appears to diminish, and 
its successful execution may be expected to form 
a memorable epoch in the annals of future times. 
It is to be hoped, that the locality of the country 
will be now explored for the purpose. An 


isthmus of only 30 miles between two oceans 
cannot be an insuperable barrier to the inventive 
genius and perseverance of man in the present 
age ; the ground is generally thought by late 
travellers to be more suitable for an enterprise of 
this kind, than the academicians sent over for its 
survey have reported. Panama, in the Indian 
language, signifies a place abounding in fish ; and 
the navigable rivers, inlets, and bays, which 
were formerly examined by Albedo, and commu- 
nicated in this Dictionary, would much facilitate 
this great and laudable work. 

Commercial disputes in Spanish America are 
not subject to the common process of the law, 
but are carried before a board of commerce, 
called el consalado, whose summary is short, defi- 
nitive, and promptly enforced. In vending a 
cargo, if the purchaser is debited to sales per such 
a vessel, and not in the name of the- merchant 
who vends, the debt is easier collected, as a delay 
beyond the time agreed upon, makes him liable 
for any detention in the returns of the vessel, 
which is a considerable check where the regularity 
of bonds is not adopted. The rules by which 
commercial transactions are guided are las orde- 
nanzas de Bilbao , as complete a digest of mercan- 
tile law and usage as any nation would wish to 
have, as it comprehends a remedy for every dis- 
tress which misfortune or fraud may bring on the 
trader. It was di’awn up by the most learned 
and experienced body of merchants the nation 
ever had. Those of Biscay had the greatest 
share in its formation, from whom it takes its 
name, and have always been the most famed ; in 
this work they particularly had in view the coun- 
teraction of abuses, likely to originate in the ex- 
tention of that good faith, which forms the basis 
of all trade on a large scale. 

As it is only by shewing what has been the 
trade of those individual ports of which we have 
authentic information, that it becomes possible 
for us to judge of the value and extent of trade 
with Spanish America, and the mode in which it 
is carried on, we insert the following statements ; 
and in addition to them a short detail of the fair 
of Xalapa, that has for many years been the stan- 
dard of trade in that country, and may be of ge- 
neral use to the trader in England, as the state of 
war alone has suspended it. 

The following are particulars of the amount 
and value of goods furnished by each European 
nation to Spain (in time of peace) for re-exporta- 
tion to her settlements and colonies in Mexico, 
the greatest part of which are shipped at, and] 


VERA CRUZ. 


215 


sent from, the port of Cadiz to the port of Vera 
Jruz, distant 201 miles from the city of Mexico. 


Millions of Spanish hard Dollars. Pounds English Money. 

15 The manufactures and products 
§ of France ------- 3,375,000 

| 8 - - do. - - of England 1,800,000 

4 - - do. - - of Spain 900,000 

| 3 - - do. - - of Italy 675,000 

^ 3 - - do. - - of Germany 675,000 

g 3 - - do. - - of Flanders 675,000 

&gt; 2 - - do. - - of Holland 450,000 

2 - - do. - - of Swisserland 450,000 


40 Millions of Spanish hard dollars 

at 4s. 6d. English each, make 9,000,000 


France supplied Spain with the following kinds 
of goods for Mexico, as likewise for her other 
settlements and colonies in America. 

Jewellery of all descriptions, made in Paris of 
the most superb and shewy kinds. Gold watches, 
and ornaments for them, as chains, seals, keys, 
rings, &amp;c. which they sell at very low prices, but 
in quality they are very inferior to those of Eng- 
land ; nevertheless they were preferred both in 
Old Spain and in Spanish America, because they 
are shewy as well as very cheap. Gold and 
silver plate for the churches, and for private 
families. Gold and silver laces, for which the 
demand is immense. French white and black 
laces for the ladies, and likewise for church orna- 
ments. Silk goods of all descriptions, silk vel- 
vets, &amp;c. manufactured at Lyons, &amp;c. are in ex- 
traordinary demand for the churches as well as 
for the dresses both of ladies and gentlemen. 
Millinery goods made in Paris. Superfine French 
woollen cloths, formerly excelling in blacks, blues, 
as well as in high colours, such as scarlets, roses, 
crimsons, &amp;c. Hats, both white and black, manu- 
factured in Paris ; they are particularly calculated 
both for Old Spain and Spanish America. In 
this article of hats, the French excel, and make 
them light. White linens, called in Spain, Bre- 
tanas legitimas, the consumption of them is con- 
siderable, both in Old Spain and in Spanish 
America. Cambricks are consumed in great 
quantities, by the church, by ladies, and by gen- 
tlemen. All the beforementioned French goods 
and manufactures were in vast demand, in all the 
Spanish American settlements, and wonderful 
quantities of them, were constantly sent out, (in 
time of peace) which gave to France a decided 
superiority over England, in the value of goods 
sold and supplied to Spain, by these two great 


rival nations. This estimate, however, is more 
conformable to the old system of things than the 
present one, but will evince the precedents the 
French have for their estimation of this trade, 
which the energy of the English merchant may 
yet more fully rival. 

The goods intended for the fair ofXalapa, the 
greatest in Spanish America, are sent up from 
Vera Cruz on the backs of mules, asses, &amp;c. 

It continues open for the sale of goods exactly 
six months. It is opened and proclaimed with 
grand public processions and other solemnities, at 
which immense numbers of people assist, attended 
by all the clergy, religious orders, &amp;c. with bands 
of music, guards of soldiers, &amp;c. On this occa- 
sion the factors and others who have goods for 
sale, are very liberal in their donations to the 
churches, in hopes thereby to insure good luck, 
quick sales, and large profits. These processions 
are repeated on the day after the fair has been 
closed, and the factors attend the churches in 
order to return thanks to the Almighty for their 
respective successes, when they present sucli fur- 
ther gifts to the churches as are most agreeable 
to themselves. 

By the laws of the Spanish Indies, not any 
sales, even of the most trifling articles, are per- 
mitted to be made until the fair has been pro- 
claimed, and the processions are completed ; nor 
can any more or further sales be made after a 
proclamation of the close of the fair has been 
made, by the second display of the public pro- 
cessions and other ceremonies as before exhibited ; 
which being completed, all goods and other arti- 
cles whatever, which may then remain in the fac- 
tor’s hands unsold and undisposed of, are imme- 
diately locked up in the king’s warehouses, under 
the management and care of the king’s officers, 
who are appointed for that ^express purpose; 
where they must remain untouched until the 
next or succeeding fair has been proclaimed and 
opened, when they are again delivered up safe, 
and in good condition to their respective owners, 
to be again offered for sale. If the commodities 
prove to be such as please, attract, and suit the 
purchasers, the profits made thereby are fre- 
quently prodigious ; frequently three to six hun- 
dred per cent. If they do not please the buyers, 
it becomes extremely difficult to dispose of them 
at any price. In the last month that this fair is 
kept open, the factors become very anxious and 
pressing to make sales on the best terms they can 
procure ; of which disposition the purchasers na- 
turally take every benefit and advantage. 

The sales at this fair are in general made for] 


216 


V E R A 

[immediate payments, which consist of coined dol- 
lars, gold and silver in ingots, bars, wedges, &amp;c. 
and products of the country, such as indigo, 
cochineal, Jesuits’ bark, &amp;c. 

It very rarely happens that any credits are 
given with the goods sold at this fair, on account 
of the very great risks which the sellers would 
run in trusting strangers who purchase, many of 
them residing from 500 to 2000 miles from Xa- 
lapa. 

This great fair, like those of Frankfort, Leipsic, 
Brunswick, and Nuremberg, has been suspended 
in consequence of the war, but is expected to be 
revived. 

The indigo brought from Guatemala to this 
fair consists of four different qualities, all of them 
excellent, but the finest is superior to any other 
brought to Europe. 

Cochineal of Mexico, without which neither 
purple nor scarlet colours can be produced, is 
found genuine in no part of the world whatever 
but in that viceroyality. 

Quinquina, or Jesuits’ bark, also brought to 
this fair, is a drug of the most salutary and resto- 
rative virtue that Providence, in compassion for 
human infirmity, has made known to, man, is 
found only in Peru, to which it affords a most 
lucrative branch of commerce, and is of the 
highest value in a climate where the corporeal 
system is so much debilitated. 

As all these goods, from a want of inland navi- 
gation, are carried, for the supply of the fairs and 
the greatest consumption of the country, on 
mules and the heads of Indians, the packages 
ought to be assorted and made up in the lightest 
way possible, and not to exceed lOOlbs. The 
Indian carries and travels quickly with that 
weight on his head, and its doubled proportion 
serves to load a mule, as a package on each side 
is put in a kind of arganas , or pannier, and makes 
a perfect equipoise. Small bales are therefore 
preferable to cases, but cards ought to accompany 
each. The wrapper for fine goods, as those from 
the East Indies, ought to have oiled or waxed 
linings to keep out the damp. 

There is an excellent highway from Vera Cruz 
to Mexico, over the mountains, and the road is 
lined with taverns and lodging-houses supported 
by the king, and for the convenience of travellers, 
whose conveyance is rendered easy by the quan- 
tity of Indians who gain a livelihood in carrying 
a kind of sedan chairs, in officiating as muleteers, 
and in bearing loads on their shoulders, with 
which they travel with safety and dispatch. There 
are guard-houses at appropriate distances, and 


CRUZ. 

travelling is generally safe, though not so at pre- 
sent, owing to the disturbed state of the country. 

A muleteer often receives 100 boxes of dollars 
with a guia, or certificate, which he carries to 
Vera Cruz without escort, a distance of better 
than 200 miles. Of late years also, a large 
causeway has been opened, to convey the indigo 
from Guatemala to Vera Cruz. 

3. Revolution . — The source and origin of the 
evils that have come upon this country have 
been similar to those of all the other Spanish 
colonies. A long history might, without doubt, 
be written on a revolutionary war that has 
existed with undiminished and mutual ferocity 
and vigilance since 1808, but we shall confine 
ourselves to a brief outline of its progress. In 
that year we find, by the periodical woi’k called 
the Espanol, vol. iii. p. 19, that the Spaniards 
became divided into two parties, upon the arrest 
and deposa! of the viceroy Ariguay. The party 
who had arrested him were favoured by the 
central Junta, and in a short time an extensive 
conspiracy was formed, which exploded upon a 
certain violent exhibition of authority at Quere- 
taro u more than half the kingdom were imme- 
diately in arms. The insurrection began at 
Dolores, on the 15th of September, 1810, in the 
province of Guanaxuato, in the centre of the 
mining country, and spread with incredible velo- 
city in every direction. The ringleaders were 
chiefly priests ; but many lawyers and military offi- 
cers joined with them ; and, what was most alarm- 
ing of all, some regiments of militia. Their 
forces rapidly increased to armies of SO or 
40,000 men, and more; and, so popular was their 
cause, that, after the severest defeats, they re- 
assembled, in a short time, with undiminished 
numbers. At this critical moment the viceroy 
Venegas arrived from Spain; and to the activity, 
firmness, and energy, which he displayed on this 
occasion, his country is indebted for the preser- 
vation of Mexico. 

The insurgents having taken by assault the 
populous town of Guanaxuato, on the 29th of 
September, in which they found immense booty, 
advanced to Valladolid, where, on the 20th of 
October, they were received with demonstrations 
of joy ; and, gathering strength as they pro- 
ceeded, they passed through Toluca, and entered 
the plain of Mexico on the 1st of November, with 
an army of more than 40,000 men. Hidalgo, 
Allende, and their other chiefs, had great expec- 
tations from the spirit of disaffection in the capi- 
tal ; but the prudence of Venegas disconcerted 
all their schemes. Their friends within the city] 


VERA 

[were deterred from showing themselves by the 
disposition which he made of his forces ; and 
many were detached from their cause, by the 
sentence of excommunication, which the arch- 
bishop, at his instigation, fulminated against 
them. After waiting some hours, without dar- 
ing to attack the troops, who remained in their 
entrenchments, they retired without attempting 
any thing; showing upon this, as upon other 
occasions, a miserable want of enterprise, and 
deficiency of military skill. After their failure 
in this attempt, they were pursued by a succes- 
sion of disasters. The judicious movements and 
well concerted attacks of Venegas baffled all 
their plans, and drove them from one end of the 
kingdom to the other. After innumerable de- 
feats, the chiefs of the insurrection were at 
length surprised at Saltillo, on the 21st March, 

1811, in endeavouring to make their escape 
into the internal provinces. Still, however, the 
country was not pacified. A month after the 
affair of Saltillo, a body of 12,000 insurgents 
were in arms in the neighbourhood of Queretaro, 
but w r ere defeated on the 20th April, 1811. 

Hidalgo’s party was doomed to feel the loss of 
their leader, who was taken by treachery in 
March, in the interior provinces of Acatia de 
Bajan. Rayon, his lieutenant, an officer of great 
resolution and intrepidity, by education an at- 
torney, punished with death the general who 
conducted the rear of the army, for not having 
supported his general. He then returned, at- 
tacked, and defeated commandant Ochoa, eight 
leagues from Saltillo, took Zacatecas, and passed 
on to Zitacuaro, where the division of Torre 
attacked him, but was beaten so completely that 
only six men escaped to carry the news. Em- 
paran met nearly the same treatment on the 
24th June, vide “ El Espanol,” No. 23, p. 361. 
He then established the National Junta in 
Zitacuaro, consisting of himself, Liseaga, and 
the curate Verdusco. In London was to be seen 
the proclamation issued by Calleja, by orders of 
the Viceroy, offering 10,000 dollars for the head 
of each member. Calleja went and attacked 
him with all the forces he could muster, and we 
have had published amongst us the dispatches 
he sent to Mexico, announcing the obstinate re- 
sistance he had met with, and dated 2d January, 

1812. In the same dispatches he adds, that he 
had burnt and levelled the city with the ground, 
and proscribed its 10,000 inhabitants. The 
latter had got out safe with Rayon’s army, 
which, having 12 regiments of cavalry, esta- 
blished itself in Zultepec, from whence 12,000 

VOL. v. 


CRUZ. 217 

men were detached to Guanaxuato, and another 
considerable force to act against Valladolid. 

Up to the end of this year the war was car- 
ried on with various fortune ; but on January, 
1812, the king’s troops had succeeded in driving 
the insurgents, under the command of Rayon, 
from their fortified place at Zataguado, and 
towards the middle of the summer their forces 
were so reduced by repeated defeats, that all 
probability of their being able to make head 
again to any extent, became exceedingly doubt- 
ful. But their spirit was not yet subdued ; and, 
on the 1st of November, Morelos, a curate, turned 
an insurgent chief : for two years that this man 
had been fighting, he had never lost an action, 
and he had beaten Calloja at Quantlan, in Fe- 
bruary, 1812, entered Origava with 7,000 men, 
when 200 of the garrison were killed, and as 
many taken prisoners. It is to be observed, to 
the credit of the general, that he gave quarter 
to the conquered, and treated the officers with 
distinction. Not a house was pillaged, nor one 
personal insult offered, and good order and re- 
spect of property were secured by proclamation. 
He ordered however the tobacco in the public 
stores to be burnt, on account of the royal mo- 
nopoly ; it was valued at 10 million dollars, be- 
ing the crop of three years. 

This event was heightened by the arrival of a 
great accession of force to the army before 
Mexico, under colonel Magie ; and before No- 
vember, Vera Cruz was so closely invested that 
all communication between it and the capital 
was impracticable. In the mean time, the 
province of Texas had had recourse to the con- 
cilium domi , without which the arm a foris are 
always invalid, and lead to no definite results. 
After the fall of San Antonio, which was looked 
upon to have decided the fate of that country, 
they assembled a Congress, after the manner of 
that of Venezuela, and published a manifesto of 
their independence, of which the following are 
extracts. 

“ We the people of the province of Texas, 
calling upon the Supreme Judge of the Universe 
to witness the rectitude of our intentions, de- 
clare that the ties which placed us under the 
domination of Spain and Europe, are for ever 
demolished; that we possess the right to esta- 
blish a government for ourselves, and that in 
future ail legitimate authority shall emanate from 
the people, to w hom alone it rightfully belongs, 
and that henceforth all allegiance or subjection 
to any foreign power whatever is entirely re- 
nounced.] 


F F 


218 


VE R 


V E R 


[“ A relation of the causes which have con- 
duced to render this step necessary is due to our 
dignity, and to the opinion of the world. A 
long series of occurrences, originating in the 
weakness and corruption of the Spanish rulers, 
has converted that country into the theatre of a 
sanguinary war between two contending parties, 
itself destined to be the prize of the victor, and 
the miserable wreck of its government in posses- 
sion of others, it appears to have lost the sub- 
stance, and almost the form of sovereignty. Un- 
able to defend itself in the Peninsula, much less 
to protect its distant colonies, those colonies are 
abandoned to the caprice of wicked men, where 
there exists no power to which they may be 
made responsible for the abuse of their autho- 
rity, or for the gains of their rapacity. Self- 
preservation, the highest law of nature, if no 
other motive would have justified this step, 
would have vindicated our conduct ; but inde- 
pendent of this necessity, you candidly will 
acknowledge that we have cause sufficient in the 
suffering and oppression which we have so long- 
endured. ” 

After some further details, in which the de- 
struction of their trade is exposed, the instru- 
ment concludes in these terms : 

“ The Spanish colonies of S. America have 
long since declared their independence, and the 
United States prove to us, by the experience of 
30 years, that such a separation may be attended 
with national and individual prosperity. 

“ We conceive it a duty we owe, as well to 
ourselves as to our posterity, to use the moment 
which now offers itself to shake off the yoke of 
European domination, and to labour in the 
cause of the independence of Mexico, taking the 
authority into our own hands, framing laws, and 
placing the government of our country upon a 
firm and sure basis, and by these means assum- 
ing the rank which belongs to us among the 
nations of the world.” 

A decisive victory obtained over the insur- 
gents in the neighbourhood of Arassa had 
caused the intercourse between Mexico and 
Vera Cruz to be renewed, before the spring of 
1813, and the consequence was that a quantity of 
treasure, valued at 10 millions of dollars, imme- 
diately reached the latter port for the mother 
country. Hitherto the Peninsula, from the un- 
settled situation of its own affairs, had not been 
able to provide or send troops, to any amount, 
to her transatlantic followers ; but in February 
of this year, 1813, 5,000 men were exported to 
different colonies, of whom 2,000 were landed 


at VeraCruz. This mutual assistance of money 
from the one, and supplies and reinforcements 
from the other, was attended with natural ad- 
vantage to both ; and the Viceroy’s party be- 
came so strengthened, that, according to the 
latest accounts, it appeared that in February of 
the present year, 1814, the Loyalists continued 
to enjoy the most decisive advantage. The 
Spanish general, Llano, had defeated Morelos 
with much loss. The latter had formed a junc- 
tion with Matamoros, a Mexican ecclesiastic, re- 
markable for his military talents, and as a dis- 
ciplinarian. They were completely beaten by 
Llano. The loss of the insurgents in this action 
was 760 men killed ; among whom were 26 
monks, and other ecclesiastics. The number of 
prisoners exceeded 700, among whom was Ma- 
tamoros himself, the life and soul of the faction. 
He was forthwith to be tried for the murder of 
Don Candano, an Austrian officer of rank, whom 
he had caused, not long before, to be shot. 

Such have hitherto been the most remarkable 
events of the revolution of the Spanish colo- 
nies as more particularly relating to VeraCruz. 
When we consider the population of Nueva 
Espana, which, according to Humboldt, consi- 
derably exceeds six millions, we cannot but 
think that the chief reason why armies have not 
hitherto been organized to a greater extent, must 
arise from the difficulty of furnishing them with 
arms and accoutrements, especially firelocks. 
The greatest number of men under Morelos, 
at any one period, was 40,000 men. Sanchez 
had 60,000 ; not to mention others under de- 
tached leaders. No accurate enumeration of the 
king’s troops has hitherto appeared ; but, allow- 
ing them to be equal to tbe insurgents, we find 
a total of 200,000 men engaged in this bloody 
and interminable warfare. Much general infor- 
mation respecting the causes of disaffection, and 
their concomitant events, may be found under 
other articles in this work, such as Mexico, 
Venezuela, La Plata, &amp;c. to which, there- 
fore, the reader is referred.] 

Vera Cruz, a small island of the N.Sea, near 
the coast of the province and captainship of 
Todos Santos in Brasil, at the entrance of the 
bay. 

Vera Cruz, a river of the same province, 
which runs near the old city, and enters the 
sea. 

[Vera Cruz, La, an excellent harbour in the 
Bay of San Felipe Santiago, on the n. side of 
the island Espiritu Santo. See Tierra Aus- 
tral del Espiritu Santo.] 


VERAGUA. 


219 


VERAGUA, a province and government of 
the kingdom of Tierra Firme ; one of the three 
of which this kingdom is composed : bounded 
n. by the province of Costarica of the kingdom of 
Guatemala, e. by that of Tierra Firme or Pa- 
nama, and n. and s. by both seas. It is 70 leagues 
long from e. to w., and 34 wide from n. to s., 
this being where the isthmus is widest : it is of 
an hot temperature, and of a country for the 
most part mountainous and rough ; some of the 
heights being inaccessible, although there are 
not wanting llanuras , wherein are found various 
estates and grazing farms, well stocked with 
cattle, from the abundance of excellent pastures. 
In the mountains are found vei’y many kinds of 
excellent wood, and plenty of wild beasts, birds, 
and animals ; and amongst these we must note 
a species of small monkies, of the colour of un- 
tanned leather, and with a skin finer and softer 
than silk, with a crown or white circle on their 
heads. These animals are particularly tame ; 
but so delicate that, if taken only the shortest 
distance from their native place, they are sure to 
die ; and this too even when they arrive at Car- 
tagena, the temperature of which place differs 
so little from their own. It rains almost conti- 
nually in this country; and indeed there is 
scarcely a day passes but there are showers, at- 
tended with violent storms of thunder and light- 
ning : in the n. part are the mountains, and the 
rains flowing down from these in various streams, 
form rivers and pools which render this pro- 
vince almost impassable, and chiefly so in the 
winter season. Here are many gold mines, from 
which great wealth has been extracted ; as most 
particularly from the mine called De Guerrero, 
from the name of its discoverer : but these 
mines are worked but little at the present day, 
owing to the excessive expense of conveying 
materials and provisions over those very craggy 
sierras , the carriage of an arroba of meal being 
equal in its cost to the meal itself, as being 
effected on the shoulders of Indians. Here are 
very large breeds of cattle, especially of swine, 
and plenty of very fine sorts of wood. 

This province was discovered by Christoval Co- 
lumbus, in his fourth voyage, in 1303, to whom 
it was conceded by the Catholic King Fernando 
and his wife Isabella of Castilla, erecting it into 
a Duchy in 1537 : the title, though not the pro- 
perty, has remained in the same family, as the 
province was afterwards incorporated with the 
crown-rights, though an equivalent was given to 
the former possessors. It was originally well 
peopled with Doraces, Guaimies, and Juries In- 


, in spite of many efforts, suc- 
bringing them back to be catechised 


dians, and with other nations, who lived in those 
mountains, like wild beasts ; going naked both 
men and women, and subsisting on wild roots, 
of which there is an abundance ; and particu- 
larly on a fruit which they call pixbaex , resemb- 
ling dates ; and which, roasted, are well tasted. 
In 1624, Adrian Wefelder, a Flemish friar, and 
of the order of preachers, came amongst these 
Indians to instruct them in the faith. He re- 
duced many ; but they returned to their heathen- 
ish customs, and retired to the mountains ; nor 
could the Jesuits 
ceed in 

until 1760, at the instance of the Governor Don 
Felix Francisco Bejarano. After this the King- 
commanded that some religious missionaries of 
the order of S. Francisco, and of the congre- 
gation for propagating the Faith, should be sent 
from Spain, and maintained them at a fixed salary, 
chargeable on the royal revenue ; and these re- 
ligious persons have already founded various set- 
tlements of the aforesaid infidels, having con- 
verted them to the faith at the expense of great 
labours and fatigues. 

The capital of this province is the city of the 
same name ; with the dedicatory title of San 
tiago. It is small, but very well situate : of a 
hot and moist temperature, abounding in maize, 
t/ucas, plantains, and cattle, and particularly in 
swine. The natives spin cotton, and dye it of a 
durable purple by the juice of a snail, found on 
the coast of the S. Sea ; and in this article, as 
well as in some gold which they extract from 
the mines, does this city carry on a trade with 
the city of Panama, the capital of the kingdom, 
and with the provinces of Guatemala, where 
both the one and the other article are highly 
esteemed. This city has a beautiful hospital, 
for which it is indebted to the zeal and labour of 
the Governor Don Felix Bejarano; the same 
person who held the reins of this government 
for 21 years, at the instance of the inhabitants 
and of the Bishop of Panama, who made, on 
that subject, various representations to the King. 
The other settlements of the jurisdiction of 


this government are, 
San Miguel de la 
Atalaya, 

San Francisco de la 
Montana, 

San Marcelo de la 
Mesa, 

La Ciudad de los 
Remedios, 

San Miguel, 


Ciudad de Santiago 
de Alanje, 

San Felix, 

San Lorenzo, 

San Pablo, 

San Joseph de Bu- 


San 
queron, 


Miguel 


de Bo- 


F f 2 


V E R 


220 V E R 

La Trinidad, or Rio Ciudad de Pueblo 
de Jesus, Nuevo. 

Montijo, 

And of the settlements lately founded by the 
Missions are those of San Antonio, Dolega, and 
Gualaca. 

Veragua, Escudo de, an island of the N. 
Sea, near the coast of the former province and 
government, in the kingdom of Tierra Firme ; 
discovered by admiral Christoval Columbus, in his 
fourth voyage. It is small, but has two good and 
sheltered ports ; the one on the s. side, looking 
to the coast of the Continent, and the other on 
the w. : it is desert and abandoned. 

VERA-PAZ, a province and alcaldia mayor of 
the kingdom of Guatemala ; bounded n. by the 
province of Yucatan, s. s. w. and s. e. by that of 
Guatemala, from whence it is divided by the 
river Zacatula, w. by the province of Chiapa, 
and e. by the Gulf of Honduras. It is 48 leagues 
long from n. to s. and 27 wide from e. to w. at 
its widest part. The religious of St. Domingo 
gave it this name by order of the emperor 
Charles V. who commanded it to be thus named, 
inasmuch as its natives were reduced merely by 
preaching and without the help of arms. 

The country is rough and broken, full of deep 
ravines, with a llanura which is half a league in 
extent, and covered with thick and impenetrable 
woods. Half of this province is of a mild and 
benign temperature, and the other half is hot and 
abounding in mosquitoes of various kinds. The 
rains here continue nine months in the year, and 
the province abounds in vegetable productions 
and cattle, and has many mountains covered with 
trees, and vast caverns in which many rivers 
laving the province, lose themselves. Between 
two lofty sierras is found a cave of very great ex- 
tent, entirely of stone, within which are formed 
by the dripping of waters several pillars resem- 
bling alabastar. In this cave the cold is extra- 
ordinary, and the noise of the waters is very 
great, which, bursting forth at various mouths, 
forms a lake, which from its depth is seen to have 
waves like a sea, and from it rises a river, which 
in the small distance that it runs is not fordable. 
Besides the several rivers which water this pro- 
vince great torrents of water are seen rushing 
down from the most lofty rocks, forming a de- 
lightful spectacle ; and thus the soil is constantly 
so moist that the maize rots in the ground. 

This province is very subject to great tempests 
of thunder and lightning, strong winds, and earth- 
quakes ; and in its mountains and forests are 
large trees of excellent kinds of wood, imparting 


a balmy fragrance to the surrounding air ; and 
amongst these we must note in particular the 
liquid amber of a thick and rough wood, and va- 
rious kinds of balsams, eopales, xuchicopales, al- 
macigos and dragon plants, from which is ex- 
tracted the gum called dragon’s blood. Here 
are canes of 100 feet long, and of such thickness 
and size as to have at each of their knots a cavity 
able to contain an arroba of water. These canes 
serve as timber in building. Moreover here are 
Guaya-canes which are incorruptible, and an- 
other sort of wood which, sawed asunder, repre- 
sents on its plane pretty vary coloured figures. 

This province is extremely fertile in all Euro- 
pean fruits and flowers ; these yielding their 
sweets to the labours of an infinite variety and 
innumerable swarms of bees ; some without sting 
and noted for making the clearest honey, others 
like those of Spain, and others only as large as 
flies, others, again, whose honey causes giddiness; 
with this peculiarity, however, equally attached 
to all, that they make no honey-comb, but work 
under ground, forming their nests in the roots of 
trees. Their honey has an acid flavour, which 
is got rid of in a great measure by boiling ; 
and it is not unfrequently kept and used after 
the same manner as the vinegar from oranges, 
for several domestic purposes. The woods of 
this province are thronged with animals and wild 
beasts; the largest of these is the danta, as big as 
a calf, though somewhat short and thicker set in 
all its joints, which on the whole resemble those 
of the elephant : it has on its claws, three joints on 
the fore feet and four on the hind feet; the head is 
large, the forehead is sunk in, the eyes small and 
the lower jaw hangs down five or six inches, and 
is raised when the animal is angry, thereby dis- 
covering its teeth and tusks, which are like those 
of a pig: its ears are piqued, the neck is sunk in 
the shoulders, and the tail short with little bris- 
tles. The hide is six fingers thick, double at 
the loin, and, when dried, resists every kind of 
arms. This animal is ferocious and terrible when 
irritated, and with its tusks destroys-every thing 
it meets in its course, not excepting trees of con- 
siderable strength. Here are likewise lions, 
tigers, bears of an enormous size, cats and 
mountain goats, monkeys of various kinds, wild 
boars, porcupines, squirrels, and a variety of 
other animals. Also amongst the birds are eagles, 
small eagles, buairones , sea-crows, alcatraces , 
bitterns, storks, parrots, and others esteemed for 
their plumage and their song. This province is 
also filled with vipers and snakes of various 
kinds. The fountains and rivers are so nume- 


y e r 


Y E It 


221 


rous that there are 30 of the latter to be met 
with in the space of three leagues ; and all of 
them run to disembogue themselves into the sea, 
at the gulf 

VERDE, a river of the province and govern- 
ment of S. Juan de los Llanos in the Nuevo 
Reyno de Granada. It rises in the cordillera of 
Peru, and in it breed the fish called remoros , 
which stop the progress of vessels. 

Verde, another river, in the province and 
government of Atacames or Esmeraldas, in the 
kingdom of Quito, which runs into the S. Sea, in 
the Bay o; Tola. 

Verde, another, of the same province and 
kingdom as the former, rising in the jurisdiction 
of the corregimiento of Otavalo, running n. and 
entering the Guaillabamba. 

Verde, another, of the province and corregi- 
miento of Tacunga in the same kingdom. It rises 
5. of this city, runs s. and enters the Pastaza very 
near its source. 

Verde, another, of the province and country 
of Las Amazonas in the territory of Matrogoso. 
It rises in the province of the Chiquitos, to the 
w. of the settlement of San Ignacio, runs n. and 
enters the Itenes or Guapore. 

Verde, another, of the province of the Apa- 
ches in the kingdom of Nuevo Mexico, which 
runs s. and enters the Salado before this joins the 
Gila. 

Verde, another, of the province and govern- 
ment of Paraguay in Peru, which rises in the 
country of the Zamucos Indians, from different 
streams, runs s.e. and enters the Paraguay op- 
posite the Mboeri. 

Verde, another, of the province and captain- 
ship of Puerto Seguro in Brazil, which rises in 
the mountains near the coast, runs w. and turn- 
ing afterwards its course to n. enters the grand 
river of San Francisco close to the real of mines 
of Cardoso. 

Verde, another, of St. Domingo, which rises 
near the n. coast, between the cities of La Vega 
and Santiago, runs w. and enters the grand river 
of Y aque or Santiago. 

Verde, another, of the province and captain- 
ship of Sergipe in Brazil, which rises in the ter- 
ritory of the Cayapos Indians, runs s.s.e. and 
enters by the n side into the Parana, just below 
the entrance of the Mapandi. 

Verde, another, of the province and govern- 
ment of Buenos Ayres in Peru, which runs w. 
and enters the Parana, between the Cavayu and 
the Feliciano. 


Verde, another, of the province and govern- 
ment of Paraguay, which runs s. e. then turns its 
course to e. and enters the Paraguay. 

Verde, another, a small river of the same pro- 
vince and government as the former, which runs 
s. s. e. and enters the Amambay. 

Verde, another, of the province and corregi- 
miento of Tacunga in the kingdom of Quito, with 
the additional title of Segundo, to distinguish it 
from the last-mentioned. It has the same course, 
rises near it, and runs in the same direction. 

Verde, a settlement, called Rio Verde, in the 
province and bishopric of Mechoacan, of the ju- 
risdiction and alcaldia mayor of Valles. 

Verde, a small island of the S. Sea near the 
coast of the jurisdiction and alcaldia mayor of 
Penonome in the kingdom of Tierra Firme, and 
opposite the settlement ofCapira. 

Verde, another island in the N. Sea, near the 
coast of the province and government of Carta- 
gena and Nuevo Reyno de Granada, on the 
side of the mouth of the river Grande de la Mag- 
dalena. 

Verde, another, a small island of the N. Sea, 
near the coast of the province and government of 
La Vera Cruz, and of the Rio de Alvarado in 
N ueva Espana, not far distant from the island of 
Sacrificios. 

Verde, another, a small island, also of the 
N. Sea, near the coast of the island of Cuba, and 
of the Lucayas ; between Long Island and that 
of St. Andrew. 

Verde, another, also small, and in the N.Sea, 
near the coast of the province and government 
of Cumana, between the islands Testigos and 
Frayles 

Verde, a point of land or cape on the coast of 
the province and corregimiento of Truxillo in 
Peru, and in the S. Sea. 

Verde, another cape, on the e. coast of the 
Strait of Magellan, between the river of Agua 
Buena and the port of Papagayos. 

Verde, a bay, called also De las Cuerdas and 
Del Conde, according to the chart of Poncho 
Chileno. It is on the same coast of the Strait of 
Magellan, to the n. 

[Verde, Porto, or Vedra, is on the N. At- 
lantic Ocean, about 4| leagues s. e. by e. of Rio 
Roxo. The Island of Blydones is at the en- 
trance of this port, round which ships may sail 
on any side, there being seven fathom on the n, 
where it is shoalest, and 20 fathoms on the 
side, where is the best entrance into the river. 
This is a port of good trade, and sometimes large 


222 


V E R 


V E R 


ships put in here. The islands of Bayonne are 
five leagues to the s. of the island in the mouth 
of the port.] 

[ Verderone, or La Bourladerie, an island 
on the e. coast of Cape Breton Island. It is 
seven or eight leagues long ; and at each end is 
a channel, through which the waters of the La- 
brador lakes, in the inner part of Cape Breton 
Island, discharge into the ocean on the e.] 

VERE, a settlement and parish of the Eng- 
lish in the island of Jamaica, on the shore of the 
Bay of Manury, the which from its convenience 
is much frequented by vessels, which here lie 
completely sheltered. 

VERENGUELA, a settlement of the pro- 
vince and corregimiento of Pacajes in Peru, cele- 
brated for its rich silver-mine, which has pro- 
duced exceeding wealth. Here are also mines of 
talc, which yield great profit, furnishing enough 
of the said article to make the windows of houses 
and temples throughout the kingdom. 

VERETES, a settlement and parish of the 
French in the island of St. Domingo, dependent 
on the district and jurisdiction of Cape Frances. 

VERGARA, a settlement of the district of 
Chanco in the kingdom of Chile, on the shore of 
the stream Chimbarongo. 

Vergara, a river of the district of the island 
of La Laxa in the same kingdom. It runs w. 
and turning to n. n. w. enters, very abundant, into 
the Biobio, near the fort of Nacimiento. 

[Vergennes, a post-town, and one of the 
most growing and commercical towns of Ver- 
mont, in Addison County on Otter Creek, about 
six miles from its mouth in Lake Champlain. It 
is regularly laid out, and contained in 1790, a 
Congregational church and about 60 houses. In 
its neighbourhood are several mills. It is 80 
miles n. of Bennington, and 18 s. of Burlington. 
The township contained 201 inhabitants in the 
above year.] 

VERINA, a small settlement of the province 
and government of Cumana, in the district and 
jurisdiction of this city, from whence it is 30 
leagues to e.s. e. It is celebrated for the excel- 
lent tobacco which it produces. 

VERISIMO, a river of the province and cap- 
tainship of Espiritu Santo in Brazil, which rises 
in the mountains of the interior, runs very abun- 
dantly to the s. and enters the Parana just after 
its rising. 

VERMEJA, Sierra, a cordillera of very lofty 
mountains, of the province and captainship of 
Puerto Seguro in Brazil. They run n. between 


the source of the river Hondo or San Francisco, 
and that of Las Velhas. 

Vermeja, another sierra , in the same king- 
dom as is the above cordillera , and a continua- 
tion of the sierra of Los Coriges, between the 
river of this name and the Araguaya. 

Vermeja, a river of the province and govern- 
ment of Quixos and Macas in the kingdom of 
Quito. It enters the San Miguel and has a good 
port, from which vessels drop down to enter the 
Putumayo. 

VERM EJ AS, a river of the province and cap- 
tainship of Rio Grande, in the same kingdom as 
the former sierras. It rises near the coast, runs 
n. n. w. and enters the sea close to the point of 
Tiburon. 

Vermejas. Some small islands near the 
coast of the province and captainship of Espiritu 
Santo in the same kingdom ; situate on the side 
of the island of Los Franceses. 

VERMEJO, a river of the province and go- 
vernment ofTucuman, called also Rio Grande. 
It rises in the mountains of Taya, runs s. e. col- 
lecting the waters of many other rivers in its 
course, and passing between those of Xujui and 
Salta, enters very abundantly into the Plata, op- 
posite the city of Corrientes, according to the 
Peruvian geographer Don Cosme Bueno; the 
Ex- Jesuit Coleti asserting that it enters the Pa- 
rana by the w. part, a little below the mouth of 
the Paraguay, in lat. 27° 22' s . ; [but according 
to the most accurate geographers it enters the 
Paraguay about 40 miles before this river joins 
the Parana. Its mouth is in lat. 26° 45 / s.] 

VERMEJO, Puerto de, a point of land on 
the coast of the S. Sea, and in the province and 
corregimiento of Truxillo in Peru. 

Vermejo, a very lofty mountain, called Cerro 
Vermejo, in the province and captainship of Seara 
and kingdom of Brazil, near the coast and the 
river Upamena. 

VERMIGLION, a river of the province and 
government of Louisiana, which rises between 
the Missouri and the Osages, runs n. e. and en- 
ters the former. 

[VERMILLAS, Barreyeras, on the coast 
of Brazil, between the island of St. John’s and 
Sypomba Island, which are seven leagues asun- 
der. Here is a large bay with good anchorage.] 

[VERMILLION, Purple, or Red Sea, a 
name given by some to the Gulf of California ] 

[Vermillion, Point, called also Long Point, 
is the peninsula between Bay Puan and Lake 
Michigan.] 


V E R 


V E R 


223 


[Vermillion River, in the N. W. Territory, 
runs n. w. into Illinois River, nearly opposite the 
w. end of Little Rocks, and 267 miles from the 
Mississippi, by the meanderings. It is 30 yards 
wide, but so rocky as not to be navigable.] 

[Vermillion Indians, reside 220 miles up 
the Miami of the Lake.] 

[VERMONT, one of the United States of 
America, lies between lat. 42° 42' and 45° n. and 
between long. 71°28 / and 73° 25' w. It is bounded 
n. by Lower Canada, e. by New Hampshire, from 
which it is separated by Connecticut River, s. by 
Massachusetts, and w. by the State of New York. 
No part of the State is nearer than 70 or 80 
miles of any part of the ocean. Computing by the 
latitudes, the length of the State from the s. to 
the n. boundary is 138 miles ; the mean width 
from e. to w. is about 55 miles. It is divided 
into 11 counties, viz. those on Connecticut River 
from s. to n. are Windham, Windsor, Orange, 
Caledonia, and Essex ; in a similar direction, 
along the New York 1 le, are the counties of 
Bennington, Rutland, Addison, Chittenden, and 
Franklin, between which last and Essex, lies the 
county of Orleans, on the n. line of the State. 
These are subdivided into upwards of 230 town- 
ships, which are generally six miles square. In 
each township is a reserve of two rights of land 
of 350 acres each, the one for the support of 
schools, the other to be given in fee to the first 
minister who settles in the township. A part of 
the townships were granted by the governor of 
New Hampshire, and the other part by that of 
Vermont. In those townships granted by the 
former, a right of land is reserved for the sup- 
port of the Gospel in foreign parts ; in those 
granted by the latter, a college right, and a right 
for the support of country grammar-schools, are 
reserved. In these reservations, liberal provi- 
sion is made for the support of the Gospel, and 
for the promotion of common and collegiate edu- 
cation. Windsor, on the e. side of the Green 
Mountains ; and Rutland, on the w. side ; both 
nearly in the centre of the settled parts of the 
State from n. to s. are, according to an act of the 
legislature, to be alternately the seat of govern- 
ment, till about the year 1800. Both are flou- 
rishing towns. In 1790, according to the census 
then taken, the number of inhabitants in this 
State was 85,589. By the census of 1810, it 
was 217,913. The people are an industrious, 
brave, hardy, active, frugal race. 

The soil is deep, and of a dark colour, rich, 
moist, warm, and loamy. It bears corn and other 
kinds of grain in large quantities as soon as it is 


cleared of the wood, without any ploughing or 
preparation ; and after the first crops, naturally 
turns to rich pasture or mowing. The face of 
the country exhibits very different prospects. — 
Adjoining to the rivers there are the wide ex- 
tensive plains of a fine level country. At a small 
distance from them the land rises into a chain of 
high mountains, intersected with deep and long 
vallies. Descending from the mountains, the 
streams and rivers appear in every part of the 
country, and afford a plentiful supply of water. 
Through this State there is one continual range 
of mountains, which are called the Green Moun- 
tains, from their perpetual verdure, and gives 
name to the State. They extend from Lower 
Canada s. through the States of Vermont, Mas- 
sachusetts, and Connecticut, and terminate within 
a few miles of the sea-coast. Their general di- 
rection is from n. n. e. to s. s. w. and their extent 
is through a tract of country not less than 400 
miles in length. They are generally from 10 to 
15 miles in breadth ; are much intersected with 
vallies ; abound with springs and streams of 
water, and are covered with woods. Kelling- 
ton Peak, one of the highest of the Green Moun- 
tains, is 3,454 feet above the level of the ocean. 

All the streams and rivers of Vermont rise 
among the Green Mountains ; about 35 of them 
have an e. direction, and fall into Connecticut 
River; about 25 run w. and pay tribute to Lake 
Champlain. Two or three running in the same 
direction fall into Hudson’s River. In the n.e. 
parts of the State, four or five streams have a n. 
direction, and discharge their waters into Lake 
Memphremagog ; from thence through the river 
St. Francis, they communicate with the river St. 
Lawrence. The most considerable on the w. side 
of the Green Mountains, are Otter Creek, Onion 
River, La Moille, and Mischiscoui. On the e. 
side of the Green Mountains, the rivers are not 
so large as those on the w. but they are more 
numerous. The largest are Wantastiquek, or 
West River, White River, and Poousoomsuck. 

The earth is generally covered with snow from 
the middle of December to the middle of March, 
and in some high lands, to the depth of four or 
five feet. Since the country has been cleared, 
the winters have proved milder. Vegetation ad- 
vances in the spring with great rapidity. 

Iron and lead ores of several kinds, pipe-clay, 
which has been wrought into durable crucibles, 
and quarries of white, grey, and variegated mar- 
ble, have been found in different parts of this 
State. The trade of Vermont is principally to 
Boston, Hartford, and New York ; to which 


224 


VER 


V E R 


places the inhabitants export horses, beef, pork, 
butter, cheese, wheat, flour, iron, nails, pot and 
pearl-ashes. Great advantages may accrue to 
Vermont, from the manufactures of iron. Large 
quantities of iron-ore are found in several of the 
towns on the w. side of the Green Mountains. 
Tinmouth, Rutland, Pittsford, and Shorehain, 
contain great quantities. The ore in these towns 
is of a reddish kind, mixed with earth, tinctured 
with yellow ore. It melts easily, and produces 
from one-fourth to one seventh of iron. The iron 
is mostly of the Coldshire kind; works easily, and 
makes excellent nails. The principal part of the 
ore hitherto used, has been brought from a moun- 
tain on the w. side of Lake Champlain, about 
four miles n. of Crown Point. Some grains of 
pure iron, nearly as big as a pea, have been found 
in this ore. This ore is so peculiarly rich, that, 
when well managed, it will yield four-sevenths 
of pure iron, but is very hard to melt. In 1792, 
several forges and furnaces were erected. In 
Bennington County they had one forge, in Rut- 
land County 14, in Addison County four, and in 
Chittenden County two. In addition to which 
there were three furnaces in Rutland County. — 
From these great quantities of bar-iron and nails 
were made. Nature, indeed, seems to have de- 
signed this part of the United States to be the 
seat of flourishing manufactures of every thing 
that can be made of iron or steel. The other 
chief manufactures are pot and pearl-ashes, maple 
sugar, and spirits distilled from grain. Most fa- 
milies manufacture a considerable part of their 
clothing. In no country is common education 
more attended to. In this respect the conduct 
of the people is laudable and exemplary. A 
charter for a richly endowed university was 
granted by the legislature of this State, in 1791, 
to be established at Burlington ; and 33,000 acres 
of land have been reserved, in the several grants 
made by this State, for the use of the univer- 
sity. 

In 1792, the state of the militia was a follows, 
20 regiments of infantry, divided into eight bri- 
gades, and four divisions; 15 companies of ca- 
valry, and six companies of artillery ; the whole 
computed at 18,500. The present number has 
not kept pace with the increased population. — 
Vermont sends two representatives to Congress, 
and has been settling only since about the 
year 1764. The Indians were never numerous 
here, and at present it is entirely destitute of 
therm] 

VERNAL, a small island of the S. Sea, near 
the coast of the province and alcaldia mayor of 


Teguantepeque in Nueva Espana. It is very 
close to the continent. 

[VERNON, a place in Sussex County, New 
Jersey, e. of the source of Wall Kill, and about 
21 miles n. e. of Newtown.] 

[Vernon, Mount. See Mount Vernon.] 

VEROA, a small lake of the province and 
country of Las Amazonas, in the territory pos- 
sessed by the Portuguese. It is a pool, formed 
from the river Maranon, between those of Coai'i 
and Cuchivara. 

VERQUE, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento ofChichas and Tarija in Peru, and 
of the district and division of the former ; an- 
nexed to the curacy of the settlement of Talina. 

VERRAMA, a small river of the province and 
government of Guayana or Nueva Andalucia, 
which rises in the country and territory of the 
Carinnacas Indians, runs n. and enters the Ven- 
tuavi. 

[VERRETTES, a settlement in the French 
part of the island of St. Domingo, on the s. w. 
bank of Artibonite River; four miles s. by e. of 
the settlement of Petit Riviere.] 

[VERSAILLES, the chief town of Woodford 
County, Kentucky; situate on a small stream 
which falls into Kentucky River. It contained, 
in 1790, a court-house, stone gaol, and about 
30 houses, and lies 12 miles w. by s. of Lex- 
ington.] 

[VERSHIRE, a township of Vermont, Orange 
County, adjoining Fairlee. It contained 439 in- 
habitants, in 1790.] 

VERT, a small port of the s. coast of Nova 
Scotia ; between Ragged and Rosway Islands. 

Vert, a large sand-bank of the coast of the 
island of Newfoundland, which serves for the 
cod-fisheries, and lies between the bank of Whale 
and Middle Bank. 

Vert, a bay on the e. coast of the island of 
Newfoundland, between the island of Bacaillon 
and Cape Flamborough. 

Vert, another, on the e. coast of Newfound- 
land, between Cape St John and the island of 
St. Barbara. 

Vert, another, on the n. coast of Nova 
Scotia, between the Bay of Borchaps and Saints 
Cape. 

[Vert Bay, or Green Bay, in the Straits of 
Northumberland, in N. America, opens to the 
n.e. opposite St. John’s Island. The head of 
the bay approximates within 12 miles of the 
north-easternmost branch of the Bay of Fundy. 
It is about 10 leagues to the n. w. ofTatama- 
gauche Harbour, and serves in part to separate 


VICENTE. 


225 


a large shoal of 


the British provinces of Nova Scotia and New 
Brunswick.] 

Vert, a point of land or cape on the coast of 
Newfoundland, within Plaisance Bay. 

Vert, a small island of the N. Sea, near the 
s. coast of Nova Scotia, opposite St. Margaret’s 
Bay. 

Vert, a small river, of the province and go- 
vernment of Louisiana; which runs e. and unites 
itself with the St. Pierre. 

Vert, another river, of the province and 
colony of N. Carolina, which runs 5. s. w. and 
enters the Conhaway. 

[VESAY CAPE, in the township of Mary’s- 
burgh, on Lake Ontario, Upper Canada, is the 
n. point, which makes Prince Edward’s Bay.] 

[VESSEL BAY, on the e. shore of Lake 
Champlain, sets up to the n. e. in the township 
of Charlotte, in Vermont.] 

VEUVE, Bank of the, 
sand, of the island Micklon, at the entrance of 
the Gulf of St. Lawrence. 

VIACHA, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Pacages in Peru. 

VIAMON, a town of the province and cap- 
tainship of Rey in Brasil ; on the shore of the 
river Grande. 

VIAPI, a small arm of the River Orinoco, 
which communicates with the River Zacri, close 
to Ciudad Real. 

VIAVIA, a small river, of the province and 
government of Guayana or Nueva Andalucia, in 
the territory possessed by the Dutch. 

VICHADA, a large and rapid river, of the 
Nuevo Reyno de Granada. It flows down from 
the mountains of Bogota, runs e. through the 
llanos of Cazanare, and enters the Orinoco. 

VICENTE, S. a province and captainship of 
the kingdom of Brasil : bounded n. by the re- 
public of San Pablo, and by the captainship of 
Rio Janeyro ; e. by the same captainship and by 
the sea, w. by the Rio Grande, and s. w. by 
the province of Gaira of the government of 
Paraguay, extending 50 leagues along the coast; 
[its length from n. to s. being about 300 miles, 
and its breadth in some places near 180, though 
for the greatest part not more than half that 
number.] 

It was ceded by King Juan III. of Portugal to 
Martin Alfonzo de Sousa, in reward for his 
splendid services in the Indies. He established 
a government here after incredible difficulties, 
owing to the opposition of the natives, who all 
preferred death to subjection ; but he at last 

VOL. V. 


founded in an island, the towns of San Vicente 
and of Los Santos. This province was the first 
established by the Portuguese in America ; and, 
after a few years, became one of the most opu- 
lent for its sugar-mills and manufactures, thus 
providing with necessaries all the other settle- 
ments of Brasil ; but it is at the present day 
(anno 1789) fallen into such a state of dilapida- 
tion as to be merely the shadow of its former 
greatness. The town of San Vicente lost also 
the quality of a capital, the church itself becom- 
ing reduced to the small chapel of San Antonio. 
Its trade, however, in hams still remained to it ; 
and these are as fine as any of Europe, the 
breeds of swine being very large, and the natives 
making use of their skins for leather in pre- 
ference to the hides of other animals. Here are 
plenty of cattle of all sorts, as also of fish and 
shell-fish, and of oysters so large as that their 
shells usually serve for plates ; one of these 
shells having been of so extravagant a size as to 
have served for a palanquin to the Bishop Don 
Pedro Leitavon. The temperature of this pro- 
vince is hot and little healthy, produces some 
sugar-canes, of which it makes sugar and con- 
serves of various fruits ; cotton and brasil-wood, 
although all but in moderation. It is watered 
by several rivers ; the most considerable of 
which are the Tapuca, Guarauba, Guapura, 
Virigi, and Una. It has in its district the 
islands of San Amaro, Cananea, San Sebastian, 
and Los Santos, in which is the capital. The 
interior of the country is uncultivated and full 
of woods, in which dwell some infidel Arapes 
and T upiguies Indians. Before the entrance of 
the Portuguese it was possessed by the Guay- 
nazes, who were very valorous, but who are now 
extinct. It now belongs to the house of the 
Marquises of Cascaes, and contains only 800 in- 
habitants. Its settlements are, 

S. Vicente, Penhamunhangaba, 

Santos, Goaratinguita, 

Parati, Corutuba, 

Ubatuba, Sorocaba, 

Igoape, Utu, 

Paranagoa, Jundiahi, 

Cananea, Paranaiba, 

Rio de S. Francisco, Taubate, 

Alaquna, Mongi. 

Jacarahi, 

The countries bounding the n. of S. Vicente 
are inhabited by savage nations, and extend to 
22 and to 27 / s. lat. [This province was much 
neglected till the discovery of the gold mines 

G G 


VIC 


VI c 


226 

in 1735, since which it has been benefited by 
the addition of a key, and several fortresses 
erected for its defence, on the n. side of Rio de 
la Plata. This part of the province is far, how- 
ever, from being yet sufficiently peopled, as 
there are only a few scattered villages on the 
sea-coast. The inhabitants carry on a contra- 
band trade with the Spaniards, whom they fur- 
nish with rum and tobacco of their own growth, 
and with cloths, silks, linens, and brandy, from 
Europe. The commerce of S. Vicente, which is 
carried on through Rio de Janeiro, consists in 
black cattle, hogs, sugar, tobacco, and spirits.] 

Vicente, S. a city of the former province, 
and once the capital ; situate in the island of 
Los Santos. It was formerly very rich, and 
enjoyed a great commerce : it lias a commodious 
and secure port with a good bottom, though 
not fit for large vessels : it is also defended with 
a well furnished castle, but the temperature is 
hot and sickly. The cathedral church is rather 
handsome, being a bishopric suffragan to San 
Salvador : [on the whole this town may be con- 
sidered well fortified. Its present population 
may be reckoned at 3,000 souls] in 5. lat. 24°. 

Vicente, S. island. See St. Vincent. 

Vicente, S. a settlement of the head settle- 
ment of the district of Coatlan and alcaldia 
mayor of Miahuatlan, in Nueva Espana. 

Vicente, S. another, of the province and go- 
vernment of Maracaibo, in the Nuevo Reyno de 
Granada, on the shore of the river St. Domingo, 
nearly to the s. of Barinas Nueva. It is one of 
the settlements of the missions of this city, which 
are held under the charge of the religious of 
San Francisco. 

Vicente, S. another, of the province and cor- 
regimiento of Chichas and Tariga, in Peru. 

Vicente, S. another, a parisli of the pro- 
vince and government of Buenos Ayres, in lat. 
35° 2' 20" and long. 58' 26' 30". 

Vicente, S. a small but convenient and 
secure port on the coast of the province and eor- 
regimiento of Quillota and kingdom of Chile; 
situate behind the Bay of Concepcion. 

Vicente, S. a cape or point of land on the 
coast of the Tierra del Fuego, in the Strait of 
Magellan ; one of those which form the entrance 
of the strait of its name. 

Vicente, S. another Cape, called also of 
Supstakes, on the s. coast of the Strait of Ma- 
gellan : one of those which form the second nar- 
row pass of the strait, which is called Barranca 
de San Simon. 


VICIII, a river of the province and govern- 
ment of Atacames or Esmeraldas, in the king- 
dom of Quito. It runs n. and enters the Guail- 
labamba just before this runs into the S. Sea. 

VICHUQUEN, a settlement of the province 
and eorregimiento of Maule, in the kingdom of 
Chile. It has a convent of the religious of San 
Francisco, with the dedicatory title of San Pedro 
de Alcantara ; and also two chapels of ease. 

VICIOSA, La, a shoal or isle of the coast of 
the N. Sea, in the province and government f 
Costa Rica and kingdom of Guatemala. 

VICIOSAS, some islands of the N. Sea, near 
the coast of the province and government of 
Yucatan, opposite the Cape of Catoche : they 
are many, and all small. 

VICO, a settlement of the province and go- 
vernment of Tarma in Peru, annexed to the 
curacy of the settlement of Tasco, between the 
Lakes Lauricocha and Chinchaicocha. 

VICTOR, Valle del, a settlement of the 
province and eorregimiento of Arequipa in Peru, 
on the sea coast. 

VICTOR, Valle del, a river of this pro- 
vince, called Quebrada del Victor. It rises in 
the valley aforesaid, and enters theS. Sea, united 
with the river Chile. 

VICTOR, Valle del, a port of the S. Sea, 
on the coast of the province and eorregimiento of 
Arica in Peru, in s. lat. 18° 47'. 

VICTORIA, a city of the province and go- 
vernment of Mariquita, in the Nuevo Reyno de 
Granada ; founded by Hernando de Salinas in 
1553, in a wood at the skirt of a mountain, 
this spot having been selected as abounding in 
gold mines ; but, when the working' of these 
mines fell off, the city was removed by the agree- 
ment of the inhabitants to some neighbouring 
llanuras. Afterwards, through some private liti- 
gations in the families of the Hospinas and Sal- 
cedos, it became entirely lost, its population 
removing to join themselves with that of Mari- 
quita, from whence it was situate, at a distance 
of 29 miles, and being about 80 n. w. of Santa 
Fe. 

Victoria, a town of the province and al- 
ealdia mayor of Tabasco, in the kingdom of 
Guatemala ; founded in 1519 by Hernan Cortes, 
w'ho gave it this name in memory of the victory 
gained by the Indians. It is small and poor; 
situate on the sea coast of the Gulf of Cam- 
peche : it has a small castle or fort for its de- 
fence, and is GO leagues from Campeche. 

Victoria, a settlement, with the dedicatory 


VIC 


VIE 227 


title of San Francisco, in the province and cor- 
regimiento of Calca and Lares in Peru ; situate 
in a rough and very mountainous territory. It 
was, at its first foundation, a very populous and 
rich city, owing to the many silver mines in its 
neighbourhood, from whence it derived infinite 
wealth ; and it is memorable as well as for hav- 
ing been the retreat of the last inca of Peru, 
as for the martyrdom of the venerable father 
Diego Ortiz, of the order of S. Augustin, at the 
hands of the Indians, whilst he was preaching to 
them the gospel, in 1586. It is now fallen into 
such decay and poverty as to be nothing but a 
small village, annexed to the curacy of the 
settlement of Vilcabamba : 20 leagues e. of 
Cazco. 

Victoria, another, with the name of Santa 
Maria de la Victoria del Prado de Talavera de 
Nirua, in the province and government of Ve- 
nezuela and Nuevo Reyno de Granada; founded 
in 1617 by Pedro Gutierrez de Lugo, by order 
of the governor Don Francisco de la HozBerrio, 
in the valley of Aragua and province of the 
Teques Indians. Here it was that all those 
natives assembled who escaped the destruc- 
tive influence of the small-pox, which raged 
here, and nearly depopulated the province, in 
1580. This settlement is near where the real 
of gold mines of Nuestra Senora, discovered 
by Gabriel de Avila in 1573, formerly stood. 
[It lies on the road from Tulmero to Caracas, 
six leagues from the former place. When first 
founded by the missionaries, it was peopled en- 
tirely by Indians, but it has now a great many 
white inhabitants, its population amounting to 
7,800 souls. It is nevertheless but a scattered 
town, (situate mostly in a plain) interspersed 
with garden trees ; some of the streets contain 
houses equal to those of Caracas. The church, 
both for size and beauty, rivals the finest ca- 
thedrals of America. The inhabitants applied 
to government to create their town into a city, 
with a cabildo ; but this petition not being com- 
plied with, Victoria continues a village, under 
the government of a justice and a regidor. It is 
the residence of the general officers of the militia 
of the vallies of Aragoa. Depons asserts, that 
the inhabitants are excessively fond of gaming, 
but that they are by far more active than the 
people of many other parts of the province.] 
Victoria, another, called Nuestra Senora de 
la Victoria de Los Nadadores ; one belonging to 
the missions held by the religious of S. Francisco, 
in the province of Coaguila ; founded on the 


shore of the river of its name, seven leagues w. 
by n. of the town of Monclova. 

Victoria, another, of the province and cap- 
tainship of Los Ilheos, in Brasil ; situate on the 
coast at the entrance of the port and river of 
Los Ilheos. 

Victoria, another, in the province and cap- 
tainship of Espiritu Santo, in the same kingdom 
as the former. 

Victoria, an island, near the extremity of 
the s. coast, in the Strait of Magellan. 

Victoria, a cape or point of land on the 
same coast of the Strait of Magellan. 

[VICTORY, a township of Vermont, situated 
in Essex County, and bounded e. by Guildhall, 
on Connecticut River.] 

VIDES, a small river of the province and 
corregimiento of Pasto, in the kingdom of Quito ; 
which enters, a little after its rising, into the 
Putumayo. 

VIEJA, La, a settlement of the province and 
government of Nicaragua, in the kingdom of 
Guatimala. It is very close to Realejo, and 30 
leagues from the town of San Miguel. 

VIEJO, Creek of, on the coast of the S. Sea, 
in the province and corregimiento of Nasca, in 
Peru. 

Viejo, a settlement of the province and cor- 
regimiento of Ibarra, in the kingdom of Quito ; 
in the vicinity of which is a large estate, called 
La Concepcion. 

Viejo, another, a small settlement of the pro- 
vince and corregimiento of Alausi, in the same 
kingdom as the former ; situate s. of the settle- 
ment of Tiscan, and near the lake. 

VIEJOS, Puerto de los, a port on the 
coast of the S. Sea, of the province and corregi- 
miento of Chancay, in Peru. 

VIELLARD, Creek. See Old Man’s. 

Viellard, Port. See Old Man’s. 

[VIENNA, a port of entry and post-town of 
the e. shore of Maryland, Dorchester County, on 
the w. side of Nanticoke River, about 14 miles 
from its mouth. It contained, in 1790, about 
30 houses, and carries on a brisk trade with the 
neighbouring sea-ports, in lumber, corn, wheat, 
&amp;c. Its foreign exports in 1794 amounted to 
1,667 dollars : it is 15 miles n. w. of Salisbury, 
22 s. s. e. of Easton, and 63 s.e. of Washington.] 

[Vienna, the capital of Green County, Ken- 
tucky ; situate on the n. side of Green River, 
about 135 miles w. s. w. of Lexington, and about 
22 miles from the mouth of Green River, in the 
Ohio.] 


G G 2 


228 


V I L 


V I L 


VIENTO, Lomas del, mountains of the pro- 
vince and o’overnment of Merida, in the Nuevo 
Reyno de Granada; of the district and jurisdic- 
tion of Pamplona, to the s. of this city. They 
are thus called from the continual and fresh 
winds which prevail there. 

Viento, a strand of the coast of the N. Sea, 
in the province and government of Cartagena 
and Nuevo Reyno de Granada, between the 
Point of Piedras and that of Venados. 

YIEU-CAP, a cape or point of land of the 
5. coast of Nova Scotia or Acadia, between the 
capes Rage and Hollibut. 

VIEU-PORT, a port of the same province 
and coast as the former cape, and close to the 
same cape. 

VIEU-ISLE, an island of the same coast and 
province as the former port ; at the mouth or 
entrance of the same. 

VIEUX, a fort of the province of Nova 
Scotia or Acadia, in the United States of Ame- 
rica ; situate on the s. coast, at the mouth of the 
river Heve. 

VIGIA, a small river of the province and 
captainship of Para, in Brasil, which runs n. n. w. 
and enters the arm of the river Las Amazonas, 
which forms the island of Marayo or Marajo, 
between the rivers Arreta and Tuma. 

Vigia, a lake of this province, on the shore 
of the former river, and of the arm of that of 
Las Amazonas. Close to it is a fort built by the 
Portuguese, to defend the entrance of the said 
river. 

Vigia, a small island; situate at the mouth 
of the lake of Maracaibo, close to that of Palo- 
mas, in the province and government of Vene- 
zuela and Nuevo Reyno de Granada. 

VILAFRO, a lake of the province and corre- 
gimiento of Collahuas, in Peru, near Cailloma. 
It is a league in circumference, and empties 
itself into a channel, which furnishes, upon oc- 
casion, with water the mills for grinding the 
metal from the mines of gold, silver, and copper. 

VILA-VILA, a settlement and asiento of mines 
of its name, in the province and corregimiento 
of Lampa, of Peru ; annexed to the curacy of 
Pucara. 

V1LCABAMBA, a settlement of the province 
and corregimiento of Cotabamba, in Peru ; an- 
nexed to the curacy of the settlement of Chuqui- 
bamba. 

Vilcabamba, another settlement, in the pro- 
vince and corregimiento of Calca and Lares, in 
the same kingdom. 


Vilcabamba, another, of the province and 
corregimiento of Angaraes, in the same king- 
dom ; annexed to the curacy of the settlement of 
Conaica. 

Vilcabamba, another, of the province and 
government of Loxa, in the kingdom of Quito; 
situate near the settlement of Chapamara. 

Vilcabamba, another, of the province and 
govern tnent of Tarma, in the kingdom of Peru ; 
annexed to the curacy of the settlement of Cha- 
cayan. 

Vilcabamba, a river, of the province and 
corregimiento of Calca and Lares, in the same 
kingdom as the former settlement. It rises n. 
of the town of San Francisco de la Victoria, 
runs to this rhumb ; and enters the Paucar- 
tambo, in the territory of the missions of Caxa- 
marquilla. 

VILCAMAYO, a large and abundant river 
of Peru, which rises in the province and corregi- 
miento of Lampa to the w. of the capital ; runs 
n. n. w., watering in its course the provinces of 
Quispu, Canches, Quispicanchi, and Calca and 
Lares ; and, in the territory of the missions of 
Caxamarquilla, unites itself with the Paucar- 
tambo ; to enter the Apurimac. It has also the 
name of Coporaque. 

VILCANCHO, a settlement of the province 
and corregimiento of Vilcas Huaman, in Peru ; 
annexed to the curacy of the settlement of 
Totos. 

VILCANOTA, Cordillera de, a branch of 
the great cordillera of the Andes of Peru; which 
run for many leagues from s. w. to n. e. serving 
as a division and as limits to the provinces of 
Carabaya and Canes and Canches. 

VILCAPUQUIO,a settlement of the province 
and corregimiento of Oruro, in Peru ; 26 leagues 
from its capital. 

VILCAS, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Vilcas Huaman, in Peru; situate 
near a mountain, from whence it is named. In 
its vicinity, or about a league’s distance, is a 
temple dedicated to St. John the Baptist, which, 
in the times of the gentilism, was dedicated to 
the sun. This temple is so large and sump- 
tuous, and the stones of which it is composed 
are so immense, that there are not wanting some 
authors to assert that it was the labour of giants ; 
and this the more particularly, as the said stones 
must have been brought from very distant parts; 
and as the Indians, who were living here at the 
time of the conquest by the Spaniards, were of 
powers little conformable to the labours of a 


Y I L 


229 


V I L 


similar enterprise. Just opposite to this temple 
are to be seen also the ruins of a great place of 
arms, surrounded with wrought stone. At the 
end of a small valley, called Pomacocha, at no 
great distance otf, are seen the ruins of the pa- 
laces of the inca also of stone ; and near to 
them the ruins of some buildings, which served 
as lodging- places for his family, and for the 
caziques of his suite. 

Vilcas, a river of the same province and 
corregimiento as the former settlement. It rises 
in the mountains of the Andes, in s. lat. 14° 17 ', 
runs n. e. ; and, after collecting the waters of 
many other rivers, and often changing its name, 
enters by the s.part into theMaranon or Amazon. 
The lands which it bathes are very fertile and 
delightful ; and are where the Incas had many 
buildings and forts, of which the vestiges still 
remain. 

VILCAS-HUAMAN, a province and corre- 
gimiento of Peru ; bounded n. by the province 
of Huanta and jurisdiction of Guamanga ; n. w. 
by the province of Castro Virreyna ; s. w. b y 
that of Lucanas, and e. and n. e. by that of An- 
daliuailas. Its territory is a ravine of 24 leagues 
long and 18 wide, and through it runs a river, 
called there Calcamayo, which, at its exit, is very 
large, as being joined in its course by several 
streams, which flow down on either side. This 
province takes its name from a mountain, or very 
lofty territory thus called. Its temperature 
throughout a great part of it is mild and very 
healthy, although in the low parts bordering upon 
the river very hot. In these parts grow sugar- 
canes, plantains, and other fruits and herbage ; 
also aji and cotton. In various districts are cul- 
tivated, according to the different temperatures, 
other vegetable productions and seeds, such as 
wheat, maize, and papas, &amp;c. Here are found 
all kinds of large and small cattle, of the wools 
of which, and of that brought from other parts, 
they fabricate much cloth of the country, baizes, 
serges, &amp;c. In the farms which abound here, 
are many animals, called Vicunas ; and, in for- 
mer times, some silver mines were worked, 
although none are now known of. Although, as 
we have before observed, the country is healthy, 
the deaths of the Indians are very frequent in 
the months between November and March, 
through the intermitting fevers, which they call 
ucchu , and to which they are accustomed through 
want of proper diet and attention. It is, never- 
theless, very populous ; since its inhabitants 
amount to 5,000. Its corregidor had a reparti- 
miepto of 92,400 dollars, and it paid an alcabala 


of 739 dollars annually to the king. The ca- 
pital is the settlement of Cangallo, and the 
others of its jurisdiction, are the following : 
Vilcas, Chumbes, 

Vizchongo, Ocros, 

Zancos, Lucanamarca, 

Canaria, Canchacancha, 

Hualla, Espite, 

Huancapi, Cocas, 

Huancarailla, Pomatambo, 

Chuschi, Sacsamarca, 

Totos, Apongo, 

Tomanga, Tiquihua, 

Paras, Casara, 

Cangallo, Mayobamba, 

Huancarucma, Cachi, 

Huambalpa, Quilla, 

Acomarca, Pitahua, 

Huanmarca, Sarhua, 

Cocha, Auquilla, 

Huarcas, Huaroaya, 

Concepcion, Vilcancho, 

Chacamarca, Putica. 

VILCAPAMPA, a settlement of the cordillera 
of the Andes to the e. of Cuzco ; to which place 
the Inca Manco Capac II. emperor of Peru, re- 
tired, after having attempted, in vain, to recover 
his empire from the Spaniards, who were in 
Cuzco ; besieging them with an army of 200,000 
Indians, for the space of two years. 

VILCHES, a river of the province and go- 
vernment of Florida ; which runs w. and enters 
the sea in the Bay of Mexico ; between the 
rivers of Valisa and San Pedro. 

VILQUE, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Lampa, in Peru ; annexed to 
the curacy of the settlement of Manaso. 

Vilque, another settlement, in the province 
and corregimiento of Chilques and Masques, of 
the same kingdom as the former ; annexed to the 
curacy of the settlement of Omacha. 

VILQUES, S. Peoro de, a settlement of the 
province and corregimiento of Paucartambo, in 
the same kingdom as the former. 

VILUYA, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Chachapoyas, in Peru ; annexed 
to the curacy of the settlement of Chiliquin. 

VILLA, La, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Tunja, in the Nuevo Reyno de 
Granada ; situate on the shore of the river 
Grande de la Magdalena. 

VILLA-ALTA, a jurisdicton and alcaldia 
mayor of Nueva Espana ; one of those of the 
greatest extent, and one the most productive. 
Its territory is very fertile and rich in grain and 


230 


V I L 


V I L 


seeds, and particularly in cochineal and cotton, 
these being the principal sources of its riches ; 
and of the latter article are made some blankets, 
which are much esteemed, and in great request 
throughout the kingdom. It is also in cotton 
that the Indians pay their tribute. This juris- 
diction produces likewise vaynilla and mixe , 
which is a species of wild tobacco. The Indian 
women make also of cotton their guepiles , or 
ordinary clothing. In this jurisdiction are va- 
rious estates, in which are considerable breeds 
of large cattle ; and in the mountains are abund- 
ance of exquisite woods serviceable for many 
purposes. 

Villa-Alt a, the capital is the settlement of its 
name, with the dedicatory title of San Ildefonso ; 
situate in the centre of the jurisdiction, of a va- 
rious and unequal temperature, and being inha- 
bited by 26 families of Spaniards and Mustees , 
and 20 of Indians ; and, although it wants both 
for vegetable productions and cattle, it is not 
without commerce ; but at it meet trading par- 
ties from all the settlements of its jurisdiction. 
It is 105 leagues from Mexico. The other 
settlements of its juridiction are the follow- 
ing: 


Lachirrio, 

Temascalapa, 

Yalahuy, 

Taguis, 

Yetzicubi, 

Ruallaga, 

Betaja, 

Y abaa, 

Chita, 

Yalala, 

Caxones, 

San Pedro, 

San Mateo, 

Theotalzingo, 

Petlapa, 

Nobani, 

Tocabela, 

Tipinapa, 

Yocotepec, 

Lalama, 

Comaltepec, 

Lachixoba, 

Atitlan, 

Alotepec, 

Ayacatepec, 

Sacaltepec, 

Metaltepec, 

Ocotepec, 

J ayacatepec, 


Jare, 

Metepec, 

Sochila, 

Sochina, 

Jopa, 

Yahuyo, 

Yeloxi, 

Yazechealto, 

Yazechebaxo, 

Sogocho, 

Tabegua, 

Juchitepec, 

Tabaa, 

Yojobii, 

Solaga, 

Yuechi, 

Yaee, 

Lachichina, 

Yagayo, 

Latani, 

Maninaltepec, 

Jalahuy, 

Suchiapa, 

Chuapa, 

Lala, 

Yahuibe, 

Zapiloza, 

Yaveo, 

Jai tepee, 


Ayutla, 

Tuxtepec, 

Templantale, 

Tamazulapa, 

Teotalco, 

Xosaa, 

Tiltepec, 

Chixila, 

Ilahuitoltepec, 

Xagalasi, 

Tocontepec, 

Yobego, 

Moctum, 

Yaxoni, 

Amatepec, 

Reagui, 

Tepitongo, 

Comatlan, 

Yaviche, 

Yetzelala, 

Tanche, 

Puxmecatan, 

Juquila, 

Otzolote, 

Yatao, 

Chisme, 

Cacalotepec, 

Candado, 

Cozocosonque, 

Lopa, 

Hoya, 

Chichicatepec, 

Yattoni, 

Mexistlan, 

Talea, 

Yacochi, 

Yagabila, 

Guite, 

Tapanzaqueco, 

Tonagui, 

Tiltepec. 

Yaneri, 

Sogochi, 


[VILLA BOA, the principal town of the pro- 
vince and captainship of Goaz in Brazil. It is 
in s. lat. 16° 22', and about 192 miles w. n w. 
of Paracuta.] 

VILLACURI, a settlement of the province 
and eorregimiento of lea in Peru. 

[VILLA DEL FUERTE, or Montesclaros, 
a town of the intendancy of Sonora, to the n. of 
Cinaloa. Its present population is 7,900 souls.] 
[VILLA DE LEON, a considerable town of 
the intendancy of Guanaxuato ; in a plain emi- 
nently fertile in grain. From this town to San 
Juan del Rio are to be seen the finest fields of 
wheat, barley, and maize.] 

[VILLA DE PRINCIPE, a town of the pro- 
vince and government of Rio de Janeyro in Bra- 
sil; on the confines of the diamond district, visited 
by Mawe in 1809. In this place, which con- 
tains about 5,000 inhabitants, is a mint-master, 
to whom all the gold found in the neighbour- 
hood is brought for permutation. This town is 
situate in a fine open country. The few inha- 
bitants that were seen by Mawe are described 
as looking very wretched ] 

[VILLA Dk LA PURIFICACION, a town 
of the intendancy of Guadalaxara, to the n. w. 
of the port of Guatlan, formerly called Santiago 
de Buena Esperanza, celebrated from the voyage 
of discovery, made in 1632, by Diego Hurtado de 
Mendoza.] 

VILLA-FRANCA, a town of the English, in 
the island of Jamaica; situate on the s. coast, be- 
tween the Port Morante and the Point Yallah. 


V I L 


V I L 


231 


VILLAGE, a settlement of the island of Gua- 
dalupe ; situate on the w. coast, between the 
river Cure and the Bay of La Barque. 

Village, another settlement, in Nova Scotia, 
on the shore of the lake Freneuse. 

VILLAGRAN, Altos de, some hills of the 
kingdom ot Chile, in the territory and country 
of the Araucanos Indians ; celebrated from the mi- 
litary exploits of the Governor Don Juan de Vil- 
lagran against those infidels ; and it was on one 
of these that he met his death, thus leaving to 
them his name. It was in these heights that the 
Governor and President Don Alonso de Soto- 
mayor succeeded in routing those Indians en- 
tirely. 

Villagran, a river of the above kingdom, 
which runs e. and enters the sea opposite the 
island of Santa Maria. 

VILLANUEVA, De los Infantos, or De 
los Confines, a city of the kingdom of Chile ; 
founded by D. Garcia Hurtado de Mendoza, Mar- 
quis of Canete. It is of an agreeable and benign 
temperature ; situate in a valley which is watered 
by several rivers, and is eight leagues from the 
cordillera , and 16 from the capital, Santiago. 

Villanueva, a town in the province and go- 
vernment of San Juan de los Llanos, in the 
Nuevo Reyno de Granada, on the shore of the 
river Apure, and opposite the mouth, where this 
is entered by the St. Domingo. 

Villanuev A, another town, with the surname 
of Principe, in the province and captainship of 
Puerto Seguro, and kingdom of Brazil. It is 
large, handsome, and rich, as having in its terri- 
tory some very abundant diamond mines. 

V illanueva, another, with the dedicatory 
title of San Antonio, and the surname Del Rio, 
in the province and captainship of Sergipe, in the 
same kingdom as the former. It has a convent 
of Capuchins of La Piedad, and another Del 
Carmen. 

VILLAR, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Tomina in Peru, and of the arch- 
bishopric ofCharcas. In its church is venerated 
a miraculous image of Nuestra Senora del Ro- 
sario ; the hands and face of which were brought 
from Spain, by the Viceroy Don Francisco de 
Toledo, and by him presented to this settlement. 

FILLA-REAL, a settlement of the province 
and government of Santa Marta in the Nuevo 
Reyno de Granada ; situate on the shore of the 
grand river Magdalena, at the elbow formed by 
the lake of the Iiompedero. 

VILLARICA, a city of the province and go- 
vernment of Valdivia in the kingdom of Chile; 


founded by Pedro de Valdivia near the cordillera. 
It is thus of a very cold temperature, [165 miles 
from Concepcion, 63 from Imperial, and 65 from 
the sea, and about 55 w. of the volcano of the 
same name, in lat. 39° KF s. long. 72° KF a&gt;.] 
Villarica, another city, with the additional 
title of Espiritu Santo, in the province and go- 
vernment of Paraguay in Peru. It was, at first, 
founded in the province of Guaira, 200 leagues e. 
of the city of La Ascuncion; but, having been de- 
stroyed in 1630, by the Mamelukes of San Pablo, 
was rebuilt in the spot where it now stands, on the 
shore of the river Tebiquarimini. It has, besides 
the parish church, a convent of religious of San 
Francisco, and 400 housekeepers. 

[Villarica, a town also of the province and 
government of Paraguay ; situate on a plain about 
68 miles s. w. from Ascuncion, in lat. 25° 48' 
55" s. and long. 56° 31' 59" a?.] 

[Villarica, a town and capital of the pro- 
vince of Minas Geraes, and the seat of its govern- 
ment ; a place which had for many years been 
reputed the richest in Brazil, as to it was brought 
all the gold found in the vast district around. — 
Mawe, who visited it in 1809, observes, that he 
naturally expected to meet with nothing but 
wealth ; 4 but when we spoke,’ says he, 4 of the 
richness of the country, and the quantity of gold 
with which it was reputed to abound, the inhabi- 
tants seemed glad of the opportunity of telling 
us that they believed it was all sent to England ; 
adding, that their town ought now to be termed 
Villa Pobre instead of Villa Rica.’ It is situate 
on the side of a large mountain, connected with 
others forming an immense chain, of which it is 
one of the highest. Most of the streets range, 
in steps, as it were, from the base to the summit, 
and are crossed by others which lead up the 
acclivity. It is most admirably supplied with 
water, which is conducted into almost every 
house in a most convenient and pleasant manner. 
In the streets are many fountains, which, though 
not to be compared w ith those of Italy in archi- 
tectural taste, are well constructed. One cis- 
tern in particular contained water which tasted 
strongly of sulphate of iron : the natives con- 
sider it serviceable in the cure of cutaneous dis- 
eases, and frequently bathe in it. The town is 
divided into two parishes, and contains a popula- 
tion of about 20,000 inhabitants, of whom there 
are more whites than blacks. The climate is 
delightful, and perhaps equal to that of Naples. 
Though the latitude of the place is only 20° s. 
yet owing to its elevated site, the temperature 
of the air is generally moderate. The thermo-] 


232 


VILLARICA. 


[meter never exceeds 82° in the shade, and is 
rarely below 48°, but its usual range is from 64° 
to 80° in summer, and from 48° to 70° in winter. 
The greatest heats prevail in January. Owing 
to its great elevation, various changes from heat 
to cold prevail in the same day, and there are 
frequent showers of rain. Thunder-storms are 
common, but by no means violent. The sun is 
sometimes clouded by dews and mist so dense 
as not to subside until the forenoon is for ad- 
vanced. 

The gardens here are laid out with great taste, 
and from the peculiarity of their construction 
present a curious spectacle. As there is scarcely 
a piece of level ground, even 10 yards square, 
on the whole side of the mountain, the defect has 
been remedied by cutting spaces one above an- 
other at regular distances, and supporting them 
by low walls, the top of one being on a level with 
the base of that next above it. An easy flight of 
steps leads from one level to the other. These 
terraces are covered with a profusion of delicate 
flowers. Here are also excellent vegetables of 
every kind, such as artichokes, asparagus, spi- 
nach, cabbage, kidney-beans, and potatoes. — 
There are many indigenous fruits, which might 
be much improved by a better system of horticul- 
ture. The peach appears to be the only exotic 
fruit which has been hitherto introduced ; it 
flourishes amazingly. The branches of the trees 
are generally so loaded as to require perpendi- 
cular support. 

The town is of considerable extent, but by no 
means so well peopled as when the mines were 
rich. Few of the inhabitants have any employ- 
ment except the shopkeepers, who are indeed a 
numerous class. English woollens are by no 
means dear, superfine cloth being at 30s. to 35s. 
per yard, coatings, &amp;c. nearly as cheap as in 
England ; common cotton prints at Is. 6d. to 2s. 
per yard; hats, handkerchiefs, kerseymeres, and 
Manchester piece goods in great plenty. There 
is generally a glut of English merchandise and 
produce of all sorts, except earthenware, hams, 
porter, butter, and such articles as are enhanced 
on account of the risk of carriage. Common 
Figueras wine is sold at 3s. 6d. the bottle. The 
shops that sell the produce of the country are 
few in number and very indifferent. There are 
a great many tailors, shoemakers, tinworkers, 
and venders of hardware, some smiths, and no 
inconsiderable number of saddlers. It is natural 
that in a country where every one is a horseman, 
this trade should take the lead of most others. 
The saddles that are made here are much supe- 


rior to those of Rio de Janeyro. The working 
in gold is prohibited by law, to prevent it from 
undergoing that operation before it might be 
permuted. 

The market of Villa Rica is but ill supplied, 
notwithstanding the fertility of the district around 
it. Pulse and vegetables for the table are scarce, 
even grass is an article in great demand, for 
mules, who require at least six-pennyworth each 
per day, exclusive of corn, and milk is as dear 
as it is in London. Poultry sells at from 3s. 6d. 
to 4s. 6d. per couple. Beef of a tolerable kind, 
but by no means good, may be had at 1 \d. per 
pound. Pork is very fine ; mutton is utterly 
unknown. Tallow is exceedingly dear, and can- 
dles are at more than double the price at which 
they sell in England. 

It is surprising, as we have just observed, to 
witness the comparative poverty which prevails 
among the inhabitants. Of above 2,000 habita- 
tions, which the town contained, a considerable 
proportion are untenanted ; and the rents of the 
rest are continually lowering. Houses are to be 
purchased at one-half their real value ; for in- 
stance, a house built a few years ago at £.1,000 
cost, would not now sell for more than £.500. 

The mountain on which the town stands, is in 
length from eight to nine miles, in every part 
narrow and almost insulated, being surrounded 
by deep ravines. It is for the most part com- 
posed of argillaceous schistus in almost every 
gradation, migrated from the compact blue slate 
into micaceous schistus. In some parts it lies 
in regular laminae, in others it appears in con- 
fused masses. The slate is sometimes, but not 
very generally, used for paving, roofing, and 
other similar purposes. In some parts are to 
be seen a few slender, confused, and irregular 
quartzose veins of little consequence, a large pro- 
portion of ferruginous accumulations and conglo- 
merations, together with martial pyrites, and a 
considerable quantity of rounded quartz of all 
sizes. That side on which the town is built pre- 
sents many small hills, which form a number of 
gulleys in narrow ravines. Numerous stream- 
lets flow down from the springs in the mountain 
in various channels, and in rainy weather swell 
into cascades ; they form a stream at its base 
called Rio del Carmen, which in its course from 
hence is joined by many others, and changes its 
name first into that of Rio St. Jose, and then into 
Rio Doce. 

It appears that the first discovery of this once 
rich mountain was effected by the enterprising 
spirit of the Paulistas, who, of all the colonists in] 


V I L LARICA. 


233 


[Brazil, retained the largest share of that ardent 
and indefatigable zeal for discovery which cha- 
racterised the Lusitanians of former days. They 
penetrated from their capital into these regions, 
braving every hardship, and encountering every 
difficulty which a savage country, infested by 
still more savage inhabitants, opposed to them. 
They cut their way through impervious woods, 
carrying their provisions with them, and occa- 
sionally cultivating small patches of land to af- 
ford them food to retreat to, in case of necessity, 
as well as to keep up a communication with their 
city, St. Paul’s. Every inch of ground was dis- 
puted by the barbarous Indians, here called 
Bootocoodies, who were constantly either attack- 
ing them openly or lying in ambush, and but too 
frequently succeeded in surprising some of them, 
or their Negroes, whom they immediately sacri- 
ficed to their horrible appetite for human flesh. 
They believed the Negroes to be the great mon- 
keys of the wood. The bones of the unfortunate 
sufferers were frequently found exposed, shock- 
ing testimonies of the barbarity of their murder- 
ers, whom the Paulistas, roused to revenge, in- 
variably shot, wherever they met them. These 
examples of vengeance answered their desired 
end ; the Indians, terrified as well by the noise 
as by the fatal effect of the fire-arms, fled with 
precipitation, believing that the white men com- 
manded lightning and thunder. 

It does not appear that in exploring this terri- 
tory they received any assistance whatever from 
the Aborigines ; they followed the course of ri- 
vers, occasionally finding gold, of which they 
skimmed the surface, and continued to proceed 
until they arrived at the mountain which is our 
present subject. Its riches arrested their course ; 
they immediately erected temporary houses and 
began their operations. The principal men of 
the party that first settled here, were Antonio 
Dias, Bartholomew Rocinho, Antonio de Fer- 
rera (filho J, and Garcia Ruis. It appears that 
they took the most direct way to the place, for 
the roads they then opened are the same which 
are still used. The fame of their success soon 
reached the city of St. Paul’s; fresh adventurers 
arrived in great numbers, bringing with them all 
the Negroes they had means to purchase. Other 
adventurers went from St. Paul’s to Rio de Ja- 
neiro to procure more Negroes, their own city 
being drained ; and thus the news of the lately 
discovered gold-mountain being made known in 
the Brazilian capital, men of all descriptions went 
in crowds to this land of promise by the way of 
St. Paul’s, which was the only route then known. 

VOL. v. 


The first settlers might have prevented the ex- 
posure of their good fortune, had they been able 
to moderate their joy, and consented to act in 
concert; but as gold was in such great abund- 
ance, every individual appropriated a lot of 
ground, and thus became a capitalist. Each 
strove which should make the most of his trea- 
sure in the shortest time, and thus there was a 
continual demand for more Negroes, more iron, 
&amp;c. and, in the general eagerness to obtain them, 
the secret which all were interested in keeping 
was disclosed. The Paulistas, independent in 
spirit, and proud of their wealth, were desirous 
of giving laws to the new-comers ; but the latter 
determining to oppose this measure, formed 
themselves into a party under the guidance of 
Manuel Nunez Viana, an adventurer of some 
consequence, who strenuously asserted their claim 
to equal rights and advantages. Disputes arose 
on both sides, and were at length aggravated into 
hostilities, which proved unfavourable to the 
Paulistas, the greater part of whom fled to a 
considerable station of their own, and there 
awaited reinforcements. Viana and his follow- 
ers, without loss of time, went in pursuit of their 
foes, whom they found on a plain near the site of 
St. Joao del Rey. The two parties met on the 
borders of a river, and a sanguinary battle took 
place, which ended in the defeat of the Paulistas, 
who afterwards made the best terms they could. 
The slain were buried on the margin of the 
river, which, from that circumstance, took the 
name of Rio das Mortes. 

The Paulistas, bent on revenge, but weakened 
by defeat, appealed to the sovereign, King Pedro, 
denouncing Viana and his followers as rebels, 
who were attempting to take the district to 
themselves, and set up an independent govern- 
ment. The king’s ministers, apprized of the 
state of affairs, and learning by report the im- 
mense riches of the country, immediately sent a 
chief, with a competent body of troops, to take 
advantage of the strife between the two parties; 
which, in a country tenable by a few men on ac- 
count of its numerous strong-holds, was a most 
fortunate circumstance. The name of this chief 
was Albuquerque; a man of enterprise and per- 
severance, in all respects qualified for the service 
on which he was sent. His appearance at first 
occasioned much confusion and discontent among 
both parties ; and though he was not openly op- 
posed, yet he was in continual alarm. The Paul- 
istas now saw that the riches which they in con- 
junction with their rivals might have retained, 
were about to be seized by a third party, which 1 

H H 


234 


VILLARICA. 


[would reduce them both to subordination. Dis- 
turbances prevailed for some time, but reinforce- 
ments continually arriving- from government, 
tranquillity was at length perfectly established ; 
and in the year 1711 a regular town began to be 
formed ; a government-house, a mint, and a de- 
pot for arms were built. A code of laws was 
enacted for the regulation of the mines; all gold- 
dust found was ordered to be delivered to offi- 
cers appointed for that purpose; a fifth in weight 
was taken for the king, and the remaining four 
parts were purified, melted into ingots at the ex- 
pense of government, then assayed, marked ac- 
cording to their value, and delivered to the own- 
ers, with a certificate to render them current. 
For the greater convenience of trade, gold-dust 
was likewise permitted to circulate for small pay- 
ments. Notwithstanding these strict regulations, 
a considerable quantity of the precious metal in 
its original state found its way to Rio de Janeiro, 
Bahia, aud other ports, clandestinely, without 
paying the royal fifth, until government, apprized 
of this illicit traffic, established registers in vari- 
ous parts for the examination of all passengers, 
and stationed soldiers to patrole the roads. By 
these means, gold in immense quantities was 
seized and confiscated ; the persons on whom 
any was found forfeited all their property, and, 
unless they had friends of great influence, were 
sent as convicts to Africa for life. The greatest 
disgrace was attached to the name of smuggler ; 
and such was the rigour of the law against of- 
fenders of this description, that every person 
quitting the district was obliged to take a certifi- 
cate stating whither he was going, and what he 
carried with him. This regulation is still in 
force, and is rigorously observed. 

Villarica soon enjoyed a considerable trade 
with Rio de Janeiro ; the returns w ere Negroes, 
iron, woollens, salt, provisions of various kinds, 
and wine, all which at that time bore amazingly 
high profits. 

About the year 1713, when Dr. Bras de Silvia 
was appointed governor, the quantity of gold pro- 
duced was so considerable that the royal fifth 
amounted to £500,000 sterling annually. The 
mountain became pierced like a honey-comb, as 
the miners w orked every soft part they could find, 
and penetrated as far as they could, conveying 
the cascalhao which they dug out to a convenient 
place for washing. In rainy weather the torrents 
of water running down the sides of the mountain, 
carried away much earthy matter containing de- 
licate particles of gold, which settled in the 
ground near its base. When the waters abated, 


this rich deposit gave employment to numbers of 
the poorer sort of people, who took it away and 
washed it at their convenience. 

Antonio Dias, the person already mentioned 
as one of the leaders of the Paulistas, who dis- 
covered the place, having become extremely rich, 
built a fine church, and dying soon after, be- 
queathed to it considerable funds. It still bears 
his name. Five or six others were begun and 
soon finished, as neither wood nor stone was 
wanting, and the inhabitants were all ready to 
contribute a share of their property, and to em- 
ploy their Negroes in furtherance of these pious 
works ; but the Portuguese government soon en- 
acted a law prohibiting friars from entering the 
territory of the mines. 

The tow n now underwent many improvements ; 
its streets were more regularly built, and some 
parts of the side of the mountain were levelled to 
afford more convenient room for the construction 
of houses, and the laying out of gardens. Reser- 
voirs were formed, from which water was distri- 
buted by means of conduits to all parts, and pub- 
lic fountains were erected in the most convenient 
and central situations. The mint and smelting- 
houses were enlarged, and rendered more com- 
modious for the transaction of business. About 
this period the inhabitants amounted to 12,000, 
or upwards ; those who possessed mines were 
either the first settlers or their descendants, and 
as the best part of the district was occupied, 
the new adventurers who continued to arrive 
from time to time were obliged to enter into the 
service of the existing owners until they had 
learned their methods of working, after which 
they generally went in search of fresh mines, 
proceeding along the water-courses and ravines, 
where they sometimes discovered new sources of 
wealth. Between the years 1730 and 1750 the 
mines were in the height of their prosperity ; the 
king’s fifth during some years of that period is 
said to have amounted to at least a million sterl- 
ing annually. 

The mines which produced this immense wealth 
at length became gradually less abundant ; and, 
as the precious metal disappeared, numbers of 
the miners retired, some to the mother-country, 
loaded with riches, which tempted fresh adven- 
turers, and many to Rio de Janeiro and other 
sea-ports, where they employed their large capi- 
tals ii^commerce. 

Villarica at the present day scarcely retains 
a shadow of its former splendor. Its inhabitants, 
with the exception of the shopkeepers, are void of 
employment; they totally neglect the fine coun-J 


V I L L A R I C A. 


235 


[try around them, which, by proper cultivation, 
would amply compensate for the loss of the 
wealth which their ancestors drew from its bo- 
som. Their education, their habits, their here- 
ditary prejudices, alike unfit them for active life; 
perpetually indulging in visionary prospects of 
sudden wealth, they fancy themselves exempted 
from that universal law of nature which ordains 
that man shall live by the sweat of his brow. — 
In contemplating the fortunes accumulated by 
their predecessors, they overlook the industry 
and perseverance which obtained them, and en- 
tirely lose sight of the change of circumstances 
which renders those qualities now doubly neces- 
sary. Reared in idleness and ignorance, they 
feel nothing for the benefits of industry. Their 
Negroes constitute their principal property, and 
them they manage so ill, that the profits of their 
labour hardly defray the expenses of their main- 
tenance. This deplorable degeneracy is almost 
the universal characteristic of the descendants of 
the original settlers ; every trade is occupied 
either by Mulattoes or Negroes, both of which 
classes seem superior in intellect to their mas- 
ters, because they make a better use of it. 

We shall conclude our notice of this capital, 
with an interesting account of the method em- 
ployed in extracting the ore in the gold- washings, 
and a description of the mint, which, with the 
chief part of the preceding information, is ex- 
tracted from the work of Mr. Mawe. 

At the washings a great extent of ground is 
already worked, and quartzose stones are lying 
about in immense heaps. On the margin of 
the river is a bank, through which they are 
obliged to cut to the depth of at least 10 feet, 
to get at the cascalhao incumbent on the rock. 
The substance they have to cut through is clay, 
so strong that though falls of water are let 
upon it, and Negroes are constantly working it 
with hoes of various kinds, it is with difficulty 
to be removed. This is not the only impedi- 
ment, for, by the constant precipitation of mud, 
the cascalao is five feet below the bed of the 
river; hence, when they have sunk their pits, 
they have to use means for drawing the water 
from them. The hydraulic machines employed 
for this purpose are constructed as follows : a 
trough or spout, made of four stout planks, 
forming a cavity, say six inches square, is 
placed in an inclined position, with its lower end 
in the pit, where a roller is properly secured to a 
pile driven into the ground : an iron chain, with 
peculiar links, on every one of which is fixed a 
piece of wood, nearly answering the interior 


dimensions of the spout, is passed through it, 
then under the roller, and over the outside, up 
to the axis of a water-wheel, which being put in 
motion, causes the discharge of a column of 
water equal to the cavity. These machines are 
calculated to raise a great deal of water, but 
they are liable to be thrown out of repair. In 
many cases hand-pumps would serve the pur- 
pose better, being made at little trouble or ex- 
pense, easily repaired, and always ready at an 
hour’s notice. They are here utterly unknown. 

In the operation of getting gold, the heavy 
work is assigned to the male Negroes, and the 
lighter labour to the females. The cascalhao , 
dug from these pits by the former, is carried 
away by the latter in game lias, or bowls, to be 
washed. In performing this process, the men do 
not, in the first instance, attempt to separate the 
gold from the black oxide of iron, but empty 
their gamellas into a larger vessel, by rinsing 
them in the wafer which it contains. Thesubstance 
deposited in this vessel is delivered out, in small 
portions of about a pound each, to the most 
skilful washers, as the operation of washing, or, 
as it is termed, purifying it, requires great nice- 
ness and dexterity. Some of the grains of gold 
are so fine as to lloat on the surface, and of 
course are liable to be washed away in these 
repeated changes of water ; to prevent which 
the Negroes bruise a few handfuls of herbs on a 
stone, and mix the juice in small proportions 
with the water in their gamellas. Whether this 
liquid does in reality tend to precipitate the 
gold, is not certain, but the Negroes certainly use 
it with the greatest confidence. 

There is another mode of separating the gold 
from the cascalhao, called canoe-washing, which 
is extremely interesting. The canoes are made in 
the following manner : two 10 or 12 inch planks, 
about 12 or 15 feet in length, are laid on the 
ground, forming an inclined plane, sloping about 
one inch in 12 ; two other planks of similar di- 
mensions are fixed in the same direction at the 
lower end, forming a second inclined plane, 
with a fall of six inches from the former. On 
their sides are boards placed edge-wise, and 
staked down to the ground so as to form long- 
shallow troughs, the bottoms of which are co- 
vered with hides tanned with the hair on, hav- 
ing the hairy side outwards, or, in defect of 
these, with rough baize. Down these troughs is 
conveyed the water containing the oxide of iron 
and the lighter particles of gold ; the latter sub- 
stance precipitating in its course is entangled by 
the hair. Every half hour the hides are taken] 
h h 2 


236 


VILLARICA. 


[up, and carried to a tank near at hand, formed 
of four walls, say five feet long, four broad, and 
four deep, and containing about two feet depth 
of water. The hides are stretched over this 
tank and well beaten, then dipped and beaten re- 
peatedly, until all the gold is disentangled, after 
which they are carried back and replaced in the 
troughs. The tanks are locked up at nights, and 
well secured. The sediment taken from them 
being light is easily washed away by the hand in 
the manner before described, leaving only the 
black oxide of iron, called esmeril, and the gold, 
which is so fine that mercury is used to separate 
it. The process is performed as follows : about 
two pounds weight of oxide of iron, very rich 
in fine grains of gold, is put in a clean bowl ; a 
quantity of mercury, about two ounces, is added 
to it ; the mass of oxide, which is very damp, is 
worked by the hand for about 20 minutes, when 
the mercury appears to separate the esmeril , and 
to take up all the gold, assuming a soft doughy 
mass, that retains any form into which it is 
squeezed. The grains of gold, however, remain 
not amalgamated with, but merely enveloped 
in, the mercury. The mass is then put into a 
folded handkerchief, and an ounce or more of 
mercury is wrung or squeezed from it. The 
rest is put into a small brass dish, covered with 
a few green leaves, and then placed over a char- 
coal fire, where it is stirred with an iron rod to 
prevent the gold from adhering to the sides of 
the dish. The leaves are occasionally changed 
as they become parched by the heat. When 
taken off, they exhibit in some parts small glo- 
bules of mercury, and in others white oxide; on 
washing them with water, nearly half an ounce 
of the former substance is obtained from them. 
The gold after this operation always becomes 
changed in colour from an agreeable soft yellow 
to a dirty brown, and presents a very different 
appearance from that which is not subjected to 
mercury. 

In the smelting-house of the mint, are eight or 
10 small blast furnaces, in form much resembling 
blacksmiths’ hearths. The fuel used is charcoal. 
When a quantity of gold dust is brought, (no 
matter whether large or small) say, for instance, 
six ounces, it is first permuted, and a fifth taken 
for the prince ; the rest is put into a Hessian 
crucible about three inches in diameter, which is 
immediately placed in the furnace. A quantity 
of corrosive sublimate is then put to it, which, 
on being heated, exhales very strong fumes ; the 
scoriae, if any be formed, are taken off with a 
pair of tongs, and more sublimate is added if 


required. Ebullition sometimes occurs, in which 
case the crucible is covered with a bit of common 
tile. As soon as the mercury is evaporated, the 
gold is poured into an ingot mould, previously 
rubbed with animal fat : it is afterwards turned 
out into a tub of water. The ingot generally, 
in some part or other, has mercury attached to 
it, which it seizes immediately, and the part of 
the gold thus affected assumes the appearance of 
lead. To remove this, they hold it in a strong 
fire with a pair of tongs until the mercury is eva- 
porated. It is afterwards sent to the assay- 
master, who first compares it on the touchstone 
with gold bars of different alloys, ascertained 
and marked, and then assays it. The two me- 
thods being found to agree, the assay master 
stamps upon the ingot its degree of fineness, 
called toque, also its weight, its number, the name 
of the place, and the year. It is then registered 
in a book kept for that purpose, and a copy of 
the entry is made out on a slip of paper, in 
which the ingot is wrapped, and delivered to 
the owner for circulation. The operation of 
melting a given quantity seldom occupies more 
than 10 minutes or a quarter of an hour ; that of 
cupelling, about double the time : but gold dust 
may sometimes be delivered, and received in a 
circulating form in less than an hour ; so that 
little delay takes place, and as there are six fur- 
naces, the bringers of gold have seldom to wait 
for their turn. The pale colour and low quality 
of various bars of gold are always imputed to 
the silver, platina, or other metal contained in 
them : they vary from 16 to 23£ carats, which is 
within half a carat of what is denominated pure 
gold. Twenty-two is the standard, and gold ex- 
ceeding that receives a premium according to its 
fineness. Villarica is in lat. 20° 26 / s. and long. 
45° 50' w.'] 

Villarica, a volcano of the kingdom ofChile, 
in the mountains of the cordillera , of the territory 
of Arauco. In its vicinity is another volcano, 
called El Chinal. From the skirt of the former 
issues forth two streams as wide as a man’s body, 
which unite, and form a large channel, emptying 
itself into a lake of this name. [This volcano may 
be seen at the distance of 150 miles; and although 
it appears to be isolated, it is said to be connected 
by its base with the Andes. It is 14 miles in 
circumference at its base, which is principally 
covered with pleasant forests. A great number 
of rivers, independently of the one mentioned 
by Algedo, have their sources from it, and its 
perpetual verdure furnishes a proof that its irrup- 
tions have never been very violent. J 


-YIN 


V I L 


237 


Villarica. Some sierras or cordillera of 
mountains of Nueva Espana, which run between 
the mouth of the river Tampico and the Point 
Delgada. 

VILLAS QUATRO, a jurisdiction and alcal- 
dia mayor of Nueva Espana, in the province and 
bishopric of Oaxaca, belonging- to the house of 
the Marquis del Valle, through a grant made by 
Hernan Cortez, as a reward for services. It is 
bounded by the jurisdiction of the city of Oaxaca ; 
the boundary being marked by a tree at the back 
of the convent of the religious women of Santa 
Monica, in the capital of the jurisdiction. The 
territory is very fertile in cochineal, seeds, and 
fruits, and with these it carries on a trade with 
the neighbouring jurisdictions. In its district are 
12 estates and small farms, in which cattle are 
bred ; also six mills for grinding corn, and by 
which supplies of flour are made to a great part 
of the province. The capital is the town which 
they call Del Marquesado ; and the settlements, 
of which its jurisdiction is composed, are the 
following : 

San Martin Mexi- Sta. Domingo Tomal- 


capa, tepee, 

San Juan Chapul- Sta. Ana Zagache, 
tepee, San Juan de Chi- 

Santo Tomas Xu- lateca, 

chimilco, San Pedro Guego- 

San Jacinto, rese, 

San Pedro Apostol, Santa Catalina de las 
San Antonio de la Minas, 

Cal, Chichicapa, 

San Sebastian de Santa Marta, 

Etla, San Martin Yachila, 

Guadalupe, San Martin de las 

Nareo, Peras, 

La Soledad, San Pablo de las 

Santo Domingo, Peras, 

Cuilapa, Santa MariaAtzompa, 

Santa Cruz Xocox- San Pablo de Etla, 
otlan, Ilapacoya, 

San Lucas Ilane- S. Agustin de Etla, 
chico, San Gabriel, 

S. Raymundo Xalpa, S. Miguel de Etla, 

San Agustin de la Asuncion, 

Cal, Santa Marta II. 

San Andres Guay- San Juan Guelache, 
apa, Santa Maria Nativi- 

Santa Lucia, tas, 

S. Sebastian Tuctla, Los Santos Reyes. 
VILLASIMA, a settlement of the province 
and government of Tucuman in Peru, of the 
jurisdiction and district of the city of San Fer- 
nando de Catamarca. 


VILLA-VIEJA, a town of the province and 
captainship of Espirtu Santo, in Brasil. 

Villa-vieja, a settlement of the province and 
government ofNeiva in the Nuevo Rey node Gra- 
nada ; annexed to the curacy of its capital. It 
is of a hot temperature, abounding in gold mines 
and the vegetable productions of its climate, as 
also in very large breeds of neat cattle. 

VILLA VISEN CIO, a settlement of the pro- 
vince and corregimiento of Chile ; situate on the 
bank of the river Longomilla, in the s. part. It 
has in its vicinity the estate of Tabontinaja. 

VILLELAS, San Joseph de, a settlement of 
the province and government of Tucuman, in 
Peru ; situate on the shore of the river Salado, 
in the jurisdiction of the city of Santiago del 
Estero, and now in the territory of the Chacos. 
It is a reduccion of the religious missionaries of 
St. Francis, and composed of Petacas, Hipas, 
Humahuampas, and Villelas Indians. 

[VILLEMONT’S PRAIRIE, a tract of mea- 
dow land, on the right of the mouth of the 
Washita River, in N. America. Seevol. iii. p. 252 
of this work.] 

VILLETA, a settlement of the government of 
Mariquita, and jurisdiction of the town of Honda, 
in the Nuevo Reyno de Granada; annexed to 
the curacy of the settlement of Sasaima. It is 
of a very hot temperature, produces much maize, 
sugar canes, yucas , and plantains, and contains 
more than 100 housekeepers, but very few In- 
dians, and has the disadvantage of abounding in 
insects. 

Villeta, a town of the province and govern- 
ment of Paraguay ; situate on the shore of the 
river of its name, and to the s. of the city of La 
Asuncion, with a fort for its defence. 

[Villeta, another parish of the province and 
government of Paraguay, in lat. 25° 30' 56 " s. 
long. 57° 3G' 25" ».] 

VILLIERS, a settlement of Canada, on the 
shore of the river St. Lawrence, nearly opposite 
Quebec. 

VILLITA, a settlement of the head settlement 
of the district of Tlatenango and alcaldia mayor 
of Colotlan, in Nueva Espana ; six leagues s. of 
its head settlement. 

VILLIVA, or QUEDAL, Punta de, a cape 
or extremity in the coast of the S. Sea, in the 
province and government of Valdivia and king- 
dom of Chile, being 80 miles s. of Valdivia, in 
lat. 41° 6' s. 

VINA, a settlement of the province and cor- 
regimiento of Huamanga, in Peru, 23 leagues 
distant from Guancabelica ; whither the natives 


238 V I N C ENT. ST. 


bring from the adjoining estates certain fruits ; 
so that they are for the most part muleteers, 
keeping for this traffic upwards of 200 mules. 

[VINALHAVEN, a township on the coast of 
the district of Maine, in Hancock County, con- 
taining, in 1790, 578 inhabitants. It is s. e. of 
Deer Island ] 

VINARA, a settlement of the province and 
government of Tucuman, in the jurisdiction of 
the city of Santiago del Estero ; from whence it 
is 20 leagues distant. 

VINCACHOS, a settlement of the province 
and corregimiento of Porco, in Peru. 

VINCELOT, a settlement of the French in 
Canada ; on the shore of the river St. Lawrence, 
and at the mouth of the river of Trois Saumons. 

VINCENT, St. an island of the N. Sea, one 
of the smaller Antilles ; situate e. of Barbadoes, 
n. of St. Lucia, and s. of Becoya, [being about 
24 miles long from the e. side of Tyrrel’s Bay, 
the extreme s. point of the island to Tarraty 
Point, its n. extremity ; and about 18 broad from 
the mouth of Calonery River, e. to Cumberland 
Bay, at the mouth of Washilabo River on the ay.] 
It is of nearly a round figure, mountainous, and 
full of lofty and thick woods, although it is not 
without some plains irrigated by several streams. 
On the coast are some convenient bays, with 
good soundings. The island is inhabited by 
Caribes, although the numbers of these are very 
inferior to those of the Negro slaves, who have 
settled here after having fled from their masters 
in the other islands, and who are always consi- 
dered, with a very jealous eye, by the Indians. 
The French endeavoured to establish themselves 
here ; and, in fact, have here a small colony, 
which came from Barbadoes, who cultivate to- 
bacco of excellent quality, known in Europe by 
the name of St. Cincent or Dunkirk. The 
English, under the Duke of Montague and Cap- 
tain Irwing, attempted to found here another 
colony, but without effect, although that com- 
mander, with a profound zeal and patriotic spirit, 
expended £.40,000 in the enterprise. 

[The tremendous convulsion of nature, with 
which St. Vincent was visited by the eruption of 
the Souffrier mountain, so late as the 1st of May, 
1812, is what first strikes us in the consideration 
of this island. It was of a magnitude unprece- 
dented even in that quarter of the globe. Such 
then of our readers as are delighted with the 
awful and terrific we refer to a long and faithful 
description of all the phenomena that took place 
on this distressing occasion under the article 
Souffrier of this work. This done, we proceed 


to shew what has been the progressive advance- 
ment of St. Vincent’s up to the awful period of 
its visitation. Whether it will ever completely 
recover from the ruin it experienced is somewhat 
doubtful ; for, if it be true, as the St. Vincent’s 
Journal asserted, that “ the quantity of com- 
bustible matter discharged was equal to the bulk 
of the whole island,” the soil must have ex- 
perienced a complete superstratum, and the 
ancient productions have been all buried in one 
heterogeneous mass. 

Previously to the year 1763, Dominica, St. 
Vincent, St. Lucia, and Tobago, were denomi- 
nated neutral islands ; or, they were rather 
islands to which both Britain and France laid a 
claim ; but by the treaty of peace in that year, 
Dominica, St. Vincent, and Tobago, were ceded 
in full right to Britain, and St. Lucia to France. 

At this time there were some trifling settle- 
ments in Dominica and St. Vincent, formed by a 
few French, who had landed and resided without 
molestation. There were also in both a few' 
families of savages, the aborigines of the islands, 
of a yellow colour, with long lank hair, and dis- 
tinguished by the name of Yellow Caribes ; but 
in St. Vincent there were also a numerous race 
of people, who called themselves Black Caribes, 
who ranged over, and had a kind of possession 
of above half the island. These were the pro- 
geny of a cargo of slaves from Africa stranded 
on the windward part of the island, about the 
year 1690. 

About the year 1764 or 5, commissioners were 
appointed by his Majesty, to sell the lands in 
Dominica and St. Vincent, thus ceded by the 
treaty of peace of 1763 ; and, in St. Vincent, 
the boundary of that part of the island, of which 
it was agreed the Black Caribes should be al- 
lowed to retain possession was ascertained, and 
the other lands disposed of by the commis- 
sioners. 

In about the year 1771, owing to some mis- 
conduct on the part of these Black Caribes, they 
were driven by his Majesty’s troops a consider- 
able way within the limits before prescribed to 
them, leaving them, however, in possession of 
lands infinitely more than sufficient for their 
maintenance, or they were likely for some hun- 
dred years to be able to cultivate. On this oc- 
casion, in the year 1773, a treaty was entered 
into with them, by which they relinquished all 
claim to lands without a certain boundary, ac- 
knowledged themselves to hold those lands, they 
were permitted to retain, of his Majesty, and to 
be amenable to the English government for any] 


239 


VINCENT, ST. 


f offences which affected British subjects,, but re- 
taining- the right to punish offences amongst 
themselves. 

The lands thus obtained have since been 
granted by the crown to the quantity of 40,000 
acres, the first 20,538 that were sold having 
brought the sum of £162,854. 11s. Id. sterling. 
A part of the rest were given to Lieut. General 
Monckton as a remuneration for services; and 
the residue has been granted to different settlers 
by the successive governors of the island. 

In the year 1795, the Black Caribes, joined by 
the French inhabitants, broke out in open rebel- 
lion, avowing an intention of murdering every 
white British subject ; and, in many instances, 
carrying such intention into effect in the most 
barbarous manner. By his Majesty’s troops, 
aided by the British inhabitants of the island, 
and their slaves, this rebellion was crushed in 
the end of the year 1796 ; and the Black Caribes 
surrendered and were conveyed to the island of 
Ratan, where they were landed with provisions, 
&amp;c. The lands they occupied, and which are 
now considered as crown lands in that island, 
are estimated to contain about 27,000 or 28,000 
acres, no survey having ever been made : of 
these, previously to the calamity of the earth- 
quake, 14,000 to 16,000 acres were supposed to 
be adapted to the culture of the sugar-cane ; 
about 6,000 or 7,000 acres to be suitable for pas- 
ture and provision ground, and the residue of 
little value, being the summits and sides of very 
high and steep mountains, making the total 
amount of acres in this island about 84,000. It 
should be observed, however, that in the Re- 
port of Privy Council on the Slave Trade, in 
1788, the British property vested here was esti- 
mated at only 25,000 taxed acres of patented 
estates ; the number of Negroes being taken at 
15,000, at £50 each Negro. A large portion of 
the lands were in high woods and brush-wood : 
parts of them indeed had been cleared in patches 
or very small parcels by the Caribes for raising 
provisions and tobacco, previous to their expul- 
sion in the end of the year 1796, and beginning 
of the year 1797. 

The whole of the lands are well watered by 
about 20 rivers, sufficiently large, and well suited 
for mills ; and the soil and surface is well cal- 
culated for the cultivation of the sugar-cane. 
The value of the lands is, however, much di- 
minished by their situation being in the wind- 
ward coast of the island, where there is, at all 
times, great difficulty in shipping any produce, 
or landing any supplies : which circumstance, 


though it operates as a very great injury to the 
planter in time of peace, yet, during a war, 
affords security against plunder by privateers, an 
evil often experienced by settlers in the leeward 
part of the island ; and indeed to such species of 
warfare all the islands, in a great degree, are 
equally liable. 

The value of these lands are estimated very 
differently. Some persons have rated the same 
land as high as £40 sterling per acre ; and 
others, who ought to be equally informed, at 
half the sum. Probably from £25 to £30 
sterling per acre is near the price they ought to 
bring if sold, payable by instalments of 1, 2, 3, 
4, or 5 years ; but, if sold for ready money, much 
less. The provision and pasturage land might 
bring from £5 to £ 10 sterling per acre. From 
the above data, the total value of the land of this 
island might be estimated, in round numbers, at 
about £420,000 sterling. 

As St. Vincent’s was only partially cultivated 
on a few leeward bays, by French intruders, pre- 
vious to 1763, when it ceased to be a neutral 
island, and w'as annexed to the British crown, 
the produce was not large. The French settlers, 
adverted to, grew, in 1764, 

Tobacco, - - - 12,000 andoulles. 

Cocoa, - - - - 7,900 cwt. 

Coffee, - - - - 14,700 cwt. 

At the restoration of the island to the domi- 
nion of Great Britain by the general pacification 
of 1783, it contained 61 sugar estates, 500 acres 
in coffee, 200 acres in cacao , 400 in cotton, 50 in 
indigo, and 500 in tobacco, besides land appro- 
priated to the raising provisions, such as plan- 
tains, yams, maize, &amp;c. All the rest of the coun- 
try, excepting the few spots that had been cleared 
from time to time by the Caribes, retained its 
native woods. Since that period much industry 
and exertion had been employed in taking advan- 
tage of its physical powers. The progress of its 
cultivation w ill appear by a return to House of 
Commons, 1806, shewing the number of hogs- 
heads of sugar of 13 cwt. exported in the follow- 
ing years : 

Hogsheads. 

In 1789, - - 6,400 

1799, - - 12,120 

1805, - - 17,200 

The total exports in 1788, in 122 vessels, 
amounted in value, according to the current 
prices in London, to £186,450 14s. 8 d. includ- 
ing exports to the American States, to the value 
of £9,019 Is. 8 d. sterling. The cargoes con- 
sisted of 65,128 cwt. 1 qr. 271b. sugar; 88,2661 


240 


VINCENT, ST. 


[gallons rum ; 9,656 gallons molasses ; 634 cwt. 
1 qr. 51b. coffee; 761,880 lbs. cotton; 143 cwt. 
241b. cocoa ; besides hides, dying woods, &amp;c. 

In the year 1800, the quantity of sugar made 
amounted to 16,518 hogsheads, and in the fol- 
lowing year the crops were increased to 17,908. 


In 1810, 18,288 hogsheads were produced, and 
at present the average quantity may possibly ex- 
tend to 20,000 hogsheads. 

The quantities of the principal articles im- 
ported into Great Britain, were in 


Coffee 

Sugar. 

Rum. 

Cotton Wool. 

British 

Plant. 

Foreign Plant. 

British Plant. 

Foreign Plant. 




Cwt. 

Cwt. 

Cwt. 

Cwt. 

Gallons. 

lbs. 

1809, 

248 

— 

202,953 

4 

243,461 

230,822 

1810, 

327 

— 

197,304 

— 

200,795 

171,032 


The official value of the Imports and Exports 
between Great Britain and St. Vincent’s, were in 
Imports. Exports. 

1809, - - £*307,829 - - £*82,408 

1810, - - 295,509 - - 96,872 

St. Vincent’s, in 1800, was divided into four 

parishes, St. David, St. Patrick, St. Andrew, and 
St. George. Its towns are Kingston, the capi- 
tal, and Richmond ; the others are villages or 
hamlets, at the several bays and landing-places. 
The islands dependent on the St. Vincent’s go- 
vernment, are Bequia, containing 3,700 acres; 
Union, 2,150 acres ; Canouane, 1,777 acres; and 
Mustique, about 1,200 acres. Of the 11,853 Ne- 
groes, in 1787, as in the table beneath, about 
1,400 were employed in the cultivation of these 
islands. There are likewise the little islots of 
Petit Martinique, Petit St. Vincent, and Balle- 
seau, each of which produces a little cotton. — 
The other productions, are cinnamon, mango, sa - 
samum, vai/nilla , China tallow tree, camphor, 
gum, and storax. 

By report of the Privy Council in 1788, and 
by subsequent returns to House of Commons, 
the population of St. Vincent’s amounted to 



Whites. 

People of 
Colour. 

Slaves. 

Total. 

1787 

1450 

300 

11,853 

13,603 

1805 

1600 

450 

16,500 

18,550 


Of late years the white population has decreased 
in the same proportion as in the other islands. 

The import of slaves into St. Vincent’s, by re- 
port of Privy Council, 1788, at a medium of four 
years, and by a return to House of Commons in 
1805, at a medium of two years, to 1803, was 



Average of 

Imports. 

Re-exports. 

Retained. 

4 

years to 1787 

1825 

300 

1525 

2 

years to 1803 

1540 

— 

1540 


For a concise and comparative view of the 
population, property, annual productions, and 
commerce of this valuable island, the reader is 
referred to the article West Indies. 

St. Vincent lies 200 miles n.e. of Margaret, 
and 78 w. of Barbadoes, its middle being in 
lat. 13° 17' n. long 61° 15' a;.] 

[Vincent, a township of Pennsylvania ; situ- 
ate in Chester County ] 

[Vincent, De las Pazes, St., or Onda, a town 
of Popayan and Tierra Firme, in S. America, 
about 25 miles e. of San Sebastian, with a port 
where canoes from Cartagena and St. Martha un- 
load their merchandise.] 

[Vincent, Port St. (the same as that called 
by Alcedo, Vicente), on the coast of Chile, in the 
S. Pacific Ocean, is six miles n. n. e. of the mouth 
of the river Biobio, having a safe harbour, and 
secure against all winds but the w. which blows 
right in. Talcaguama Port is six miles to the n. 
of it.] 

[Vincent, a captainship of Brazil. See Vi- 
cente.] 

[VINCENTO, a channel which goes in on 
the w. side of the channel of Amiaz Island, in 
the Bay of Todos Santos, on the coast of Brazil.] 
[VINCENTS, Fort, in the N. W. Territory, 
stands on the e. side of Wabash River, 150 miles 
by the meanderings of the river from its mouth. 
It was erected in the year 1787, in order to repel 
the incursions of the W abash Indians, and to se- 
cure the w. lands from intruding settlers. It 
has four small brass cannon, and is garrisoned] 


V I N 


V I R 


241 


by a major and two companies. The town of 
Vincents contained, in 1792, about 1,500 souls, 
principally of French extraction. It is about 
140 miles s. zo. of Fort Recovery. Lat. 38° 48 ' n. 
Long-. 87° 25 / zo. They raise Indian corn, and 
wheat ; and tobacco of an extraordinary good 
quality, superior, it is said, to that produced in 
Virginia. They have a fine breed of horses, 
brought originally by the Indians from the Spa- 
nish settlements, on the®, side of the Mississippi. 
Here are large herds of swine and black cattle, 
and the settlers deal with the Indians for furs 
and deer-skins. Hemp of a good quality grows 
spontaneously in the low lands of the Wabash; 
as do grapes, of which the inhabitants make a 
sufficient quantity, for their own consumption, 
of well-tasted red wine. Hops, large and good, 
are found in many places, and the lands are par- 
ticularly adapted to the culture of rice. All Eu- 
ropean fruits thrive well, both here and in the 
country bordering on the river Ohio.] 

VINCHAINA, a settlement of the province 
and corre gimiento of Huanta in Peru; annexed 
to the curacy of the settlement of Quinoa. 

V inchain a, another settlement, in the same 
province and kingdom as the former. It has the 
surname of La Sal, to distinguish it, and is 
annexed to the curacy of the settlement of 
*1* icl lets 

[VINER’S Island, in Hudson’s Bay, lies 
n. e. of the mouth of Albany River.] 

[VINEYARD, New, a plantation in Lincoln 
County, district of Maine, on the two north-east- 
ernmost branches of Sandy River, about 59 miles 
n. by zo. of Brunswick, and 37 n. zo. of Hal- 
lowell.] 

Vineyard Sound, on the s. e coast of Massa- 
chusetts, is the strait or passage between the 
Elizabeth Islands and Martha’s Vineyard. The 
s. zo. channel of which is from four to seven 
miles broad, has Gay Head on the s. e. and the 
Sow and Pigs on the n. zo.] 

Vineyard, Marthas, an island of theN.Sea; 
situate near the coast of New England, of the 
United States of America, opposite the Bay of 
Buzard. [See Martha s Vineyard.] 

Vinnoque, a river of the kingdom of Peru, 
which rises in the province and corregimiento of 
Castro Vdrreyna, to the e. of the capital, runs to 
this rhumb, and then turning its course to the 
province of Vilcas Huaman to the n. enters the 
river Pangora. 

VINTER, a settlement of the island of Bar- 
badoes ; situate on the e. coast. 

VOL. v. 


[VIPER Key, one of the Tortugas, on the 
coast of Florida ; five miles n. e. of Duck Key, 
and 3| e. of Old Matacombe.] 

VIRACALHA, a settlement of the province 
and corregimiento of Tunja, in the Nuevo Reyno 
de Granada. It is of a very cold temperature, 
produces much wheat, maize, papa ^ ’ k' r ;i»es, and 
apples, and Alexandrian roses in great abundance. 
— The natives fabricate rugs, blankets, baizes, and 
other articles of wool. It contains very few 
white inhabitants, and about 80 Indians, is three 
hours journey s. e. of Tunja, and near the settle- 
ment of Ramiquiri. 

VIRAGO, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Condesuyos de Arequipa in Peru. 

VI RCA S, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Canta in Peru, annexed to the 
curacy of the settlement of Pari. 

[VIRGIL, a military township of Onondago 
County, New York, having Dry den on the zo. 
Cincinnatus e. Homer n. and on the s. 230,000 
acres of land on Susquehannah River, ceded to 
the State of Massachusetts. It is under the juris- 
diction of Homer, which was incorporated in 
1794.] 

VIRGIN GORDA, an island in the N. Sea, 
one of the Lesser A ntilles, situate to the e. of the 
island of Puerto Rico, and four leagues from 
Tortola. It is of a very irregular figure, and its 
greatest length from n.e. to s. zo. is eight miles. 
It has very few inhabitants, and in the centre of 
it is a mountain in which is said to be found a 
silver-mine. It is situate in lat. 18° 30' n. long. 
64° 25' zo. and is one of those called the Virgin 
Islands. — See this ai'ticle. 

[VIRGIN MARY, Cape, the n. e. point of 
the entrance of the Straits of Magellan, in the 
S. Atlantic Ocean, is a steep white cliff. Lat. 
52° 21' s. long. 68° 17' zo. The variation of the 
compass, in 1780, was 24' 30" e.] 

[Virgin Rocks, off the s.e. part of the coast 
of Newfoundland Island, 20 leagues s. e. of Cape 
Race. Lat. 46° n. According to others, lat. 46° 
30 / n. and these last say 17 or 18 leagues s. e. by 
e. of Cape Ballard.] 

VIRGINES, or Virgin Isles, a group of 12 
or more islands of the N. Sea, and of the Lesser 
Antilles, for the most part uncultivated, barren, 
and desert. They lie to the e. of Puerto Rico, 
and to the zo. of Anguila. Although the pass 
through the middle of them is looked upon as 
difficult and hazardous, it was effected by Francis 
Drake, when he went to attack the island of St. 
Domingo, in 1580. One of these islands is 

i i 


242 


VIRGIN ISLANDS. 


called De Paxaros, or Birds’ Island, since there 
are such numbers of them, and so tame, that a 
ship load might be caught without difficulty. 

These islands belong to different powers, and 
occupy a space of 24 leagues from c. to w. and of 
16 leagues in width. This archipelago is com- 
posed o c a great number of isles, the coasts of 
which are very dangerous for navigators, and 
celebrated for the shipwreck of many vessels, 
particularly of some valuable Spanish galleons ; 
but very luckily for trade and navigation nature 
has situate in the midst of them a bay of three or 
four leagues wide, and of six or seven long, the 
most beautiful that can possibly be imagined, 
called the Bay of Francis Drake, in which ves- 
sels may lie at anchor close to the shore in 
safety, and well sheltered from all the winds. 

At present the possession of these islands is 
divided between the English and the Danes, and 
the Spaniards pretend to those which are nighest 
to Puerto Rico. Those belonging to the Eng- 
lish are, the Virgin Gorda, on which depend 
Anegada, Nicker, Prickly Pear, Mosquito Island, 
Cumanoes, Dog Island, the Fallen City, the 
Round Rock, Ginger, Coopers, Salt Island, Pe- 
ter’s, and Dead Chest ; besides which, Tortola, 
on which depend Jost Van Dykes, Little Van 
Dykes, Guana, Beef, and Thatch Islands, all of 
which have, in the course of a few years, been 
put under a regular form of government. 

The islands belonging to the Danes are, St. 
Thomas, on which those of Brass, Little Saba, 
Buck, Great and Little St. James, and Bird Is- 
land, are dependent ; with St. John’s, on which 
depend those of Lavango, Cam, Witch, and Santa 
Cruz. 

The Spaniards claim Serpents’ Island, (which 
the English call Green Island), the Tropic Keys, 
Great and Little Passage Island, and particularly 
Crab Island. 

[The Virgin Islands were so named by Colum- 
bus himself, who discovered them in 1493, and 
gave them this appellation, in allusion to the 
well-known legend in the Romish ritual of the 
11,000 virgins. 

The Spaniards of those days, however, thought 
them unworthy of further notice. A century af- 
terwards, 1596, they were visited by the Earl of 
Cumberland, in his way to the attack of Puerto 
Rico ; and the historian of that voyage, whose 
narrative is preserved in Hakluyt’s collection, 
calls them “ a knot of little islands wholly un- 
inhabited, sandy, barren, and craggy.” Although, 
as has been already stated, the principal islands 


do not exceed 10 or 12, the whole group may 
comprehend about 40 islands, islots, and keys, 
and they are divided as just mentioned. 

The first possessors of such of these islands as 
now belong to the British government, were a 
party of Dutch Bucaniers who fixed themselves 
at Tortola about the year 1648, and built a fort 
there for their protection. In 1666, they were 
driven out by a stronger party of the same ad. 
venturers, who, calling themselves English, pre- 
tended to take possession for the crown of Eng- 
land, and the English monarch, if he did not 
commission the enterprise, made no scruple to 
claim the benefit of it; for Tortola and its de- 
pendencies were soon afterwards annexed to the 
Leeward Island government, in a commission 
granted by King Charles II. to Sir William Sta- 
pleton. 

The Dutch had made but little progress in 
cultivating the country when they were expelled 
from Tortola; and the chief merit of its sub- 
sequent improvements was reserved for some 
English settlers from the little island of Anguilla, 
who, about a century past, embarked with their 
families and settled in the V irgin Islands. Their 
wants were few, and their government simple 
and unexpensive. The deputy-governor, with a 
council nominated from among themselves, exer- 
cised both the legislative and judicial authority, de- 
termining, in a summary manner, without a jury, 
all questions between subject and subject ; and 
as to taxes, there seem to have been none laid : 
when money was absolutely necessary for public 
use, it was raised, we conjecture, by voluntary 
contribution. 

Under such a system, it was impossible that 
the colony could attain to much importance. It 
wanted the advantage of English capitals ; but 
credit is sparingly given where payment cannot 
easily be enforced. The inhabitants therefore, 
whose numbers in 1756, amounted to 1,263 
whites, and 6,121 blacks, reasonably hoped to 
be put on - the same footing with the sister 
islands, by the establishment of a perfect civil 
government, and constitutional courts of justice 
among them ; but in this expectation they were 
not gratified until the year 1773. In that year, 
they presented an humble petition to the captain- 
general of the Leeward Island government, re- 
questing his excellency to unite with them in an 
application to his Majesty, for permission to elect 
an assembly of representatives out of the free- 
holders and planters, in order that such assem- 
bly, with the governor and council, might framed 


V I R 


V I R 


243 


f proper laws for their peace, welfare, and good 
government ; pledging themselves, in that case, 
to grant to his Majesty, his heirs and successors, 
an impost of 4£ per cent, in specie, upon all 
goods and commodities the growth of these 
islands, similar to that which was paid in the 
other Leeward Islands. 

Their application, thus sweetened, proved suc- 
cessful. It was signified to them that his Ma- 
jesty, fully considering the persons, circumstan- 
ces, and condition of his said Virgin Islands, and 
the necessity there was, from the then state of 
their culture and inhabitancy, that some adequate 
and perfect form of civil government should be 
established therein ; “ and finally trusting that 
his faithful subjects in his said Virgin Islands, 
who should compose the new assembly, would, 
as the first act of legislation, cheerfully make 
good the engagement of granting to his Majesty, 
his heirs and successors, the impost of 4| per 
cent, on all the produce of the Virgin Islands, to 
be raised and paid in the same manner as the 4y 
per cent, is made payable in the other Leeward 
Islands,” did cause his royal pleasure to be sig- 
nified to the governor in chief, that he should 
issue writs in his Majesty’s name, for convening 
an assembly or house of representatives, who, to- 
gether with a council, to be composed of 12 per- 
sons, to be appointed by the governor for that 
purpose, might frame and pass such laws as 
should be necessary for the welfare and good 
government of the said islands. 

Accordingly, on November 30, 1773, the go- 
vernor in chief of the Leeward Islands, in obe- 
dience to his Majesty’s orders, issued a procla- 
mation for convening an assembly or house of 
representative of the Virgin Islands, who met on 
the first of February following-, and very honour- 
ably complied with their engagement to the 
crown ; the very first act passed by them being 
the grant before mentioned of 4y per cent, on the 
produce of the colony for ever. They afterwards 
passed a grant of j?.400 currency per ann. as 
their proportion towards the salary of the gover- 
nor-general. 

Such was the price at which the Virgin Islands 
purchased the establishment of a constitutional 
legislature, and they were thus included under 
the Leeward Charaibean island government. 

The chief, and almost the only staple produc- 
tions of these islands are sugar and cotton. Of 
the quantity of land appropriated to the cultiva- 
tion of either, we have no account, nor can we 
venture even to guess, at the quantity of unim- 


proved land which may yet be brought into cul- 
tivation. Tortola itself is not more than 15 miles 
long and six miles broad. 

The exports of 1787, that were raised by the 
labour of 1,200 whites, and 9,000 blacks, in the 
whole of these islands belonging to Great Bri- 
tain, amounted in value to £. 166,959 12s. 6rf. ; 
of which the proportions to different parts were 
as follow : — 

£. s. d. 

To Great Britain, - 164,128 17 6 

American States, - - 1,499 9 0 

British Colonies in America, 1,230 15 0 
Foreign W. Indies, - - 100 11 0 


166,959 12 6 

The exports from Tortola alone, the principal 
island, into Great Britain, for the year 1810, 
amounted to £. 61,520 . 

The Virgin Islands extend, as before ob- 
served, for the space of 24 leagues, from e. to w. 
and nearly approach the e. coast of Puerto Rico. 
They lie about lat. 18° 20 / n. and the course 
through them, with due attention, is perfectly 
safe at w. by n. and w. n. w. as far as the w . end 
of the fourth island. Leave this on the starboard 
side, and the island called Foul Cliff, on the lar- 
board, between which there is 16 fathoms, and a 
free channel to the w. before there is any altera- 
tion of the course ; for though there be but six 
or seven fathoms in some places, it is no where 
shoaler, and in some places there is from 16 to 
20 fathoms. The island of Anguilla, on the n. 
side of St. Martin’s Island, is e.s. e. from them.j 

Virgin, a point of land or cape of the coast 
of the Strait of Magellan ; one of those which 
form the entrance into the N. Sea, in lat. 52° 
30° 5. 

Virgin, another cape or point of land, on the 
coast of the Gulf of California or Mar Roxo de 
Cortes, to the w. of the Cape of San Marcos. 

Virgin, a bay, which like the W. Indian Vir- 
gin Isles, is called of the Eleven Thousand Virgins 
(De las Once Mil Vigines). It is on the n. coast 
of the Strait of Magellan, between the bays of 
Santiago and San Gregorio. 

Virgin. Some very lofty mountains of the 
province of Californias, between the cape of this 
name and the Bay of Concepcion, in the which, 
in the year 1746, were discovered several vol- 
canoes. 

VIRGINIA, a province and colony of the 
English in N. America, the first province which 
the English possessed in this part of the world, 

i i 2 


244 


VIRGINIA. 


they having given this name to the whole of the 
country, which was afterwards divided into dif- 
ferent provinces and colonies. This colony, which 
was founded by Sir Walter Raleigh, was thrice 
destroyed by the Indians, and for the fourth time, 
re-established by Lord Delaware in the reign of 
King Charles I. of England. It was again thrown 
into a state of disturbance through a gentleman 
of the name of Bacon, but whose death put a stop 
to the ruinous consequences which threatened to 
ensue. The inhabitants are 650,000, the greater 
part Negroes. Indeed, the number of these, 
alone, amounts to 500,000 ; and the importation 
of them anually is from 7,000 to 8,000. 

[Virginia, now one of the United States, lies 
between lat. 36° 30 / and 40° 40 / n. and between 
long. 75° 30 / and 83° 8' w. It is in length 386 
miles, in breadth 245 at its broadest part, con- 
taining about 70,000 square miles ; bounded n. 
by Maryland, part of Pennsylvania and Ohio 
River, w. by Kentucky, s. by N. Carolina, and 
e. by the Atlantic Ocean. This State is divided 
into 82 counties, (and by another division into 
parishes) which, with the number of inhabitants, 
according to the census of 1790, are mentioned 
in the following table 


West of the Blue Ridge. 


Counties. 

Slaves. 



Total Inhabitants. 

Ohio - - 

- 281 

- 

- 

- - 5,212 

Monongalia - 

- 154 

- 

- 

- - 4,768 

Washington - 
Montgomery I 

- 450 
- 2,087 

— 

— 

- - 5,625 

Wythe - &gt; 

- 

- 

- - 23,752 

Botetourt 
Greenbriar ) 
Kanawa - ) 

- 319 

- 

- 

- - 6,015 

Hampshire 

- 454 

- 

- 

- - 7,346 

Berkly - - 

- 2,932 

- 

- 

- - 19,713 

Frederick 

- 4,250 

- 

- 

- - 19,681 

Shenandoah - 

- 512 

- 

- 

- - 10,510 

Rockingham - 

- 772 

- 

- 

- - 7,449 

Augusta - - 

- 1,222 

_ 

- 

- - 10,886 

Rockbridge - 

- 682 

- 

- 

- - 6,548 

Between the Blue Ridge and 

the Tide Waters. 

Loudoun - - 

- 4,030 

_ 


- - 18,962 

Fauquier 

- 6,642 

- 

- 

- - 17,892 

Culpepper - 

- 8,226 

- 

- 

- - 22,105 

- - 11,252 

Spotsylvania 

- 5.933 

- 

- 

Orange - - 

- 4,421 

- 

- 

- - 9,921 

- - 8,467 

Louisa - - 

- 4,573 

- 

- 

Goochland - 

- 4,656 

- 

- 

- - 9,053 

Flavania 

- 1,466 

- 

- 

- - 3,921 


Counties. 

Albemarle - 

Slaves. 

5,579 



Total Inhabitants, 

- - 12,585 

Amherst - - - 

5,296 

_ 

- 

- 

13,703 

Buckingham 

4,168 

- 

- 

- - 

9,779 

Bedford - - - 

2,754 

- 

- 

- 

10,531 

Henry - 

1,551 

- 

- 

- - 

8,479 

Pittsylvania - - 

2,979 

- 

- 

- - 

11,579 

Halifax - - - 

5,565 

- 

- 

. 

14,722 

Charlotte 

4,816 

- 

_ 

. 

10,078 

Prince Edward - 

3,986 


_ 

- - 

8,100 

Cumberland - - 

4,434 

- 

- 

_ 

8,153 

Powhatan - 

4,325 

- 

- 

_ 

6,822 

Amelia \ 
Nottaway f 

11,307 

- 

- 

- - 

18,097 

Lunenburg - - 

4,332 

- 

- 

- - 

8,959 

Mecklenburg 

6,762 

- 

- 

- . 

14,733 

Brunswick - - 

6,776 

- 

- 

- - 

12,827 


Between James River and Carolina. 


Greensville - 

3,620 

- 

- - 6,362 

Dinwiddie - 

7,334 

• 

- - 13.934 

Chesterfield - - 

7,487 

- 

- - 14,214 

Prince George - 

4,519 

- 

- - 8,173 

Surry - - - - 

3,097 

- - 

- - 6,227 

Sussex - - - - 

5,387 

- - 

- - 10,554 

Southampton 

5,993 

- - 

- - 12,864 

Isle of Wight 

3,867 

- - 

- - 9,028 

Nansemond - - 

3,817 

- 

- - 9,010 

Norfolk - 

5,345 

- 

- - 14,524 

Princess Ann 

3,202 


- - 7,793 

Between James and 

York Rivers. 

Henrico - - - 

5,819 

- - 

- - 12,000 

Hanover - - - 

8,223 

- - 

- - 14,754 

New-Kent - - 

3,700 

- - 

- - 6,239 

Charles City - - 

3,141 

_ - 

- - 5,518 

James City - 

2,405 

- 

- - 4,070 

Williamsburg? - 
York - - - j - 

2,760 

- - 

- - 5,233 

Warwick 

990 

- 

- - 1,690 

Elizabeth City - 

1,876 

- - 

- - 3,450 


Between York and Rappahannock Rivers. 
Caroline - - 10,292 - - - - 17,489 

King William - 5,151 - - - - 8,128 

King and Queen 5,143 - - - - 9,377 
Essex - - 5,440 - - - - 9,122 

Middlesex - - 2,558 • - - - 4,140 

Gloucester - - 7,063 - - - - 13,498 

Between Rappahannock and Patowmaek Rivers. 

Fairfax - - - 4,574 - 12.320 

Prince William 4,704 - - - - 11,615 

Stafford - - 4,036 - - - - 9,588] 


VIRGINIA. 


245 


Counties. 

[King George 

Slaves. 

- 4,157 


Total Inhabitants. 

- - 7,366 

Richmond - 

- 3,984 

- - 

- - 6,985 

Westmoreland 

- 4,425 

- _ 

- - 7,722 

Northumber.and 4,460 

- - 

- - 9,163 

Lancaster - 

- 3,236 

- - 

- - 5,638 

Accomac 

Eastern Shore. 

- 4,262 - - 

- - 13,959 

Northampton 

- 3,244 

- - 

- - 6,889 

Campbell 

New Counties. 

- 2,488 - - 

- - 7,685 

Franklin 

- 1,073 

- - 

- - 6,842 

Harrison 

67 

- 

- - 2,080 

Randolph - 

19 

- - 

- - 951 

Hardy - 

- 369 

- - 

- - 7,336 

Pendleton - 

73 

- 

- - 2,452 

Russel - 

190 

- - 

- - 3,338 

Whole number of inhabitants, 747,610 


of whom 292,627 were slaves. 


By the census of 1810, the whole number was 
965,079, giving - an increase in 20 years of 2 17,469. 
— According to the latter census, there were of 


Whites - 548,320 

Slaves - ------ 386,377 

Free persons of colour - - 30,382 


965,079 

In an extensive country, it will be expected 
that the climate is not the same in all its parts. 
It is remarkable that, proceeding on the same 
parallel of latitude w. the climate becomes colder 
in like manner as when you proceed n. This 
continues to be the case till you attain the sum- 
mit of the Alleghany, which is the highest land 
between the ocean and the Mississippi. From 
thence, descending in the same latitude to the 
Mississippi, the change reverses; and, if we may 
believe travellers, it becomes warmer there than 
it is in the same latitude on the sea-side. Their 
testimony is strengthened bv the vegetables and 
animals which subsist and multiply there natu- 
rally, and do not on the sea-coast. Thus catal- 
pas grow spontaneously on the Mississippi, as 
far as the latitude of 37°, and reeds as far as 38°. 
Parroquets even winter on the Scioto, in the la- 
titude of 39°. The s.w. winds, e. of the moun- 
tains, are most predominant. Next to these, on 
the sea-coast, the n. e., and at the mountains, the 
n. w. winds prevail. The difference between 
these winds is very great. The n. e. is loaded 
with vapour, insomuch that the salt manufactu- 
rers have found that their crystals would not 


shoot while that blows ; it occasions a distressing 
chill, and a heaviness and depression of the spi- 
rits. The n. w. is dry, cooling, elastic, and ani- 
mating. The e. and s. e. breezes come on gene- 
rally in the afternoon. They have advanced into 
the county very sensibly within the memory of 
people now living. Mr. Jefferson reckons the 
extremes of heat and cold to be 98° above, and 
6 below 0, in Fahrenheit’s thermometer. The 
months of June and July, though often the hot- 
test, are the most healthy in the year. The wea- 
ther is then dry and less liable to change than in 
August and September, when the rain commences 
and sudden variations take place. On the sea- 
coast the land is low, generally within 12 feet of 
the level of the sea, intersected in all directions 
with salt creeks and rivers, the heads of which 
form swamps and marshes, and fenny ground, 
covered with water in wet seasons. The uncul- 
tivated lands are covered with large trees, and 
thick underwood. The vicinity of the sea, and 
salt creeks and rivers, occasion a constant mois- 
ture and warmth of the atmosphere, so that al- 
though under the same latitude, 100 or 150 miles 
in the country, deep snows and frozen rivers fre- 
quently happen for a short season, yet here such 
occurrences are considered as phenomena ; for 
these reasons, the trees are often in bloom as 
early as the last of February ; from this period, 
however, till the end of April, the inhabitants are 
incommoded by cold rains, piercing winds, and 
sharp frosts, which subject them to the inflamma- 
tory diseases, such as pleurisy and peripneu- 
mony. 

The chief rivers are, Roanoke, James’s, Nan- 
semond, Chickahominy, Appamatox, Rivanna, 
York, Piankatank, Rappahannock, Patowmaek, 
Shenandoah, and the Great Kanhaway. These 
rivers and creeks are described under their re 
spective names. They abound with fish of vari- 
ous kinds, as sturgeon, shad, bass, carp, sheeps- 
head, drum, herrings, perch, cat-fish, oysters, 
crabs, &amp;c. 

It is worthy of notice, that the mountains are 
not solitary and scattered confusedly over the 
face of the country ; but commence at about 150 
miles from the sea-coast, are disposed in ridges 
one behind another, running nearly parallel with 
the sea-coast, though rather approaching it as 
they advance n.e. See Alleghany Moun- 
tains. In the same direction generally are the 
veins of lime-stone, coal, and other minerals 
hitherto discovered; and so range the falls of the 
great rivers. But the courses of the great rivers 
are at right angles with these. James and Pa-] 


246 


VIRGINIA. 


[towmack penetrate through all the ridges of 
mountains e. of the Alleghany, which is broken 
by no water course. It is in fact the spine of 
the country between the Atlantic on one side, and 
the Mississippi and St. Lawrence on the other. 
The passage of the Patowmack through the Blue 
Ridge is perhaps one of the most stupendous 
scenes in nature. The mountains of the Blue 
Ridge, and of these, the Peaks of Otter, are 
thought to be of a greater height, measured from 
their base, than any others in Virginia, and per- 
haps in N. America. From data, which may 
found a tolerable conjecture, we suppose the 
highest peak to be about 400 feet perpendicular, 
which is not a lifth part of the height of the 
mountains of S. America, nor one-third of the 
height which would be necessary in our latitude 
to preserve ice in the open air unmelted through 
the year. The ridge of mountains next beyond 
the Blue Ridge, called the North Mountain, is of 
the greatest extent; for which reason they are 
named by the Indians, The Endless Mountains. 
The Onasioto Mountains are 50 or 60 miles wide 
at the Gap. These mountains abound in coal, 
lime, and free-stone ; the summits of them are 
generally covered with a good soil, and a variety 
of timber; and the low intervale lands are rich 
and remarkably well-watered. The whole coun- 
try below the mountains, which are about 150, 
some say 200 miles from the sea, is level, and 
seems from various appearances to have been 
once washed by the sea. The land between York 
and James Rivers is very level, and its surface 
about 40 feet above high water mark. It appears 
from observation, to have arisen to its present 
height at different periods far distant from each 
other, and that at these periods it was washed by 
the sea ; for near Yorktown, where the banks are 
perpendicular, you first see a stratum, intermixed 
with small shells resembling a mixture of clay 
and sand, and about five feet thick; on this lies 
horizontally, small white Shells, cockle, clam, &amp;c. 
an inch or two thick ; then a body of earth, simi- 
lar to that first mentioned, 18 inches thick ; then 
a layer of shells and another body of earth ; on 
this a layer of three feet of white shells mixed 
with sand, on which lay a body of oyster shells 
six feet thick, which were covered with earth to 
the surface. The oyster-shells are so united by 
a very strong cement, that they fall only when 
undermined, and then in large bodies from one 
to 20 tons weight. They have the appearance of 
large rocks on the shore. The soil below the 
mountains seems to have acquired a character for 
goodness which it by no means deserves. Though 


not rich, it is well suited to the growth of to- 
bacco and Indian corn, and parts of it for wheat. 
Good crops of cotton, flax, and hemp, are also 
raised ; and in some counties they have plenty 
of cider, and exquisite brandy, distilled from 
peaches, which grow in great abundance upon 
the numerous rivers of the Chesapeak. The 
planters, before the war, paid their principal at- 
tention to the culture of tobacco, of which there 
used to be exported, generally, 55,000 hogsheads 
a year. Since the revolution, they are turning 
their attention more to the cultivation of wheat, 
Indian corn, barley, flax, and hemp. It is ex- 
pected that this State will add the article of rice 
to the list of her exports ; as it is supposed, a 
large body of swamp in the easternmost counties, 
is capable of producing it. 

Horned or neat cattle are bred in great num- 
bers in the w. counties of Virgina, as well as in 
the States s. of it, where they have an extensive 
range, and mild winters, without any permanent 
snows. They run at large, are not housed, and 
multiply very fast. In the lower parts of the 
State a disease prevailed some years ago among 
the neat cattle, which proved fatal to all that 
were not bred there. The oxen, from the more 
n. States, which were employed at the siege of 
Yorktown, in October, 1781, almost all died, 
sometimes 40 of them in a night, and often sud- 
denly drop down dead in the roads. It is said 
that the seeds of this disease were brought from 
the Havanna to S Carolina or Georgia in some 
hides, and that the disease has progressed n. to 
Virginia. Lord Dunmore imported some cattle 
from Rhode Island, and kept them confined in a 
small pasture, near his seat, where no cattle had 
been for some years, and where they could not 
intermix with other cattle, and yet they soon 
died. The gentlemen, being fond of pleasure, 
have taken much pains to raise a good breed of 
horses, and have succeeded in it beyond any of 
the States. They will give ^£.1000 sterling for 
a good stallion. Horse racing has had a great 
tendency to encourage the breeding of good 
horses, as it affords an opportunity of putting 
them to the trial of their speed. They are more 
elegant, and will perform more service, than the 
horses of the N. States. 

Caves among the mountains, have lately been 
discovered, which yield saltpetre in such abund- 
ance, that 500,000 lbs. of it might be collected 
from them annually. Virginia is the most preg- 
nant with minerals and fossils of any State in the 
Union. A single lump of gold ore has been 
found, near the falls of Rappahannock River, j 


VIRGINIA. 


247 


[which yielded 17 dwt. of gold, of extraordinary 
ductility. No other indication of gold has been 
discovered in its neighbourhood. On the great 
Kanhaway, opposite to the mouth of Cripple 
Creek, and also about 25 miles from the s. boun- 
dary of the State, in the county of Montgomery, 
are mines of lead. The metal is mixed, some- 
times with earth, and sometimes with rock, which 
requires the force of gunpowder to open it ; and 
is accompanied with a portion of silver, too small 
to be worth separation, under any process hi- 
therto attempted there. The proportion yielded 
is from 50 to 80 lbs. of pure metal from lOOlbs. 
of washed ore. The most common is that of 60 
to the 100 lbs. Copper, iron, black-lead, coal, 
marble, lime-stone, &amp;c. are found in this coun- 
try. Crystals are common. Some amethysts, 
and one emerald have been discovered. 

Every able-bodied freeman, between the ages 
of 16 and 50, is enrolled in the militia. Those 
of every county are formed into companies, and 
these again into one or more battalions, accord- 
ing to the numbers in the county. They are 
commanded by colonels and other subordinate 
officers, as in the regular service. In every 
county is a county lieutenant, who commands the 
whole militia in his county, but ranks only as a 
colonel in the field. They have no general offi- 
cers always existing. These are appointed oc- 
casionally, when an invasion or insurrection hap- 
pens, and their commission ceases with the occa- 
sion. The governor is head of the military as 
well as civil power. The law requires every 
militia man to provide himself with the arms 
usual in the regular service. The intersection 
of Virginia by so many navigable rivers, renders 
it almost incapable of defence- As the land will 
not support a great number of people, a force 
cannot soon be collected to repel a sudden inva- 
sion. The militia, in 1792, amounted to about 
68,000 men. 

This State is not divided into townships, nor 
are there any towns of consequence, owing pro- 
bably to the intersection of the country by navi- 
gable rivers, which brings the trade to the doors 
of the inhabitants, and prevents the necessity of 
their going in quest of it to a distance. The 
principal towns, or more properly villages or 
hamlets, are as follows. On James River, and 
its waters, Norfolk, Portsmouth, Hampton, Suf- 
folk, Smithfield, Williamsburg, Petersburg, Rich- 
mond, Manchester, Charlottesville, New London. 
— On York River, and its waters, York, New- 
castle, Hanover. — On Rappahannock, Urbanna, 


Port Royal, Fredericksburg, Falmouth. — On Pa- 
towmack, and its waters, Dumfries, Colchester, 
Alexandria, Winchester, and Staunton. There 
are places, at which, like some of the foregoing, 
the laws have said there shall be towns ; but na- 
ture has said there shall not, and they remain un- 
worthy of enumeration. Norfolk will probably 
become the emporium for all the trade of the 
Chesapeak Bay and its waters ; and a canal of 
eight or 10 miles, which is contemplated, and 
will probably soon be completed, will bring 
to it all that of Albemarle Sound and its waters. 
Secondary to this place, are the towns at the 
head of the tide-waters, to wit, Petersburg on 
Appamattox, Richmond on James River, New- 
castle on York River, Fredericksburg on Rappa- 
hannock, and Alexandria on Patowmack. From 
these the distribution will be to subordinate situ- 
ations of the country. Accidental circumstances, 
however, may control the indications of nature, 
and in no instances do they do it more frequently 
than in the rise and fall of towns. The college 
of William and Mary was founded about the be- 
ginning of this century. See Williamsburg. 
— The academy in Prince Edward County has 
been erected into a college, by the name of 
Hampden Sidney College. There are a number 
of academies in different parts of Virginia, one 
at Alexandria, one at Norfolk, one at Hanover, 
and others in other places. The present deno- 
minations of Christians in Virginia are Presbyte- 
rians, who are most numerous, Episcopalians, 
Baptists, and Methodists. 

The exports of this State, in the year 1791, 
ending Sept. 30, amounted to 3,131,227 dollars; 
in 1792, 3,549,499 dollars; in 1793, 2,984,317 
dollars; in 1794, 3,321,494 dollars; and in 1796, 
5,268,615 dollars. In 1790, about 40,000 hhds. 
of tobacco were exported ; but its culture has 
since declined, and that of wheat taken its place. 
The greatest quantity of tobacco every produced 
in this country, in one year, was 70,000 hhds. in 
the year 1758. 

Virginia was settled permanently, after several 
preceding unsuccessful attempts, in 1610, being 
the earliest established of any of the United 
States ; to which article, for a more copious 
information of this State, the reader is re- 
ferred.] 

The capital is Williamsburg; the two capes or 
points of land, called Henry and Charles, form 
the entrance of the Bay of Chesapeak, one of the 
largest and most handsome in the known world, 
it being no less than 16 miles wide at its mouth.] 


248 


V I R 


V I S 


[LIST of Presidents and Governors of Virginia, from its first Settlement to the Year 1624. 


Edward Maria Winfield, from 
John Ratcliffe, ------ 

Mat. Scrivener, Vice President, 
John Smith, ------- 

George Percy, Governor, - - - 

Sir Thomas Gates, - - - - - 

Lord Delaware, ------ 

George Percy, ------- 

Sir Thomas Dale, ------ 

Sir Thomas Gates, - 
Sir Thomas Dale, - 
George Yeardley, - - - 

Samuel Argali, ------ 

George Yeardley, - - - - - 

Sir Francis Wyat, 

VIRGINS, Rochers des. Some rocky shoals 
near the s. coast of Newfoundland, within the 
Bay of Plaisance. 

VIRO, a settlement of the province and cor- 
regimiento of Aimaraez in Peru ; annexed to the 
curacy of the settlement of Mollebamba. 

VIROA, a lake of the province and country 
of Las Amazonas, in the part possessed by the 
Portuguese. It is formed by a waste-water of 
this river, and is situate between the lakes Ma- 
nila and Quamaru. 

VIRO -TIRO, a settlement of the province 
and corregimiento of Huanta in Peru ; annexed to 
the curacy of the settlement of its capital. 

VIRU, a large and beautiful valley of the pro- 
vince and corregimiento of Truxillo in Peru; si- 
tuate nine leagues s. e. of the city, in the road 
leading to Lima, and which is called De Los 
Valles, inasmuch as near it are also the vallies 
of Guaman, Sana, and Chico. It would be very 
fertile were it supplied with other water than 
what it has by a small river of its name. It is 
said that this valley gave name to Peru ; for some 
persons belonging to Vasco Nuiiez de Bilboa, 
exploring the country, and asking of an Indian 
what was the name of that land, received for an- 
swer, Viru, which in the idiom of the country 
signifies river ; the name of Peru being thus a 
corruption of the same word. 

Viru, San Pedro de, a settlement of this 
province and kingdom ; founded in the former 
valley and on the shore of the said river. It was 
once large and populous, but now reduced to a 
village of about 100 Indians. 


May, 

1607, 

to 

Sept. 

1607 

Sept. 

1607, 

to 

July, 

1608 

July, 

1608, 

to 

Sept. 

1608 

Sept. 

1608, 

to 

Sept. 

1609 

Sept. 

1609, 

to 

May, 

1610 

May, 

1610, 

to 

June, 

1610 

June, 

1610, 

to 

March, 

1611 

March, 

1611, 

to 

May, 

1611 

May 

1611, 

to 

August, 

1611 

August, 

1611, 

to 


1614 


1614, 

to 


1616 


1616, 

to 


1617 


1617, 

to 


1619 


1619, 

to 

Nov. 

1621 

Nov. 

1621, 

to 


1624] 


Viru, the aforesaid river, rises in the province 
of Guamachuco, from some mountains which they 
call Los Pedernales, and runs 18 leagues, col- 
lecting in its course the waters of a smaller river 
called Izquiocda, when it enters the S. Sea. In 
the rainy season it swells prodigiously ; but in 
the summer it experiences a great drought. 

VIRUBA, a settlement of the province and 
government of San Juan de los Llanos, in the 
Nuevo Reyno de Granada, on the shore of the 
abundant river Ariari. 

VISACACA. See Guallaga. 

VISCAPALCA, a settlement of the province 
and corregimiento of Castro Virreyna in Peru; 
annexed to the curacy of Totos, in the province 
of Vilcashuaman. 

VISCAS, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento ofYauyos, in the same kingdom as 
the former; annexed to the curacy of the settle- 
ment of Ayaviri. In its vicinity is a stone or 
slab, on which, according to the vulgar tradition 
of the Indians, the apostle St. Batholomew had 
reclined. On the same there were formerly some 
characters sculptured, which the archbishop’s 
vicar ordered to be obliterated. 

VISCHONGO, a settlement of the province 
and corregimiento of Vilcas Huaman in Peru. 

VISECA, a settlement and asiento of silver 
mines of the province and corregimiento of Lu- 
canas in the same kingdom as tne former ; an- 
nexed to the curacy of its capital. 

VISITACION, a settlement of Indians of the 
province of Californias ; situate on the sea-shore, 
between the settlements of Santa Isabel and San 


Bstanislao, in the interior of the gulf or Mar 
Roxo de Cortes. 

VISKILL, a settlement of the province of 
New York in the United States of America; on 
the shore of the river Hudson. 

VISO, San Miguel del, a settlement of the 
province and eorregimiento ofHuarochiri in Peru; 
annexed to the curacy of the settlement of San 
Mateo de Huanchor. 

VISUANTA, a small river of the province 
and government of Huanuco in Peru; which 
rises in the cordillera , runs n. and incorporates it- 
self with the Maranon at its source. 

VITA, a river of the province and govern- 
ment of San Juan de los Llanos, in the Nuevo 
Reyno de Granada. It rises s. of the Meta, near 
the settlement of San Joaquin, runs nearly pa- 
rallel to that river for many leagues, and enters 
the Orinoco, opposite the rapid stream of the 
Carichana. 

VITIS, a settlement of the province and cor- 
regimiento of Yauyos in Peru ; annexed to the 
curacy of the settlement of Laraos. 

[VITTORIA, St. Juan de, a city of Peru. 
See Guamanga, its most common name.] 

[VAttoria, a town of the province and go- 
vernment of Venezuela. It was almost entirely 
demolished by the earthquake that happened on 
Holy Thursday, in the year 1812. It is the 
same as that described under the article Vic- 
toria ; which see.] 

VITUIMA, a settlement of the province and 
eorregimiento of Tunja in the Nuevo Reyno de 
Granada, and of the district of the jurisdiction of 
Tocaiina. It is of a very hot temperature, poor, 
and of a reduced population, but producing some 
sugar-cane, maize, i/iteas, and plantains. 

VIVORA, or Pedro, shoals or rocks of the 
N. Sea, situate SO miles s. of the island of Ja- 
maica. They are 103 miles long from e. to w., 
very dangerous for vessels, many of these hav- 
ing been wrecked on it ; and amongst the rest, in 
1690, the ships called the Angel, Nuestra Senora 
del Carmen, and Nuestra Senora de la Concep- 
cion, all of them galleons, under the charge of 
the Marquis del Bao del Maistre. Also, in 
1694, were wrecked here the galleons under the 
command of the Count of Saucedilla ; in 1738, 
the frigate of war, called the Genovesa, com- 
manded by the captain Don Francisco Ghiral ; 
and the squadron of the admiral Don Antonio 
Cotaire, which was sailing from Caracas to Vera 
Cruz. [The e. head is in lat. 17° n. and long. 
76° 29' a&gt;.] 

Vivora, a small river of the province and 
VOL. v. 


government of Buenos Ayres ; which runs w. 
and enters the Huruguay near its entrance into 
the Plata. 

Vivora, a cape or point of land on the coast 
of the province and government of Guayana, in 
the part possessed by the Dutch, and which they 
call Addershoec. 

[VIVOllAS, a parish of the province and go- 
vernment of Buenos Ayres, situate on the Pa- 
rana, about 43 miles n. of Buenos Ayres, in lat. 
33° 56' 20" s. and long. 58° IF 30".] 

Vivoras, Mountain of the, in the province 
and government of Buenos Ayres ; situate on 
the shore of the river Saladillo, near the coast 
which lies between the river La Plata and the 
Strait of Magellan. 

Vivoras, a lake of this province and govern- 
ment ; formed by an arm or waste water of the 
river Salado, in the province of Tucuman. 

VIVORILLAS, a settlement of the missions 
which were held by the Jesuits in the province 
of Taraumara and kingdom of Nueva Vizcaya : 
32 leagues w. s. w. s. of the town and real of 
mines of San Felipe de Chiguagua. 

VIURUQUANTI, a river of the province and 
government of Darien and kingdom of Tierra 
Firme. It rises in the mountains in the interior 
of this province, runs nearly due w. and enters 
the Chucunaqui. 

VIZARRON, a settlement of the province 
and government of Nueva Santander or Sierra 
Gorda, in the Bay of Mexico and kingdom of 
Nueva Espana; founded in 1748 by the Count 
of Sierra Gorda, Don Joseph de Escandon, co- 
lonel of militia of Queretaro, who gave it this 
name in honour of the archbishop of Mexico, 
Don Juan Joseph de Vizarron. 

VIZCAYA, Nueva, a kingdom of N. Ame- 
rica; bounded n. by the kingdom of Nuevo 
Mexico ; s. by that of Nueva Galicia ; e. by that 
of Nuevo Leon ; and w. by that of Californias. 
It is 200 leagues long from n. to s. from the real 
of mines of Chalchichihuites to the garrison of 
the Paso del Norte, and nearly as many wide. 
It comprehends the provinces of Tepeguana, 
Taraumara, Batopilas, Sinaloa, Culiacan, Osti- 
muri, Sonora, Pimeria alta and baxa, and Chia- 
metian ; in which articles we have given notice 
of the corresponding climates, productions, situa- 
tion, and commerce. This extensive country is 
traversed and irrigated by the grand river of 
Las N asas. It was peopled by the captain 

Francisco de Ibarra, in the time of the viceroy 
Don Luis de Velasco, Marquis of Salinas; and 
the natives were reduced to the Catholic faith by 

K K 


‘250 


VIZ 


V Y U 


the Jesuits, although they have made insurrec- 
tions at different times. It is bounded by the 
barbarian Indians the Chichimecas ; as a de- 
fence against whom 12 garrisons were esta- 
blished on the frontier, with the names of 
Nayarit, Conchos, 

Pasage, El Passo, 


El Gallo, 
Mapimi, 
Zerrogordo, 
San Bartolome, 


Janos, 
Fronteras, 
Sinaloa, 
Adais, 


each being a great distance from each other : 
but, although the viceroys have added some 
others of late, yet still do the Chichimecas, de- 
spising all the rules of civilized life, disperse 
themselves like wild beasts about the mountains, 
without any fixed abode, living in caverns, and 
betraying few of the characteristics of rational 
creatures. 

The principal productions of this kingdom are 
wheat, maize, and other European seeds, much 
large and small cattle and horses. It has also 
many rich mines of silver ; and, in its woods, 
are abundance of different kinds of trees, and 
many wild beasts and birds ; nor are there want- 
ing many saline grounds. Its jurisdiction con- 
sists of the following alcaldias mayores. 

Saltillo, Cinaloa, 

Laguna, Minas de Topia, 

Guanaval, Minas de San Andres, 

San Antonio deCuen- Minas deDihastla, 


came. 


S. Juan del Rio, 
Minas de Coreto, 


Mascatlan, 

Chiametlan, 

Xalisco, 

Minas de Maloya, 
San Sebastian, 

Minas de Panico, 

San Francisco del 
Mesquital. 


Minas de Mapimi, 

Minas de Chindea, 

Minas de Santa Bar- 
bara, 

San Bartolome, 

Minas deGuanacevi, 

[The present population of Vizcaya is esti- 
mated by Pike, in the account of his travels, at 
200,000, and Humboldt will have it at 159,700. 
According to the enumeration of the former, 
three-twentieths are Spaniards from Europe, 
five-twentieths Creoles, five-twentieths Mustees 
and Quatroons, and seven-twentieths Indians. 


The same author estimates the population of 
Durango, the capital, at 40,000 souls : Humboldt 
at 12,000. Vizcaya trades with New Mexico, 
Senora, and the Viceroyalty. Tlie present ma- 
nufactures are some few arms, blankets, tamp 
leather, embroidery, coarse cotton, and woollen 
cloths ; and some of their blankets sell for 25 
dollars. They cultivate wheat, corn, rice, oats, 
cotton, flax, indigo, and vines. This province is 
supposed to have been populated about 280 
years. The military force of Vizcaya consists, 
in ordinary, of 1,100 dragoons, besides a militia, 
who qre not much worthy of note.] 

Vizcaya. The capital is the city of Durango. 

VIZCAINO, Cayo, an isle or rocky shoal of 
the N. Sea, near the coast of the province and 
government of Florida, between the coast and 
the shoal of La Parida. 

VIZTLAN, a settlement of the province and 
alcaldia mayor of Chiapa, in the kingdom of 
Guatemala. 

[VOLCANIC Island, lies n. w. of the Island 
of Santa Cruz, about eight leagues in the Pacific 
Ocean, in which Mendana, in 1595, saw a vol- 
cano, which flamed continually, in lat. 10° 
30' s .] 

[VOLUNTOWN, a township on the e. line 
of Connecticut, Windham County, e. of Plain- 
field, 11 n. e. of Norwich, and 26 s. w. of Provi- 
dence. It was settled in 1696, having been 
granted to volunteers in the Narraganset war; 
hence its name. It was incorporated in 1719. 
It is 20 miles long, and between three and four 
broad, and has a large swamp abounding with 
white pine, sufficient to supply the neighbouring 
towns with materials for building.] 

VUL, Point, or cape or extremity of the 
coast of the province and captainship of Seara in 
Brasil ; between the rivers Uquiquara and 
Persi. 

VUNCUMIRI, a channel of water, forming a 
communication between the river Maracapura 
and the lake Vanama, in the province and coun- 
try of Las Amazonas. 

VYUMBICHU, a settlement of the province 
and kingdom of Quito, in the corregimiento of 
the district of Las cinco Leguas de la Capital. 


W A C 


WAG 


251 


w 


[Wabash is a beautiful navigable river, of 
the N. W. Territory, which runs a s. w. and s. 
course, and empties into the Ohio, by a mouth 
270 yards wide, in lat. 37° M' n. 168 miles from 
the mouth of the Ohio, and 1,022 miles below 
Pittsburg. In the spring, summer, and autumn, 
it is passable in batteaux and barges, drawing 
about three feet water, 412 miles, to Ouiatanon ; 
and for large canoes 197 miles further, to the 
Miami carrying- place, nine miles from Miami 
village. This village stands on Miami River, 
which empties into the s. w. part of Lake Erie. 
The communication between Detroit and the 
Illinois and Ohio countries, is up Miami River 
to Miami village, thence by land nine miles, 
when the rivers are high, and from 18 to 30 
when they are low, through a level country to 
the Wabash, and through the various branches of 
the Wabash to the places of destination. The 
land on this river is remarkably fertile. A silver 
mine has been discovered about 28 miles above 
Ouiatanon, on the n. side of the Wabash. Salt 
springs, lime, free-stone, blue, yellow, and white 
clay, are found in plenty on this river. The copper 
mine on this river is, perhaps, the richest vein 
of native copper in the bowels of the whole 
earth. See Vincents and Ouiatanon.] 

[Wabash, Little, runs a course s. s. e. and 
falls into the Wabash, 10 miles from the Ohio.] 

[WABUSCOMMONG, a lake of Canada, in N. 
America, one of those on the communication be- 
tween Lake Simcoe and the Rice Lake.] 

WACABARI, a port of the river Poumaron, in 
the province and government of Guayana, in the 
part possessed by the Dutch. 

WACAYO, a settlement of the province and 
colony of N. Carolina, on the shore of the river 
Yadkin. 

[WACHOVIA, or Dobb’s Parish, a tract of 
land in N. Carolina, situate between the e. side 
of Yadkin River, and the head waters of Haw 
and Deep Rivers, consisting of about 100,000 
acres, partly in Stokes and Surry Counties. The 
United Brethren, or Moravians, purchased this 
tract of Lord Granville, in 1751, and called it 
Wachovia, after the name of an estate of Count 
Zinzendorf, in Germany. In 1755, it was made 
a separate parish, and named Dobbs, by the 


legislature. The settlement of Bethabara was 
begun in 1753, by a number of the Brethren from 
Pennsylvania. Salem, which is the principal set- 
tlement, commenced in 1766, and is inhabited by 
a number of ingenious tradesmen. This thriv- 
ing parish lies about 10 miles s. of Pilot Moun- 
tain, and contains six churches.] 

[WACHQUATNACH, an ancient Moravian 
settlement in Connecticut, on Stratford River ; 
23 miles from its mouth.] 

[WACHUSET Mountain, in the town of 
Princetown, Massachusetts, may be seen in a 
clear horizon, at the distance of 67 miles, being 
2,989 feet above the level of the sea.] 

WACUNY, a settlement of Indians of the 
province and colony of N. Carolina; in the 
s. part, and at the source of the river Tugelo. 

[WADESBOROUGH, the chief town of Anson 
County, in Fayetteville District, N. Carolina. It 
contains a court-house, gaol, and about 30 houses; 
and being seated on a lofty hill, is both pleasant 
and healthy : it is 57 miles w. of Fayetteville, 
and 43 s. e. by s. of Salisbury.] 

WADMALA, a small island of the N. Sea; 
situate near the coast of the province and govern- 
ment of Georgia ; one of those called Georgian, 
and situate near the island of Edisto. 

[WADSWORTH, a town of New York, On- 
tario County ; situate on the e. bank of Genesse 
River, 4 miles w. of Conesus Lake, and 1 3 s. w. 
by s. of Hartford.] 

[WADHAM Islands, near the n. e. coast of 
Newfoundland Island. Lat. 49° 57' n. long. 53° 

37' ®.] 

WAERT. See Sebald. 

WAGER, a port of the s. coast of Nova Scotia, 
or Acadia, between Black Cape and Green Creek. 

[WAGER’S Strait, or River, in New N. 
Wales, in N. America, lies in lat. 65° 23 / n. and 
is about two or three miles wide. At live or six 
miles within its entrance, it is six or eight leagues 
wide, having several islands and rocks in the 
middle. It has soundings from 16 to 30 and 44 
fathoms ; and the land on both sides is high, (ac- 
cording to captain Middleton’s account) as any 
in England. Savage Sound, a small cove or 
harbour, fit for ships to anchor in, lies on the n. 
shore, 13 or 14 leagues up the Strait, in long. 
k k 2 


252 


W A I 


87° 50 / w. All the country from Wager's Strait 
to Seal River, is in some maps called New 
Denmark. Captain Monk was sent thither, in 
1610, by the King of Denmark, and wintered at 
a place called Monk’s Winter Harbour, in lat. 
63° 20' n. which must be a little n. of Rankin’s 
Inlet. When- captain Ellis was in this latitude, 
the tide ran at the rate of from 8 to 10 leagues 
an hour. He compares it to the sluice of a 
mill.] 

WAGOMAU, a river of the province and 
colony of S. Carolina; which runs s. e. and then 
turns s. to enter the sea. 

Wagomau, a lake of the same province, on 
the shore of the former river. 

[WAHPACOOTA. Indians of N. America, 
who rove in the country s. w. of the river St. 
Peters, from a place called the Hardwood, to 
the mouth of the Yellow Medicine River: they 
are never stationary but when their traders are 
with them, and this does not happen at any re- 
gular or fixed point. At present they treat their 
traders tolerably well. Their trade cannot be 
expected to increase much. A great proportion 
of their country consists of open plains, lies 
level, and is tolerably fertile. They maintain a 
partial traffic with the Yanktons and Tetons to 
the w. of them ; to these they barter the articles 
which they obtain from the traders on the river 
St. Peters, and receive in return horses, some 
robes, and leather lodges.] 

[WAHPATONE. Indians of N. America, 
who claim the country in which they roye on the 
n. w. side of the river St. Peters, from their vil- 
lage to the mouth of the Chippeway River, and 
thence north-eastwardly towards the head of the 
Mississippi, including the Crow-wing River. Their 
lands are fertile, and generally well timbered. 
They are only stationary while their traders are 
with them, which is from the beginning of Oc- 
tober to the latter end of March. Their trade 
is supposed to be at its greatest extent. They 
treat their traders with respect, and seldom at- 
tempt to rob them. This, as well as the other 
Sioux bands, act, in all respects, as independently 
of each other as if they were a distinct nation.] 

[WAINFLEET, a township of Upper Canada, 
N. America, in the county of Lincoln. It lies 
zo. of Hnmberstone, and fronts Lake Erie, being 
watered by the Welland or Chippewa to the «.] 

WAIN Y, a river of the province and govern- 
ment of Cumana, which runs n. and enters the 
sea between those of Amacuro and Moruga. 

WAIT, a settlement of the island of Barba- 


W A L 

does, in the district and parish of S. Joseph, 
near the e. coast. 

Wait, another settlement in this island, of the 
district of the parish of San Lucas; also situate 
on the e. coast. 

[WAJTSFIELD, the south-easternmost town- 
ship of Chittenden County, Vermont, containing 
61 inhabitants.] 

[WAIT’S River rises in OrangeCounty, Ver- 
mont, and empties into Connecticut River, at 
Bradford.] 

[WAJOMICK, an Indian town on Susque- 
hannah River, about 400 miles from the sea. In 
the spring of 1756, the Indians shot two seals 
here, and they could not sufficiently express 
their astonishment at the sm-ht of these animals 

O 

unknown to them.] 

[WAKE, an inland county, of Hillsborough 
district, N. Carolina, bounded n. w. by Orange, 
and e. and s. e. by Johnson. It contained in 
1790, 10,192 inhabitants, including 2,463 slaves. 
Chief town, Raleigh.] 

[WAKEFIELD, formerly East-town and Wa- 
tertown, a township of Stratford County, New 
Hampshire, e. of Wolf borough, incorporated in 
1774. It contained, in 1790, 640 inhabitants. In 
the n. e. part is a pond which is the source of 
Piscataque River.] 

WAKKAMAW, a beautiful lake, 26 miles in 
circuit, situate in Bladen County, N. Carolina. 
The lands on its e. shores are fertile, and the 
situation delightful, gradually ascending from 
the shores, bounded on the n. w. coast by vast 
rich swamps, fit for rice. This lake is the source 
of a fine river, of the same name, and runs a 
southerly course, for 70 or 80 miles, and empties 
into Winy aw Bay, at GeorgeTown,in S. Carolina.] 

WALBISCH, an island of the river Dissequeve, 
in the province of Guayana, and in the part pos- 
sessed by the Dutch. 

[WALDEN, a township of Vermont, Cale- 
donia County, having Danville on the s. e. It 
contains only 11 inhabitants.] 

[WALDOBOROUGH, a post-town and port 
of entry of the district of Maine, in Lincoln 
County, 12 miles s. by as. of Warren, 10 e. by 
n. of Newcastle, 20 e. of Wiscasset. This is the 
port of entry for the district, lying between the 
towns of Camden and Northport; and all the 
shores and waters from the middle of Dama- 
riscotta River to the s. zo. side of the town ol 
Northport. The township of Waldoborough 
was incorporated in 1773, and contained, in 
1790, 1,210 inhabitants.] 


W A L 


W A L 


2o3 


[WALDO Patent, a tract of land forming 
the s. e. part of Hancock County, in the district 
of Maine, and on the w. side of Penobscot River 
and Bay.] 

WALES, New North, a country of America, 
having the tract called Prince William to the n . ; 

f &gt;art of Baffin’s Bay to the e. ; the unknown 
ands called N ew Denmark, to the s. ; and an- 
other country, also unknown, to the w. If the 
supposition that Wager Strait communicates with 
the e. ocean, or S. Sea, were true, (and it is not 
improbable) this country would be entirely sepa- 
rate from the Continent of America, it being 
situate on the other side of the Polar Circle, 
near the entrance of the Strait of Wager Strait. 

This country of New N. Wales is but little 
known ; and we have no accounts of the terri- 
tory situate to the s. of the said Strait, other 
than those made by Captain Middleton, in his 
voyage in 1742; and the observations of Mr. 
Dobbs, who asserts, that between lat. 62° and 
63° is a Strait called Welcome by Mr. Thomas 
Roe ; and in 66° SO' a fine cape or point of 
land on the w. shore of the said Strait. It is 
further asserted, that the land, running from e. 
to n. and from this rhumb to the w., gave indi- 
cations of being the extreme part of America, 
and was, for this reason, called Cape Hope; 
but from this cape, as soon as it was doubled, 
the sea was found, to the great mortification of 
the navigators, to extend still farther, from 
whence they named it Repulse Bay ; [an appel- 
lation which it acquired in the year 1742.] 
WALES, New South, another extensive 
country of America, on the $. part of Hudson’s 
Bay ; it is bounded e. and s. by Canada, and w. 
by some unknown lands, which are inhabited by 
many tribes of Indians. Its size is not, however, 
exactly ascertained ; for the English, who are the 
only people who trade to this part, have their 
establishments on the coast only, and none in 
the interior. From the river St. Margarite, which 
enters the St. Lawrence, to the river Rupert in 
Hudson’s Bay, the distance is not more than 150 
miles. The large continent on the e. side of the 
bay is called Labrador, and that on the w. New 
N. Wales, whilst that properly denominated 
New S. Wales lies exactly s. and at the bottom 
of the bay, forming, as it were, the base of a 
triangle. Here the Hudson’s Company have 
many establishments. Five or six leagues from 
land is an island called Little Rocky Island ; the 
same being a mountain of stones, on which some 
trees have grown ; and which is covered by the 
sea when the wind blows from n. w ., so as to 


increase the high tides. The island of Charlton, 
which is composed of a white sand, is covered 
with trees, with ginger plants and other shrubs, 
although not of great size ; and the aspect of the 
country is extremely reviving to such as approach 
to the island, after a long and perilous voyage of 
three or four months through seas unknown, and 
terrific, through the vast mountains of ice which 
are found in the bay and its straits ; for should a 
vessel unfortunately run against these huge 
masses, it becomes fast held and by degrees frozen 
in. On one day to see the w. coast entirely 
naked, its mountains covered with snow, and, on 
all sides, the dreary waste of winter ; and, on 
the next, the beautiful island of Charlton, with 
the verdure of its trees and shrubs, forming one 
beautiful carpet of green, is a change calculated 
to excite the most pleasing sensations. The air, 
as far as towards the bottom of Hudson’s Bay, is, 
for nine months, excessively cold ; and, in three 
other months, very hot, except when the n. w. 
wind blows. In 1667 Guillan, an Englishman, 
arrived at Baffin’s Bay, in lat. 75°, and, from 
thence passed s. as far as 51°, when he entered 
a river, to which he gave the name of Prince 
Rupert ; and finding that the natives here were 
disposed to a friendly commerce, he erected a 
small fort, giving it the name of Charlesfort. 
After this, in consideration of the happy event of 
this expedition, those who had been interested in 
it, obtained a patent-grant from Charles II. to 
establish themselves here in 1670. The mer- 
chandize which they bring consists of powder, 
ball, cloth, knives, padlocks, tobacco, and other 
effects ; taking in exchange of the natives the 
skins of castors, foxes, and other skins. The 
vast profits of this trade, and the great proba- 
bilities of an increase of the same, led the English 
to spare no pains to ensure the good will of the 
Indians. These are very tractable and disposed 
to rationality ; and, indeed, the inhabitants of 
the river Rupert and other parts of the bay have 
a greater simplicity of character than have those 
of Canada; although the latter have enjoyed the 
greatest intercourse with Europeans. The In- 
dians of whom we treat are peaceably inclined, 
as well amongst themselves as to strangers ; with 
the exception of the Nodways, a barbarous and 
ferocious race, dwelling on the confines of Hud- 
son’s Bay. 

[Wales, a plantation in Lincoln County, dis- 
trict of Maine, 55 miles n. e. of Portland. It 
contains 439 inhabitants.] 

[WALHALDING, the Indian name of an e. 
branch of Muskingum River, at the mouth of 


254 


W A L 


W A R 


which stood Goschachguenk, a Delaware town, 
and settlement of Christian Indians.] 

WALKERS, a city of the province and colony 
of N. Carolina ; situate at the source of the river 
Cumberland, and founded in 1750. 

Walkers, a small river of the above province, 
which runs n. e., and enters the Conahuay be- 
tween those of Pointe and De Pierres. 

WALKER TOWN, a settlement of King and 
Queen County, in the province and colony of 
Virginia; situate on the n. side of the river 
Mattaponi, 15 miles n. e. of Newcastle. 

[WALLINGFORD, a township of Vermont, 
Rutland County, e. of Tinmouth. It contained, 
in 1790, 536 inhabitants.] 

[Wallingford, a pleasant post-town of Con- 
necticut, New- Haven County, 13 miles s. w. of 
Middleton, 12 n. e. of New-Haven, and 195 n. e. 
of Philadelphia. This township, called by the 
Indians Coginchauge , was settled in 1671 ; is 
divided into two parishes, and contained, in 1790, 
about 2000 inhabitants. It is 12 miles long and 
7 broad.] 

[WALLKILL, a township of New York, 
Ulster County, on the creek of its name, about 
12 miles n. by e. of Goshen, 11 w. of Newburgh, 
and 52 n. w. of New York city. It contained, in 
1790, 2571 inhabitants, of whom 340 were quali- 
fied electors, and 103 slaves.] 

[WALNUT Hills, in the w. territory of 
Georgia, are situate on a tract of land formed 
by Mississippi River and the LoosaChitto, and on 
the n. side of the latter.] 

[WALLOOMSCHACK, a small branch of 
Hoosack River, Vermont.] 

[WALLPACK, a township in Sussex County, 
New Jersey, on Delaware River, about 11 miles 
w. of Newtown. It contained, in 1790, 496 in- 
habitants, including 30 slaves.] 

[WALPOLE, a post-town of New Hampshire, 
Cheshire County, on the e. side of Connecticut 
River, 12 miles s. of Charlestown, 14 n. zd. by n. 
of Keen, and 74 w. of Portsmouth. The town- 
ship contained, in 1790, 1245 inhabitants.] 

[Walpole, a township of Massachusetts, 
Norfolk County, on the great road to Providence, 
and 22 miles s. w. of Boston. It was incorporated 
in 1724, and contained, in 1790, 1005 inhabi- 
tants.] 

[Walpole, a township of Upper Canada, N. 
America, in the county of Norfolk, which lies 
w. of Rainham, and fronts Lake Erie ] 

[WALSINGHAM, Cape, is on the e. side of 
Cumberland’s Island, in Hudson’s Straits. Lat. 
62° 39' n. long. 77° 53 / w ] 


[Walsingiiam, a township of Upper Canada, 
N. America, which lies zd. of Charlotteville, in 
the county of Norfolk, having the bay and marsh 
of Long Point in its front.] 

WALTHAM, a small city of the county of 
Middlesex, in the Bay of Massachusetts, in the 
United States of America ; five miles s. e. of Con- 
cord, four .v. of Lexington, and eight w. of Cam- 
bridge. It was the piace of head-quarters for the 
troops of the province of New Hampshire, in 
the battle of Bunker’s Hill. 

WALTON, a settlement of the island of Bar- 
badoes, in the district and jurisdiction of the city 
of Bridgetown. 

WAMBAY, a settlement of the province and 
captainship of Sergipe, in Brazil ; situate on the 
shore of the River Grande de San Francisco, near 
its entrance into the sea. 

[WAMPANOS, an Indian tribe in N. Ame- 
rica, allies of the Hurons ] 

WANANOAK, a settlement of Indians of 
Canada, on the shore and at the source of the 
river Puante. 

[WANASPATUCKET River, rises in Glou- 
cester, Rhode Island, and falls into Providence 
River, n. w. of Weybossett Bridge. Upon this 
river formerly stood the only powder mill in this 
state, and within one mile of its mouth there are 
two paper mills, two grist mills with four run of 
stones, an oil mill, a saw mill, and a slitting 
mill.] 

WANDO, a small river of the province of 
Georgia, in the United States of America. It 
runs s. and joins the Cooper, at its mouth, below 
Charleston. 

[WANOOETTE, an island in the S. Pacific 
Ocean, about two miles in extent from s. e. to n. 
zd. It is about 10 miles at n. to. by zd. from the 
n. end of Wateehoo Island.] 

[WANTAGE, a township near the n. zd. corner 
of New Jersey, Sussex County, 15 miles n. of 
Newtown. It contained, in 1790, 1700 inhabi- 
tants, including 26 slaves.] 

[WAPOSE, an island in Lake Ontario, N. 
America; it lies off the n. point that makes Prince 
Edward’s Bay, on the e. shore of Marysburgh.] 
[WAPPv\CAMO River, a large s. branch of 
Patomack River, which it joins in lat. 39° 39' n. 
where the latter was formerly known by the name 
of Cohongoronto.] 

[WAPUWAGAN, or Wapitwagan Islands, 
on the Labrador coast, lie between lat. 50° and 
50° 5' n., and between long. 59° 55 / and 60° 30'a;.] 
WARAGANABO, a river of the province of 
Guayana; in the part possessed by the French. 


J 


WAR 


W A R 


255 


[WARD, a township of Massachusetts, Wor- 
cester County, five miles s. of Worcester, and 37 
,9. w. of Boston, and contained, in 1790, 473 in- 
habitants J 

[WAR DSBOROUGH, a township of Vermont, 
Windham County, 12 or 15 miles w. of Putney, 
and 27 n. e. of Bennington, and contained, in 
1790, 753 inhabitants.] 

[WARE, a township of Massachusetts, Hamp- 
shire County. It is 15 miles n. e. of Springfield, 
and 70 miles w. n. to. of Boston ] 

[WA REHAM, a township of Massachusetts, 
Plymouth County, 38 miles s. by e. of Boston. 
It was incorporated in 1739, and contained, in 
1790, 854 inhabitants. Lat. 41° 45' n. long. 70° 
40' o&gt;.] 

WARIBA, a small river of the province and 
colony of Surinam, in the part of Guayana, pos- 
sessed by the Dutch. It enters the sea close to 
the mouths of the Demerari and Essequibo. 

WARIBU, a river of the same province and 
colony as the former. 

[WARMINSTER, a small post-town of Vir- 
ginia, on the n. side of James’s River, in Amherst 
County, about 65 miles above Richmond. Con- 
tained, in 1790, about 40 houses and a tobacco 
warehouse. It is 24 miles from Charlottesville 
and nine from Newmarket. There is also a 
township of this name in Bucks County, Penn- 
sylvania.] 

[WARM SPRING, a ridge of mountains bear 
this name, a part of the Alleghany mountains ; 
situate n. w. of the Calf Pasture, and famous for 
w arm springs. The most efficacious of these are 
two springs in Augusta, near the sources of 
James’s River, where it is called Jackson’s River. 
They rise near the foot of the ridge of mountains, 
generally called the W arm Spring Mountains, 
but in the maps Jackson’s Mountains. The one 
is distinguished by the name of the Warm Spring, 
and the other of the Hot Spring. The warm 
spring issues with a very bold stream, sufficient 
to work a grist mill, and to keep the water of its 
bason, which is 30 feet in diameter, at the vital 
warmth, viz. 96° of Fahrenheit’s thermometer. 
The matter with which these waters is allied is 
very volatile ; its smell indicates it to be sul- 
phureous, as also does the circumstance of turn- 
ing silver black. They relieve rheumatisms. 
Other complaints also of very different natures 
have been removed or lessened by them. It 
rains here four or five days in every week. The 
hot spring is about six miles from the warm, is 
much smaller, and has been so hot as to have 
boiled an egg. Some believe its degree of heat 


to be lessened. It raises the mercury in Fahren- 
heit’s thermometer to 1 12 degrees, which is fever 
heat. It sometimes relieves where the warm 
spring fails. A fountain of common water, is- 
suing within a few inches of its margin, gives it 
a singular appearance. Comparing the tempe- 
rature of these with that of the hot springs of 
Kamtschatka, of which Krachininnikow gives an 
account, the difference is very great, the latter 
raising- the mercury to 200 degTees, which is 
within 12 degrees of boiling water. These 
springs are very much resorted to, in spite of a 
total want of accommodation for the sick. Their 
waters are strongest in the hottest months, which 
occasions their being visited in J uly and August 
principally. The sweet springs in the county of 
Botetourt, at the e. foot of the Alleghany, are 
about 42 miles from the warm springs.] 

[WARNER, a township of New Hampshire, 
Hillsborough County. It was incorporated in 
1774, and contained, in 1790, 863 inhabitants.] 
[WARREN, a new county of the upper dis- 
trict of Georgia.] 

[Warren, a township of Grafton County, 
New' Hampshire, n.e. of Orford adjoining, incor- 
porated in 1763, and contained, in 1790, 206 in- 
habitants.] 

[Warren, a post-town of Rhode Island, in 
Bristol County, pleasantly situate on Warren 
River and the n. e. part of Narraganset Bay, four 
miles n. of Bristol, 10 s. s. e. of Providence, and 
302 from Philadelphia This is a flourishing- 
town ; carries on a brisk coasting and West 
India trade, and is remarkable for ship building. 
The whole township contained, in 1790, 1122 in- 
habitants, of whom 22 are slaves. Rhode Island 
college was first instituted in this tow n, and after- 
wards removed to Providence ] 

[Warren, a new township of Herkemer 
County, New York. It was taken from German 
Flats, and incorporated in 1796.] 

[Warren, a part of the township ofChenengo, 
in the State of New York, on Susquehannah 
River, bears this name in De Witt’s map ] 

[Warren, a township of Connecticut, in Litch- 
field County, between the townships of Kent and 
Litchfield ] 

[Warren, a post-town of Virginia, 10 miles 
from Warminster, 21 from Charlottesville, and 
326 from Philadelphia.] 

[Warren’s Point, on the coast of Nova 
Scotia, is on the e. side of Chebucto Harbour, 
about two miles e. of the town of Halifax. It is 
at the entrance of a creek, which receives Saw 
Mill River and other streams.] 


256 


WAR 


WAS 


[WARRINGTON, the name of two town- 
ships of Pennsylvania; the one in York County, 
the other in Buck’s County.] 

[WARSAW, or Wassaw, an island and sound 
on the coast of Georgia, between the mouth of 
Savannah River and that of Ogeechee. The 
island forms the n. side of Ossabaw Sound; being 
in a n. e. direction from Ossabaw Island. War- 
saw Sound is formed by the n. end of the island 
of its name, and the s. end of Tybee Island.] 
[WARWICK, a county of Virginia, bounded 
n. by York County, and s. by James’s River, 
which separates it from Isle of Wight and Nan- 
semond Counties. It is the oldest county of the 
State, having been established in 1628. It con- 
tained, in 1790, 1690 inhabitants, of whom 990 
were slaves.] 

[Warwick, a township of Massachusetts, in 
Hampshire County, incorporated in 1763, and 
contained, in 1790, 1246 inhabitants. It is bound- 
ed n. by the State of New Hampshire, not far e. 
of Connecticut River, and is 78 miles n. w. of 
Boston.] 

[Warwick, the chief town of Kent County, 
Rhode Island ; situate at the head of Narragan- 
set Bay, and on the w. side, about eight miles s. 
of Providence. The township contained, in 1790, 
2493 inhabitants, including 35 slaves. A cotton 
manufactory has been established in this town 
upon an extensive scale. One of Arkwright’s 
machines was erected here in August, 1795 ; and 
the yarn produced answers the most sanguine 
expectation. This town was the birth-place of 
the celebrated General Greene.] 

[Warwick, a township of New York, Orange 
County, bounded e. by New Cornwall, and s. by 
the State of New Jersey. It contained, in 1790, 
3603 inhabitants, of whom 383 were electors and 
95 slaves.] 

[Warwick, the name of two townships of 
Pennsylvania ; the one in Buck’s County, the 
other in that of Lancaster. In the latter is the 
fine Moravian settlement called Litiz ; which 
see.] 

[Warwick, a post-town of Maryland, Cecil 
County, on the e. shore of Chesapeak Bay ; about 
14 miles s. of Elkton, eight n. e. of George-town 
Cross Roads, and 46 s. w. of Philadelphia.] 

[Warwick, a small town of Chesterfield 
County, Virginia; agreeably situate on the s. 
w. side of James’s River, about seven miles s. s. e. 
of Richmond, and 14 n. of Petersburg. Vessels 
of 250 tons burden can come to this town. In 
1781, Benedict Arnold destroyed many vessels in 
the river and on the stocks at this place.] 


WARU, a river of the province and captain- 
ship of Seara, in Brazil ; which rises very near 
the coast, runs n. n. e. and enters the sea at the 
point of Mello. 

[WASHAS, Indians of N. America, who, when 
the French first came into the Mississippi, lived 
on an island to the s. w. of New Orleans, called 
Barritara, and were the first tribe they became 
acquainted with, and were always friends. They 
afterwards lived on BayauLaFosh; and, from 
being a considerable nation, are now reduced to 
five persons only, two men and three women, who 
are scattered in French families; have been many 
years extinct, as a nation, and their native lan- 
guage is lost.] 

[WASHINGTON, a county of the district of 
Maine, and the most e. land in the United States. 
It is bounded s. by the ocean, w. by Hancock 
County, n. by Lower Canada, and e. by New 
Brunswick. It is about 200 miles in length, but 
its breadth is as yet undetermined. It was erected 
into a county in 1789 ; but has few towns yet in- 
corporated. The coast abounds with excellent 
harbours. Although the winters are long and 
severe, yet the soil and productions are but little 
inferior to the other counties. The number of 
inhabitants in this country, according to the 
census of 1790, was 2758 ; but the increase since 
must have been very considerable. Chief town, 
Machias. 

[Washington, a maritime county of the State 
of Rhode Island ; bounded n. by Kent, s. by the 
N. Atlantic Ocean, w. by the State of Connecti- 
cut, and e. by Narraganset Bay. It is divided 
into seven townships, and contained, in 1790, 
18,075 inhabitants, including 339 slaves. Chief 
town, S. Kingstown.] 

[Washington, a county of New York; 
bounded n. by Clinton County, s. by Rensselaer, 
s.w. by Saratoga, w. by Herkemer, and e. by the 
State of Vermont. Until 1784 it was called 
Charlotte. It contained, in 1790, 14,042 inha- 
bitants, including 742 slaves. In 1796 there 
were 3370 of the inhabitants qualified electors. 
It is subdivided into 12 townships, of which 
Salem is the chief.] 

[Washington, a county of Pennsylvania; 
situate on the s. w. corner of the State ; bounded 
n. by Alleghany County, 5. by Monongalia County 
in Virginia, e. by Monongahela River, which 
divides it from Fayette County, and w. by Ohio 
County in Virginia, agreeably diversified with 
hills, which admit of easy cultivation quite to 
their summits. It is divided into 21 townships, 
and contained, in 1790, 23,866 inhabitants, in- 


WAS 


W A S 


257 


! eluding 263 slaves. Mines of copper and iron 
ore have been found in this county.] 

[Washington, the capital of the above county, 
and a post-town, is situate on a branch of Charter’s 
Creek, which falls into Ohio River, a few miles 
below Pittsburg. It contains a brick court house, 
a stone gaol, a large brick building for the public 
offices, an academy of stone, and nearly 100 dwel- 
ling-houses. It is 22 miles s. s. w. of Pittsburg, 
22 n. w. of Brownsville, 38 n. by w. of Morgan- 
town, in Virginia. Lat. n. 40° 13' w. long. 80° 
19'. It is remarkable for its manufactures for so 
young a town. There are three other townships 
of the same name in Pennsylvania, viz. in Fayette, 
Franklin, and Westmoreland Counties.] 

[Washington, a county of Maryland, on the 
w. shore of Chesapeke Bay ; bounded n. by the 
State of Pennsylvania, e. by Frederick County, 
from which it is divided by S. Mountain, s. w. 
by Patowmack River, which divides it from the 
State of Virginia, and w. by Sideling-Hill Creek, 
which separates it from Alleghany County. This 
is called the garden of Maryland, lying princi- 
pally between the N. and S. Mountains, and in- 
cludes the rich, fertile, and well cultivated valley 
of Conegocheague. Its streams furnish excellent 
mill seats, and the lands are thought to be the 
most fertile in the State. Lime-stone and iron- 
ore are found here. Furnaces and forges have 
been erected, and considerable quantities of pig 
and bar iron are manufactured. Chief town, 
Elizabeth Town.] 

[Washington, a county of Virginia; bounded 
e. and n. e. by Wythe, n. w. by Russell, s. by the 
State of N. Carolina, and w. by Lee. It is 
watered by the streams which form Holston, 
Clinch, and Powell’s Rivers. There is a natural 
bridge in this county similar to that in Rock- 
bridge County. It is on Stock Creek, a branch 
of Peleson River. It contained, in 1790, 5625 
inhabitants, including 450 slaves. Chief town, 
Abingdon.] 

[Washington, a district of the upper country 
of S. Carolina, perhaps the most hilly and moun- 
tainous in the State. It lies w. of Ninety-Six 
district, of which it was formerly a part, and is 
bounded n. by the State of N. Carolina. It con- 
tains the counties of Pendleton and Greenville ; 
and its population, in 1790, amounted to 14,619 
inhabitants, sending to the State legislature five 
representatives and two senators. Chief town, 
Piekensville. A number of old deserted Indian 
towns of the Cherokee nation, are frequently met 
with on the Keowee River, and its tributary 
streams which water this country.] 

VOL. v. 


[Washington^ a county of Kentucky ; bounded 
n. e. by Mercer, n. w. by Nelson, s. e. by Lincoln, 
and w. by Hardin.] 

[Washington, a district of the State of Ten- 
nessee ; situate on the waters of the rivers Hol- 
ston and Clinch, and is divided from Mero dis- 
trict on the w. by an uninhabited country. It is 
divided into the counties of Washington, Sullivan, 
Greene, and Hawkins. It contained, according 
to the State census of 1795, 29,531 inhabitants, 
including 4693 slaves.] 

[Washington, a county of Tennessee in the 
above district, contained, in 1795, 10,105 inhabi- 
tants, inclusive of 978 slaves. Washington col- 
lege is established in this county by the legis- 
lature.] 

[Washington, a county of the N. W. Terri- 
tory, erected in 1788 within the following boun- 
daries, viz. beginning on the bank of the Ohio 
where the w. line of Pennsylvania crosses it, and 
running with that line to Lake Erie ; thence 
along the s. shore of that lake to the mouth of 
Cayahoga River, and up that river to the portage 
between it and the Tuscarawa branch of Muskin- 
gum ; thence down that branch to the forks of 
the crossing-place above Fort Lawrence ; thence 
with a line to be drawn w. to the portage, on that 
branch of the Big Miami on which the fort stood, 
which was taken from the French in 1752, until 
it meets the road from the Lower Shawanese 
Town to Sandusky ; thence s. to the Sciota River 
to the mouth, and thence up the Ohio to the 
place of beginning.] 

[Washington, a county of the upper district 
of Georgia, which contained, in 1790, 4552 inha- 
bitants, including 694 slaves. Fort Fidus is 
situate in the westernmost part of the county, on 
the c. branch of Alatamaha River. The county 
is bounded on the n. e. by Ogeechee River. 
Numbers have lately moved here from Wilkes 
County, in order to cultivate cotton in preference 
to tobacco. This produce, though in its infancy, 
amounted to 208,000 lbs. weight in 1792. Chief 
town, Golphinton.] 

[Washington, a township of Vermont, Orange 
County, 12 miles w. of Bradford. It contained, 
in 1790, 72 inhabitants.] 

[Washington, a township of Massachusetts, 
in Berkshire County, seven miles s. e. of Pitts- 
field, eight e. of Lenox, and 98 w. of Boston. 
It was incorporated in 1777, and contained, in 
1790, 588 inhabitants.] 

[Washington, or Mount Vernon, a planta- 
tion of Lincoln County, district of Maine, n. w. 
of Hallowed, and nine miles from Sterling. It 

L L 


258 


WAS 


WAS 


consists of 16,055 acres of land and water, of 
which the latter occupies 1641 acres. It con- 
tained, in 1790, 618 inhabitants, and was incor- 
porated by the name of Belgrade in 1796; 
which see.] 

[Washington, a township of New York, in 
Dutchess County, bounded s. by the town of 
Beekman, and w. by Poughkeepsie and Clinton. 
It contained, in 1790, 5189 inhabitants, of whom 
286 were electoi’s and 78 slaves.] 

[Washington, a township of New Hamp- 
shire in Cheshire County, first called Camden. 
It was incorporated in 1776, and contained in 
1790, 545 inhabitants. It is 12 or 14 miles e. of 
Charlestown.] 

[Washington, a township of Connecticut in 
Litchfield County, about seven miles s. w. of 
Litchfield.] 

[Washington, a port of entry and post-town 
of N. Carolina ; situate in Beaufort County, on 
the n. side of Tar River, in lat. 35° 30 ' n. 55 
miles from Ocrecok Inlet, 22 from the mouth of 
Tar River, 38 s.s. w. of Edenton, 18 n. by e. of 
Newbern, and 95 n. e. by n. of Wilmington. It 
contains a court-house, gaol, and about 80 houses. 
From this town is exported tobacco of the Peters- 
burg quality, pork, beef, Indian corn, peas, beans, 
pitch, tar, turpentine, rosin, &amp;c. also pine boards, 
shingles, and oak staves. About 130 vessels en- 
tered annually at the custom-house in this town, 
in the year 1790. The exports for a year ending 
September 30, 1794, amounted to 33,684 dol- 
lars.] 

[Washington, a post-town of Kentucky, and 
the capital of Mason County, about three miles 
s. by w. of the landing at Limestone, on the s. 
side of Ohio River. It contained in 1790, about 
100 houses, a Presbyterian church, a handsome 
court-house and gaol, and is fast increasing in 
importance. It is 50 miles n. e. of Lexington, 
61 n.e. by e. of Frankfort.] 

[Washington Court-house, in S. Carolina, is 
10 miles from Greenville, and 16 from Pen- 
dleton.] 

[Washington, a post-town of Georgia, and 
the capital of Wilkes County, 40 miles n. w. by 
w. of Augusta, 41 n. by w. of Louisville, and 40 
from Greensborough. It stands on the to. side 
of Kettle Creek, a n. branch of Little River, 
which empties into Savannah River from the e. 
about 36 miles e. of the town. It is regularly 
laid out, and contained, in 1788, 34 houses, a 
court-house, gaol, and academy. The funds of 
the academy amount to about £.800 sterling, and 


the number of students to between 60 and 70. 
On the e. side of the town, 1| miles distant, is a 
medicinal spring, which rises from a hollow tree 
four or five feet in length. The inside of the tree 
is covered with a coat of matter an inch thick, 
and the leaves around the spring are incrusted 
with a substance as white as snow. It is said to 
be a sovereign remedy for the scurvy, scrophu- 
lous disorders, consumptions, gout, and every 
other disorder arising from humours in the blood. 
This spring being situate in a fine healthy part 
of the state, will, no doubt, be a pleasant and 
salutary place of resort for invalids from the ma- 
ritime and unhealthy parts of Georgia, and the 
neighbouring states.] 

[Washington, City, in the territory of Co- 
lumbia, was ceded by the State of Virginia and 
Maryland to the United States, and by them 
established as the seat of their government, after 
the year 1800. This city stands at the junction 
of the river Patowmack, and the Eastern Branch 
latitude 38° 5 3' n. extending nearly four miles 
up each, and including a tract of territory, ex- 
ceeded, in point of convenience, salubrity and 
beauty, by none in America. For although the 
land in general appears level, yet by gentle and 
gradual swellings, a variety of elegant prospects 
are produced, and a sufficient descent formed for 

conveying off the water occasioned by rain. 

Within the limits of this city are a great number 
of excellent springs ; and by digging wells, water 
of the best quality may readily be had. Besides, 
the never failing streams that now run through 
that territory, may also be collected for the use 
of the city. The waters of Reedy Branch, and 
of Tiber Creek, may be conveyed to the Presi- 
dent’s house. The source of Tiber Creek is ele- 
vated about 236 feet above the level of the tide 
in said creek. The perpendicular height of the 
ground on which the capitol stands, is 78 feet 
above the level of the tide in Tiber Creek. The 
water of Tiber Creek may therefore be conveyed 
to the capitol, and after watering that part of the 
city, may be destined to other useful purposes. 
The Eastern Branch is one of the safest and 
most commodious harbours in America, bein°’ 
sufficiently deep for the largest ships, for about 
four miles above its mouth, while the channel 
lies close along the bank adjoining the city, and 
affords a large and convenient harbour. The 
Patowmack, although only navigable for small 
craft, for a considerable distance from its banks 
next the city, excepting about half a mile above 
the junction of the rivers, will nevertheless afford 


WAS 


WAS 


259 


a capacious summer harbour ; as an immense 
number of ships may ride in the great channel, 
opposite to, and below the city. 

The situation of this metropolis is upon the 
great post-road, equi-distant from the n. and s. 
extremities of the union, and nearly so from the 
Atlantic and Pittsburg, upon the best navigation, 
and in the midst of a commercial territory, proba- 
bly the richest, and commanding the most exten- 
sive internal resource of any in America. It has 
therefore many advantages to recommend it, as 
an eligible place for the permanent seat of the 
general government ; and it may be expected to 
grow up with a degree of rapidity commensurate 
with its advantages. The plan of this city ap- 
pears to contain some important improvements 
upon that of the best planned cities in the world, 
combining in a remarkable degree, convenience, 
regularity, elegance of prospect, and a free cir- 
culation of air. The positions of the different 
public edifices, and for the several squares and 
areas of different shapes as they are laid down, 
were first determined on the most advantageous 
ground, commanding the most extensive pro- 
spects, and from their situation, susceptible of 
6uch improvements as either use or ornament 
may hereafter require. The capitol is situated 
on a most beautiful eminence, commanding a 
complete view of every part of the city, and of a 
considerable part of the country around. The 
President’s house stands on a rising ground, pos- 
sessing a delightful water prospect, together with 
a commanding view of the capitol, and the most 
material parts of the city. Lines, or avenues of 
direct communication, have been devised to con- 
nect the most distant and important objects. 
These transverse avenues, or diagonal streets, 
are laid out on the most advantageous ground 
for prospect and convenience, and are calculated 
not only to produce a variety of charming pro- 
spects, but greatly to facilitate the communication 
throughout the city. North and 5 . lines, inter- 
sected by others running due e. and w. make the 
distribution of the city into streets, squares, &amp;c. 
and those lines have been so combined, as to 
meet at certain given points, with the divergent 
avenues, so as to form, on the spaces first deter- 
mined, the different squares or areas. The 
grand avenues, and such streets as lead imme- 
diately to public places, are from 130 to 160 feet 
wide, and may be conveniently divided into foot- 
ways, a walk planted with trees on each side, and 
a paved way for carriages. The other streets 
are from 90 to 110 feet wide. In order to exe- 
cute this plan, Mr.Ellieott drew a true meridional 


line by celestial observation, which passes through 
the area intended for the capitol. This line he 
crossed by another, running due e. and w. which 
passes through the same area. These lines were 
accurately measured and made the bases on which 
the whole plan was executed. He ran all the 
lines by a transit instrument, and determined the 
acute angles by actual measurement, leaving no- 
thing to the uncertainty of the compass. 

Washington, or the Federal City, is separated 
from Georgetown in Montgomery County, Mary- 
land, on the w. by Rock Creek, but that town is 
now within the territory of Columbia. It is 42 
miles s. w. by s. of Baltimore, 876 from Passama- 
quoddy, in the district of Maine, 500 from Bos- 
ton, 248 from New York, 144 from Philadelphia, 
133 from Richmond in Virginia, 232 from Hali- 
fax in N. Carolina, 630 from Charleston in S. Ca- 
rolina, and 794 from Savannah in Georgia. The 
above distances are English miles, and include 
the windings of the roads. 

The population of the territorial government 
of Columbia, in which this federal city is situate, 
amounted by the census of 1810, to 24,023 
souls.] 

[Washington College, in Maryland. See 
Chestertown.] 

[Washington Fort, in the territory n.w. of 
the Ohio, is situate on the n. bank of the river 
Ohio, w. of Little Miami River, and 37 miles 
n.w. of Washington in Kentucky. See Cincin- 
nati.] 

[Washington, Mount, a small township of 
Massachusetts, Berkshire County, in the s. w. 
corner of the State. It was incorporated in 1779, 
and contained in 1790, 201 inhabitants.] 

[Washington, Mount, one of the White 
Mountains of New Hampshire, which makes so 
majestic an appearance all along the shore of 
the e. counties of Massachusetts. See White 
Mountains.] 

[Washington’s Islands, on the n.w. coast of 
N. America. The largest is of a triangular 
shape, the point ending on the s. at Cape St. 
.lames’s, in lat. 51° 58 x n. Sandy Point, at its 
n. e. extremity, is in lat. 54° 22' n. Its longi- 
tude 226° 37 '' to. extends from Hope Point, the 
n. w. extremity, to Sandy Point, in 228° 45 / w. 
Port Ingraham, Perkins, and Magee Sound, lie 
on the w. side of the island ; on the e. side are 
the following ports from n. to s. Skeetkiss or 
Skitkiss Harbour, Port Cummashawa, Kleiws 
Point, Smoke Port, Kanskeeno Point, Port Ge- 
yers, Port Ueah, and Port Sturgis. Captain 
Cook, when he passed this island, supposed i( 
l l 2 


260 


WAT 


WAT 


America, which 


to be a part of the continent, as the weather at 
fhe time was thick, and the wind boisterous, 
which obliged him to keep out at sea, till he 
made the w. cape of the continent in about 
lat. 55° n. Captain Dixon discovered these is- 
lands in 1787, and named them Queen Char- 
lotte’s Islands. Captain Gray discovered them 
in 1789, and called them Washington’s Islands. 
There are three principal islands, besides many 
small ones. It is conjectured that they make a 
part of the archipelago of St. Lazarus.] 

[WASHITA, a river of N 
rises in about lat. 30° n. and with the Bayan 
Tenza forms the Black River. — For an accurate 
account of which, see Vol. III. page 251, of this 
Dictionary.] 

[WASHQUARTER, or Weighqueta, in 
Upper Canada, N. America, afterwards called 
Lake Geneva, and now Burlington Bay, by pro- 
clamation, July 16, 1792, is a very beautiful 
small lake, lying within the head of Lake On- 
tario, from which it is divided by a long beach : 
over the outlet has been erected a good bridge ; 
and on the s. part of the beach, near the portage, 
is a good inn, erected by his Excellency Major- 
general Simcoe.] 

[WASKEMASHIN, an island in the Gulf of 
St. Lawrence, on the coast of Labrador. Lat. 
50° 3' n. Long. 59° 55 / ®.] 

WASSAW Island. See Warsaw.] 
WATAGUAKI Isles, on the coast of La- 
brador, and in the Gulf of St. Lawrence, lies 
near the shore, n. e. of Ouapitougan Isle, and 
s. w. of Little Mecatina, about 10 or 12 leagues 
from each.] 

[WATAUGA, a river of Tennesse, which 
rises in Burke County, N. Carolina, and falls into 
Holstein River, 15 miles above Long Island.] 

[WATCH Point, lies to the n. e. of Fisher’s 
Island, in Long Island Sound, and w.s.w. 14 
miles from Block Island.] 

[WATEHOO, an island in the S. Pacific 
Ocean ; a beautiful spot, about six miles long and 
four broad. Lat. 20° V n. Long. 158° 15' ®.] 

[WATERBOROUGH, a township of the dis- 
trict of Maine, York County, on Mousom River, 
15 miles n. w of Wells, and 75 from Boston. It 
was incorporated in 1787, and contained in 1790, 
965 inhabitants.] 

[WATERB1 1RY, a township of Vermont, in 
Chittenden County, separated from Duxbury on 
the s. w. by Onion River. It contained in 1790, 
93 inhabitants.] 

[Waterbury, the n. westernmost township 
of New Haven County, Connecticut, called by the 


Indians, Matteluck. It was settled in 1761, and 
is divided into the parishes of Northbury, Salem, 
and South Britain.] 

[WATEREE, a branch of Santee River, S. 
Carolina,] 

[WATERFORD, a plantation in Cumberland 
County, district of Maine, s. e. of Orangetown, 
or Greenland.] 

[Waterford, a new township in York 
County, district of Maine, incorporated Febru- 
ary, 1797, formerly a part of Waterborough.] 

[Waterford, a township of New Jersey, in 
Gloucester County.] 

[Waterford, a neat village of New York, 
in the township of Half Moon ; which see.] 

WATER Fresh. See Aquabuena. 

WATEREE, a settlement of the province and 
colony of S. Carolina, where the English have a 
fort and establishment, on the shore of the river 
of this name. 

WATERY, a settlement of the province and 
colony of S. Carolina, in the territory of the Ca- 
tabaw Indians, where the English have a fort 
and establishment. It is situate on the shore, 
and at the source of the river of its name. 

Watery. This river runs s.e. and enters the 
Congari. 

[WATERLAND, an island in the S. Pacific 
Ocean, so named by Le Maire. L^t. 14° 46' s. 
Long. 144° 10 / 

[WATERQUECHIE, or QuechV, a small 
river of Vermont, which empties into Connecti- 
cut River in Hartland.] 

[WATERTOWN, a very pleasant town in 
Middlesex County, Massachusetts ; seven miles 
w. n. w of Boston. Charles River is navigable 
for boats to this town, seven miles from its mouth 
in Boston Harbour. The township contained in 
1790, 1091 inhabitants, and was incorporated in 
1630. The Rev. Mr. Elliot relates, that in the 
year 1670, a strange phenomenon appeared in a 
great pond at Watertown, where the fish all died; 
and as many as could, thrust themselves on shore, 
and there died. It was estimated that not less 
than 20 cart loads lay dead at once round the 
pond. An eel was found alive in the sandy 
border of the pond, and upon being cast again 
into its natural element, it wriggled out again as 
fast as it could, and died on the shore. The cat- 
tle, accustomed to the water, refused to drink it 
for three days, after which they drank as usual. 
When the fish began to come on shore, before 
they died, many were taken both by English and 
Indians, and eaten without any injury.] 

[Watertown, a township in Litchfield County, 


W A W 

Connecticut. It is about 26 miles n. n. zo. of 
New Haven.] 

[WATER VLIET, an extensive township of 
New York, Albany County, on the zo. side of 
Hudson’s River, and includes the village of Ha- 
milton, and the islands in the river nearest the 
zo. side. It is bounded zo. by the manor of Rens- 
selaerwych, and contained, in 1790, 7419 inhabi- 
tants, including 707 slaves. In 1796, there were 
600 of the inhabitants qualified electors.] 

WATING, a small island of the N. Sea, one 
of the Lucayas, to the zo. of Long Island. 

WAT I NO, Point of, on the coast of the 
province and colony of Maryland in the United 
States, within the Bay of Chesapeak. 

WATKINS, a settlement of the Island of Bar- 
badoes ; situate on the s. coast, and in the juris- 
diction of the city of Bridgetown. 

[WATLINGS Island, one of the Bahama 
Islands, situate in the Atlantic Ocean, about 
IS leagues n. by zo. from Bird Rock, the n. zo. 
point of Crooked Island. By an enumeration in 
1803, the number of whites amounted to 13, and 
of blacks to 126 : and the number of acres of 
patented estates, granted by the crown for the 
purposes of cultivation, to 10,975 acres. The 
s. point is in lat. 24° n. and long. 74° to.] 

WATOGA, a settlement of the province and 
colony of N. Carolina ; situate on the shore and 
at the source of the river Tenessee. 

WATOGO, a settlement of Indians of the 
same province and colony as the former, on the 
shore of the river Cherakees, and at tire mouth 
of the river of its name. 

Watogo. This river is small, runs nearly zo. 
and enters the Cherakees. 

[WATSON, Fort, in S. Carolina, was situate 
on the 7i. e. bank of Santee River, about half way 
between the mouth of the Congaree and Nelson’s 
Fort, on the bend of the river opposite the Eu- 
taw Springs. Its garrison of 114 men being be- 
sieged by General Greene, surrendered in April, 
1781. He then marched with his main force 
against Camden, higher up the river.] 

[WAUKEAGUE, a village in the township of 
Sullivan, in the district of Maine, nine miles 
from Desert Island ] 

[WAVENEY, a river in the county of Nor- 
folk, Upper Canada, rises in the township of 
Townsend, and running thence s. through the 
townships ofWoodhouse and Walpole, discharges 
itself into Lake Erie, where it has about three 
feet water over the bar, and is a good harbour 
for batteaux ] 

[WAWASINK, a village in New York, on 


W E A 261 

Rondout Kill, a branch of Wall Kill, seven miles 
zo. of New Paltz, and 12 s. zo. of Esopus.] 

[WAWIACHTANOS, andTwicHTWEEs, two 
Indian tribes, residing chiefly between Sciota 
and Wabash Rivers.] 

WAYBARI, a small river of the province of 
Guayana, in the part possessed by the Dutch. 
It enters the sea above the mouth of the river 
Berbice. 

[WAYNE, a new county in the N. W. Terri- 
tory, laid out in the fall of 1796, including the 
settlements of Detroit and Michillimakkinack.] 

[Wayne, a county of Newbern District, N. 
Carolina ; bounded n. by Edgcome, and s. by 
Glasgow. It contained in 1790, 6133 inhabi- 
tants, inclusive of 1557 slaves.] 

[Wayne, a township of Pennsylvania, situate 
in Mifflin County.] 

[Wayne, Fort, in the N. W. Territory, is si- 
tuate at the head of the Miami of the Lake, near 
the Old Miami villages, at the confluence of St. 
Joseph’s and St. James’s Rivers. It is a square 
fort, with bastions at each angle, witli a ditch and 
parapet, and could contain 500 men, but has only 
300, with 16 pieces of cannon. It is 62 miles n. 
by e. of Fort Recovery, and 127 zo. by s. of De- 
troit. The Indians ceded to the United States 
a tract of land six miles square, where this fort 
stands, at the late treaty of peace at Green- 
ville.] 

[WAYNESBOROUGH, a post-town of N. 
Carolina, 19 miles from Kingston, and 36 s. e. 
from Raleigh.] 

[Waynesborougii, a post-town in Burke 
County, Georgia, 24 miles s. zo. of Augusta, 30 
e. by n. of Louisville. No river of consequence 
passes near this town ; yet being the place where 
both the superior and inferior courts are held, it 
is in a prosperous condition.] 

WEALE, a settlement of the island of Barba- 
does, in the district of the parish of Santiago ; si- 
tuate on the zo. coast. 

[WE ARE, a township of New Hampshire, 
situate in Hillsborough County, 18 miles s.zo. of 
Concord, 60®. of Portsmouth, and 70 n. zo. of 
Boston. It was incorporated in 1764, and con- 
tained in 1790, 1924 inhabitants.] 

WEATHER-FAIR. See Been Tiempo. 

[WEATHERSFIELD, a township of Ver- 
mont, Windsor County, on the zo. side of Con- 
necticut River, between Windsor on the n. and 
Springfield on the s. Ascutney Mountain lies 
partly in this township, and in that of Windsor. 
It is a flourishing town, and contained in 1790, 
1097 inhabitants.] 


262 


WEL 


W £ L 


[ We ath e rs fi e ld, a post-town of Connectic ut, 
pleasantly situate in Hartford County, on the w. 
side of Connecticut River, four miles s. of Hart- 
ford, 11 n. of Middleton, 32 n. by e. of New Ha- 
ven, and 165 n. e. of Philadelphia. This town 
was settled in 1 635 or 1636, by emigrants from 
Dorchester in Massachusetts, and has a fertile 
and luxuriant soil. It consists of between 200 
and 300 houses, and has a very elegant brick 
meeting-house for Congregationalists. The in- 
habitants are generally wealthy farmers ; and be- 
sides the common productions of the country, 
raise great quantites of onions, which are ex- 
ported to different parts of the United States, 
and to the W. Indies.] 

[WEATHERFORD’S Peace, Charles, an 
Indian house and plantation of that name, on 
the e. side of Alabamba River, above M‘Gilli- 
vray’s sister’s place, and a good way below the 
junction of Tallapoosee and Coosa rivers.] 

[WEAUCTENEAU Towns, Indian villages 
on Wabash River, destroyed by Generals Scott 
and Wilkinson in 1791.] 

[WEAUS, or Weeas, an Indian tribe, whose 
towns lie on the head waters of Wabash River. 
At the treaty of Greenville they ceded a tract of 
land, six miles square, to the United States.] 
[WEAVER’S Lake, in the State of New 
York, is three miles n. w. of Lake Otsego. It is 
two miles long and If broad.] 

WEBASAW, a settlement of the province and 
captainship of Rio Grande in Brazil ; situate near 
the coast, on the shore of the river Amargoso. 

[WEBHAMET River, in the district of Maine, 
is the principal entrance by water to the town of 
Wells, in York County. It has a barred har- 
bour.] 

WECAUNSEE, a small river of the province 
and colony of Virgina, which runs e. and enters 
the Nansemond. 

[WECHQUETANK, a Moravian settlement 
made by the United Brethren in Pennsylvania, 
behind the Blue Mountains. In 1760, the Beth- 
lehem congregation purchased 1400 aci-es of 
land for the Christian Indians. In 1763, it was 
destroyed by white savages, who inhabited near 
Lancaster ; they likewise murdered many of the 
peaceable Indians settled here. It was finally 
destroyed by the A mericans during the late war. 
It lies about 30 miles n. w. by w. of Bethlehem.] 
[WEISENBEBO, a township of Pennsyl- 
vania, in Northampton County.] 

[WELCH Mountains, are situate in Chester 
County, Pennsylvania. Besides other streams, 
Brandywine Creek rises here.] 


Welch-Tract, a territory thus called, in the 
county of Newcastle and province of Pennsyl- 
vania in the United States of America ; contain- 
ing nearly 40,000 acres of plantation land. It 
has some, although inconsiderable towns, such as 
West Haverford, and Merioneth, and others. It 
is well peopled with industrious inhabitants, who 
have cultivated great part of it ; and thus does 
it produce wheat in abundance, having a stock 
of cattle wherein it trades, and plantations the 
most flourishing of any in the province. 

[WELCOME, Sir Thomas Roes, or Ne 
Ultra, a bay or strait in that part of Hudson’s 
Bay which runs up to the n. round from Cape 
Southampton, opening between lat. 62° and 63° n. 
On the w. or n. shore is a fair head land, called 
The Hope, by Captain Middleton, in lat. 66° 
30' n . ] 

[WELLFLEET, a township of Massachusetts, 
in Barnstable County ; situate on the peninsula 
called Cape Cod; s.e. from Boston, distant by land. 
105 miles, by water 56, and from Plymouth light- 
house eight leagues. The harbour is large, in- 
dented within with creeks, where vessels of 70 or 
80 tons may lie safe in what is called the Deep 
Hole. The land is barren, and its timber is 
small pitch-pine and oak. Before it was incor- 
porated in 1763, it was called the North Precinct 
of Eastham, and was originally included in the 
Indian Skeekeet and Pamet. In 1790, it con- 
tained 1,117 inhabitants. Since the memory of 
people now living, there have been in this small 
town 30 pair of twins, besides two births that 
produced three each. The method of killing- 
gulls in the gull-house, is no doubt an Indian 
invention, and also that of killing birds and fowl 
upon the beach in dark nights. The gull-house 
is built with crotchets fixed in the ground on the 
beach, and covered with poles, the sides being- 
covered with stakes and sea-weed, and the poles 
on the top covered with lean whale. The man 
being- placed within, is not discovered by the 
fowls, and while they are contending for and eat- 
ing the fish, he draws them in one by one be- 
tween the poles, until he has collected 40 or 50. 
This number has often been taken in a morning. 
The method of killing small birds and fowl that 
perch on the beach, is by making a light; the 
present mode is with hog’s lard in a frying-pan ; 
but the Indians are supposed to have used a 
pine torch. Birds, in a dark night, will flock 
to the light, and may be killed with a walking- 
cane. It must be curious to a countryman who 
lives at a distance from the sea, to be acquainted 
with the method of killing black fish. Their 


WEN 


size is from four to five tons weight, when full 
grown. When they come within the harbours, 
boats surround them, and they are as easily driven 
on shore as cattle or sheep are driven on the 
land. The tide leaves them, and they are as easily 
killed. They are a fish of the whale kind, and 
will average a barrel of oil each : 400 have been 
seen at one time on the shore. Of late years 
these fish rarely come into the harbours.] 

[WELLS, a small but rapid river of Vermont, 
which, after a short s. e. course empties into 
Connecticut River, below The Narrows, and in 
the n. e. corner of Newbury. Its mouth is 40 
yards wide.] 

[Wells, a township of Vermont, Rutland 
County, between Pawlet and Poultney, and con- 
tained in 1790, 622 inhabitants. Lake St. Austin 
lies in this township, and is three miles long, and 
one broad.] 

[Wells, a post-town of the district of Maine, 
in York County ; situate on the bay of its name, 
about half way between Biddeford and York, and 
S8 miles n. by e. of Boston, and 441 from Phila- 
delphia. This township is about 10 miles long, 
and seven broad, was incorporated in 1653, 
and contained in 1790, 3,070 inhabitants. It is 
bounded s. e. by that part of the sea called 
Wells Bay, and n. e. by Kennebunk River, which 
separates it from Arundel. The small river Ne- 
gunket, perhaps formerly Oguntiquit, has no na- 
vigation, nor mills of any value, but noticed, 
about 170 years ago as the boundary between 
York and Wells. The tide through Piscataqua 
Bay urges itself into the marshes at Wells, a few 
miles e. of Negunket, and forms a harbour for 
small vessels. Further e. in this township, the 
small river Mousum is found coming from ponds 
of that name about 20 miles from the sea. Seve- 
ral mills are upon the river, and the inhabitants 
are opening a harbour by means of a canal. — 
Webhamet River is the principal entrance to this 
town by water.] 

[Wells Bay, in the township above men- 
tioned, lies between Cape Porpoise and Ned- 
dock. The course from the latter to Wells Bar, 
is n. by e. four leagues.] 

[Wells Falls, in Delaware River, lie 13 miles 
n. w. of Trenton in New Jersey.] 

[WENDELL, a township in Massachusetts, in 
Hampshire County, 80 miles n. w. of Boston. It 
was incorporated in 1781, and contained in 1790, 
519 inhabitants.] 

[Wendell, a township of New Hampshire, 
Cheshire County, about 15 miles n.e. ofCharles- 


W E S 263 

town, containing 267 inhabitants. It was called 
Saville, before its incorporation in 1781.] 

[WENHAM, a township of Massachusetts, 
Essex County, between Ipswich and Beverley, 
26 miles n.e. by n. of Boston. It was incorpo- 
rated in 1643, and contained in 1790, 502 inhabi- 
tants. Here is a large pond, well stored w ith 
fish, from which, and its vicinity to Salem, it w as, 
with whimsical piety, called Enon, by the first 
settlers.] 

[WENITAGONK, a river of Tapper Canada, 
which runs into Lake Ontario, in the w. part of 
the township of Clarke.] 

[WENMAN, one of the Gallipago Islands, 
on the coast of Peru ; situate w. of Cape Fran- 

CISCO. J 

WENSMINSTER, an island of the Strait of 
Magellan ; situate at that entrance leading into 
the S. Sea, and close to the coast of this rhumb. 

[WENTWORTH, a township of New Hamp- 
shire, Grafton County, containing in 1790, 241 
inhabitants. It was incorporated in 1766, and is 
s. e. of Oxford, adjoining.] 

WESE, a small island of the N. Sea, near the 
coast of Florida, one of the Georgian ; between 
the island of Jekil and the bay of San Agustin. 

[WESEL, a village of New Jersey, Essex 
County, on Pasaic River, two miles n. w. of 
Acquakenunk, and five w. of Hakkensack.] 
[WEST, or Wantastiquek, a river of Ver- 
mont, has its main source in Bromley, about three 
miles s. e. from the head of Otter Creek. After 
receiving seven or eight smaller streams, and 
running about 37 miles, it falls into Connecticut 
River at Rrattleborough. It is the largest of 
the streams on the e. side of the Green Moun- 
tains ; and at its mouth is about 15 rods w ide, 
and 10 or 12 feet deep. A number of figures, 
or inscriptions, are yet to be seen upon the rocks 
at the mouth of this river, seeming to allude to 
the affairs of war among the Indians ; but their 
rudeness and awkwardness denote that the form- 
ers of them were at a great remove from the 
knowledge of any alphabet.] 

[West Bay, Great, in Upper Canada, com- 
prehends all that part of the Bay of Quinte, from 
John’s Island, upw ards, to the head of the bay.] 
[West Bay, another, lying in the s. w. extre- 
mity of Lake Superior, Upper Canada, within 
the isles Royale and Philipeaux.] 

[West Bay, a large bay of Lake Superior, at 
its westernmost extremity, having the 12 isles at 
its mouth. It receives St. Louis River from 
the w.~\ 


‘204 


WES 


WES 


[West Bethlehem, a township of Washing- 
ton County, Pennsylvania.] 

West River Mountain, in New Hampshire, 
in the township of Chesterfield, lies opposite to 
the mouth of West River ; and from this part of 
Connecticut River to Piscataqua Harbour on the 
e. is 82 miles, the broadest part of the State. — 
Here are visible appearances of volcanic erup- 
tions. About the year 1730, the garrison of Fort 
Dumraer, four miles distant, was alarmed with 
frequent explosions of fire and smoke, emitted by 
the mountain. Similar appearances have been 
observed since.] 

[WESTBOROUGH, a township of Massachu- 
setts, Worcester County, 33 miles w. s. w. of Bos- 
ton, and eight e. of Worcester, was incorporated 
in 1717. Among other singular occurrences in 
the Indian wars, the strange fortune of Silas and 
Timothy Rice is worthy of notice. They were 
sons of Mr. Edmond Rice, one of the first settlers 
in this town, and carried off by the Indians on 
August 8, 1704, the one nine the other seven 
years of age. They lost their mother tongue, 
had Indian wives, and children by them, and 
lived at Cagnawaga. Silas was named Tooka- 
nowras, and Timothy, Oughtsorongoughton. — 
Timothy recommended himself so much to the 
Indians by his penetration, courage, strength, and 
warlike spirit, that he arrived to be the third of 
the six chiefs of the Cagnawagas. In 1740 he came 
down to see his friends. He viewed the house 
where Mr. Rice dwelt, and the place from whence 
he with the other children were captured, of 
both which he retained a clear remembrance ; as 
he did likewise of several elderly persons who 
were then living, though he had forgot the Eng- 
lish language. He returned to Canada, and, it is 
said, he was the Chief who made the speech to 
General Gage in behalf of the Cagnawagas, after 
the reduction of Montreal. These men were 
alive in 1790.] 

[West Camp, a thriving village of New York, 
containing about 60 houses, in Columbia County 
. on the e. side of Hudson’s River, seven miles 
above Red Hook, and 13 n. of New York City.] 

[West-Chester, a county of New York; 
bounded n by Duchess County, s. by Long Island 
Sound, w. by Hudson’s River, and e. by the State 
of Connecticut. It includes Captain’s Islands, 
and all the islands in the sound to the e. of 
Frogs Neck, and to the n. of the main channel. 
In 1790, it contained 24,003 inhabitants, includ- 
ing 1,419 slaves. In 1796, there were, in its 
21 townships, 3,243 of the inhabitants qualified 
electors.] 


[West-Chester, the chief township of the 
above county ; lying partly on the Sound, about 
14 miles n.e. of New York City. It was much 
impoverished in the late war, and contained, in 
1790, 1,203 inhabitants; of whom 164 were 
electors, and 242 slaves.] 

[West-Chester, the chief town of Chester 
County, Pennsylvania; containing about 50 
houses, a court-house, stone gaol, and a Ro- 
man Catholic church. It is about 23 miles w. of 
Philadelphia, j 

[WESTERLY, a post-town on the sea-coast 
of Washington County, Rhode Island, and sepa- 
rated from Stonington, in Connecticut, by Pau- 
catuck River, 27 miles w. by $. of Newport. The 
inhabitants carry on a brisk coasting trade, and 
are extensively engaged in the fisheries. The 
township contained, in 1790, 2,298 inhabitants, 
of whom 10 were slaves.] 

[WESTERN DISTRICT, the, in Upper Ca- 
nada, was originally constituted and erected into 
a district by the name of the District of Hesse, 
in the province of Quebec, by his Excellency 
Lord Dorchester’s proclamation, of the 24th 
July, 1788. It received its present name by an 
act of the provincial legislature ; and by its pre- 
sent limits is bounded s. by Lake Erie ; e. by 
the London District, on the w. by Detroit, Lake 
St. Clair, and river St. Clair, and on the n. by 
the Lake Huron.] 

[Western, a township of Massachusetts; 
situate in the s. w. corner of Worcester County, 
18 miles e. by n. of Springfield, 23 w. by s. from 
Worcester, and 58 s. w. by s. of Boston.] 

[Western, Fort, in the district of Maine, 
was erected in 1752, on the e. bank of the small 
fall which terminates the navigation of Kenne- 
beck River. It is 18 miles from Taconnet Fall. 
See Kennebeck River. It is in the township 
of Harwington, Lincoln County. A company 
was incorporated in February, 1796, to build a 
bridge over the river at this place.] 

[Western Precinct, in Somerset County, New 
Jersey, contained, in 1790, 1,875 inhabitants, in- 
cluding 317 slaves.] 

[Western Territory, the same asTERRiTORV, 
n. w. of the Ohio, which see. With respect to 
the litigated claims upon this territory, the fol- 
lowing document will give a concise and clear 
view.] 

p A summary Statement of the claims of Georgia , 
and of the United States, to the Georgia Western 
Territory ; and of the arguments, adduced by the 
purchasers of a part of this territory , to invali- 


WESTERN TERRITORY. 


265 


[date these claims ; particularly to such parts as 
are covered by their purchases ; collected and 
stated with impartiality from various authentic 
printed manuscript documents. 

1 1. The State of Georgia say, that u the unap- 
propriated territory,” usually considered as 
within the limits of the State of Georgia, or the 
tract of country now distinguished by the name 
of the Georgia Western Territory, is their pro- 
perty, and that they have “ not only the right of 
pre-emption, but also of exercising all territorial 
rights.” 1. Because, by the 2d and 9th articles 
of the confederation of 1781, the territory within 
the limits of each of the United States is con- 
firmed and guaranteed to each of them respec- 
tively. 2. Because the boundaries of Georgia, 
as established by the treaty of Paris, of .1783, 
and by the convention of Beaufort of 1787, in- 
clude this territory ; and the 6th article of the 
Federal Constitution, by the spirit and meaning 
of it, confirms these limits ; and, Sdly, Because 
the United States, by accepting a cession from N. 
Carolina of her w. territory. To this claim of 
Georgia the purchasers accede ; upon this ground 
the sales were made to the respective companies 
in 1795, and on this ground the purchasers rested 
the validity of their claim.’ 

‘ But the State of Georgia now reclaims that 
part of her w. territory sold according to the act 
of her legislature, of January 7, 1795, alleging 
that the act authorising the sale, is contrary to 
the 4th article of the constitution of the United 
States ; repugnant to the 16th and 17th sections 
in the 1st article of the constitution of Georgia, 
and was moreover obtained by means of “ fraud, 
atrocious speculation, corruption, and collusion.” 
Hence, by an act passed February 13, 1796, the 
above act of January 7, 1795, was “ declared 
null and void, and the grants, rights, and claims, 
deduced from it, annulled, and rendered void, and 
of no effect.” 

* In answer to the above-stated claim of Geor- 
gia, it is contended by the purchasers, 1. That 
the repealing law of Georgia is merely void, and 
leaves the title of the purchasers where it found 
it. If corruption, they say, did exist in the le- 
gislature which made the sale (which is however 
strenuously denied), it is very questionable whe- 
ther it can ever be alleged, as a contract cannot 
be repealed, like other acts of legislation ; and 
as the supreme power of a State, as such, can- 
not be accountable to any other constituted au- 
thority ; for that implies a superior tribunal. 
By this, however, is not meant that the wrong 
done cannot be individually prosecuted for cor- 
vol. v. 


ruption, though the State may be bound by the 
sales. If the allegation were, say they, that the 
legislature were deceived by the purchasers, the 
grant, like that of an individual, unfairly ob- 
tained, would be void on proof of the fraud : but 
for a legislature to allege its own criminality and 
corruption, to avoid its own grant, is truly 
novel ; and, in point of principle, there is no dif- 
ference between the same and a preceding legis- 
lature. But if corruption of this kind can make 
void the grant, at least it ought to be proved ; 
and that too in a court competent to weigh the 
evidence, and decide on the fact : in other words, 
it is a judiciary question, triable only in a judi- 
ciary court, and being a question of fact, must 
be tried by a jury. The legislature, therefore, 
having no authority in this case, this examina- 
tion and decision can be considered no otherwise 
than as mere usurpation, and void. And per- 
haps injustice to the purchasers, it ought to be 
added, that the depositions taken by the com- 
mittee of the legislature (though taken ex parte , 
and under a strong bias of party) do not contain 
much clear evidence of fraud.’ 

‘ It is also said by the purchasers that even if 
there had been fraud, and that fraud might be 
alleged to destroy the title of the original pur- 
chasers who were privy to it ; yet that innocent 
persons having purchased, utterly unacquainted 
with the facts, and living in remote parts of the 
United States, their title could never be contro- 
verted ; that it was enough for them to know 
that a legislative act, granting the lands, had 
passed ; and that they were ignorant of any frau- 
dulent practices.’ 

4 With regard to the allegation in the repeal- 
ing act of Georgia, that sales were against the 
constitution of the United States, and that of 
Georgia, it does not appear to have been treated 
as having any foundation ; it has been called a 
naked assertion without any reasoning to support 
it. It has been said that every State in the 
Union, having unappropriated lands, has dis- 
posed of them through the medium of legislative 
acts, and their validity has never been question- 
ed ; though there is no peculiar difference in this 
respect between the constitution of Georgia and 
those of the other States. In short, it seems to 
be generally agreed among the informed part of 
the community, that, whether Georgia had cause 
of complaint on account of unfairness in the 
sales, or not, the repealing law must be consi- 
dered as a 44 contravention of the first principles 
of natural justice and policy,” and void. 

4 II. The claim of the United States deserves} 

M M 


266 


WESTERN TER RI T O R Y. 


[more particular attention. Various grounds have 
been taken to support this. It has been inti- 
mated, rather than asserted, in a Report of the 
Committee of the Senate of the United States, 
that by the proclamation of the British King, of 
October 7, 1763, all lands lying w. of the heads 
of the rivers which fall into the Atlantic Ocean, 
were taken from the colonies, and so remained 
with American Independence, and then became 
the property of the aggregate body politic of the 
United States, as they were not within the limits 
of any particular States.’ 

4 This, it is said by the purchasers, is bold 
ground, and is opposed not only to all the mea- 
sures and opinions in Britain and America, while 
we were colonies, but also to the whole course 
of arrangements since our independence. It 
proves too much to prove any thing. The ar- 
gument destroys itself ; for if this be true, all 
the lands ceded to the United States by Carolina, 
Virginia, and every other State ceding w. lands, 
belonged to the United States without cession. 
Some of the best counties of Virginia now be- 
long to them ; the Connecticut Reserved Land, 
is theirs ; the whole States of Kentucky and 
Tennessee are theirs : the consequences, say 
they, are too wild to suffer the principle to be 
admitted. Nor do the words of the proclama- 
tion warrant the construction. The governors 
of the colonies are thereby only forbidden, u for 
the present, and until the King’s further plea- 
sure should be known, to grant warrants of sur- 
vey, or pass patents for those lands.” And the 
reason is given by the proclamation ; viz. that the 
several tribes of Indians living under the king’s 
protection, “ should not be molested or disturbed 
in the possession of their hunting grounds.” In- 
stead of a permanent alteration of the boundaries 
of the colonies, a temporary prohibition to the 
governors to grant those western lands, is alone 
to be found in the proclamation ; and the object, 
viz. peace with and justice towards the Indians, 
required no more. And another fact seems to 
put this matter past all doubt ; the boundaries 
of the colonies, as expressed in the commissions 
of the several governors, were uniformly the 
same after the proclamation as before.’ 

1 Others, in suDport of the claim of the United 
States, have said, that the original charter of 
Georgia did not include the lands lying 5. of a 
line projected due w. from the head of the most 
s. stream of the Alatamaha River : that this 
stream is the Oakmulgee River, and that its 
most s. head is probably about lat. 33° 3 O' n. 
It is further said, that no act of the British go- 


vernment ever enlarged the colony beyond its 
original chartered limits, except the proclama- 
tion of 7th October, 1763 ; and that this annexes 
the lands between Alatamaha and St. Mary, no 
further w. than their heads ; therefore it is con- 
cluded that the whole w. country claimed by 
Georgia, except so much thereof as lies n. of a 
due w. line from the head of the Oakmulgee, 
never was within the colony of Georgia.’ 

4 To this it is answered, by the advocates for 
the title of Georgia, that the charter of Caro- 
lina, granted in 1662, extended that country as 
far s. as lat. 31° n. and as far w. as the Western 
Ocean. That after the division of Carolina into 
two colonies, S. Carolina had the same s. and w. 
limits. That the surrender of the charter by 
the proprietors of Carolina, only restored the 
property to the crown, but did not annihilate 
the colony, which is evident from a royal gover- 
nor being immediately appointed, who, by his 
commission, is made u governor of our colony 
of S. Carolina,” without any specific bounda- 
ries ; which meant a tract of country bounded as 
under the proprietary government, or it meant 
nothing. That on the 9th of June, 1732, the 
colony of Georgia was carved out of S. Caro- 
lina ; but all lands belonging to S. Carolina shall 
continue to belong there, except that which was 
contained in the charter of Georgia ; and of 
course the land lying s. of the s. line of Georgia, 
as far as lat. 31° still belonged to S. Carolina, 
which is evident from common sense, as well as 
from the fact that the governor of S. Carolina 
made grants of lands 5. of the colony of Georgia 
in 1763 ; which, though highly offensive to the 
Board of Trade, were at length admitted to be 
legitimate. It is further said, that the State of 
S. Carolina, in 1788, by solemn legislative act, 
ceded to Georgia all her right to the lands in 
question, by ratifying the articles of the Con- 
vention of Beaufort, agreed upon between the 
States of S. Carolina and Georgia ; and that the 
lands became thereby unquestionably the pro- 
perty of Georgia.’ 

‘ Other answers have been made to this ground 
of claim by the United States, such as that the 
true intent and meaning of the proclamation of 
1763, was to annex the land in question to 
Georgia, and that this was considered as the fact 
by the British government; and if the commu- 
nication from Mr. George Chalmers, the certi- 
fying officer of the Board of Trade, to the At- 
torney General of the United States, is to be re- 
lied on as an authority, this is true. It has also 
been answered, that the Oakmulgee is not the] 


WESTERN TERRI T O R Y. 


267 


[most s. stream of the Alatamaha, but Phenhal- 
loway’s Creek, which heads in lat. 31 ° n. ; so 
that the whole of this land was strictly within 
the original chartered limits of Georgia.’ 

4 Other advocates for the claim of the United 
States, have said, that at least this claim is good 
from lat. 3U as far n. as a line projected due e. 
from the confluence of the Mississippi and Yazoo 
Rivers.’ 

4 The foundation of this assertion is this. The 
Board of Trade, in 1764, l'epresented to the king, 
that it was expedient to extend West Florida as 
far northward as the above-mentioned line, and 
advised that a proclamation might issue for that 
purpose. No such proclamation, however, was 
made ; but several subsequent commissions to 
the governors of West Florida, bounded the co- 
lony of West Florida, n. by that line ; and in 
this state the matter rested until the inde- 
pendence of the United States. Hence it is 
argued that this land, being a part of West 
Florida in 1783, when the bounds of the United 
States were settled by treaty with Great Britain, 
could not belong to Georgia ; but being within 
no particular State, it became the property of the 
United States.’ 

4 To this the purchasers have answered, that 
the proclamation of 7th October, 1763, was a 
solemn public act, and established the s. boun- 
dary of West Florida at lat. 3U, and that the 
commission of a governor, being inferior in so- 
lemnity and publicity, could not abrogate it. 
That the reason why no proclamation was made 
probably was, that the supposed fact on which 
the expediency of the alteration was predicated, 
was not known to exist ; and that in the com- 
missions themselves are words leading to a belief 
that it was considered only as a temporary ar- 
rangement. The fact is, say they, that this 
matter was wholly founded on a gross misre- 
presentation of the governor of Florida, who 
represented to the Board of Trade, and they to 
the King, that in lat. 3U was s. of the town of 
Mobille. It is nearly certain that the British 
government did not consider this as a permanent 
alteration on the n. boundary of West Florida ; 
for no reason can be given why, in the peace of 
1783, they should cede to the United States, 
without any equivalent, so great and valuable a 
part of West Florida, which had never joined in 
the Revolution ; especially considering that on 
the same day on which our treaty with Britain 
bears date, she ceded West Florida, without 
bounds, to Spain ; thus on the same day ceding 


the same territory to two different nations, if it 
was then a part of West Florida.’ 

4 Other objections have been urged aganist 
the claim of the United States, which apply to 
all the grounds of claim above mentioned. It 
has been said by the purchasers and their agents, 
that the most solemn acts of the three nations 
who have been immediately interested in the 
question, have, for a long course of years, recog- 
nized the title of Georgia, viz. Britain, Spain, 
and the United States.’ 

4 Britain, as has been mentioned, recognized 
this title by the peace of 1783. The general 
principle on which the boundaries of the United 
States were then established, was, that the for- 
mer 13 colonies were to be acknowledged as 
Independent States by Britain; and consequently 
the bounds of the colonies were to be the bounds 
of the States, it cannot be pretended, that the 
land in question was within any other colony 
than that of Georgia or S. Carolina; and, as 
has been mentioned, S. Carolina has ceded all 
her right to Georgia by the Convention of Beau- 
fort, 1787 ; and it is incredible that Britain 
should then consider the land as part of West 
Florida ; for then, without motive or reason, she 
gave to the United States the best part of a co- 
lony which had chosen to remain under her 
allegiance.’ 

4 Spain has recognized the title of Georgia 
by the late treaty made between her and the 
United States, for if the land was, in 1783, a 
part of Florida, Spain had an equal right to it 
with the United States ; Great Britain having- 
ceded it to both nations on the same day. But 
Spain has given up all claim to the United States 
without any equivalent. This was done on the 
explicit representation on the part of govern- 
ment of the United States, first by Messrs. Car- 
michael and Short, and afterwards by Mr. Pinck- 
ney, under express instructions from the Su- 
preme Executive of the United States, to claim 
the land as a part of Georgia ; and these in- 
structions were the result of an elaborate inquiry 
by Mr. Jefferson, then Secretary of State, as 
appears by his report to the Executive on the 
subject. Indeed Spain never claimed the land 
as a part of West Florida, but set up a claim by 
conquest. And it has been added, that as the 
cession of this country from Spain by the late 
treaty was obtained by a representation from the 
United States, that it was a part of Georgia, 
Spain was not in honour bound by this article of 
the treaty, if the fact was not so, if the land did] 
mm2 


268 


W E S 


✓ 


[indeed belong to her own province of West 
Florida.’ 

* The government of the United States, it is 
said, has tor a long course of years acquiesced 
in, and b) many public acts acknowledged the 
title of Georgia, so as to bar all claim, even if 
the title of the United States were otherwise 
valid. As a principle to govern in this case it is 
stated, that in courts of equity it has been esta- 
blished, 44 that the true owner of land shall be 
bound by a sale of a stranger who has no title, 
if the owner suffer the sale to go on by an inno- 
cent purchaser, without giving notice of his title 
when he has it in his power ; and that the case 
is much stronger against the owner when he has 
given a colour of title to the seller, and thus 
helped to deceive the purchaser.” As facts fall- 
ing within this principle it has been stated, 
1. That the government of the United States in- 
structed their commissioners for making the peace 
of 1783, to claim this land as belonging to 
Georgia, and this appears by the Journals of 
Congress in the fullest manner. 2. That attempts 
were made by the United States to obtain a 
cession of this land from Georgia, and a consi- 
deration offered for it, without any intimation 
that the United States had a claim. 3. That 
the Convention of Beaufort, by which the con- 
flicting claims of S. Carolina and Georgia were 
amicably settled, was conducted under the au- 
spices of the United States ; the question having- 
been submitted to a court appointed by Congress 
to try it, according to a provision in the former 
Confederation of the United States. 4. That, in 
1789, the government of the United States stated 
to Spain, as the ground of the claim of the Ame- 
rican government, that this territory belonged 
to Georgia by virtue of her charter and the pro- 
clamation of 1763. 3. That in the negociation 

which preceded the late treaty between the 
United States and Spain, Messrs. Carmichael and 
Short, American commissioners, by express in- 
structions from the SupremeExecutiveoftheUnited 
States, asserted the same thing as the ground of 
the claim of the American government ; and that 
even after the existing sales of this territory, 
and after the same had been officially commu- 
nicated by the government of Georgia to the 
President of the United States, and by him laid 
before Congress, Mr. Pinckney, late envoy to 
the court of Spain, expressly declared, in his 
official communication, that the claim of the 
United States was founded on the fact, that this 
country was a part of Georgia, and this too pur- 


WES 

suant to express instructions from the American 
Executive.’ 

4 These have been urged as public acts of the 
American government, giving strong colour or 
title to Georgia. Others of acquiescence in her 
title by the United States have been added, 
such as the silence of the general government, 
when, in 1783, Georgia passed a legislative act, 
declaring her title to this country, and taking- 
measures to settle it. Also, when in 1785, 
Georgia erected part of this territory into a 
county by the name of Bourbon, and appointed 
magistrates there, and provided for the further 
settlement of it ; and also, when, in 1789, Geor- 
gia passed an act for the sale of the now con- 
troverted lands to certain companies, who after 
failed of complying with the terms of payment.’ 

4 It has been said, by the purchasers and their 
agents, that it would be indelicate, at least, for 
the government of the United States to hold 
such language as this : 44 It is true, we repre- 
sented to Great Britain that this land belonged 
to Georgia, and obtained a cession from her on 
this ground. It is true, that we claimed it of 
Spain on the same ground for years together, 
and at last on that ground obtained a relinquish- 
ment of her claim ; but we falsified, and they 
were cheated. It is true, we claimed it in behalf 
of Georgia ; but having obtained it, we will 
keep it ourselves. It is true, we declared by 
many public and solemn acts, that the title of 
Georgia was good, and thereby induced a great 
number of American citizens to purchase and 
risk all their property in the enterprise ; but we 
will now assert our claim, and destroy them for 
being weak enough to believe us ; and it is true, 
it has long been settled that the principles of 
justice forbid individuals from doing thus : but 
we are above the rules of justice.” 

4 The foregoing (says an American advocate) 
is a clear and impartial record of the conflicting- 
claims to the Georgia Western Territory.’] 
[WESTFIELD, a township of Vermont ; Or- 
leans County, s. of Jay.] 

[Westfield, a pleasant post-town of Massa- 
chusetts, Hampshire County, on the river of this 
name, in a curious vale, eight miles w. of Spring- 
held, 26 e. by s. of Stockbridge, 46 w. of Wor- 
cester, 80 w. s. w. of Boston. It contained, in 
1790, a congregational church, an academy, and 
about 50 or 60 compact houses. The township 
was incorporated in 1660, and contained, in the 
above year, 2,204 inhabitants.] 

[Westfield, a small river of Massachusetts,] 


WEST INDIES. 269 


which rises in Berkshire County, and runs nearly 
a s. e. course through Middlefield, Westfield, 
and West Springfield, where it empties into the 
Connecticut, by a mouth about 30 yards wide.] 
[Westfield, a township of N. York, Wash- 
ington County, bounded s. by Kingsbury, and 
n. by Whitehall. It contained, in 1790, 2,103 
inhabitants, of whom 186 are electors, and nine 
slaves. It lies near Lake George.] 

[Westfield, in Richmond County, N. York, 
is bounded n. by the Fresh Kill, e. by Southfield, 
and w. by the Sound. It contained, in 1790, 
1,151 inhabitants, of whom 131 were electors, 
and 276 slaves.] 

[Westfield, a small town in Essex County, 
New Jersey, containing a Presbyterian church, 
and about 80 compact houses. It is about seven 
or eight miles w. of Elizabeth Town.] 

[WEST FLORIDA. See Florida.] 
[WESTFORD, a township of Vermont, in 
Chittendon County, n. e. of Colchester, adjoining, 
and contains 63 inhabitants.] 

[Westford, a township of Massachusetts, 
situate in Middlesex County, 28 miles n. w. of 
Boston, and contained, in 1790, 1,229 inhabitants. 
In the year 1792, an academy was established 
here.] 

[WEST GREENWICH, a township in Kent 
County, Rhode Island, containing 2,054 inha- 
bitants, including 10 slaves.] 

[WESTHAM, a small town of Virginia, Hen- 
rico County, on the n. bank of James’ River, six 
miles n. w. ¥ w. of Richmond. Here Benedict 
Arnold destroyed one of the finest foundaries 
for cannon in America, and a large quantity of 
stores and cannon, in January, 1781.] 

[WEST HAMPTON, a township of Massa- 
chusetts, Hampshire County, seven miles w. of 
Northampton. It contained, in 1790, 683 inha- 
bitants, and lies on the w. side of Connecticut 
River.] 

[WEST HARBOUR, on the s. coast of the 
island of Jamaica, is to the n. of Portland Point. 
There is good anchorage, but exposed to s. and 
s. e. winds.] 

[WEST HAVEN, a parish of the township 
of New Haven, in Connecticut, pleasantly si- 
tuate on the Harbour and Sound, 3 miles w. s. 
W. of the city.] 


[INDEX TO ORIGINAL INFORMATION RESPECT- 
ING THE W. INDIES. 

Chap. 1. General topographical description. — Geo- 
graphical , historical , and statistical table of the 
■islands and colonies. — Climate . — Winds and hur- 
ricanes . — Soil and productions. — Animals . — 
Mountains and rivers. — Rejections concerning 
the origin of the islands. 

Chap. II. Historical narrative between the 
years 1625 and 1793. 

Early history. — Settlement , 1625. — Expedition of 
the Dutch, 1630 — Treaty of mutual cessions, 
1660. — Buccaneers . — These acknowledged by 
France, 1665. — Capture of Jamaica under Crom- 
well. — Carthagena captured by Buccaneers, with 
aid of France , 1685. — Dreadful earthquake in 
Jamaica, 1692. — French invasion. — Pacification 
with negroes, 1738. — Revolt of the same, 1760. — 
Succession of hurricanes . — Claims of Great Bri- 
tain and France to neutral islands, 1763. — Foss 
of the British sugar islands, 1778. — Restoration 
of the same, 1783. — Commencement of the war, 
between the years 1793 and 1814. — Capture of 
Tobago . — Unsuccessful attempt against Marti- 
nique. — Resolution of the British ministry there- 
on . — Capture of Martinique. — Ditto of St. 
Lucia. — Ditto of Guadaloupe, completing the 
conquest of the Trench islands. — Reverse of for- 
tune. — Mortality of the troops. — Arming of the 
Blacks and Mulattoes. — Massacre of the French 
Royalists. — Events relating to St. Domingo, 
1794 and 1795. — Occupation by the French, 
1801. — Expedition under Fe Clerk, 1802.- — 
Views of the French in acquiring St. Domingo. 
— Their policy explained with regard to this and 
other islands. — Provincials rally under the stand- 
ard of Ferdinand. — Assistance given by Major 
General Carmichael, leading to the capture of 
the Spanish part, 1809. — Treaty o/' 1814. 

Chap. III. Origin of trade in the Antilles. — The 
British TV Indies considered as depots of foreign 
trade. — Navigation acts . — W. India free ports. 
— Ports of commercial enterprise. 

Chap. IV. Intercourse of the British W. Indies 
with America, and in particular with the British 
provinces of Canada, Nova Scotia , and New- 
foundland. — Intercourse and trade of the United 
States of America with the British TV. Indies. 
— British shipping employed in the TV. India 
trade. — Shipping belonging to the several ports 
of Great Britain, from 1791 to 1812. — Passage ] 


270 


WEST INDIES. 


[ outwards to the TV. Indies. — Passage homewards 
from the W. Indies. 

Chap. V. Tables and Accounts of imports and 

EXPORTS of W. INDIA STAPLES. 

Sugar. 

Tables and Accounts of imports and exports 

of OTHER W. INDIA STAPLES. 

1. Rum . — 2. Coffee . — 3. Cocoa . — 4. Pimento . — 
5. Cotton Wool. — 6. Dye Woods, 8?c. 

Later Accounts of the quantity and value of 
imports and exports. 

1 . Quantity and value of the principal articles im- 
ported from the British and foreign W. India 
islands , 1805, 1807, 1810, add 1812.— 2. Offi- 
cial value of exports from Great Britain to the 
island of St. Domingo , 1809 and 1813. — 3. Offi- 
cial value of exports from Great Britain to Afri- 
ca , 1810 and 1812. — 4. Account of the colonial 
staples imported into Great Britain , for the year 
1809, distinguishing the countries from whence 
imported. 

Chap. VI. Introduction. — Trade between Great 
Britain and the British plantations , the W. 
Indies, and N. and S. America, but exclusive of 
those colonies now the United States, from 1697 
to 1759. — Trade between Great Britain and her 
colonies in North America, exclusive of those 
now the United States, for 53 years, from 1760 
to 1812, inclusive . — Trade of Great Britain 
with the British and Foreign JV. Indies, and 
Foreign America, for 53 years, from 1760 to 
1812, inclusive. — Results of the foregoing ta- 
bles. — Trade of the W. Indies and America com- 
pared with that to other parts. — Account of the 
official value of the imports and exports between 
Great Britain and the British W. Indies (in- 
cluding the conquered islands and colonies ) in the 
year 1809 and 1810 ; distinguishing each island 
and colony ( Table A.) — Account of the real value 
of exports from Great Britain to all parts of the 
world, in the seven years ending 1811, distin- 
guishing British produce and manufactures from 
foreign and colonial merchandize ; and distin- 
guishing the amount to the N. of Europe, to 
Spain, to Portugal, to other parts of Europe, to 
Asia, to Africa, to the United States o f America, 
and to all other parts of America (Table B.j — 
Account of the value of all imports to, and all 
exports from, Great Britain, in the years 1805, 
1806, 1807, 1808, 1809, 1810; distinguishing 
each year, the real from the official value ; and 
also the imports from, and exports to, the Con- 


tinent of Europe, the W. Indies, America , Afri- 
ca, Asia and Ireland, respectively (Table C.) 

Chap. VII. Population and African slave trade. 
— Abolition of the African slave trade ; being a 
succinct account of all the persons, whose writings 
or labours have conduced to that important event. 

Chap. VIII. Aggregate value of the productions 
of the W. India colonies. — General view of the 
present state of the W. India colonies. 

TV. B. All the above accounts and documents, unless 
otherwise specified, are from official authority. 


CHAP. I. 

General Topographical Description . — The West 
Indies were so named at first, on the presump- 
tion that they extended so far as to form a 
connection with those of the East Indies. The 
fallacy of this supposition was soon discovered ; 
the name, however, has been retained, to pre- 
vent confusion in the geographical accounts of 
the islands. The Continent was also sometimes 
called by this name, till its natural division 
being more attended to, it obtained a distinct 
appellation. It is worthy of remark, that Co- 
lumbus sailed on his first voyage the 3d of 
August, 1492, and that although Bartholemus 
Dias discovered the Cape of Good Hope, only 
two years after, in 1494, it was not doubled 
till the year 1497, when Vasquez de Gama suc- 
ceeded (for the first time in modern navigation) 
in this, as it was then supposed, formidable at- 
tempt. The W. Indies have thus the priority of 
discovery. That part only of them is to be 
called Antilles, as Hoffman supposes, which com- 
prehends the windward or Caribean islands. He 
says, u Dicuntur Antilles Americas quasi ante in- 
sulas Americce, nempe ante majores insulas Sinus 
Mexicani." ( Hoffman Lexic. Univ.) Rochfort 
and Du Tertre explain the word nearly in the 
same manner, while Mons. D’Anville applies 
the name to those islands only, which are more 
immediately opposed to, or situated against, the 
Continent : thus he terms Cuba, Hispaniola, Ja- 
maica, and Porto Rico, the Great Antilles, and 
the small islands of Aruba, Cura 9 oa, Bonair, Ma- 
garita, and some others near the coast of Ca- 
racas on the Southern Peninsula, the Less ; ex- 
cluding the Caribean islands altogether. What 
is most probable is, that the etymology signifies 
ante islas, quasi islas ante el Continente, islands] 


WEST INDIES. 


271 


[before the Continent : and thus the whole of the 
islands above mentioned might properly be de- 
nominated Antilles. 

But, subordinate to this comprehensive and 
simple arrangement, necessity or convenience 
has introduced more minute and local distinc- 
tions. That portion of the Atlantic, which is se- 
parated from the main ocean to the n. and to the 
e. by these islands, although commonly known by 
the general appellation of the Mexican Gulf, 
is itself properly subdivided into three distinct 
basins : the Gulf of Mexico, the Bay of Hon- 
duras, and the Caribean Sea. The islands have 
each a channel or passage, of various widths, 
some of which serve for access to the s. side of 
each, or to communicate with the main : the 
largest, however, most central, and least dan- 
gerous, is that called the Mona Passage,, between 
Puerto Rico and Hispaniola. 

The Caribean sea takes its name from that 
class of islands which bound this part of the 
ocean to the e. Most of these were anciently 
possessed by a nation of Cannibals, the scourge 
and terror of the mild and inoffensive natives of 
Hispaniola, who frequently expressed to Colum- 
bus their dread of those fierce and warlike in- 
vaders, styling them Caribes. And it was in 
consequence of this information that the islands 
to which these savages belonged, when disco- 
vered afterwards by Columbus, were by him de- 
nominated generally the Caribean Islands. 

Of this class, however, a group nearly ad- 


joining to the e. side of St. John de Puerto Rico 
is likewise called the Virgin Isles. The old 
Spanish navigators, in speaking of the W. Indian 
Islands in general, frequently distinguish them 
into two classes, by the terms Barlovento and 
Sotavento, from whence our Windward and Lee- 
ward Islands ; the Caribean constituting in strict 
propriety the former class; and the four large 
islands of Cuba, Jamaica, Hispaniola, and Puerto 
Rico, the latter. But our English mariners ap- 
propriate both terms to the Caribean Islands 
only, subdividing them according to their situa- 
tion in the course of the trade wind ; the Wind- 
ward Islands by their arrangement terminating 
with Martinique, and the Leeward commencing 
at Dominica, and extending to Puerto Rico. 

Neither must it pass unobserved, that the name 
of Bahama is commonly applied by the English 
to that cluster of small islands, rocks, and reefs 
of sand, which stretch in a n. to. direction for the 
space of near 300 leagues from the n. coast of 
Hispaniola to the Bahama Strait, opposite the 
Florida shore, and which are called by the 
Spaniards the Lucayos. The Bermudas lie still 
more to the n. ; and, though not generally enu- 
merated amongst the W. India Islands, must at 
least be looked upon as a valuable entrepot be- 
tween them and the British colonies of N. 
America. 

In order more fully to illustrate the above de- 
cription, we shall here present our readers with] 


[A Geographical 


272 


WEST INDIES. 


[Climate . — The climate in all the W. India 
Islands is nearly the same, allowing for those ac- 
cidental differences which the several situations 
and qualities of the lands themselves produce. As 
they lie within the tropics, and the sun goes quite 
over their heads, passing beyond them to the 
and never returning farther from any of them 
than about 30' to the s., they would be conti- 
nually subjected to an extreme and intolerable 
heat, if the trade winds, rising gradually as the 
sun gathers strength, did not blow in upon them 
from the sea, and refresh the air in such a man- 
ner as to enable the inhabitants to attend their 
concerns even under the meridian sun. On the 
other hand, as the night advances, a breeze be- 
gins to be perceived, which blows smartly from 
the land, as it were from the centre, towards 
the sea, to all points of the compass at once. 
By the same remarkable Providence in the dis- 
posing of things, it is, that when the sun has 
made a great progress towards the tropic of 
Cancer, and becomes in a manner vertical, he 
draws after him a vast body of clouds, which 
shield them from his direct beams, and dissolv- 
ing into rain, cool the air, and refresh the coun- 
try, thirsty with the long drought, which com- 
monly prevails from the beginning of January 
to the latter end of May. 

The temperature of the air varies indeed con- 
siderably according to the elevation of the land ; 
but, with this exception, the medium degree of 
heat is much the same in all the countries of this 
part of the globe. 

A tropical year seems properly to compre- 
hend but two distinct seasons ; the wet and the 
dry ; but as the rains in these climates constitute 
two great periods, we shall describe it, like the 
European year, under four divisions. 

The vernal season, or spring, may be said t&amp; 
commence w ith the month ofMay, when the foli- 
age of the trees evidently becomes more vivid, and 
the parched savannas begin to change their russet 
hue, even previous to the first periodical rains, 
which are now daily expected, and generally set 
in about the middle of the month. These, com- 
pared with the autumnal rains, may be said to 
be gentle showers. They come from the s. and 
commonly fall every day about noon, and break 
up with thunder storms ; creating a bright and 
beautiful verdure, and a rapid and luxuriant ve- 
getation. The thermometer at this season varies 
considerably ; commonly falling six or eight de- 
grees immediately after the diurnal rains : its 
medium height may be stated at 75°. 


After these rains have continued about a fort- 
night, the weather becomes dry, settled, and sa- 
lutary ; and the tropical summer reigns in full 
glory. Not a cloud is to be perceived ; and the 
sky blazes with irresistible fierceness. For some 
hours, commonly between seven and ten in the 
morning, before the setting in of the sea breeze 
or trade wind, which at this season blows from 
the s. e. with great force and regularity until 
late in the evening, the heat is scarcety support- 
able ; but, no sooner is the influence felt of this 
refreshing wind, than all nature revives, and the 
climate, in the shade, becomes not only very to- 
lerable, but pleasant. The thermometer now 
varies but little in the whole 24 hours : its me- 
dium, near the coast, may be stated at about 80°. 
It is seldom observed higher than 85° at noon, 
nor much below 75° at sun-rise; a variation but 
small compared with the climate of some of the 
s. parts of N. America ; of Virginia, for instance, 
where, according to Mr. Jefferson, the mercury 
in Farenheit’s thermometer has been known to 
descend from 92° to 47° in 13 hours. The W. 
India Islands are happily exempt from those 
noxious variations. 

The nights at this season are transcendently 
beautiful. The clearness and brilliancy of the 
heavens, the serenity of the air, and the softtran- 
quillity in which nature reposes, contribute to 
harmonize the mind, and produce the most calm 
and delightful sensations. The moon too in these 
climates displays far greater radiance than in 
Europe. The smallest print is legible by her 
light, and in the moon’s absence her function is 
not ill supplied by the brightness of the milky 
way, and by that glorious planet Venus, which 
appears here like a little moon, and glitters with 
so refulgent a beam as to cast a shade from trees, 
buildings, and other objects, making full amends 
for the short stay and abrupt departure of the 
crepusculum or twilight. 

This state of the weather commonly conti- 
nues, with little variation, from the beginning of 
June until the middle of August, when the diur- 
nal breeze begins to intermit, and the atmosphere 
becomes sultry, incommodious, and suffocating. 
In the latter end of this month, and most part of 
September, we look about in vain for coolness 
and comfort. The thermometer occasionally ex- 
ceeds 90°, and instead of a steady and refreshing 
wind from the sea, there are usually faint breezes 
and calms alternately. These are preludes to 
the second periodical or autumnal season. Large 
towering clouds, fleecy and of a reddish hue, are] 


WEST INDIES. 


*271 


rj Geographical, Historical, and Statistical Table of the British and Foiif.ig.v West India Islands or Antilles, and Colonies, or 
L such iii arc worth Cultivation; us thru lie in a Direction from n. to s giving the General Designation , Peculiar Xante, Length and 
Breadth, Tree Ports, Latitude and Longitude, and Abstract of particular Events relating to each. 


il&lt; 


12 


^lst Silbdivi 
Leeward "] 


Subdivision, 

Windward 

Isles. 


o“ f 2d Subdivi- T 

£ £ ) Leeward f 
( Isle*. ) 


! l 


Province 
of Dutch t 
Guayana. 


Tortola 

Cm*... 


St. Thomns... 
Cbristopbe 

Nevis 

Antigua 


Monlserrat... 


Demernra... 

Eseqoibo... 


Port Franco F. 

Basseterre 

Cba ties tow 

t. John's F. 


Principal Port. ....F. 

in F. 

Pitt’s Town F. 

Havana F. 


| Port o'Prince... 
Cape Francois.. 
[ St. Domingo... 


Kingston F. 

Road Harbour F. 


Roseau F, 


S. Josef F- 

Amsterdam F. 


Discovered, 15*2 — colonized, 1612, by English, to whom, with the 
rest, it belongs. 

First land touched at by Columbus, 1 1 111 October, 1192— settled by 
Europeans, loot)— Captain Rogers sent to destroy freebooters, 1710 
—surrendered to Spaniards, 1781 — restored, 1783, to the British, to 
whom they belong. 

Discovered, 1492, by Columbus — to be an island by Obando, 1494 
—always belonged to Spain, excepting in 1762, when it was taken 
by Admiral Pocock and Earl of Albemarle — restored by the peace, 

_ 176S, in exchange for the Florida*. 

I Ditto ..ditto ..ditto.. -nearly depopulated by small-pox, 1666 — 
partly occupied by Bnccancrs, who submitted io the French govern- 
ment, and became a most productive and valuable colouy in W. 
Indies — Spanish part very little cultivated — French negroes revolt, 
1790 — Spanish part ceded to France, 179.1 — French part surrendered 
to English, who evacuated it 1796 — Restored to French, by treaty of 
Amiens, 1801 — French expelled, 1803, by the Blacks and an English 
squadron — Spanish part reconquered by Spaniards and English, 1809 
l. — French, part still independent, but claimed by France. 

S Discovered by Columbus, 1509 — Capital plundered, by Drake, 
1577 — Ditto by Duke of Cumberland, 1598 (who took possession, 
but relinquished)— Ditto by Dutch, 1615 — attacked by English, 1742 
—again, 1797 — still retained by Spain, 
l Discovered by Columbus, 1491, named by him Santiago, and oc- 
9 copied by Spain— attacked by Admiral Penn and Colonel Vernon, 
( 1655— reded 6th May, 1656, to Great Britain, to whom it belongs. 

J Colonized by Dutch — these expelled by English, 1666 — made a 
f free port, 1802— belongs to British. 

r First of Antilles visited by Columbus — deserted till settled by 
\ English — these expelled by French, 1650— sold, 1651, to Knights of 
&lt; Malta — bought of them by W. India Company, 1661 — incorporated 
J with French crown, 1674^— sold to Danes— taken, in late war, by 
L British — restored to Denmark by treaty, 1814. 

I Belonged first to Danish company — sold to the King, who made it 
J a free-port— factory plundered by Flibiulicre, 1688— taken by Great 
( Britain in last war — restored by treaty, 1814. 

r Named after Columbns, 1493 — settled, 1623, by English and French 
1 — these driven out by Spaniards, 1629— resumed by English and 
) French— ceded to former by treaty of Utrecht, 1713— Taken by 
l French, 1782— restored, 1783, to Great Britain, to whom it belongs. 

J Settled by English, 1628 — taken, by French, 178* — restored, 1783, 
( to Great Britain, to whom it belongs. 

{ Discovered, about 1623, by Sir Thomas Warner — settled by 
English, 1636— granted by Crown to Mr. Willoughby, 1663 — who 
sent to it a large colony, 1666 — same year taken by French— re- 
taken, 1690— belongs to Great Britain. 

{ Discovered by Columbus, 1493— colonized hy Dish, 1632 — sacked, 
1700, 10 days by French ; compensation agreed by treaty of 
Utrecht — taken by Frencb, 1781 — restored at peace of 1783 to 
Great Britain. 

f Discovered by Columbus, 1493 — retained by Spain till 1635, when 
it was ceded to Fiance — attacked by English, 1691, 1703, and 
taken 1759— restored, 1763 — again taken by English, 1794— reco- 
^ vered by Frencb iu the same year— again taken by English, 1810— 

I to Sweden by treaty of Match, 1813, to bring the Crown 
e into the Grand Alliance— restored to France by treaty 50lli 
(.May, 1814. 

So named, as discovered by Columbus (in bis secoud voyage) on a 
Sunday — inhabited by Caribes ; who, iu 1640, entered with llic 
French into a league against the English — ceiled to Great Britain, 
1763— taken by French, 1781 — restored to Great Britain, 1783, to 
whom it belongs. 

Settled by Frencb, 1635 — possessed by French W. In lia Com- 
pany till 1651, when it was sold to Mons. Parquet — re-purchased anil 
incorporated with the Crown, 1671— suffered by earthquake. 17. 7 — 
ditto in 1767 and 1772— and in 1766 by a hurricane— attacked by 
Dutch, 167-1 — ditto by Admiral Penn, 1695— taken by English, 
1761 — restored, 1763— again taken, 1794 — restored, 1801— again 
.taken, 1809 — restored to France, 1814. 

Discovered by Porluguose — deserted by them — visited by English 
ship Oliver Blossom, 1605 — colonized, 1624, under Comteen — 
1627, patented to Earl of Pembroke — 1646, Lord Willoughby, go- 
vernor, divides revenues with the heir of the Earl of Pembroke — 
1650, great accession of population from Great Britain — settled to 
the Crown, 1663— dreadful storm, 1780 — always belonged to Great 
(.Britain. 

r Discovered hy French — possessed by them and English frequently 
till 1782 — then evacuated with SI. Viuteul — given by George I. to 
Duke of Montague, who was driven out by French from Mar- 
unique — these agreed to evacuate but returned — laken by British, 
1762— ceded to France, peace of Versailles, 1763— taken by Bri- 
| tisli, 1778— restored, 1783— taken by British, 1794 — restored, 1801 
(.—taken, 1803 — ceded to Great Britain, 1814. 

, Discovered by Spaniards — weak attempts of British In possess it, 
t 1723 — taken by Admiral Rodney and General Monckton, 1762 — 
J Curibe lands sold by British government — to individuals, 1763, 
\ which caused insurrection of natives; this quelled hy treaty, 1773, 
/ by which lands were assigned them— belongs to Great Britain— 
V. suffered by eruption of Volcano, 1812. 

, Discovered by Columbus, 1498 — settled by French, 1638 — taken 
V by Admiral Rodney and General Monckton, 1762— retaken by 
&lt; French iu 1780 — restored to Great Britain, 1783, to whom it be- 
/ longs— it suffered greatly by hurricanes, 1780, and an insur- 
rection 1795. 

f Settled chiefly by Dutch till 1748, when declared neutral by 
j treaty of Aix la Cliapelle — yielded to Great Britain by that of 1763— 
5 1781, taken by Frencb — ceded to these, 1783 — captured by British, 
1793 — restored to France by treaty of Amiens, 1801— again taken 
^-by British, 1803 — ceded to Britain, 1814. 

{ Discovered by Columbus, 1498 — conquered by Bcnio, 1592 — 
Spanish policy, 1763, caused it to be peopled by all nations — taken 
without resistance, 1797, by Sir Ralph Abercrombie— ceded to 
Great Britain, 1801— bus since belonged to Great Britain, 
i Settled by Emperor Charles V. 1627 — taken by Dutch, 1632— 
&lt; from them by English, 1798— restored, 1801— agnm taken by Cap 
I tain Brisbane, 1806— restored to Holland, 1814. 
r 1 Taken by Admiral 

} Unsettled till end of 18lli century I Rodney, 1782— again 

( taken, 1794— rentor- 

r First settled by Frencb, 1630 — aban- 1 cd to Holland, 1801 
doued on account of unhealthy climate, 1650 ! — DemeraraaudEse 
—resorted to bv some English, 1662— Charter ' qnibo taken, 1803— 
J granted by CbarlesII.— tnkenby Dutch, 1667 Surinam. 1805— Su- 
I —retaken by English, and ceded to Dutch in rmnm restored to 
| exchange for New York, 1674— attempted by | Holland, 1814. 
(.French, 1688 J 


e LEEWARD CARIBE ISLANDS, comprehending Su Cbrlslophcrt, t 
oiler * Governor 1100010103104 Captain General 0/ the I era aril and t 
ibteoce, where no Lltnt. Governor Is sppololed, Ibe Frerldent or Ihc Coo 


Earl ol Lilinjhsm, rroni 1790 10 1792. — Major 
e. In I807-— Caplalu General, Governor lo Chief, a 


o Williamson, from 1790 “ 179 *.— 
d, noth EUOI, Eeq. present Governor. 



WEST INDIES. 


273 


[now seen, in the morning, in the quarters of the 
s. and s. e.; the tops of the mountains at the same 
time appear clear of clouds, and the objects upon 
them wear a bluish cast, and seem much nearer to 
the spectator than usual. When these vast accu- 
mulations of vapour have risen to a considerable 
height in the atmosphere, they commonly move 
horizontally towards the mountains, proclaiming 
their progress in deep and rolling thunder, which, 
reverberated from peak to peak, and answered 
by the distant . roaring of the sea, heightens the 
majesty of the scene, and irresistibly lifts up the 
mind of the spectator to the great Author of all 
sublimity. 

The waters, however, with which these con- 
gregated vapours load the atmosphere, seldom 
fall with great and general force until the begin- 
ning of October. It is then that the heavens 
pour down cataracts. An European who has not 
visited these climates, can form no just concep- 
tion of the quantity of water which deluges the 
earth at this season : by an exact account which 
was kept of the rain which fell in one year in 
Barbadoes (1754) it appeared to have been 87 ^- q 
cubic inches, equal to 7 feet inches perpen- 
dicular. 

Taking the whole islands throughout, from 60 
to 65 inches, appear to be about the medium of 
rain in seasonable years. If this quantity should 
annually fall in England, the country would be 
deluged, and the fruits of the earth" destroyed. 
The power of the sun, at that distance from the 
equator, would be too feeble to exhale a suffi- 
cient quantity of it. On the other hand, if so 
small a portion as 21 inches only, should fall in 
the whole year at Barbadoes or Jamaica, where 
the exhalation by the sun and the sea breeze is 
so great, the springs and rivers would probably 
be dried up, and the inhabitants perish by thirst 
and famine. 

It is now, in the interval between the begin- 
ning of August and the latter end of October, 
that hurricanes, those dreadful visitations of the 
Almighty, are apprehended. The prognostics 
of these elementary conflicts, have been minutely 
described by various writers, and their effects 
are known by late mournful experience to every 
inhabitant of every island within the tropics ; 
concerning their immediate cause we shall pre- 
sently have something to impart. 

Earthquakes also are not unfrequent ; but 
none have been productive of mischief since the 
fatal one of June, 1692, which swallowed up 
Port Royal. Slight shocks are felt in Jamaica 

VOL. v. 


every year, generally about the month of June, 
immediately after the May rains; but these little 
concussions have been attributed, with some rea- 
son, solely to changes in the atmosphere, and 
may, therefore, rather be called airquakes than 
earthquakes; they are however very terrifying. 
During the autumnal rains the climate is very 
sickly, and the four last months of the year com- 
monly prove fatal to a great many of the old 
inhabitants, but more especially to persons of 
a full habit newly arrived from Europe, and 
seafaring people. 

Towards the end of November, or sometimes 
not till the middle of December, a considerable 
change in the temperature of the air is perceiv- 
able. The coasts to the n. are now beaten by a 
rough and heavy sea, roaring with incessant 
noise; the wind varies from the e. to the n. e. and 
n., sometimes driving before it, across the high- 
est mountains, not only heavy rains but hail ; 
till at length, the n. wind having acquired suffi- 
cient force, the atmosphere is cleared ; and now 
comes on a succession of serene and pleasant 
weather, the n. e. and n. winds spreading cool- 
ness and delight throughout the whole of this 
burning region. 

If this interval, therefore, from the beginning 
of December to the end of April, be called win- 
ter, it is certainly the finest winter on the globe. 
To valetudinarians and persons advanced in life, 
it is the climate of Paradise. 

The account which we have thus given is, 
hoAvever, to be received not as uniformly exact 
and minutely particular ; but as a general repre- 
sentation only, subject to many variations and 
exceptions, which will be found detailed under 
the particular islands. In the large islands of 
Cuba, Hispaniola, and Jamaica, whose lofty 
mountains are clothed with forests perhaps as old 
as the deluge, the rains are much more frequent 
and violent than in the small islands to wind- 
ward ; some of which are without mountains, 
and others without wood ; both powerful agents 
on the atmosphere. In the interior and elevated 
districts of the three former islands, there are 
showers in every month of the year ; and on the 
n. coasts of those islands, considerable rains are 
expected in December or January, soon after the 
setting in of the n. winds. 

Thus far we have taken the more favourable 
view of the climate of these islands, and under 
circumstances in which it is supposed sufficient 
care may be taken against its more deleterious 
effects. In the case of the military, the same 

J * 

N N 


274 


WEST INDIES. 


[precautions could not always be had ; and the 
mortality that has ensued, at different periods, 
was far more distressing than surprising. The 
following tables are recorded, not with a view of 
recapitulating past grievances, but as a means of 


pointing out, by comparison, the seasons, and the 
systems of management that may in future prove 
most conducive to the preservation of the sol- 
dier’s life. 


TABLES, 

Showing the Mortality of Troops in the W. Indies, (exclusive of those who fell in Action) 
during Seven Years, from 1796 to 1S02 inclusive, compiled from Regimental Returns collected 
by John Sayer, Esq. Commissary in the Windward and Leeward Islands during that Period. 

No. I. 



European Soldiers. 

Negro Soldiers. 

Officers. 


Largest 

Force. 

Medium 

Monthly 

Returns. 

Died. 

Per 

Cent. 

Force. 

Died. 

Per 

Cent. 

Died. 

1796, April 

19,676 

15,881 

6,484 

40± 

2,495 

75 

3 

226 

1797, April 

13,627 

11,50 3 

3,766 

32| 

3,080 

118 

4 

99 

1798, April 

9,192 

8,416 

1,602 

m 

3,055 

252 

8 

38 

1799, Feb. 

7,654 

7,202 

876 

hi 

3,354 

258 

7| 

24 

1800, Feb. 

8,840 

7,890 

1,221 

151 

4,320 

286 

6| 

5S 

1801, Feb. 

11,745 

10,315 

2,340 

22f 

4,604 

276 

6 

104 

1802, Feb. 

10,198 

9,038 

990 

11 

3,840 

199 

5 

41 

Original army 

19,676 

— 

17,173 

— 

— 

— 

— 

590 


With relation to this table, it is to be remarked 
that in 1796-7, on opening the campaign under 
Sir Ralph Abercrombie, with the great rein- 
forcements then arrived in the W. Indies, the 
troops were generally unseasoned to the climate ; 
the duties of fatigue and service, especially in 
St. Lucia and Grenada, were immediate and 
excessive, and barracks and hospitals were un- 
prepared or insufficient ; and to these, with other 
causes, may be attributed the very extraordinary 
mortality in the two first years. — 1798, &amp;c. the 
second period of four years, may afford premises 


for estimating the mortality of troops in the W. 
Indies, under exposure to climate, and duties of 
fatigue on active service. — 1802, the last year, 
affords grounds of estimate, when a year of peace 
admits of care of the soldiery, in avoiding ex- 
posure to night dews and meridian suns, in regu- 
lating diet, and in mitigating fatigue. In refe- 
rence to the black corps, it is to be observed, 
that the two first years (1796-7) they were newly 
raised, and probably not yet engaged in the 
hardships of service, and which accounts for the 
very few negroes lost in those years.] 


WEST INDIES. 


27 5 


[No. II. 


Comparative Mortality of Troops in the W. Indies, in different Months and Seasons of the Year. 



European Soldiers. 

Negro Soldiers. 




Died 

Died 

On Me- 

Rate 



Died 

Died 

On Me- 

Rate 




Force. 

each 

each 

dium 

each 

Per 

Force. 

each 

each 

dium 

each 

Jrer 




Month. 

Season. 

Force. 

Year. 

Cent. 


Month: 

Season. 

Force. 

Year. 

v/Gllt. 

s 

c&gt; 

f December . . 

7,248 

49 









3,292 

13 

. 

— 

— 

— 

J5J 

January 

7,170 

44 

— 

— 

— 

— 

3,277 

14 

— 

— 

— 

— 


February . 

10,198 

110 

— 

— 

— 

— 

4,275 

18 

— 

— 

— 

— 

Ho 

March . 

10,195 

94 

— 

— 

— 

— 

4,232 

17 

— 

— 

— 

— 


April . . . 

10,133 

67 

— 

— 

— 

— 

4,220 

9 

— 

— 

— 

— 


May . . . 

10,005 

53 

— 

— 

— 

— 

4,114 

17 






June . . . 

10,000 

55 

— 

— 

— 

— 

3.903 

14 

— 

— 

— 

— 

Q 

IJuly • • • 

9,731 

48 

520 

9,800 

780 

8 

3,825 

17 

119 

3,892 

180 

H 

O 

(August 

8,880 

82 

- - 







3,759 

28 



— 



— 

3 

cc 

; September 

8,759 

183 

— 

— 

— 

— 

3,719 

27 

— 

— 

— 

— 

S 

) October 

8,385 

105 

— 

— 

— 

■ — 

3,461 

7 

— 

— 

— 

— 

c 

.November 

8,024 

100 

470 

8,512 

1410 

17 

3,448 

18 

80 

3,597 

240 

6| 

Medium of the Year 

9,038 

— 

990 

— 

— 

11 

4,000 

— 

199 

— 

— 

5 


From which it appears that the mortality of 
the four months of the rainy season is more than 
double that of the other eight months, being as 
17 to 8 per cent, on the numerical forces of 
European soldiers ; but that the deaths of the 
Negro soldiers, in the unhealthy months, increase 
only in the ratio of about one-third. 

As a general prevention to those disorders to 
which the troops are liable, Sir William Young, 
who appears, with a laudable philanthropy, to 
have given the subject much attention, recom- 
mends, amongst the wise precautions in regard 
to clothing, &amp;c. already adopted, open galleries 
and sheds in the barracks to shelter every pas- 
sage and communication, covering the windows 
from the beating in of the rains, and preventing 
the soldier’s exposure to the meridian sun, in 
every case, when actual service and duty do not 
require it; that not only each sentry walk, but 
the very parade should be covered ; that the bar- 
racks being properly built, and adapted to a cer- 
tain number of men, should on no occasion re- 
ceive beyond the complement : above all, that 
the apartments for sleep should never be crowd- 
ed, since the stifled soldier is thus often driven 
to the necessity of throwing open the windward 


casements, and letting in the heavy night dews 
on those in sleep, whereby the perspiration so 
necessary to health and life in those climates, by 
becoming checked, is the cause of fevers, fluxes, 
and the whole train of tropical disorders. 

The necessity of limited service is another of 
the points on which he insists, and likewise on 
the formation of a depot for military invalids and 
convalescents to be established in some one 
island ; the situation of the same to be selected 
by medical commissioners, having before them 
military returns, and every document of past and 
comparative health, added to such personal in- 
spection and observation as may best direct their 
judgment, and choice of situation, for a general 
hospital of recovery. 

u Such place of depot (continues this author) 
being chosen and prepared, soldiers from every 
regiment, and whatever island, after tedious in- 
termittents, liver complaints, and other chronical 
cases, or consequent debility, should be sent for 
the re-establishment of health and strength, 
before the constitution is wholly broken and 
enervated by the disorder, or its effects. My in- 
formation, in the first instance, would direct to 
Dorsetshire Hill, in the island of St. Vincent’s.”] 
n n 2 


276 


WEST INDIES. 


[ Winds and hurricanes . — Concerning the trade- 
wind, or diurnal sea-breeze, which blows in 
these climates from the e. and its collateral 
points, with little intermission or variation nine 
months in the year, the causes of it having been 
traced and displayed by numerous writers, it is 
unnecessary for us to treat ; but the peculiarity 
of the land-wind by night (than which nothing- 
can be more grateful and refreshing) has been 
less generally noticed. This is an advantage, 
among others, which the larger islands of the W. 
Indies derive from the great inequality of their 
surface ; for as soon as the sea-breeze dies away, 
the hot air of the plains being rarefied, ascends 
towards the tops of the mountains, and is there 
condensed by the cold ; which making it specifi- 
cally heavier than it was before, it descends back 
to the plains on both sides of the ridge. Hence a 
night-wind is felt in all the mountainous coun- 
tries under the torrid zone, blowing on all sides 
from the land towards the shore, so that on a n. 
shore the wind shall come from the s. and on the 
s. shore from the n. Agreeably to this hypothe- 
sis, it is observable that in the islands to wind- 
ward, where they have no mountains, they have 
no land-breeze. 

In Barbadoes, and most of the small islands to 
windward, the sea-breeze blows as well by night 
as by day. It is sometimes the case in Jamaica 
in the months of June and July, the land at that 
time being heated to such a degree, that the cold 
air of the mountains is not sufficiently dense to 
check the current which flows from the sea. 

Many persons are of opinion, that among the 
consequences attendant on rain, earthquakes may 
be enumerated ; but they are now so unfrequent, 
in Hispanola at least, that they create no sensa- 
tions whatever of dread. It is, however, more, 
perhaps, from their having been generally noticed 
to occur at the end of the rainy season, and those 
when the tides rise to the highest, that philoso- 
phers have said that they might be attributed to 
these two causes, which may, however, be thought 
to have a collateral operation. 

The united waters of the sky and sea rush on, 
and ravage and undermine the earth in convul- 
sive shocks. The sea, particularly, in this quar- 
ter, bursts with redoubled force on the coasts, and 
there spends its fury Amongst the most violent 
assaults of this unquiet and turbulent element, 
ate those which are experienced once or twice a 
year, between the months of July and October, 
and which are called in the colonies, raz de 
maree. They are always most noticed on the w. 
coasts, when the winds have continued blowing 


from that quarter, or the s. The waves then 
break on the shore with an astonishing violence, 
and throw the spray in milky clouds around. 
No vessels in the outports or open roads, can, 
at that time, keep their anchors. 

The hurricanes are, however, thought to be 
serviceable to the crops, in both increasing and 
bringing them forward. Whether it is, that 
these violent agitations, in rending the bosom of 
the earth, prepare it for fecundity, or that they 
leave behind them some particles proper to the 
vegetation of plants, appears difficult to decide ; 
it has, however, been remarked, that this appa- 
rent and passing disorder, was not only a conse- 
quence of the constant order of nature, which 
provided for regeneration, by the means of pre- 
vious destruction ; but a cause of preservation 
to the whole system of reproduction. 

The first settlers of the Antilles, thought they 
had discovered the certain prognostics of this 
alarming event. They considered it was indi- 
cated by the air being troubled, the disk of the 
sun turning red, and being covered with a thick 
vapour, that added to its size. The caverns 
emitted a sound as if winds were closed and pent 
up within them. To the n. w. the sky was seen 
to lower, the sea groaned and sent forth a strong 
smell, and though its surface was not broke in 
waves, it seemed to swell and roll in long and 
wide bodies of lifted water. The wind suddenly 
changed from the e. to the w., and blew with 
quick and increased violence. 

These hurricanes are seldom experienced from 
the e., their influence is in general partial, and 
what is still more strange is, that though they 
often scour the windward islands, nay, one may 
almost say, annually, they are not often felt be- 
low Puerto Rico. This has induced many to be- 
lieve, that they are formed on the continent ; for 
the w. wind, which sometimes reigns, blows with 
violence in the s., meeting with the n. wind, which 
in his turn having sway, produces a shock equal 
to their respective rapidity and acquired motion. 
If this happens in the long and narrow defiles of 
the mountains, a current of air must naturally 
issue, and extend in proportion to the assumed 
force and impulsive velocity, and of a size on a 
parallel with the channel, in which it has been 
confined. All solid bodies which may be op- 
posed to this impelling torrent of air, will receive 
a shock proportionate to their surface ; but hap- 
pily the different bearings of the islands, their 
angular and spherical figures, present to these 
volumes of compressed air, surfaces more or less 
oblique, which serve to break the current, divide] 


WEST INDIES. 


277 


[its force, and gradually disunite its dreaded 
power. Experience has proved this to be so 
much the case, that, in a direction where a hur- 
ricane has smitten with its greatest and combined 
fury, it has frequently not been perceived 10 
leagues to windward or to leeward. 

Soil and Productions . — The soil of the West 
India islands is generally formed of layers of rich 
clay, or soft light gravel, on a bed of rock, which 
renders the different qualities and proportions 
more or less suited to vegetation. Where the 
clay is found less humid, and easily broken, 
mixed with spreads of rotten leaves, and crum- 
bled remains of plants, the soil is thicker than 
where it is only composed of rich clays. Where 
the earth is light, less compact, and as it were 
more porous, the dew and moisture are imbibed 
the deeper, and preserves longer that freshness, 
which is the parent of fecundity. Where these 
advantages are not united, the soil is more ste- 
rile, and as soon as the layers which have been 
created by the long decomposition of original 
plants and vegetable productions, becomes de- 
stroyed, by the surface being too much exposed 
to the action of the sun, the salt and juicy parti- 
cles exhale; for which reason, in colonial plan- 
tations, umbrageous trees are mixed, as well to 
preserve the nutritive moisture of the ground, as 
to protect the tender nurseling from the potent 
rays of the mid-day sun, and the powerful and 
dreaded effects of the sweeping winds, till it has 
taken sufficient root, and horizontally spread its 
own branches for the purposes of its defence. In 
coffee grounds the upper shoots are always cut, 
which makes the sucker spread below to shelter 
the space it covers, and as a convenience also to 
the gatherer of the berries who cannot easily 
reach beyond six feet. It is in consequence of 
this great evaporation of the particles of nutri- 
tion, that lands which have been long uncovered 
of their native forests, are not suited to any 
planting that requires rich or forced soil, and 
only serve for sugar, which needs less indul- 
gence. 

When the Europeans first landed on these 
shores, they found them covered with large, lofty, 
and stately trees, bound as it were together, with 
a great variety of wood-bands and creepex's, 
which rendered them impenetrable till they were 
cut ; and of these native forests many are yet in 
their original state in Hispafxola, though the 
other islands in general have seen them exhaust- 
ed. These tall, straight, and towering woods, 
apparently coeval with the formation of the 
world, seemed to possess several generations of 


trees, and the annual falling of their leaves, their 
decomposition, and the successive decay of their 
limbs and trunks, gave the surface of the soil, 
that rich sediment or deposit which produced so 
rapid an inci’ease of vegetation, when plants, 
reared by the hand of man, wei’e substituted for 
those gi'oves, which first studded the face of the 
country. The roots of the largest trees, it is yet 
remarkable, do not strike perpendicularly into 
the ground, but seem to take an horizontal direc- 
tion at the distance of two feet from the surface, 
inclining that way in search of the moist influence 
of the rains, which do not generally sink deeper, 
from being again absorbed by the solar x - ay, and 
only partially leplaced by the descending dews. 
Ti'ees again found on the rugged summit of the 
mountain, or the naked sides of the precipice, 
are comparatively so bal’d and solid, as to blunt 
the best tempered tools, as well from the time 
exhausted in their growth, as from the little 
moisture by which it has been assisted. In the 
valleys therefore, refreshed as they are by the 
mountain cascade, the woods are uniformly of a 
softer texture, but clothed in greater verdure. 
There the native shrubs and nutritive l’oots, des- 
tined for the subsistence of man, grew in their 
original state, seemingly planted by a superior 
hand, to be the staff of life in these regions, both 
fi'om their variety, utility, and wholesomeness. 

Nature, which appears to have placed a degree 
of relation between the character of the people 
and the productions which are to form their sub- 
sistence, had gifted the Antilles with vegetables 
which shunned the mid-day heat, that sought the 
freshening shade, that required little or no cul- 
ture, suited to the languor of the natives, and 
which were yeaxdy repi’oduced, twice or three 
times. Their inhabitants appeared not ambitious 
of improving or aiding her spontaneous opera- 
tions, but suffered nature freely and unmolested 
to produce her bounties, nor ever thought of 
destroying one of her pi’oductions, to give greater 
vigour to another. Dii'ected by the hand of 
chance, as the season came, they gathered what 
the earth had prepared for their aliment, but 
wei’e not sensible of the advantages of timely or 
added culture. 

To these tuberous roots, with which the coun- 
try was stored, were superadded fruits of a 
vai’iety of kinds, and of different size and flavour; 
as well intended for the food of man, as to allay 
the parching effects of a tori'id zone, and relieve 
his system from the effects of fatigue, under the 
influence of a glowing sun. These fruit trees 
were the ornament of the forest, as well as the] 


278 


WEST INDIES, 


[waving beauty of the plain, according to their 
genus; they required no care, and ministered to 
the wants of the journeying Indian, as well as 
of those who were collected into clans. The 
cabbage tree and forest fruits now often give 
subsistence to runaway negroes, who travel on 
devious roads from one end of the island to the 
other, and alone serve to nourish them for many 
months. It is remarkable, that the creeper and 
wood-band, which cling to, and often out-top 
the tallest inhabitant of the woods, seldom or 
never approach those which bear fruit, as if 
parent nature had stamped them with respectful 
deference to what was destined to form the sus- 
tenance and relief of man. 

In other vegetables, however, such as eatable 
herbs, &amp;c. these islands seemed deficient, and 
purslane and water-cresses nearly filled up the 
list. They had no domestic fowls, and all the 
game they have, though now found in abundance, 
consists chiefly of exotics. The finny race, ne- 
vertheless, was not wanting to the pleasure and 
convenience of the aborigines, though, in general, 
it is less healthy and more tasteless, than that 
taken in the European waters. But their woods 
were crowded with medicinal herbs, gums, and 
balsams, suited to the ills of the climate, which 
they were intended to counteract, and the mine- 
ral rills which roll down from the mountains, 
served to give tone to the human frame, and add 
to the blessings of health. 

Notwithstanding that the rains refresh the air, 
they, at the same time, give it a certain moisture, 
that is not only uncomfortable, but extremely 
destructive. Flesh meat, for this reason, is soon 
tainted ; and it becomes necessary to consign 
dead bodies early to their graves. Bread soon 
turns mouldy, wine easily sours, fruits decay soon 
after they are plucked ; but this corroding and 
humid power, is most prevalent on iron and steel, 
which soon rust, so as to render an assortment 
of hardware, whose merit often depends on the 
polish, a very dangerous selection in this coun- 
try, for, being closed up in stores, where a cur- 
rent of air cannot remove the damp atmosphere, 
they soon tarnish, and, if neglected, spoil. 

Garden seeds can scarcely be preserved till 
the season of putting them into the ground ar- 
rives, nor can it be considered, on this account, 
healthy to visit the churches in the night or 
morning, till they have been opened some time, 
and are well ventilated from the pernicious mias- 
mata that arise from the vaults and burying 
places. Books and papers easily moulder away, 
or are devoured by a small insect that burrows 


in them; for which reason, when the French 
held possession of the w. end of Santo Domingo, 
every notary, magistrate, and parish curate, was 
obliged annually to send over legalized copies of 
all their transactions and records, for the purpose 
of being preserved in the archives of Paris, and 
secured from the destruction of the colonial cli- 
mate. These now serve as a partial consolation, 
at least, to the expelled planters of the island, 
for, although they have lost their estates, they 
have yet access to the titles of property. Owing 
to this great decay of papers, and their conti- 
nually being consumed by worms, which prey 
upon them, the archives of the city of Santo Do- 
mingo do not contain any writing or document 
of ancient date. In consequence, also, of the 
moisture of the surrounding element, the poison- 
ous qualities of the ink seem to have corroded 
through, and destroyed the texture of the paper ; 
but a letter written by Columbus, is said to be 
preserved in Jamaica. The natives also say, 
that many of their public records were destroyed, 
in the capture of the city, by Sir Francis Drake. 

These moist properties of the air, are, in a 
more striking manner, observed, with regard to 
all sorts of grain. This was one of the causes, 
in the early days of the discovery, that reduced 
Columbus to such great distress for want of pro- 
visions ; his grains and flour fermented and be- 
came spoiled, his followers were dissatisfied and 
clamorous, heavy complaints were sent over by 
the fleets to Spain against the admiral, which 
formed one link of that chain of misfortunes, 
which afterwards fell upon him. The wheat and 
barley were observed soon to sprout, swell, and 
be rendered useless. The French, in storing 
their garrisoned towns in the W. Indies, found 
that it greatly aided to the preservation of flour, 
to pack it very tight in the barrels, by beating it 
with an iron weight, which rendered it less im- 
pervious to the destructive air. A plan was 
afterwards thought of, which fixed the attention, 
and received the encouragement of their minis- 
ters; which was to pass it, when powdered, 
through kilns, which operation removed all 
moisture, and destroyed the yet remaining vege- 
table particles. Experiments have also proved, 
that it is a great advantage, in point of preserva- 
tion, frequently to besmear the barrels, particu- 
larly of American flour, which are packed loosely, 
with the greasy brine in which pork has been 
put up, as it helps greatly to fill up the pores, 
and hinders the many weavels from lodging in 
the wood, which is the first point of their attack, 
so that an old flour barrel, in which they have] 


WEST INDIES. 


279 


[spread devastation, is perforated throughout like 
a honeycomb, particularly in the heading. 

Animals . — The majestic groves of these islands 
were found to be enlivened by the singular forms 
of some, and the surprising beauty of others of 
the inferior animals which possessed and peopled 
them. Although a fuller description of them 
more properly appertains to the Appendix of this 
Dictionary, a few observations which at present 
occur, will not, perhaps, be misplaced. If it 
be true, as it hath been asserted, that in most 
of the regions of the torrid zone, the heat of the 
sun is, as it were, reflected in the untameable 
fierceness of their wild beasts, and in the exalted 
rage and venom of the numerous serpents with 
which they are infested, the Sovereign Disposer 
of all things has regarded the islands of the W. 
Indies with peculiar favour ; inasmuch as their 
serpents are wholly destitute of poison, and they 
possess no animal of prey to desolate their v al- 
lies. This assertion is, doubtlessly, as great as 
extraordinary ; but it is made on the authority 
of Brown, Charlevoix, and Hughes, (of whom 
the first compiled the History of Jamaica, the 
second that of Hispaniola, and the last that of 
Barbadoes) — on the testimony of many gentlemen 
who have resided in several of the Win Iward 
Islands — and, lastly, on the known experience of 
Bryan Edwards, who passed eighteen years of 
his life in Jamaica. The crocodile, or alligator, 
is indeed sometimes discovered on the banks of 
their rivers ; but, notwithstanding all that has 
been said of its fierce and savage disposition, it is 
pronounced, on the best authorities, to be a cau- 
tious and timid creature, avoiding, with the ut- 
most precipitation, the approach of man. The 
rest of the lizard kind are perfectly innocent and 
inoffensive. Some of them are even fond of 
human society. They embellish the walks by 
their beauty, and court attention by gentleness 
and frolic ; but their kindness, it must be owned, 
is returned by aversion and disgust. Anciently 
the woods of almost all the equatorial parts of 
America abounded with various tribes of the 
smaller monkey, a sportive and sagacious little 
creature, which the people of Europe seem like- 
wise to have regarded with detestation ; for they 
hunted them down with such assiduity, that in 
several of the islands every species of them has 
been long since exterminated. Of the feathered 
race too, many tribes have now nearly deserted 
those shores where polished man delights in 
spreading universal and capricious destruction. 
Among these, one of the most remarkable was 
the flamingo, an elegant and princely bird, nearly] 


as large as the swan, and arrayed in plumage of 
the brightest scarlet. Numerous, however, are 
the feathered kinds, deservedly distinguished by 
their splendour and beauty, that still animate 
these sylvan recesses. The parrot, and its va- 
rious affinities, from the maccaw to the parroquet, 
some of them not larger than a sparrow, are too 
well known to require description. These are 
as plentiful in the larger islands of the W. Indies 
as the rook is in Europe. But the boast of Ame- 
rican groves is doubtless the colibry, or humming- 
bird ; of the brilliance of whose plumage no 
combination of words, nor tints of the pencil, can 
convey an adequate idea. The consummate 
green of the emerald, the rich purple of the ame- 
thyst, and the vivid flame of the ruby, all happily 
blended and enveloped beneath a transparent 
veil of waving gold, are distinguishable in every 
species, but differently arranged and apportioned 
in each. Nor is the minuteness of its form less 
the object of admiration, than the lustre of its 
plumage ; the smallest species not exceeding the 
size of a beetle, and appearing the link which 
connects the bird and insect creation. 

It has been observed, however, that although 
nature is profuse of ornament to the birds of the 
torrid zone, she has bestowed far greater powers 
of melody on those of Europe ; and the observa- 
tion is partly true. That prodigality and variety 
of music which in the vernal season enlivens the 
British groves, is certainly unknown to the shades 
of the tropical regions ; yet are not these alto- 
gether silent or inharmonious. The note of the 
mockbird is deservedly celebrated, while the hum 
of myriads of busy insects, and the plaintive me- 
lody of the innumerable variety of doves abound- 
ing in these climates, form a concert, which, if it 
serves not to awaken the fancy, contributes at 
least to soothe the affections, and, like the mur- 
muring of a rivulet, gives harmony to repose. 

Mountains and Rivers . — It is in the magnitude, 
extent, and elevation of the mountains of the 
New World, that the Almighty has most strik- 
ingly manifested the wonders of his omnipotence. 
Those of S. America are nearly twice the height 
of the highest in the ancient hemisphere, and, 
even under the equator, have their tops involved 
in everlasting snow. To those massive piles, the 
loftiest summits of the most elevated of the W. 
Indian islands cannot indeed be compared ; but 
some of these rise, nevertheless, in amazing 
grandeur, and are among the first objects that fix 
the attention of the voyager. The mountains of 
Hispaniola in particular, whose wavy ridges are 
descried from sea at the distance of 30 leagues,] 


280 


WEST INDIES. 


[towering- far above the clouds in stupendous mag- 
nificence, and the blue mountains of Jamaica, 
have never yet been satisfactorily explored. 
Neither curiosity nor avarice has hitherto ven- 
tured to invade the topmost of those lofty regions. 
In such of them as are accessible, nature is found 
to have put on the appearance of a new creation. 
As the climate changes, the trees, the birds, and 
the insects are seen also to differ from those which 
are met with below. To an unaccustomed specta- 
tor, looking down from those heights, the whole 
scene appears like enchantment. The first ob- 
ject which catches the eye at the dawn of day, is 
a vast expanse of vapour, covering the whole 
face of the vallies. Its boundaries being perfectly 
distinct and visibly circumscribed, it has the 
exact resemblance of an immense body of water ; 
whilst the mountains appear like so many islands 
in the midst of a beautiful lake. As the sun in- 
creases in force, the prospect varies : the incum- 
bent vapours fly upward, and melt into air; dis- 
closing all the beauties of nature, and the triumphs 
of industry, heightened and embellished by the 
full blaze of a tropical sun. In the equatorial 
season, scenes of still greater magnificence fre- 
quently present themselves ; for, while all is 
calm and serene in the higher regions, the clouds 
are seen below sweeping along the sides of the 
mountains in vast bodies ; until growing more 
ponderous by accumulation, they fall at length 
in torrents of water on the plains. The sound 
of the tempest is distinctly heard by the spectator 
above ; the distant lightning is seen to irradiate 
the gloom ; while the thunder, reverberated in a 
thousand echoes, rolls far beneath his feet. 

The direction of the mountains that stud and 
diversify these several islands, is on a parallel 
with the situation and bearings of each ; and 
their summits form the same regular curve. The 
waters also which issue from their bosoms, seem 
in like manner to incline to the w. The three 
largest, viz. Puerto Rico, Hispanola, and Cuba, 
have indeed some rivers, which descend to the 
n. and e., but they are not so large, or so general 
as those which fall in the other two directions ; 
but the ocean beats with greatest violence to the 
s., though the volume of water is there less than 
that which constitutes the Atlantic seas. Besides 
the evident parallel directions of the mountains, 
that coincides also with the Main, we are further 
led to suppose them to be detached islands, from 
the similarity of indigenous productions remark- 
able in each : thus in Tobago, Marguerita, and 
Trinidad, to windward, and which lie off from 
the main, the wild cocoa, and a variety of soft 


woods are found, such as correspond to the oppo- 
site shores ; and in Cuba, and the other extreme 
islands to leeward, the cedar, cypress, &amp;c. are 
produced, the same as in the Floridas. 

Reflections concerning the Origin of the Islands. 
— Lofty as the tropical mountains generally are, 
it is wonderfully true, that all the known parts 
of their summits furnish incontestable evidence 
that the sea had once dominion over them. Even 
their appearance at a distance affords an argu- 
ment in support of this conclusion. Their ridges 
resemble billows, and their various inequalities, 
inflexions, and convexities, seem justly ascriba- 
ble to the fluctuations of the deep. As in other 
countries too, marine shells are found in great 
abundance in various parts of these heights. On 
a mountain in the interior parts of Jamaica 
petrified oysters have been dug up, which per- 
fectly resembled, in the most minute circum- 
stances, the large oysters of the w. coast of Eng- 
land ; a species not to be found at this time, it is 
believed, in the seas of the W. Indies. Here 
then is an ample field for conjecture to expatiate 
in ; and indeed few subjects have afforded greater 
exercise to the pens of physical writers, than the 
appearances here mentioned. While some phi- 
losophers assign the origin of all the various in- 
equalities of the earth to the ravages of the 
deluge, others, considering the mountains as the 
parents of springs and rivers, maintain that they 
are coeval with the world ; and that, first emerg- 
ing from the abyss, they were created with it. 
Some again ascribe them to the force of volca- 
noes and earthquakes : “ the Almighty,” say 
they, “ while he permits subterranean fires to 
swallow up cities and plains in one part of the 
globe, causes them to produce promontories and 
islands in another, which afterwards become the 
fruitful seats of industry and happiness.” (See 
Goldsmith’s History of the Earth, &amp;c. vol. i.) 

All these and other theorists concur, however, 
in the belief that the surface of the globe has 
undergone many surprising and violent convul- 
sions and changes since it first came from the 
hands of the Creator. Hills have sunk into 
plains, and vallies have been exalted into hills. 
Respecting the numerous islands of the W. In- 
dies, they are generally considered as the tops 
of lofty mountains, the eminences of a great con- 
tinent, converted into islands by a tremendous con- 
cussion of nature, which, having increased the na- 
tural course of the ocean from e. to w., has laid a 
vast extent of level country under water. (See 
L’Abbe Raynal, L’Abbe Pluche, and others.) 

Other writers, instead of considering these] 


WEST INDIES. 


281 


[islands as the fragments of a desolated continent, 
are disposed to regard them as the rudiments of 
a new one. They think it not improbable that 
many of them, even now, are but beginning to 
emerge from the bosom of the deep. Mr. Buffon 
has shown, with much ingenuity, that the bottom 
of the sea bears an exact resemblance to the land 
which we inhabit ; consisting, like the earth, of 
hills and vallies, plains and hollows, rocks, sands, 
and soils of every consistence and species. To 
the motion of the waves, and the sediments which 
they have deposited, he imputes too, with great 
probability, the regular positions of the various 
strata or layers which compose the upper parts 
of the earth ; and he shows that this arrangement 
cannot have been the effect of a sudden revolu- 
tion, but of causes slow, gradual, and successive 
in their operations. To the flow of tides and 
rivers, depositing materials which have been ac- 
cumulating ever since the creation, and the 
various fluctuations of the deep operating there- 
on, he ascribes, therefore, most of those inequali- 
ties in the present appearance of the globe, which 
in some parts embellish, and in others (to our 
limited view at least) appear to deface it. 

CHAP. II. 

BETWEEN THE YEARS 1625 AND 1793. 

Early History and Settlement , 1625. — Expedition 
of the Dutch, 1630. — Treaty of Mutual Ces- 
sions , 1660. — Buccaneers . — These acknowledged 
by France, 1665. — Capture of Jamaica , under 
Cromwell. — Carthagena captured by Buccaneers , 
with the aid of France, 1685. — Dreadful Earth- 
quake in Jamaica , 1692. — French Invasion. — 
Pacification with Negroes , 1738. — Revolt of 
the same , 1760. — Succession of Hurricanes. — 
Claims of Great Britain and France to Neutral 
Islands , 1763. — Foss of the British Sugar 
Islands , 1778. — Restoration of the same , 1783. 
An historical narrative of all the events that 
have taken place in these islands would form a 
subject very diffuse, and in many points unin- 
teresting ; but there are facts which require to 
be recorded as eminent in themselves, and as 
having given rise to a string of consequences at 
once decisive and important A statement of all 
the conquests, cessions, treatises, and remarkable 
events, that apply to each island, is already given 
in the foregoing chapter. A dilatation on some 
of them will be necessary. 

It will be gathered from what has been recorded 
in other parts of this Work, that the English and 

VOL. V. 


French established themselves in the windward 
islands, on the ruin of the Caribes. These ports 
afterwards became the first seats in the colonies, 
for partial armaments made to intercept the Spa- 
nish vessels that visited those seas. The depre- 
dations continued even in times of peace ; and, 
in retaliation, the Spaniards seized all vessels 
they met in the islands, which they considered as 
exclusively belonging' to them, from their prior 
discovery. Both the English and French long 
frequented these shores, where they were well 
received by the Caribes, before they thought of 
making any settlements. In 1625, both formed 
a lodgment on St. Christopher’s, and peaceably 
divided the island between them, intent only on 
enriching themselves with the spoils of the com- 
mon enemy. The natives retired, telling them 
“ that land must be very scarce and bad in their 
countries, since they came so far, and amidst so 
many dangers in search of fresh ones, that had 
little alluring in their quality or appearance.” 

The court of Madrid viewed these settlements 
with a jealous eye, and in 1630 sent Admiral 
Toledo with a formidable fleet to the Brazils, 
intended to operate against the Dutch. They 
ordered him on his way to exterminate these 
pirates, as they called them, and who, according 
to the notions of that crown, had usurped part of 
their possessions ; but it was the dread of neigh- 
bourhood with two active and enterprising peo- 
ple, that led at this early period to such direct 
hostilities. The greatest part of the French who 
escaped upon the first defeat, went down to the 
small island of Tortuga, opposite the w. end of 
Hispanola, and eventually receiving succours 
from their government at home, at length got 
possession of part of the main island, by which 
means the Spaniards lost what they prized more 
than the useless island from which they had 
driven them. 

The English and the other French who escaped 
the sword of the Spaniards at St. Christopher’s 
fled to other islands, and the latter, busied about 
their other more valuable possessions of the main, 
left them there to repose in tranquillity. The 
conquered settlers, to the great misfortune of the 
Caribes, soon suspended their national rivalries. 
Frequent and destructive wars were waged mu- 
tually against them, and the different islands often 
presented scenes of horror and desolation. These 
hitherto adventurers did not receive the conside- 
ration of their respective governments at home, 
till the month of January 16 60, when a treaty 
was formed, which secured to each nation the 
possessions w hich the varied fortune of war had] 
o o 


282 


WEST INDIES. 


[mutually placed in their power. By this treaty 
it was stipulated, that France should retain Mar- 
tinique, Grenada, and Guadaloupe ; and England 
was to maintain Barbadoes, Nevis, Antigua, and 
Montserrat ; but St. Christopher’s was to remain, 
in common, between the two nations. The Ca- 
ribes were confined to Dominica and St. Vincent, 
where their population was now reduced to 6000 ; 
but they have gradually decreased from that 
number as the white population has spread, and 
at present there are only a few left, who live 
separate in a kind of independence, too insignifi- 
cant to deserve force being carried against them. 
These islands have all undergone a change of 
fortune; in general, those of the French have 
been taken in time of war, and given up at the 
making of peace ; and previous to the treaty of 
the present year, 1814, the English and Spaniards 
were masters of all the W. Indies excepting St. 
Bartholomew’s, which was too inconsiderable to 
merit the attention of either. 

The English colonies, in the first stages of cul- 
ture, flourished more than those of the French, 
owing to a greater naval protection, and the bet- 
ter establishment of regulations. The latter, like 
the Spaniards, soon fell into the depressing sys- 
tem of abusive privileges and monopoly. As we 
have already observed, many of the French ad- 
venturers, who had escaped the inroads of the 
Spaniards at St. Christopher’s, effected a lodge- 
ment on Tortuga, and turned their pursuits first 
to privateering, and then to form settlements on 
the opposite and fertile shores ofHispanola. 

They were at first called Buccaneers, from the 
colonial word bonean, which means a fire made 
in the woods, at which they dressed and smoked 
their food, in a kind of barbarian way. They 
were yet without women, and they associated in 
small parties. Every tiling was in common, and 
descended to the survivors, and they resembled 
some of the clans which Caesar found when he 
conquered the Gauls. Whenever personal dis- 
putes occurred, if the arbitration of the neigh- 
bours was unavailing, they ended in duels, fought 
at a certain distance with their firelocks. Their 
own country was forgotten. They even changed 
their family names, and adopted warlike ones, or 
noms de guerre, that afterwards descended to their 
families, and created some singular law-suits 
among the most wealthy of the future planters 
respecting genealogy, as they afterwards became 
the greatest landholders in the country when it 
was planted, and left behind them the largest and 
most valuable estates. 

A shirt, often stained in the blood of the ani- 


mals killed in the chase, a thick pantaloon, and 
a leather girdle, from which hung a short sword 
or manchete, a butcher’s knife, a pair of sandals 
made of dried hides, formed their clothing and 
accoutrements ; and a musket that carried an 
ounce ball, and some good bull-dogs, were what 
they depended on for subsistence and defence. 
Their time was taken up in hunting the bulls, 
which, since the discovery of the Spaniards, had 
increased to such a rapid degree, that the hide 
was all they sought ; and these were collected in 
the bye ports, where the Dutch and Danes came 
to barter with the arms, ammunition, and cloth- 
ing the hunters required. 

To these original settlers of the great colony 
of French St. Domingo were added, redemption- 
ers, or a species of poor men, who were carried 
out from Europe ; and, for the consideration of 
their passage, were sold to the Buccaneers, whom 
they consented to serve for three years, at the 
expiration of which time they became free, and 
might work for themselves. These were what 
the French called, un trente six mois , or redemp- 
tioners. They became, as it were, the founders 
of the colony, and many afterwards sought to be 
ennobled with brevets of nobility. 

Men of this description, hardened by continual 
exercise, and daily fed with fresh meat and game, 
were not subject to infirmities, and their daily 
exposure to danger made them so familiar with 
it, that they became a deadly foe to the troops 
which the Spanish government of Santo Domingo 
sent against them. The Spanish colony however 
which, in the early times, as it is known, had 
reached a high degree of splendour and consis- 
tency, had gradually declined, and, by this time, 
retained little else than the shadow of what it 
had been. At different periods strong expedi- 
tions were, however, sent out against the Bucca- 
neers, who fled to the mountains, which they 
were obliged to defend with unequal success. At 
length the Spaniards resolved, themselves, to kill 
all the horned cattle that had spread in the w. 
end of the island, and this effected, they returned 
to the e. leaving the desert woods and plains to 
the quiet possession of the former hunters, who, 
finding their pristine habits of life useless, turned 
their attention to planting, at first for their own 
subsistence, which laid the great foundation to 
the most important colony in the W. Indies. 

In 1665, it was that France began to acknow- 
ledge them, and sent them out a governor ; and 
women were picked up to be distributed amongst 
them. The morals of these could not be sup- 
posed to be the best, from the manner in which} 


WEST INDIES. 


283 


[they were collected : they were, in general, 
amassed from the purlieus of the large cities, and 
were within the power of the police, at the time 
they were sent out. They were, however, the 
most acceptable to these hermits, and chance de- 
cided their lot. “ I take thee,” the husband 
generally said, “ without caring what thou hast 
been. Thy being here, is an indication that thy 
past life has not been the most exemplary, but I 
need little about it. I do not ask thee to render 
me any account of the past, thou wert then mis- 
tress of thy own will and actions, but I shall de- 
mand of thee rigorously to answer for what is to 
come.” Then striking the butt end of his mus- 
ket, he added, “ this is what will avenge me of 
thy future infidelities ; if thou art wanting to me, 
this wilt thou not escape — and thus was the 
marriage ceremony ended. 

In the meantime, the Buccaneers were not con- 
fined in their feats of prowess to the shores of 
Hispanola. After driving the Spaniards from 
Tortuga, they erected fortifications. They fitted 
out light vessels manned with from 70 to 150 
daring spirits, who formed into a company, and 
cruized with the greatest success against the 
common enemy. They seemed to be a congre- 
gation of all nations, and many Indians preferred 
their free mode of life to that forced restraint they 
experienced from the Spaniards. They generally 
boarded their enemy, and their history is filled 
with feats that would ever have ennobled the 
naval annals of any nation. Vessels laden with 
merchandize from Europe were not sufficiently 
tempting, they had no means of expending such 
cargoes, they waited till they returned freighted 
with precious metals. They have even attacked 
the galleons, and were dreaded by strong convoys, 
which they followed to pick up the stragglers. 
They went round into the S. Seas, spread terror 
along the coasts of Peru and California, and even 
captured the armed force that was sent to repel 
them : frequently the English and French joined 
in the same attack, and fraternally shared the 
spoils. The first lots were always laid aside for 
those who had been wounded in the combat ; and 
an extra remuneration was besides made, accord- 
ing to the deserts of the case. The commander 
had only a right to one share, like the rest of the 
crew, but they presented him with more, in a way 
proportioned to the zeal and activity he had dis- 
played, and if any were killed in the action, their 
parts were given to their relations. 

The Spanish navigation being unprotected by 
a naval force, and continually exposed to dan- 
gers, became confined, the merchants finding 


their property continually devastated by these 
privateers, ceased their commercial relations, and 
sea-privateering at length became a trade to the 
Buccaneers scarcely worth following. They then 
turned their attacks to some of the rich maritime 
towns of the main continent, and to Cuba, but 
amongst all their acts of atrocious courage and 
cruel audacity, none were rendered so famous as 
those of the leader Montbars. His dislike to the 
Spaniards commenced in early youth, when at 
college, and carried him to lengths almost un- 
precedented. A handful of the Buccaneers took 
and pillaged Maracaibo, and overran the coun- 
try surrounding the lake. They burnt the town 
of Gibraltar on the Main, because its pillage 
did not answer their expectations, and Maracaibo 
would have met with the same fate, had not the 
inhabitants ransomed the town. They, however, 
carried off all the valuables they could meet 
with, several images and bells, many of which 
are existing at present in Port au Prince, par- 
ticularly a large Saviour on the cross, cut out of 
iron-wood, and much revered by the common 
people. It was in this interval, that Morgan, 
one of the most famous Buccaneers of Jamaica, 
made himself master of Porto Bello. After sur- 
prising the tow n, he took possession of the forts, 
by making the women and friars march before 
him, and first ascend the ladders, supposing that 
the garrison would not fire upon the objects of 
their love and respect. He afterwards took and 
ravaged Panama, which was preceded by the de- 
struction of St. Catherines. 

The declension of Spain, had, in the mean 
time, brought on a state of langour which soon 
reached her distant colonies. The peninsula had 
long become the seat of domestic divisions, and 
it was weakened by the revolt in Catalonia and 
Portugal, by convulsions in the kingdom of 
Naples, by the defeat of the Spamsh armies at 
Rocroy, in 1643, when 9000 Spaniards and Wal- 
loons are said to have fallen after having refused 
to take quarter ; by their continued losses in the 
Low Countries, by the incapacity of those placed 
at the head of affairs, and by the apparent extinc- 
tion of that national pride which had till then made 
them so famous. This was a moment too auspi- 
cious not be seized upon both by the English and 
French to attack her foreign dominions. Accord- 
ingly Cromwell, in 1655, sent an expedition that 
captured Jamaica, which from the year 1509 had 
remained under the Spanish flag, and its former 
inhabitants retired to Cuba. 

From Jamaica several expeditions were formed 
against the Main, and often carried on in concert j 


284 


WEST INDIES. 


[with the French Buccaneers, as the same object 
led on both parties. Peru now became the 
point of attack, and each nation thought of 
bringing - back to their own homes, riches, and an 
abundance of pillage. Some marched to the S. 
Sea by the isthmus of Darien, and others went 
round by the Straits of Magellan, in all to the 
number of 4000 men. On arriving, they spread 
desolation and terror in every direction, they 
took upwards of 20 towns, pillaged the country 
round, and laid every place, through which they 
passed, under contribution. 

The issue of this famous expedition did not an- 
swer however the expectations of the adven- 
turers, many fell a prey to the climate, others 
again in returning loaded with their spoils, fell 
into ambuscades, which were placed to intercept 
them, some perished with hunger, so that few got 
safe to their respective islands. Many of the 
vessels in doubling Cape Horn were lost, and an 
expedition which had taken four years to effect 
it, ended in nearly the destruction of the brave 
band that undertook it. 

Campeachy was the next place on which the 
Buccaneers of St. Domingo resolved a descent, 
and in 1685 it was carried into execution. The 
inhabitants fled into the woods, so great was 
their dread of these famed ravagers of their 
country, a considerable booty was carried oft", 
but the last most memorable occurrence of these 
daring men was the capture of Carthagena in 
conjunction with an armed force from France. 
The war, however, which soon afterwards broke 
out with the Prince of Orange, creating a divi- 
sion of interests in the Buccaneers of the English 
and French islands, these depredations ceased; 
the respestive governments began to encourage 
the progress of culture, the toils of the field were 
assumed, and this hardy and enterprising race 
of men, gradually became dispersed, and dis- 
tributed in the tilling of grounds, eventually 
laying the foundation of those two great colonies, 
which we have witnessed in our own days, and 
that have progressively exceeded those of any 
other nations. 

The year 1692 was marked by one of the most 
tremendous earthquakes that ever visited this 
hemisphere. It happened on the 7th of June; 
Port Royal of Jamaica was in part swallowed up 
by its destructive influence. A description of it, 
dreadfully minute, may be found in the Philoso- 
phical Transactions ; but it ought to be observed, 
as not being generally known, that the town was 
chiefly built on a bank of sand, adhering to a 
rock in the sea, and that a very slight concus- 


sion, aided by the weight of the buildings, 
might probably have accomplished its destruc- 
tion 

The inhabitants were scarcely recovered from 
the terrors occasioned by the earthquake, when 
they were alarmed with an account of an in- 
tended invasion by an armament from Hispanola, 
commanded by Mons. Du Casse, the governor of 
that island, in person. Accordingly on the 17th 
of June, 1694, a fleet of three men of war, and a 
20 privateers (having on board 1,500 land forces) 
appeared off Cow Bay, where 800 of the soldiers 
were landed, with orders to desolate the country 
as far as Port Morant. The French obeyed their 
instructions to the full extent. They not only 
set fire to every settlement they came to, but, 
according to the account transmitted by Sir Wil- 
liam Beeston, the governor, to the secretary of 
state, tortured their prisoners in the most shock- 
ing manner, and were guilty of many other 
abominable excesses. Unfortunately, the militia 
of this part of the country had been draAvn off 
to guard the capital; whereby the French con- 
tinued their ravages without resistance, and hav- 
ing set fire to all the plantations w ithin their 
reach, and seized about 1000 negroes, Du Casse 
sailed to leeward, and anchored in Carlisle Bay, 
in the parish of Vere. This place had no other 
fortification than an ill-contrived breast-work, 
manned by a detachment of 200 men from the 
militia of St. Elizabeth and Clarendon, which 
Du Casse attacked with all his force. The En- 
glish made a gallant resistance ; but Colonel 
Cleyborn, Lieutenant Colonel Smart, Captain 
Vassal, and Lieutenant Dawkins being killed, 
and many others dangerously wounded, they 
were compelled to retreat. Happily, at this mo- 
ment, arrived five companies of militia, which 
the governor had sent to their assistance from 
Spanish Tow n. These, though they had marched 
thirty miles without refreshment, immediately 
charged the enemy with such vigour, as entirely 
to change the fortune of the day. The French 
retreated to their ships, and Du Casse soon 
afterwards returned to Hispanola with his ill- 
gotten booty. 

In 1712, on the 28th of August, and again on 
the same day of the same month, in the year 
1722, Jamaica was shaken to its foundations by a 
dreadful hurricane. This day, therefore, as well 
as the 7th of June, the Colonial Legislature has, 
by an act of assembly, piously set apart for 
fasting and humiliation, though its commemora- 
tion is annually falling oft’ 

The next important occurrence in the history] 


WEST INDIES. 


285 


[of this island, was the pacification, concluded in 
1738, with the hostile negroes called Maroons; 
but the respite which this treaty afforded the in- 
habitants from intestine commotion was of short 
duration. In 1760, the very existence of the co- 
lony was endangered by a revolt of the enslaved 
negroes. This revolt arose at the instigation of a 
Koromantyn Negro ofthe name of Tacky, who had 
been a chief in Guinea ; and it broke out on the 
frontier plantation in St. Mary’s parish. The 
insurgent band having collected themselves into 
a body, about one o’clock in the morning- pro- 
ceeded to the fort at Port Maria ; killed the cen- 
tinel, and provided themselves with as great a 
quantity of arms and ammunition as they could 
conveniently dispose of Being by this time 
joined by a number of their countrymen frora 
the neighbouring plantations, they marched up 
the high road, that led to the interior parts ofthe 
country, carrying death and desolation as they 
went. At Ballard’s V alley they surrounded the 
overseer’s house about four in the morning, in 
which finding all the white servants in bed, they 
butchered every one of them in the most savage 
manner, and literally drank their blood mixed 
with rum. At Esher, and other estates, they 
exhibited the same tragedy ; and then set fire to 
the buildings and canes. In one morning they 
murdered between 30 and 40 Whites and Mulat- 
toes, not sparing even infants at the breast, be- 
fore their progress was stopped. Tacky, the 
chief, was killed in the woods by one of the 
parties that went in pursuit of them ; but some 
others of the ringleaders being taken, and a 
general inclination to revolt appearing among all 
the Koromantyn Negroes in the island, it was 
thought necessary to make a few terrible exam- 
ples of some of the most guilty. Of three who 
were clearly proved to have been concerned in 
the murders committed at Ballard’s Valley, one 
was condemned to be burnt, and the other two 
to be hung up alive in irons, and left to perish in 
that dreadful situation. The wretch that was 
burnt was made to sit on the ground, and his 
body being chained to an iron stake, the fire was 
applied to his feet. He uttered not a groan, and 
saw his legs reduced to ashes with the utmost 
firmness and composure ; after which, one of his 
arms by some means getting loose, he snatched a 
brand from the fire that was consuming him, and 
flung it in the face of the executioner. The two 
that were hung up alive were indulged, at their 
own request, with a hearty meal immediately be- 
fore they were suspended on the gibbet, which 
w as erected in the parade of the town of King- 


ston. From that time, until they expired, they 
never uttered the least complaint, except only of 
cold in the night, but diverted themselves all 
day long in discourse with their countrymen, who 
were permitted, very improperly, to surround 
the gibbet. On the morning of the eighth day 
one of them silently expired, as did the other on 
that ofthe ninth day. 

These dreadful examples were not without 
their effect, though some were of opinion that 
it was principally owing to the co-operation of 
the people called Maroons, that the suppression 
of the revolt of 1760 was to be ascribed. Sub- 
sequent events, however, proved that judgment 
to be false, for these very people, a very short 
time afterward, began a most unprovoked war 
against the white inhabitants, which, however, 
ended in their total defeat, and the final expul- 
sion of most of them from the island. 

The year 1744 was distinguished by another 
destructive conflict of the elements ; and in 1780, 
after a long respite, began that dreadful suc- 
cession of hurricanes, which, with the excep- 
tion of 1782 and 1783, desolated this, and some 
of the neighbouring islands, for seven years 
together. The dates of their occurrence, were 
as follows : 

1780 hurricane October 3. 


1781 ----- August 1. 

1784 ----- July 30. 

1785 August 27. 

1786 ----- October 20. 


Of the w hole series of these awful visitations, 
the first was undoubtedly the most destructive ; 
but in Jamaica, the sphere of its activity was 
chiefly confined to the western parts of the 
island. The large and opulent districts of West- 
moreland and Hanover presented, however, such 
extent and variety of desolation from its effects, 
as are scarcely to be equalled in the records of 
human calamity. Westmoreland alone sustained 
damage to the amount of ,£.700,000 sterling, and 
Hanover nearly as much. The sad fate of Sa- 
vanna la Mar (a small sea-port in the former 
parish) can never be remembered without horror. 
The sea, bursting its ancient limits, overwhelmed 
that unhappy town,' and swept it to instant de- 
struction, leaving not a vestige of man, beast, or 
habitation behind ; so sudden and comprehensive 
was the stroke, that the catastrophe of Savanna 
la Mar might be considered even more terrible, 
in many respects, than that of Port Roj-al. The 
latter, however, was in its effects more lasting; 
for to this hour the ruins of that devoted town, 
though buried for upw ards of a century beneath ! 


236 


WEST INDIES. 


[the waves, are visible in clear weather from the 
boats which sail over them, presenting an awful 
monument or memorial of the anger of Omnipo- 
tence ! 

At a pacification, entei'ed into in the year 1763, 
the claims of Great Britain and France to the 
neutral Islands of St. Lucia, Tobago, St. Vincent, 
and Dominica, were adjusted by a division of the 
spoil. 

One of the causes of former contests between 
France and England fthe claim to those islands) 
having been thus removed, there was certainly 
reason to suppose that the remembrance of re- 
cent calamities, the pressure of poverty, and the 
various other distresses which the war had brought 
on all the belligerent powers, were circumstances 
highly favourable to a continuance of the peace. 
The short experience of ten years proved the 
fallacy of this expectation. The martial spirit 
of Great Britain sickened for employment ; and 
pretences being wanting for directing it towards 
her ancient enemies, it was turned, in an evil 
hour, against her own subjects in N. America. 
Wise men foresaw and predicted that the restless 
and intriguing genius of France would not allow 
that kingdom to continue an indifferent spectator 
of such a contest. Accordingly, in the year 
1778, she rushed into another war with England, 
without even affecting to have sustained the 
shadow of provocation ; and the consequence of 
her injustice, and British insanity, was the loss 
not only of those of the sugar islands, which had 
been assigned to her in 1763, but of almost all 
the rest, the dismemberment of the empire, and a 
combination of dangers from which, at one mo- 
ment, dissolution seemed to be the only refuge. 

The sugar islands having been captured in 
that war, were restored to Great Britain at the 
peace of 1783 ; but it was America alone who 
derived advantage from the contest. As the 
French had engaged in the war without provoca- 
tion, so they retired from the field, not only with- 
out benefit, but with manifest loss. They con- 
tracted an enormous debt, to the payment of 
which their ordinary revenues were inadequate ; 
and to this circumstance, in co-operation with 
others, the ruin of their ancient government must 
be greatly attributed. 


BETWEEN THE YEARS 1793 AND 1814. 

Commencement of the War , 1793 — Capture of To- 
bago — Unsuccessful attempt against Martinique 
—Resolutions of the Ministry thereon — Capture 
of Martinique — Capture of St. Lucia — Capture 
of Guadaloupe , which completes the Conquest of 


the French West India Colonies — Reverse of 
Fortune — Mortality of the Troops — Arming of 
the Blacks and Mulattoes — Massacre of the 
French Loyalists — Events relating to St. Do- 
mingo , 1795 — Occupation by the French , 1801 — 
Expedition under Le Clerk , 1802 — Views of the 
French in acquiring St. Domingo — Their poli- 
cy explained , with regard to this and other 
Islands — Provincials rally under the Standard of 
Ferdinand — Assistance given by Major General 
Carmichael , leading to the Capture of the Spa- 
nish part , 1809 — Treaty of 1814. 

Upon the renewal of the war in 1793, the W. 
Indies became, as usual, the scene of military 
enterprize ; and Great Britain had the advan- 
tage (if an advantage it might be called) of 
making the first onset. On February 10, 1793, 
a few days only after notice had been received 
of the French declaration of war, directions were 
transmitted to Major General Cuyler, the com- 
mander in chief of the British troops in the 
Windward Islands, and to Sir John Laforey, 
who commanded in the naval department, to 
attempt the reduction of Tobago. As most of 
the proprietors in that island were English, it 
was supposed that an English armament would 
be favourably received by the inhabitants ; and 
the event justified this expectation. The island 
surrendered, without any great struggle, on the 
17th of April 

This was followed by an attack on Martinique ; 
an enterprise of great magnitude : for the labours 
and ingenuity of man had co-operated with the 
hand of nature, in rendering that island one of 
the strongest countries in the world. In 1759, it 
had successfully resisted a formidable British 
armament of 10 ships of the line, besides frigates 
and bomb ketches, having on board 5,800 regular 
troops ; and although the island surrendered 
three years afterwards, to a much superior force, 
yet the gallant and vigorous resistance which the 
garrison was enabled to make on that occasion, 
for upwards of three weeks, ought surely to have 
induced great caution and consideration, with 
regard to future expeditions against a country so 
amply provided, both by nature and art, with the 
means of defence. 

In the present conjuncture the whole of the 
British force in the Windward Islands, was known 
and allowed to be, of itself, vastly inadequate to 
the object in view ; but such representations had 
been spread throughout the army, concerning the 
disaffection of the greater part of the inhabitants 
of all the French islands towards the republican] 


WEST INDIES. 


■287 


[government, recently established on the ruins of 
their monarchy, as to create a very general be- 
lief, that the appearance of a British armament 
before the capital of Martinique would alone pro- 
duce an immediate surrender. General Bruce, 
on whom the chief command of the British troops 
had devolved in the interim, was indeed assured, 
by a deputation from the principal planters of the 
island, that “ a body of 800 regular troops, 
would be more than sufficient to overcome all 
possible resistance.” 

These representations (as the general himself 
informed the king’s ministers) induced him, in 
conjunction with Admiral Gardner, to undertake 
the expedition ; and the land forces having been 
embarked in the ships of war, the armament 
arrived off Cape Navire, June 11, 1793. On the 
16th the British troops, in number 1100, made 
good their landing ; and having been joined by a 
body of about 800 F rench royalists, took posses- 
sion of a very strong post within five miles of St. 
Pierre, it being the general’s intention to attack 
the two forts which defended that town. The 
plan, however, did not succeed ; and the causes 
of its failure may best be told in the general’s 
own words : u The morning of the 18th (he 
observes) was the time fixed for the attack, and 
we were to move forward in two columns, the 
one consisting of the British troops, the other of 
the French Royalists ; and for this purpose, the 
troops were put in motion before day break ; but 
unfortunately, some alarm having taken place 
amongst the royalists, they began, in a mistake, 
firing on one another, and their commander be- 
ing severely wounded on the occasion, his troops 
were disconcerted, and instantly retired to the 
post from which they marched. This conduct 
(continues the general) strongly proved that no 
dependance could be placed on the royalists, and 
that the attack against St. Pierre, must have been 
carried on solely by the British troops, to which 
their numbers were not equal. They were there- 
fore ordered to return to their former posts, from 
whence they re-embarked,” &amp;c. 

This is the whole, or nearly the whole, of what 
the British administration thought proper to fur- 
nish for the gratification of the public curiosity, 
concerning the conduct and failure of this unfor- 
tunate expedition ; and indeed it is sufficient to 
demonstrate, that the strong assurances which 
had been given, and the sanguine expectations 
which had been formed, of support and assistance 
from the greater part of the French inhabitants, 
consisting in the whole of upwards of 10,000 
whites, were not justified by the event. It re- 


flects, therefore, great honour on the liberal and 
humane disposition of the British commanders, 
that they did not suffer the disappointment, which 
they must have felt on this occasion, to operate 
to the disadvantage of those of the F rench plant- 
ers, by whom such assurances were held forth ; 
and who, though mistaken as to their country- 
men, manifested the sincerity of their own pro- 
fessions by their subsequent conduct. u As they 
would certainly have fallen victims,” observes 
General Bruce, “ to the implacable malignity of 
the republican party, as soon as we quitted the 
island, it became in a manner incumbent on us, 
in support of the national character, to use our 
utmost exertions to bring these unhappy people 
from the shore ; and although the necessity of 
impressing such vessels as could be found, and 
the purchasing provisions from the merchant 
vessels, will incur a great expense, I have never- 
theless ventured upon it, trusting for my justifi- 
cation to the generous and humane disposition 
exhibited by the British nation on similar occa- 
sions. We were therefore employed in embark- 
ing these people, from the 19th to the 21st,” 
&amp;c. &amp;c. 

Notwithstanding this discouraging account, 
the British ministers, on receiving intelligence of 
General Bruce’s miscarriage, considered them- 
selves imperiously called upon to vindicate the 
honour of the English arms, by enterprises of 
greater magnitude in the same quarter. They 
resolved to send thither, forthwith, such an ar- 
mament as, in addition to the British force already 
in the W. Indies, should be sufficient not only 
for the conquest of Martinique, but even u to dis- 
lodge the enemy from every one of their posses- 
sions in that part of the world such was their 
declaration. Every man who is acquainted with 
the relative situation of the French and British 
colonies in those islands, the condition of each, 
and their affinity to each other, will allow that, 
in this case, there was no medium, and that their 
determination was founded in sound policy. 

It must likewise be admitted, that the prepara- 
tions which the ministers caused to be made, in 
consequence of this determination, corresponded 
to the magnitude and extent of their views. 
Orders were issued for the immediate embarka- 
tion of 14 regiments of infantry, consisting of 
near 11,000 men; a fleet composed of four first- 
rate ships of war and nine frigates, besides sloops, 
bomb ketches, and transports, was appointed to 
convey them to the scene of action, and act in 
conjunction with them. And that no possible 
doubt might arise in the public mind, concerning] 


"283 


WEST INDIES. 


[the judicious application of this great armament 
to its proper object, the whole was placed tinder 
the direction of two of the most distinguished 
officers which any age or nation has produced ; 
the chief command being assigned to Sir Charles 
Grey, general of the land forces, and the naval 
department to Vice-admiral Sir John Jervis. 
Neither must it pass unobserved, in justice to the 
different public offices of this kingdom, that the 
whole was ready for its departure in less than 
three months after the receipt of General Bruce’s 
dispatches ; but by a subsequent order 4,600 
of the troops, that had been placed under the 
orders of the general, were deputed to another 
service. 

On the 26th of November, 1793, the armament, 
thus reduced, sailed from St. Helen’s ; and on 
January 6, 1794, the squadron cast anchor in 
Carlisle Bay, in the island of Barbadoes : it was 
afterwards reinforced by the Asia, of 64 guns, and 
some additional frigates. 

After a month’s stay at Barbadoes (an interval 
which was usefully employed in preparing gun- 
boats, in training the seamen for land service, and 
in attendance on the sick) the squadron sailed for 
the attack of Martinique ; having- on board, of 
land forces (including a detachment of negro dra- 
goons) 6,085 effective men. 

On Wednesday, February 5, 1794, the fleet 
approached the 5. e. coast of that island, and the 
general (having previously made the necessary 
arrangements with Sir John Jervis) divided the 
army into three detachments, with a view to land 
them at three separate and distinct quarters. 
These were G allion Bay on the n coast, Case de 
Navires, nearly opposite, on the s., and Trois 
Rivieres towards the .v. e. The first detachment 
was commanded by Major general Dundas, the 
second by Colonel Sir Charles Gordon, and the 
third by the general himself, assisted by Lieute- 
nant-General Prescott. The measure was well 
concerted ; for, by inducing the enemy to divide 
his force, it enabled the British to effect their 
landing, at each place, with very little loss. 

By the 16th, the army, after a succession of 
valiant conflicts, had arrived within two leagues 
of St. Pierre, from whence, at day-break, the 
enemy sent a flag, requiring three days to con- 
sider of a capitulation. The Major-General re- 
turned for answer, that instead of three days he 
would allow them only three hours ; and, leaving 
a company of grenadiers in possession of Belle- 
vieur, he immediately moved on towards St. 
Pierre. At this juncture, the detachment of the 
squadron arrived in the bay, and began their ope- 


rations. Colonel Symes, with the troops and 
seamen who were to land with him, had, previous 
to their entering the bay, embarked on board the 
Zebra and Nautilus sloops, which, drawing little 
water, could land them without difficulty. In 
the e"vening of the 16th, these vessels approached 
the n. part of the bay, the other men of war 
standing in to cover them from the fire of the 
enemy. Captain Hervey, in the Santa Marga- 
rita, perceiving the troops were likely to be much 
annoyed by two batteries with heated shot, 
steered close under the guns of the most consi- 
derable of them, and effectually silenced it. About 
four in the morning of the 17th, the troops made 
good their landing, and immediately advanced 
towards St. Pierre ; but the conflict was at an 
end, for the enemy seeing the British approach 
both by sea and by land, evacuated the town, 
leaving their colours flying, which were imme- 
diately hauled down, and the British colours 
placed in their room. By ten o’clock the whole 
of Colonel Symes’s detachment had marched into 
the town, and were soon afterwards joined by 
General Dundas and his army. 

No injury was done, nor outrage offered, to 
the inhabitants ; the women and children sat at 
their doors to see the soldiers march in, as peace- 
ably and cheerfully as the inhabitants of an En- 
glish village behold a regiment pass through 
their streets. One instance only occurred, an 
attempt to pillage ; for which the offender was 
immediately hung up by the Provost Marshal, at 
the gate of the Jesuits College. 

The town of St. Pierre being thus captured, 
and many important posts in different parts of 
the country already in possession of the British 
troops, it might have been supposed that the sur- 
render of the island was speedily to have followed; 
but so great was the natural and artificial strength 
of the country, and so obstinately was it defended 
on this occasion by the inhabitants, that much 
remained to be done before this event took place. 
The two great forts of Bourbon and Fort Royal 
(the former commanded by Rochambeau the go- 
vernor of ttie island), were still to be conquered ; 
and it was impossible closely to invest Fort Bour- 
bon, w ithout first possessing the heights of Surie 
or Sourier, a situation eminently strong and diffi- 
cult, and defended by a large body of the enemy, 
under the command of the mulatto General Bel- 
legarde. The commander-in chief therefore pro- 
posed to attack this post from his camp at Bru- 
neau, on the night of the 18th, and to depend for 
success solclv on a vigorous use of the bayonet; 
but, a few hours previous to the time he had fixed] 


WEST INDIES. 


289 


[for the enterprise, Bellegarde himself, with part 
of his troops, descended the heights, and attacked 
the general’s left. His intention was, if possible, 
to cut off the communication between the British 
army and navy. The attempt was bold, but it 
was ruinous. The general immediately perceived 
the advantage to be derived from it, and seized it 
in the moment ; for, directing Lieutenant-General 
Prescott to keep the enemy in check, he ordered 
from his right Lieutenant-Colonel Buckeridge, 
with the third battalion of grenadiers, and Lieu- 
tenant-Colonels Coote and Blundell, with the 
first and second battalions of light infantry, to 
attack Bellegarde’s camp on the left. In this 
service this detachment displayed such spirit and 
impetuosity as proved irresistible ; and posses- 
sion being taken of Bellegarde’s camp, his own 
cannon were turned against him. This unfortunate 
man and his second in command, with about 300 
of their followers, surrendered themselves to the 
general a few days afterwards, the two leaders 
desiring to be sent to N. America, on condition 
of never serving against his majesty; and in this 
request they were gratified. Their followers 
were sent on board the king’s ships as prisoners 
of war. 

From February 20, Forts Bourbon and Louis, 
with the town of Fort Royal, were completely 
invested, and the general was busily employed in 
erecting batteries on his first parallel. On March 
17, the general concerted measures with the ad- 
miral for a combined assault, by the naval and 
land forces, upon the fort and town of Fort Royal. 
Scaling ladders being provided, and the necessary 
arrangements settled, the ships destined for the 
service took their stations on the morning of 
March 20. The Asia and the Zebra sloop, with 
Captain Rogers and a body of seamen in flat 
boats, (the whole under the command of Com- 
modore Thompson) composed the naval force ; 
the land force consisted of the first battalion of 
grenadiers, the first and third light infantry, with 
the third grenadiers. 

The success of this expedition was owing to 
the gallantry of Captain Faulkner of the Zebra, 
who perceiving that he could not expect any as- 
sistance from the Asia, (a ship of the line) on 
account of the shoals, determined to undertake 
the service alone in his small sloop of 16 guns, 
and he executed this design with matchless intre- 
pidity and good conduct ; for running the Zebra 
close to the walls, and leaping overboard at the 
head of his sloop’s company, he scaled the ram- 
parts, and drove the enemy from the fort. “No 
language of mine (says Admiral Jervis) can ex- 

vol. v. 


press the merit of Captain Faulkner on this occa- 
sion ; but as every man in the army and squadron 
bears testimony to it, this incomparable action 
cannot fail of being recorded in the page of his- 
tory.” Colonel Symes, in the same triumphant 
moment, entered and took possession of the 
town. 

This signal success determined the fate of the 
island ; for General Rochambeau, perceiving that 
all was lost, immediately sent a flag from Fort 
Bourbon, offering to surrender on capitulation. 
The terms were accordingly adjusted on the 23d, 
and on the 23th, the garrison, reduced to 900 
men, marched out prisoners of war. To the gal- 
lantry with which this fortress was defended. 
General Grey bore an honourable testimony, by 
observing, that “ the British troops, on entering 
the place, could scarcely find an inch of ground 
which had not been touched by their shot or their 
shells.” 

Thus was achieved the conquest of Martinique, 
with the loss on the part of the British of 7 1 men 
killed, 193 wounded, and of three that were 
missing. 

Victory having thus far crowned the British 
arms, General Grey determined, without loss of 
time, to persevere in his career of glory ; where- 
fore, leaving five regiments under the command 
of General Prescott for the protection of Marti- 
nique, he and the brave admiral proceeded, on 
the morning of March 31, to the attack of St. 
Lucia. This island had not the means of a for- 
midable defence ; and on April 4, his Royal 
Highness Prince Edward, after a fatiguing march 
of 14 hours from the landing place, hoisted the 
British colours on its chief fortress Morne For- 
tune ; the garrison, consisting of 300 men, having 
surrendered on the same terms of capitulation as 
those that had been granted to General Rocham- 
beau. Ricard, the officer commanding in St. 
Lucia, desired and obtained permission, as Ro- 
chambeau had done before him, to embark for 
N. America ; but the garrisons of both, of St. 
Lucia and Martinique, were sent to France im- 
mediately on their surrender. 

After the completion of this service, General 
Grey, having left the sixth and ninth regiments, 
with detachments of artillery and engineers, as a 
garrison for St. Lucia, and appointed Sir Charles 
Gordon governor of that island, returned to Mar- 
tinique ; and the spirit of enterprise among the 
soldiers being thus kept alive and encouraged, 
the general turned his attention, in the next 
place, to the large and fertile colony of Guada- 
loupe.j 

p p 


290 


WEST INDIES. 


[It is necessary the reader should be apprized 
in this place, that Guadaloupe consists, in fact, 
of two islands, divided from each other by a nar- 
row arm of the sea, called La Riviere Salee, (Salt 
River) which is navigable for vessels of 50 tons ; 
the e. island, or division, being called Grande 
Terre, and the w. Basse Terre. Adjoining the 
former, is a small island called Desirade, and 
near to the latter a cluster of little islands called 
Les Saintes. At some distance from these, to- 
wards the e., is another island called Marie Ga- 
lante; all these were dependencies on Guada- 
loupe, and comprised in its government. 

On Tuesday, April 8, such of the troops as 
remained after the necessary garrisons for the 
conquered islands were formed, embarked in 
transports, and the fleet sailed from the Bay of 
Fort Royal. A detachment of the squadron hav- 
ing been sent, in the first place, to attack the 
little islands above mentioned, called Les Saintes, 
that service was executed with much spirit and 
gallantry by a party of seamen and marines; and 
about noon on the 10th, the Boyne and Veteran 
cast anchor in the Bay of Point a Petre, in the 
division of Grande Terre; a fresh wind and lee 
current preventing many of the transports from 
getting in until the day following. 

Without waiting however for the arrival of all 
the troops, the general effected the landing of a 
considerable detachment, with the addition of 500 
marines at Grosier Bay, at one o’clock in the 
morning of the 1 1th, under cover of the Winchel- 
sea man of war, the captain of which, Lord Vis- 
count Garlies, being the only person that was 
wounded on the occasion. “ He received a bad 
contusion (observes Admiral Jervis) from the fire 
of a battery against which he had placed his ship, 
in the good old way, within half musket shot.” 
The battery however was soon silenced, and, 
early on the morning of the 12th, the fort of La 
Fleur d’Epee was carried by assault, and the 
greatest part of the garrison put to the sword. 
Port St. Louis, the town of Point a Petre, and 
the new battery upon Islet a Cochon being after- 
wards abandoned, and the inhabitants flying in 
all directions, the possession of Grande Terre 
was complete. 

The reduction of Basse Terre was effected the 
21st of the same month ; for the strong post of 
Palmiste being carried by the gallantry of Prince 
Edward and Colonel Symes, and that of Houel- 
mont by Major-General Dundas, the French 
governor (Collot) immediately capitulated ; sur- 
rendering the whole of Guadaloupe and all its 
dependencies to the king of Great Britain, on the 


same terms that were allowed to Rochambeau at 
Martinique, and Ricard at Lucia. It is pleasing 
to add, that this conquest was happily effected 
with the loss, on the part of the British, of only 
17 men killed and about 50 wounded. 

This gallant and successful enterprise com- 
pleted the entire conquest of the French posses- 
sions in the W. Indian Islands; and the primary 
views and declarations of the British ministers 
were thus wonderfully realized by British energy 
and valour. Happy if the scene had shut at this 
period, and no envious cloud overcast the close 
of a campaign, the opening and progress of which 
had shone with so bright a lustre in the eyes of 
all Europe ! 

But now it was that the measure of reducing 
the army at the outset of the expedition began to 
manifest those unhappy consequences, which it 
was then predicted would ensue from it. In al- 
lotting garrisons for the security of the several 
islands which had surrendered, the deficiency of 
troops for that purpose was at once obvious and 
alarming. It was discovered that the mortality 
had been so great (more from sickness, the never- 
failing effect of extraordinary exertion in tropical 
climates, than the sword of the enemy) as to have 
reduced the ranks to nearly one half their ori- 
ginal numbers ; and of the troops which remained 
alive, a very large proportion were so worn down 
by unremitting fatigue, as to be rendered abso- 
lutely incapable of efficient service. Unfortu- 
nately the numerous enterprises in which the 
British forces were engaged, and especially the 
fatal, and never-enough to be lamented, attempt 
on St. Domingo, left it not in the power of the 
king’s ministers to send such a reinforcement to 
the Windward Islands as the occasion required. 

So early however as March 22, four regiments, 
consisting of 2,377 men, had sailed from Cork for 
Barbadoes. They were intended, indeed, for St. 
Domingo ; but authority was given to General 
Sir Charles Grey to detain two of them, if cir- 
cumstances should render it necessary, to serve 
under his own command in the Windward Islands. 

These regiments arrived at Barbadoes May 5, 
and the general detained the eight battalion 
companies of the 35th, one of the four regiments ; 
but, observing the extreme anxiety which the 
British minister expressed in his dispatches for 
prosecuting the enterprise against' St. Domingo, 
and trusting (as he writes) “ that effectual care 
would be taken at home to prevent the enemy, 
in the conquered islands, receiving assistance 
from Europe,” he replaced those battalion com- 
panies with eight flank companies from his own! 


WEST INDIES. 


291 


[army, which was thus rather diminished than 
augmented by the exchange. 

From this period the tide, which had hitherto 
flowed with so rapid and prosperous a current, 
began to run in a contrary direction. The sick- 
ness which had for some time prevailed in the 
army, was become exasperated to pestilence. 
The troops sunk under it in great numbers, and 
among its most distinguished victims was Major- 
General Dundas, the governor of Guadaloupe. 
On June 4, the commander-in-chief (being at 
that time with the admiral, inspecting the state of 
St. Christopher’s) received the melancholy ac- 
count of this gallant officer’s death ; and early on 
the morning of the 5th further intelligence ar- 
rived, which rendered his loss at that juncture 
doubly afflicting. This was nothing less than 
the very unexpected information that a French 
armament of considerable force was, at that mo- 
ment, off Point a Petre ! 

On receipt of this intelligence, the admiral 
made immediate sail for Guadaloupe, and arrived 
there on the afternoon of the 7th, and having put 
the commander-in-chief ashore at Basse Terre, 
he proceeded with the ships to Point a Petre ; 
but found that the enemy had not only made 
good their landing, but had also forced Fort Fleur 
d’Epee on the preceding day, and were actually 
in possession of the town, and the forts by which 
it was defended. They had likewise secured 
their shipping at safe anchorage in the harbour. 
It was now discovered that this armament, which 
had sailed from Rochfort April 25, consisted of 
two frigates, a corvette, two large ships armed 
en jlute , and two other vessels, having brought 
with them 1500 regular troops. 

The success of the French on this occasion 
was the more surprising, as there was at this 
time in Guadaloupe a larger proportion of Bri- 
tish troops than in either of the other conquered 
islands : it is asserted by a respectable author, 
the Rev. Cooper Willyams, chaplain to the 
Boyne, who collected his observations on the 
scene of action, that the progress of the enemy 
was greatly accelerated by the misconduct of 
several of the French royalists then in the fort, 
a party of whom (misinformed perhaps as to the 
real number of the invaders ) offered their ser- 
vices to sally on the besiegers, and marched out 
for that purpose, under the command of Captain 
M‘ Dowall of the 43d, but on approaching the 
enemy they were panic struck, and deserted to 
the town. Thirty of them only out of 140 re- 
turned to Fleur d’Epee with Captain M‘Dowall. 
The British merchants and sailors from the town 


of Point a Petre, had thrown themselves into 
this fort to co-operate with the garrison. This 
little band, under the command of Lieut. Colonel 
Drummond, of the 43d regiment, did all that 
gallant men could do ; twice they repulsed the as- 
sailants ; but the French royalists who remained 
in the fort, conceiving the vain hope of obtain- 
ing mercy for themselves by a surrender, insisted 
at length that the gates should be thrown open. 
This was no sooner done, than the enemy poured 
in from all sides, and the few surviving British 
soldiers (not more than 40 in number) were 
obliged to make the best retreat they could to 
Fort Louis. This place not being tenable after 
the loss of Fleur d’Epee, was soon abandoned by 
them, and they crossed over to Basse Terre. 

The commander in chief, the moment the 
strength of the enemy was ascertained, had 
transmitted orders to the commanders in the dif- 
ferent islands to send from thence whatever force 
could be spared ; and the legislature of St. Chris- 
topher, immediately on receiving notice of the 
enemy’s appearance, raised a considerable body 
of volunteers at the expense of the colony, and 
dispatched them, with great expedition, to co- 
operate in this important service. 

All the force that could be thus obtained, being 
at length collected at Basse Terre, detachments 
were landed on the side of Fort Fleur d’Epee, 
and many skirmishes took place with the enemy, 
between the 19th of June and the beginning of 
July, the particulars of which it is not neces- 
sary to relate. The weather was now become 
insupportably hot, and the tropical rains being 
already set in, the General determined to make 
an effort to finish the campaign at a blow. It 
was planned that a large body of troops, under 
Brigadier General Symes, should march during 
the night, and make themselves masters of Morne 
government, and the other commanding heights 
round the town of Point a Petre ; the General 
himself, at the head of the rest of his army re- 
maining in readiness on the heights of Mascot, 
to storm Fort Fleur d’Epee, on receiving a sig- 
nal from the brigadier : the failure of this enter- 
prize was a fatal circumstance ; and many ani- 
madversions having been made on the conduct of 
it, we shall recite the particulars in General 
Grey’s own words : £ On the evening of the 1st 
instant, Brigadier-General Symes marched from 
Morne Mascot with the 1st battalion of grena- 
diers, the 1st and 2d battalions of light infantry, 
and the 1st battalion of seamen commanded by 
Captain Robertson, to attack the town of Point 
a Petre before day-break on the 2d instant ; but] 


292 


WEST INDIES. 


[being misled by their guides, the troops entered 
the town at the part where they were most ex- 
posed to the enemy’s cannon and small arms, and 
where it was not possible to scale the walls of 
the fort ; in consequence of which, they suffered 
considerably from round and grape shot, toge- 
ther with small arms fired from the houses, &amp;c. 
and a retreat became unavoidable.’ 

The meditated attack on Fort Fleur d’Epee, 
being thus rendered abortive, and the British 
troops so reduced or debilitated as to be abso- 
lutely unfit for further exertion, (exposed as they 
were to the sun and the rains) it was resolved, at 
a consultation held on the 3d, between the com- 
mander in chief and the admiral, to relinquish all 
further attempts for the present on Grand Terre ; 
and to remove the artillery and stores, and to 
reinforce, with the troops, the posts in Basse 
Terre. This determination, dictated by a ne- 
cessity which left no alternative, was carried 
into effect, without loss, on the night of the 5th. 

‘ I now,’ said the General in his letter of the 
8th, c occupy, with my whole force, the ground 
between St. J ohn’s Point and Bay Mahault, and 
having erected batteries with 24 pounders, and 
mortar batteries, at Point Saron and Point St. 
John, opposite to the town of Point a Petre, 
my situation gives perfect security to Basse 
Terre.’ 

Many arrangements, however, were yet to be 
made for the maintenance of this position dur- 
ing the approaching hurricane months, and until 
a reinforcement should arrive from Great Bri- 
tain. These being at length completed, the 
General embarked on board the Boyne, and 
sailed for St. Pierre in the island of Martinique, 
where he established his head quarters, leaving 
Brigadier Graham to command in his absence at 
Basse Terre. 

The head-quarters of the British army in Gua- 
daloupe were at camp Berville, which was placed 
on commanding ground ; flanked by the sea on 
one side, and on the other by an impassable 
morass. About a mile on the rear was a narrow 
pass, by which alone the camp could be approach- 
ed, and in front was the river Sallee, on the fur- 
thermost banks of which stands the town of Point 
a Petre ; but the situation of this encampment, 
so favourable in other respects, proved to be, in 
the highest degree, unhealthful. The baneful 
effects of the climate at this season of the year 
were aggravated by putrid exhalations from the 
neighbouring swamps, and a dreadful mortality 
ensued among the troops. By the middle of Au- 
gust, the numbers on the sick list constituted the 


majority of the camp. During the month of 
September, the army was inadequate to the sup- 
ply of guards for the different batteries. Several 
companies could not produce a single man fit for 
duty ; and the 43d regiment could not even af- 
ford a corporal and three men, for the protection 
of their own camp in the night. 

In order, therefore, to keep up the appearance 
of force in front of the enemy, the different 
islands were completely drained of troops, and a 
body of French loyalists were selected to per- 
form military duty at the post of Gabarre; where 
they conducted themselves with much spirit and 
fidelity. 

The commissioner from the French convention, 
and afterwards commander in chief of the French 
troops in Guadaloupe, was Victor Hugues, a 
man not deficient either in courage or capacity, 
but notorious for his cruelty. Observing how 
severely his own troops, as well as the British, 
suffered from the climate, he conceived the pro- 
ject of arming in his service, as many blacks and 
mulattoes as he could collect. These men, inured 
to the climate, and having nothing to lose, 
flocked to his standard in great numbers, and 
were soon brought into some degree of order and 
discipline. With the co-operation of these auxilia- 
ries, apprized at the same time of the debilitated 
state of the British army, the French commis- 
sioner determined to attack the British camp at 
Berville. For this purpose, on Saturday, the 
26th of September, he embarked a large body of 
troops in small vessels, which passing the British 
ships of war unperceived, under cover of a dark 
night, made good their landing in two detach- 
ments; the one at Goyave, the other at Bay 
Mahault. The detachment which took posses- 
sion of the place last-mentioned, immediately 
marched to Gabarre, in the view of surrounding 
the French royalists stationed there, and it was 
with great difficulty that they escaped to Berville. 
The other detachment which had landed at 
Goyave, began its march to Petit Bourg. Lieut. 
Colonel Drummond, of the 43d regiment, with 
some convalescents from the hospital, and a 
party of royalists, advanced to meet them, but 
perceiving their great superiority, found it ad- 
visable to retreat ; and they took post at a battery 
upon the shore, called Point Bacchus, where 
however they were soon surrounded, and the 
whole party made prisoners. By the possession 
of this post, the enemy entirely cut off all com- 
munication between the British camp and ship- 
ping. They then proceeded to possess them- 
selves of the neighbouring heights, and formed aj 


WEST INDIES. 


293 


[junction with the other detachment which had 
landed at Bay Mahault : by this means the camp 
at Berville was completely invested by land ; its 
whole strength, including the sick and con- 
valescent, consisted of no more than 250 regular 
troops, and 300 hundred royalists. All that cou- 
rage, perseverance, and despair, could effect, 
was performed by the united exertions of this 
gallant band. In the first attack on the morning 
of the 29th, after a conflict of three hours, the 
Republicans were defeated with great loss. They 
were again repulsed in two subsequent attacks, 
on the 30th of the same month and the 4th of 
October. But their numbers continually increas- 
ing, and the manifest impossibility of opening a 
communication with the British fleet, depriving 
the garrison of all proper succour, General Gra- 
ham, on the representation of his officers, con- 
sented on the 6th of October to send a flag to the 
French commissioner, offering to capitulate. To- 
wards the British, the terms granted by the 
enemy were sufficiently liberal, but the condition 
demanded for the French royalists, that they 
should be treated as British subjects, was declared 
inadmissible ; all the favour that could be ob- 
tained for them, was the sanction of a covered 
boat, in which 25 of their officers escaped to the 
Boyne. The rest of the miserable royalists, up- 
wards of 300 in number, were left a sacrifice to 
the vengeance of their republican enemies. Find- 
ing themselves excluded from the capitulation, 
they solicited permission to endeavour to cut 
their way through the enemy, an attempt which 
must have ended only in the destruction both of 
themselves and the British. There was a faint 
hope entertained, however, that Victor Hugues 
( whose character was not at that time sufficiently 
developed) would relent on their surrender. In 
this expectation, however, these unfortunate 
people were cruelly disappointed, and their sad 
fate cannot be recorded without indignation and 
horror. The Republicans erected a guillotine, 
with which they struck off the heads of 50 of 
them in the short space of an hour. This mode 
of proceeding, however, proving too tedious for 
their impatient revenge ; the remainder of these 
unhappy men were fettered to each other, and 
placed on the brink of one of the trenches which 
they had so gallantly defended : the Republicans 
then drew up some of their undisciplined re- 
cruits in front, who firing an irregular volley at 
their miserable victims, killed some and wounded 
others ; leaving many, in all probability, un- 
touched : the weight however of the former 
dragged the rest into the ditch, where the living, 


the wounded, and the dead, shared the same 
grave ; the soil being instantly thrown in upon 
them. 

Thus was the whole of this fertile country 
(the single fortress of Matilda excepted) restored 
to the power of France, and placed under the 
domination of a revengeful and remorseless de- 
mocracy. General Prescott, who commanded 
the Matilda Fort, sustained a long and most 
harassing siege, from the 14th of October to the 
10tli of December. His conduct throughout, as 
well as that of the officers and men under his 
command, was above all praise. He maintained 
his position until the fort was no longer tenable, 
and having no other means of saving his reduced 
and exhausted garrison from the sword, he was 
obliged at length to abandon it by silent evacua- 
tion. Three line of battle ships had indeed ar- 
rived in the interim from Great Britain, but they 
came only to behold the triumph of the enemy. 
With this adverse stroke of fortune, closed the 
campaign of 1794 : its career for a while was 
glorious beyond example, and if the very un- 
happy measure of reducing the number of the 
troops at the outset had not taken effect, or if, 
as soon as the news of the capture of Martinique 
had reached England, a strong reinforcement 
had been sent to the scene of action, it cannot 
be doubted that Guadaloupe would not, with 
the other islands that followed its fate, have 
been forfeited by the English. 

It will here be necesssry to refer to the con- 
comitant events that were taking place at this pe- 
riod in St. Domingo. To enter on the details of 
the revolutions of the French part, were to bur- 
den the narrative with a recital of gloomy oc- 
currences, still fresh in the memories of most 
persons : and, indeed, a tolerably diffuse account 
of them have been already given under the arti- 
cle St. Domingo. 

In the year 1794, the British armies being en- 
tirely engaged in St. Domingo, succeeded, after 
severe struggles, in which they lost infinitely 
more by the climate than by war, in achieving the 
conquest of Port au Prince. This event, brought 
about by the skill and intrepidity of General 
Whyte, proved not less profitable than honourable 
to such of the officers and soldiers by whom it was 
effected, as lived to enjoy the fruits of their vic- 
tory ; for there were captured in the harbour, 22 
topsail vessels, fully laden with sugar, indigo, and 
coffee, of which 13 were from 3 to 500 hundred 
tons burthen, and the remaining 9 from 150 to 
300 tons, besides 7,000 tons of shipping in bal- 
last ; the value of all which, at a moderate com-J 


WEST INDIES. 


294 

putation, could not be far short of ^.400,000 
sterling. 

The island was, however, in too disturbed a 
state to induce the British government to follow 
up this success. Indeed they had rather cause 
for relinquishing it, owing to some defeats that 
almost immediately ensued, and from the in- 
creasing and irremediable mortality of the forces; 
but the formal renunciation of all their title to 
possession was not made till 1806. The French 
were not, however, so easily induced to relinquish 
the footing they had gained ; through their perse- 
verance the island was doomed to be the prey of 
deep intrigues and aggravated misfortunes. The 
value of the w. part of it was too well known 
not to make the possession of the whole an ob- 
ject of solicitation with a power less ambitious 
than France. The same grasping policy that dic- 
tated the stipulations of 1795, accompanied all 
the three changes that have given other names to 
that French government, without altering its 
entity or revolutionary and destructive system. 

The first public instance of their profound de- 
signs, was evinced in the exchange of Louisiana 
for the duchy of Parma, which at all times was 
in their power to regain. This measure was na- 
turally followed by that long concerted plan, so 
much dwelt upon by their best authors, and re- 
lished by their ministers, under the ancien regime, 
of depriving the Spaniards of Hispanola. 

As early as 1795 it was carried into execution, 
forming part of the disgraceful treaty made at 
Basle in Switzerland, which gave the minister 
Godoy the title of Prince of the Peace, and served 
to consolidate the empire and influence which he 
afterwards attained, and formed the first link of 
that fatal chain of events, which has since brought 
his country to her present awful state of anarchy 
and confusion. 

By this instrument of diplomatic intrigue and 
subtlety, Hispanola was made over unreservedly 
to France; the oldest subjects of the Spanish 
crown, in the w. world, were thus bartered, like 
so many sheep, and an island, not the capture of 
an enemy during war, and given up at its termi- 
nation, but one that had descended to them as a 
primitive right, and had formed the glory of the 
preceding monarchs, who saw it discovered and 
settled. When possession was given, in further 
aggravation of the Spanish natives, the transfer 
was received by Toussaint, at the head of the 
intrusive settlers of one division of the island, 
with whom the former had previously and gene- 
rously shared their territory ; in short, by a horde 
of emancipated slaves, to whom the French re- 


public had given equality, consistence, and 
power, and who now came to erect a new stand- 
ard on the spot consecrated by the labours and 
ashes of Columbus, and long revered as an ob- 
ject of national pride. 

In justice to the Dominican people it may be 
said, that none of the Spanish settlements pos- 
sess more of that amor patriae which ought to 
distinguish loyal subjects; they received the 
news as a thunderbolt, and the country pre- 
sented an universal scence of lamentation. 

The nuns, friars, and clergy, left their con- 
vents, churches, and abodes ; emigration became 
general, near one-third of the population went 
over to the Main, to Cuba, and to Puerto Rico, 
in search of their own laws, and their own 
flag. 

It was not, however, till the latter end of 1801 
that legal delivery was made to the representa- 
tive of the French nation, Toussaint L’Ouver- 
ture, who came with a considerable force, to 
repel the resistance he expected to meet on the 
part of the Spanish people ; which opposing 
spirit would have yet secured the country, had 
not Don Joachim Garcia, the then governor, 
refused arms, and counteracted every thing that 
could militate against the orders he had received 
from his master. The entry of the Black Ge- 
neral was not, however, marked by any act in- 
consistent with justice and decorum ; the pro- 
perty of individuals, and of the church, was re- 
spected. When he retired to his own govern- 
ment in the French part, his brother Paul was 
placed in command, and continued till January, 
1803. 

The government of France had scarcely signed 
the treaty of Amiens, when the expatriated plant- 
ers and traders to St. Domingo, to second their 
own views, set on foot plans, and devised means 
to turn into their wonted channel, the great re- 
sources of their settlements in this island. The 
ambitious consul of France, who at that time 
sought popularity, joined in the public voice; 
being well aware that inaction did not suit the 
restless and turbulent spirit of the French, and 
impressed with the sanguine assurance of suc- 
cess, he thought this a fit time to rid himself of 
many individuals whom he mistrusted, and of a 
part of his armies, who from being commanded 
by other more favourite officers, were not so 
much under his own individual controul as he 
could wish. 

The expedition at length sailed, in December, 
1802, the military amounting to 35,000 men, 
under the command of General Le Clerk, his] 


WEST INDIES. 


295 


[brother-in-law, accompanied by his sister and 
younger brother Jerome, to whom this conquest 
was intended as a schooling-. The shipping was 
under the guidance of Admiral Villaret, rendez- 
vousing in the Bay of Samana ; the branch of the 
armament intended to take possession of Santo 
Domingo, amounting, in military, to 700 men, 
under Kierversan, who was nominated governor, 
sailed round to the s. side, and anchoring in a 
small bay to windward, sent to sound the state of 
the town. 

Paul Toussaint, who was unprepared for this 
supercession by any instructions from his bro- 
ther, felt disposed to resist. But the Black gar- 
rison, being weak and scattered, and the num- 
bers of the invading force exaggerated, a Spanish 
party was formed, which, though disarmed of 
every weapon but their manchetes, in the night 
took possession, on a preconcerted plan with the 
shipping, of the yellow battery at the w. end of 
the ramparts, and covered the landing of the 
French. Thus was the city given up, with the 
loss of only three lives, the Blacks returned to 
their own lines, and the tricoloured flag was 
planted on its battlements, by the Whites. 

It is, however, foreign to our purpose to enter 
into any further particulars respecting this grand 
expedition to Haiti, which cost the Republic up- 
wards of 50,000 lives, and immense treasures, 
the recency of occurrences superseding the ne- 
cessity of further remarks. Suffice it to say, that 
it proved in every way abortive, and that, dis- 
graced as it was, by the most atrocious act of du- 
plicity to the great and unfortunate Toussaint, it 
has not failed to impress the natives with a very 
unfavourable impression of the sincerity of that 
regime. 4 

On the general defeat and evacuation of the 
French troops sent out under Le Clerk, General 
Ferrand, who had been left by Rochambeau in 
command of Monte Christi, with 200 men, with- 
drew to the city of Santo Domingo, formed a 
powerful party, dispossessed Kierversau, who 
was an older officer, and under the immediate no- 
mination of his government at home, shipped 
him away, and vested in himself the entire con- 
trol. This piece of usurpation, so much op- 
posed to strict discipline, and to the great de- 
ference expected from subalterns, was never ob- 
literated from the breast of his despotic ruler, 
until after his gallant defence of the capital 
against Dessalines, though his services were only 
then rewarded by the member’s cross of the 
Legion d’Honneui*, notwithstanding that his mi- 


litary rank comported to that of commandant of 
the same order. 

The definitive oi'ganization of this country 
was, by imperial decree, postponed until peace, 
and in the mean time Ferrand was made com- 
mander in chief and administrator general, which 
charge he held till the 7th of November, 1809, 
when he was defeated at Seibo by the Spaniax'ds, 
and obliged to fly, and finding himself hard 
pressed, his horse tii-ed, and unable to regain 
the gates of the capital, from which he was at a 
distance of 12 leagues, he shot himself with a 
pistol through the head, in order to avoid falling 
into the hands of the provincialists, whose me- 
rited vengeance he dreaded. 

The strong hold of Santo Domingo, on ac- 
count of its locality and territorial productions, 
which were eventually anticipated in its tenure, 
was considered as a rallying spot whenever the 
French should make advances on Haiti, or direct 
their views towards the more attractive shores of 
the Spanish main. They valued this fortress as 
a deposit for their heavy baggage, a secure means 
of supplying their armies with provisions, and 
in the mean time of directing their plans of 
espionage ; and from the year 1804 till the time 
of its capture, in consequence of the existing 
state of war, though five millions of livres were 
annually allowed, which, added to its local re- 
venue, defrayed the expense of the island, they 
considered it trivial, compai-ed with the projected 
advantages they hoped to realize. 

They saw that from among the frugal well- 
seasoned natives of Hispanola, they could ob- 
tain soldiers capable of bearing the fatigue and 
heat of the climate, of following the Haitian to 
his inmost recesses, of tracing him to the summit 
of a mountain, of ferreting him in the fastnesses 
of his retreat, and hunting him in the almost 
untrodden wild, for it was eai'ly evident that it 
formed part of the policy and plans of these peo- 
ple, to flee to the mountains, if their towns were 
attacked ; of this the French were well aware, 
and did not dislike it, since to them it gave the 
advantage of meeting their enemy collectively, 
in the interior, where the climate was best, a de- 
sii-able object, when once they had obtained the 
proper men, which the ground and mode of war- 
fare required. 

In order to form an army of 8,000 or 10,000 
men, qualified to fight their enemy in their own 
way, it only became necessary to provide officers 
and arms, so that as early as 1805, all those who 
had survived the disasters ofLe Clerk’s expedi-[ 


296 


WEST INDIES. 


[tion, and had fled to the neighbouring islands, 
were ordered to rendezvous and hold themselves 
in readiness in Santo Domingo, by which means, 
even at the time of the late capitulation, the 
officers, compared to the privates, were as one is 
to twelve. To give greater spread to that in- 
fluence which they wished to extend over the 
Spanish inhabitants of the country, French offi- 
cers were suffered and encouraged to intermarry 
with the natives, though refused all alliance with 
their own creoles. 

Notwithstanding that the cession of the island 
to the French, guaranteed the tenure of all pro- 
perty to its former holders, no sooner were they 
well established, than edicts were issued to in- 
vite the absentees to return, under threats of a 
general sequestration, and on the expiration of 
the time prescribed, the menace was carried into 
rigid execution. Near 500 of the houses, 
estates, and hatos, or pasture grounds with herds, 
were put on the cadastre of sequestration ; for, 
as we have already observed, the rich and power- 
ful had withdrawn, and the menace proclaimed, 
could not induce them to abandon their first pa- 
triotic resolves. By other decrees it became 
illegal for absentees to dispose of property by 
powers of attorney, or to draw any thing from 
their estates. These, together with the seques- 
trated houses, were let out to officers and fa- 
vourites, and the surplus of them by the public 
cryer annually ; the grazing grounds were de- 
populated and laid waste, the dwellings suffered 
to decay, the negroes sent to other islands to be 
sold, the church plate melted down, and the poor 
Spaniard bent under the rod of oppression. The 
emigrants were thus left to protract a miserable 
existence in other settlements, were declared out 
of the protection of the law, whilst many of 
their best families lived on the small pittance 
they could collect from charity. We may judge 
then of the feelings of this unhappy people, 
when, by the aid and protection of the British 
nation, they were restored to their country and 
estates ; and again saw themselves in possession 
of their long deserted homes. Te Deums were 
sung U the different towns of the Main, Puerto 
Rico, and Cuba, where the poor emigrants were 
collected, in commemoration of success, and the 
name of George the Third of England, was 
united to that of the presiding deity of conquest. 

The plans of the cabinet of Paris, respecting 
the W. Indies, were not altogether confined to 
that division of Hispanola, of which they gained 
possession. In the early stage of horrors and 


revolutions that devastated the part which the 
French originally held, the inhabitants fleeing 
from the sword of rebellion and vengeance, 
sought refuge in the neighbouring and opposite 
island of Cuba, and particularly centered in St. 
Jagoand Baracoa. Upwards of 40,000 whites, 
persons of colour, and negroes, were at length 
collected ; and, having been stripped of their 
wealth by their own revolted slaves, now aiming 
at independence, some of them turned their at- 
tention to the planting of coffee, and other 
branches of culture, and the rest to privateering 
and carrying on a predatory war in the island 
passages. Many rich vessels fell a prey to their 
activity, and fast sailing cruizers, even whole 
convoys have been distressed by them ; and 
amongst them their most valuable captures, were 
several guineamen. The slaves were sold to 
their own planters, who had often shares in the 
equipments. Their habitual industry soon 
changed the face of the country ; many were 
already in possession of 2 and 300 Blacks, which 
raised the country to a state of affluence, con- 
sistency, and power, which it had never before 
attained in the hands of the Spaniards. 

Though so well settled, they were ever rest- 
less and devising plots, and drew up in a body 
long memorials which were transmitted to the 
Emperor, soliciting that half of the island of 
Cuba, by a line drawn from Trinidad to Bara- 
coa, might be ceded and confirmed in the right 
of the French, together with the whole of Puerto 
Rico, where others of their settlers had also 
formed establishments. Active agents were sent 
to Paris, provided with funds raised from the 
subscriptions of both parties, who were directed 
to make the obtaining of this cession a common 
cause. That this project was relished by the 
French ministers is beyond doubt, but how far it 
was in reality followed up is uncertain ; yet on 
the authority of their agents, it was announced 
in the Bulletin of Santo Domingo, and several 
other official papers, that the cession had actually 
been agreed upon, and carried into effect by the 
two governments, and on the strength of it, fresh 
lands had been purchased. In this way did they 
seek to repay the hospitality of the Spaniards, 
who received them cordially in distress, and al- 
lowed them to buy lands and settle amongst 
them, though the French had often exposed the 
national honour of the island, by the excesses 
their privateers committed on their coasts. 

No sooner had the national wrongs of the 
Peninsula in Europe began to spread abroad in] 


WEST INDIES. 


‘297 


[Cuba, than the French took alarm at the pa- 
triotic feelings testified by the W. Indian Spa- 
niards, and fearing for their property and per- 
sonal safety, they assembled at Candelaria, near 
St. Jago, to oppose their being sent en masse from 
the island, armed their negroes, and prepared to 
deluge in blood, the country that had so lately 
received them witii open arms. Their plans 
were, however, discovered in time, their party 
proved weak, and they were obliged to quit the 
country in shame and disgrace, but under the 
most bitter imprecations of vengeance, most of 
them retiring to Louisiana. 

Seeing themselves thus obliged to leave this 
quarter, their first project was to form a lodge- 
ment on the n. side of Hispanola, and penetrate 
to the capital of Santo Domingo, which yet held 
out ; had they effected this, scenes of horror must 
have followed, and it might afterwards have cost 
many valuable lives to dispossess them. 

No sooner had the abdication of the King of 
Spain taken place at Bayonne, than Joseph, 
assuming his royal robes, sent out new constitu- 
tions, regulations, and orders, which, together 
with his own likeness, were purposely distributed 
round ; but being received at the Havannah, 
they were thrown down into the court-yard of 
the government-house, in presence of the Cabildo 
and officers assembled on the occasion, and there 
burnt by the public executioner, and the proceed- 
ings put on record ; an example that has since 
been followed in Mexico, and other provinces of 
the Spanish Main. 

As early as the month of October, the occur- 
rences in Spain began to be known in Hispanola, 
the provincials assembled in the e. end, under 
Don J uan Sanchez Ramerez, to assert the tram- 
pled rights of their beloved Ferdinand, and dis- 
lodge the standard of wrong and perfidy that yet in- 
sulted the country. Their first outset was crowned 
by the defeat of the French general, who sallied 
out against them ; the cause spread, and every 
sentiment was responsive to the feelings of their 
injured countrymen in Europe, in addition to 
their own local wrongs. But when they came 
regularly to attack, without arms, artillery, or 
officers, the walls of a fortified city, in which the 
French were now enclosed, the work could not 
go on ; the siege lingered from November to 
July, under accumulated horrors to the inhabi- 
tants. 

Such was the dreadful situation to which the 
Spanish natives of the city of Santo Domingo 
were reduced, the armies of their contending 
patriots, without the walls, dispirited, and unpro- 

VOL. IV. 


vided with necessaries, when the French were 
summoned to surrender by Captain Price Cumby, 
commanding his Britannic Majesty’s naval forces 
before that port ; and the refusal of the garrison 
was immediately communicated to the respective 
commanders in Jamaica. 

The commanders saw that if some more effec- 
tive measures were not adopted, England would 
lose the merit of all that aid and succour which 
had been already afforded the Spanish patriots, 
in a considerable and expensive armament sent 
up to their aid, and that in the event of the 
blockading squadron having to leave the grounds, 
the French would receive those succours for 
which they had sent to Europe, to the United 
States, and particularly to Cuba, according to 
previous arrangements. From these considera- 
tions Major-general Carmichael, commander of 
the land forces, calculated the fatal consequence 
that would result to the combined English and 
Spanish cause, and the vengeance that woidd be 
subsequently inflicted on the patriots of the island, 
were the enemy not dislodged. With the most 
laudable and humane zeal he resolved to espouse 
the cause, and his own letter to the Spanish ge- 
neral on arriving, will best explain his sentiments. 

(Copy.) 

D His Majesty’s Ship Lark, off Point Ahacoa, 

SlR, 17th June, 1809. 

“ I have the honour to acquaint your excel- 
lency that in consequence of a communication 
from Vice-admiral Rowley, commander in chief 
of his majesty’s naval forces, Jamaica, and having 
been made acquainted with a summons from 
Commodore Cumby, commander of his Britannic 
Majesty’s squadron off Santo Domingo to the 
commander in chief of the French forces, with 
General Barquier’s reply thereto ; I considered 
it my duty to adopt the most efficacious means 
of giving every aid in my power to the arms of 
his Catholic Majesty, Ferdinand the Seventh, by 
assisting your excellency in your zealous opera- 
tions, and to dispossess the French of the city of 
Santo Domingo, that it may be restored to its 
lawful sovereign. 

“ For this purpose I have thought proper to 
form a corps of artillery and infantry, who, in 
obeying the commands of their king, and main- 
taining the honour of the British nation, are in- 
spired with a fervent wish to co-operate by every 
means in their power, for the glorious cause of 
the Spanish patriots. 

u Being informed that the fortifications are 
very strong, and that the French in reliance upon] 

Q Q 


‘298 


WEST I 

[them, expect reinforcement and supplies, and 
that the army under your excellency’s command 
is not sufficiently furnished with artillery, it 
appeared to me a primary object, to have the 
means of opening an access to the enemy, and 
proving to the French the intrepid spirit that 
will ever animate troops, actuated by loyalty to 
their beloved sovereign, and real patriotism to 
their country. 

u Being so far advanced in his Majesty’s ship 
Lark, with a division of the troops that sailed on 
the 7th instant; I have the pleasure of making 
an early communication to your excellency, with 
an anxious hope, of a speedy interview, to concert 
measures for the entire expulsion of the French, 
in this quarter of the globe. 

I have the honour to be, &amp;c. 

(Signed) H. L. Carmichael, 

- Major-general, &amp;c. 

To his Excellency , General Sanchez Ramirez 

The expedition destined to go on this service, 
in all amounting to 1200 men, embarked about 
the 4th and 7th of June at Jamaica, but owing to 
adverse winds only part of the divisions arrived 
before the city on the 26th, and on the following- 
day the major general landed at Palenque, and 
proceeded with his confidential officers to recon- 
noitre the walls and fortifications, which he fully 
effected on the 29th. 

The major general then disposed a small body 
of Spaniards, so as to cut off all communication 
with fort St. Jerome, which is a strong hold 
situated two miles w. from the capital, on the 
main road. After reconnoitring all the works of 
the Spaniards, and viewing the resources of the 
country, he took post at the village of St. Carlos, 
expecting the British light infantry to join him, 
which from the inclemency of the weather, and 
swelling of the intervening rivers, was not effected 
till July 1. 

The French general in the mean time, applied 
to the British commander for a cessation of hos- 
tilities, which was refused ; and some prisoners 
having been taken in going to the French out- 
posts, with orders and public and private letters, 
it appeared, that the French had determined not 
to surrender as prisoners of war. The white 
flag was, however, kept flying, and another over- 
ture being made, the British general, as well to 
gain time, as to avoid the effusion of blood, which 
must have ensued in the storming of that place, 
the enmity of the exasperated Spanish peasantry 
particularly considered ; consented to the meet- 
ing of commissioners, but from the difficulty of 


NDIES. 

communicating with the navy, they did not assem- 
ble till J uly 3. 

The commissioners on the part of the French, 
declaring their determination and pointed in- 
structions, never to submit as prisoners of war, 
the major-general immediately broke off the ne- 
gociation, but required a communication with 
Commodore Cumby commanding the squadron, 
for the purpose of intimating the rupture, and 
concerting measures to receive supplies of men 
ordnance stores, and provisions, the overflowing 
of the river Haina, having completely obstructed 
all intercourse with the distant landing place of 
Palenque. 

On the 4th, a letter was received by the Eng- 
lish commander from the Spanish chief, express- 
ing his apprehensions from the severe commence- 
ment of the rainy season, respecting the diseases, 
that prevailed amongst the Spanish troops ; re- 
presenting the dangers that threatened the block- 
ading squadron from the approaching hurricane 
season of the year, on a coast destitute of shel- 
ter ; and intreating him to concede in some 
points of the conditions proposed to the French. 
The major-general, however, was resolved not to 
yield a single point derogatory to the English 
and Spanish interests ; but saw from existing 
circumstances, the necessity of bringing the affair 
to a speedy issue. 

There being now reason to believe, from various 
sources of information, that the object of the 
French garrison was to gain time, and obtain in- 
telligence by spies and emissaries among the 
Spaniards, of the number of British forces which 
had arrived ; the major-general peremptorily re- 
fused, on the part of the British, the admission 
of the propositions made by the French, and in 
expectation that hostilities would instantly com- 
mence, general dispositions both for defence and 
attack were made, which ultimately led to the 
siege and capture of the city. 

A capitulation at length being agreed upon, 
the forts of St. Jerome and Ozama, with the gate 
of Conde, were delivered up at 12 o’clock the 
next day, to the combined English and Spanish 
troops, and on the 11th of the same month, the 
French troops, consisting of 1200 effective men, 
evacuated the city, and laid down their arms as 
prisoners of war, to 528 British troops, with 
about 200 Spanish militia, exclusive of armed 
peasantry and blacks then before the walls. On 
taking possession it appeared that there were, 
besides 200 sick or convalescents, 300 militia, 
and above 400 armed inhabitants. On their 
walls were 115 serviceable guns, 42 of which] 


WEST INDIES. 


299 


[were brass, and in their magazines, a large supply 
of ordnance, engineer-stores, and ammunition, 
and 14 days provisions. It was ascertained, that in 
a council of war, previous to the surrender, a sor- 
tie and attack upon the British forces at St. Carlos 
was proposed, and overruled by one voice only. 

The expulsion of the French and subsequent 
evacuation of the English, was followed by a 
commercial treaty with the Spaniards, which 
placed the British on a footing with themselves. 

In the treaty entered into between Great 
Britain and France, of January 1814, those rela- 
tions seemed to have been strengthened and 
cemented by the noble and generous resolution of 
the two high contracting parties, to secure to 
Spain her possession and title in this island ; for, 
by the eighth article of that treaty it is agreed, by 
his most Christian Majesty, that the “ portion of 
St. Domingo , ceded to France by the treaty of 
Basle,” shall be restored “ in full right and 
sovereignty to his Catholic Majesty but, by the 
treaty of May of the same year, the whole island 
was restored to the Fi’ench crown. 

CHAP. III. 

Origin of Trade in the Antilles. — The British TV- 

Indies considered as Depots of Foreign Trade. 

— Navigation Acts.-— TV. India Free-Ports . — 

Ports of Commenced Enterprise. 

Origin of Trade in the Antilles. — It was as 
early as the year 1626 that ‘ there was a company 
(says FrogerJ erected for the American islands, 
and then they began to be peopled, and ships 
frequently sailed thither to trade for sugar, for 
which they paid ready money ; but after divers 
petty wars, there was a general peace made with 
the Indians in 1660, and they had St. Vincent 
and St. Domingo assigned them to retire to. The 
American Islands Company were of no longer 
duration than the year 1651, when they sold them 
to the Knights of Malta, and several other indi- 
viduals. They then came under the dominion of 
the French crown. Martinique having been 
established the residence of the General and So- 
vereign Courts of Judicature; whereupon were 
dependent St. Domingo, Guadaloupe, Granada, 
Marigalante, Santos, St. Croix, St. Lucia and 
Tobago.’ 

But what may be called a steady trade by the 
W. Indies to the Americas, was not engaged in 
by the British till after the restoration of Charles 
the Second, in 1660 ; and from its very com- 
mencement, the scheme of adventure hath chiefly 
been directed to the Spanish settlements, as 


offering the most advantageous market for British 
produce and manufacture, and the most valuable 
returns of exotic dyes, drugs, raw materials, live 
stock and bullion. 

British West Indies considered as Depots of 
Foreign Trade. — In order to facilitate the above 
course of trade, the British government hath 
most judiciously devised the erecting certain 
places and harbours of its W. India settlements 
into free ports, admitting, under certain restric- 
tions and regulations, a free entry and trade by 
foreign vessels. 

It was considered that masters and mariners 
coming from those countries which were to be 
supplied with European articles, of whatever 
description, could more readily procure and bring 
what was desirable for barter, and in payment ; 
and being better acquainted with the means of 
access, and channels of disposal on their return, 
might greatly extend the use and sale of British 
goods. 

The English merchantmen could in many cases 
merely hover over the creeks and inlets of an 
immense line of coast, which the natives might 
run into, for a retreat and safeguard for their car- 
goes, from aid of friends or accomplices, partners 
in their business, or dealers in their commodities ; 
for their business, on one side, was illicit, and 
strictly forbidden. 

The trade, however, connived at and encou- 
raged under the British Free-port Acts, ever 
has been, and is, a contraband trade in view of 
the Spanish government ; which enforces the 
system of colonial monopoly with an extraordi- 
nary jealousy, and rigour proportionate to the 
value of what it possesses, and to its intrinsic 
weakness for the conservation of it. 

The simple fact, that the government of Old 
Spain is in itself a principal merchant, or rather 
trading company, with Mew Spain, leads at once 
to an estimate of commerce carried on between 
the two parties, that of Europe in power, and 
that of S. America in subjection. The interme- 
diate, or private traders, whether licensed to 
share in the register ships or otherwise, or deal- 
ing in the interior country by agency, or under 
patronage, may be supposed to indemnify them- 
selves against exaction by extortion, and to 
aggravate oppressions on the industrious part of 
the community, who work to pay others beside 
themselves, and must sell as well as buy at the 
price of the monopolist. 

Nothing but absolute and vigilant power can 
bind the parties to such dealing and traffic : 
under such circumstances, there myst ever be al 
Q Q 2 


300 


WEST INDIES. 


[struggle to evade the oppression which cannot 
be resisted ; every native of New Spain must at 
heart be disloyal, and seek to elude the ordinances 
which enact the pillage of his industry, and the 
privation of what he requires ; show him in 
secret what will compensate his work, and fur- 
nish to his necessities — he is of course a smug- 
gler ! 

It is this description of people, possessing the 
means from a rich country, which has invited and 
supported a British trade. 

It is an error to suppose that, in any case, or 
under any compromise, the Spanish administra- 
tion allows of a trade with its American settle- 
ments by foreign nations. It hath, indeed, ad- 
mitted enumerated articles of necessity for work- 
ing its mines ; but with the utmost caution in 
excluding all others. When, at any former pe- 
riod, it hath relaxed in a small and fixed propor- 
tion, allowing miscellaneous imports, it was to 
cover and ensure the import which was indispen- 
sable ; but the exception hath depended upon, 
and ceased with the exigency. Its asiento treaty, 
of ancient date, hath long expired ; its dealing 
since for African slaves never admitted them as a 
passport for other commodities ; if any such pass- 
port article ever existed, it was, and is, quick- 
silver, so indispensable for separating the ore of 
Potosi, and other mines ; but this, also, hath 
been merely occasional, and a connivance rather 
than a regulation, unknown, and to be excused 
to the government at home, as a case of necessity, 
and in exception to its general sy stem and orders. 

The foreign trader can of course place no 
reliance on such instance of admission and traffic, 
proceeding, as it may have done, from circum- 
stances of necessity and policy, which were merely 
contingent, and may not operate in a future case. 

The course of this trade being, then, on the 
one side, illicit, and liable to check and preven- 
tion as occasionally discovered, it admits not of 
exposure as to its points of destination, its in- 
terior channels, and general means of success. 
With a view to British interests, it cannot be 
exhibited in detail ; and we contentourselves with 
pointing to the Spanish Main, and, in general 
terms, recommending this branch of W. India 
trade ; we merely call the attention of the British 
merchant to the wealth, population, and extent 
of country, he may have to deal with ; and to the 
extent of coast for his selection of adventure, 
where it may least be provided against and 
obstructed. 

Mr. Bryan Edw ards, in his first volume of the 
History of the W. Indies, gives a remarkable in- 


stance of the exposure of the details of trade be- 
tween the W. India free ports and the Spanish 
Main, and of the consequent loss to the British 
merchant, of much, or most, of that lucrative 
commerce. Mr. Edwards states, that the trade 
from England, via Jamaica, about the beginning 
of the last century, furnished the Spanish settle- 
ments yearly with £.1,500,000 value of British 
goods ; that subsequently, from the vigilance of 
the Spanish government, and its guarda costas, 
or from other causes, the trade w as on the de- 
cline ; but that it was yet considerable to the 
year 1764. To revive and encourage this trade, 
free ports were established at Jamaica, and other 
islands, in 1766 ; but unwarily, and unfortunately, 
an order of the British government followed, 
requiring of its officers at such ports, a return of 
entries of all Spanish and other foreign vessels, 
with accounts of their cargoes, to be made to 
ministers at home. These accounts, however 
officially marked private, yet passing through 
the hands of many clerks, were by some one be- 
trayed ; and Mr. Edwards was informed by a 
merchant of Carthagena, that, in fact, a copy 
reached the ministry at Madrid, who immediately 
dispatched orders to the governments in New 
Spain, directing the most exemplary and cruel 
punishment of tfie parties concerned in the traffic 
so exposed ; and enforcing greater vigilance of 
the guarda costas, and other measures of preven- 
tion, in future. 

The whole subject indeed, however important, 
is peculiarly delicate ; it admits merely of hints 
and intimations : contraband is a kind of com- 
mercial warfare, in which to publish the design 
of attack, is to suggest the means of defence and 
prevention. The institution of British free ports 
is, however, matter of notoriety, and their sta- 
tions may be severally considered as suitable or 
not, to the establishment. But before we proceed 
to the consideration of them, it w ill be our duty 
to enter into an analysis of the system of British 
navigation, up to the period of their establish- 
ment. 

Navigation Acts . — Of the commercial regula- 
tions of this kingdom, the memorable law which 
was passed in the 12th year of King Charles II. 
chap. 18, commonly called, by w ay of eminence, 
the Navigation Act, may be considered as the 
foundation. By this law it is, among other pro- 
visions, declared, 

First, That no goods or commodities should be 
imported into, or exported out of, any of his 
majesty’s plantations or territories in Asia, Africa, 
or America, but in ships belonging to the sub-] 


WEST INDIES. 


SOI 


[jects of England, Ireland, Wales, or Berwick, or 
in such as are of the built of, and belonging to, 
such plantations, and whereof three-fourths of 
the mariners and the master are English subjects, 
on pain of the forfeiture of ship and cargo ; and 
all admirals and commanders of king’s ships are 
authorized to make seizure of ships offending 
herein. 

Secondly, That no person born out of the alle- 
giance of his majesty, w ho is not naturalized, or 
made a free denizen, shall act as a merchant or 
factor in any of the said places, upon pain of for- 
feiting all his goods and chattels. 

Thirdly, That all governors, before they enter 
into the exercise of their office, shall take an oath 
to do their utmost, that the above-mentioned 
regulations shall be punctually and bona fide 
observed ; and a governor neglecting his duty 
therein, shall be removed from his government. 

Fourthly, That no goods or commodities what- 
ever of the growth or manufacture of Africa, 
Asia, and America, shall be imported into Eng- 
land, Ireland, Wales, Guernsey and Jersey, or 
Berwick, in any other ships but those belonging 
to the said places, or to the plantations, and navi- 
gated in the manner aforesaid, under penalty of 
forfeiting both ship and cargo. 

Fifthly, That no sugars, tobacco, cotton, in- 
digo, ginger, fustick, or other dying woods, of 
the production of any English plantation in Asia, 
Africa, or America, shall be exported therefrom 
to any place, except to some other English plan- 
tation ; or to England, Ireland, Wales, or Ber- 
wick. The above commodities being named in 
the act are called, generally enumerated, in con- 
tradistinction to all others of plantation growth ; 
and, 

Lastly, Bond security is required from all ships 
trading to or in the plantations, and lading on 
board such commodities, for the due observance 
of this part of the law. 

Such, together with the conditions under which 
foreign-built ships were to enjoy the privilege of 
English ships, are the chief restrictions and pro- 
visions of this celebrated statute, so far as they 
relate to the plantation trade, and they are ex- 
tended and strengthened by a law which passed 
three years afterwards, which the plantation go- 
vernors are also sworn to enforce ; for by the 
15th of Cha. II. c. 7. it is enacted, That no com- 
modity of the growth, production, or manufacture 
of Europe, shall be imported into the British 
plantations, but such as are laden and put on 
board in England, Wales, or Berwick; and in 
English-built shipping, (or ships taken as prize, 


and certified according to a former act) whereof 
the master and three-fourths of the mariners are 
English, and carried directly to the said planta- 
tions. There is an exception however as to salt 
for the fisheries of New England and Newfound- 
land, wines from Madeira and the Azores, and 
horses and victuals from Ireland and Scotland; 
and the preamble to the act, after stating that 
plantations are formed by citizens of the mother- 
country, assigns the motive for this restriction to 
be, a the maintaining a greater correspondence 
and kindness between the subjects at home and 
those in the plantations — keeping the colonies in 
a firmer dependance upon the mother-country, 
making them yet more beneficial and advantage- 
ous to it in the further employment and encrease 
of English shipping, vent of English manufactures 
and commodities ; rendering the navigation to 
and from them more safe and cheap, and making 
this kingdom a staple, not only of the commodi- 
ties of the plantations, but also of the commodi- 
ties of other countries and places for the supply 
of them, it being (continues the preamble) the 
usage of other nations to keep their plantation 
trade to themselves.” 

The design of this act, says Postlethwaite, was 
to make a double voyage necessary, where the 
colonies used any commodities of the growth and 
manufacture of Europe but British : for if they 
could not be shipped in Great Britain, they must 
first be brought thither from the places of their 
growth and manufacture, and Great Britain 
would consequently have the benefit, not only 
of that freight, but of as many ships and sailors 
as must be employed in bringing them from 
thence. It is remarkable, that by this act Ireland 
was indirectly deprived of the benefits allowed 
that kingdom by the act of navigation, for it is 
required, that none of the enumerated goods shall 
be carried from the plantations to any country 
or place whatsoever, until they have been first 
unladen and put ashore in some port or haven 
in England, Wales, or Berwick. By a subse- 
quent act this intention was avowed, and Ire- 
land was expressly shut out from a direct trade 
with the plantations. 

Ten years after this, another act passed (25th 
Cha. II. c. 7.) imposing duties on sugar and other 
commodities exported from one colony to an- 
other, and the following is assigned as the rea- 
son : “ that the inhabitants of some of the said 
colonies, not content with being supplied with 
those commodities for their own use, free from 
all customs, had, contrary to law, exported con- 
siderable quantities to divers parts of Europe,] 


302 


WEST INDIES. 


[and did likewise vend great quantities to the 
shipping of other nations, to the great injury of 
the trade and navigation of the parent state.” — 
For the prevention of this inconvenience in fu- 
ture, the duties in question are laid on the ex- 
port of those commodities from the plantations ; 
unless security be given to transport them di- 
rectly to England, Berwick, or Wales. The du- 
ties were the same as were then paid in Eng- 
land on most of those commodities imported for 
home consumption. Those upon sugar were, for 
white sugar, 5s. and Muscavado, Is. 6d. per cwt. ; 
tobacco, Id. cotton-wool, \d. indigo, 2d. cacao , 
Id. per lb.; logwood, £5. ginger, Is. the cwt.; 
fustick, &amp;c. 6d. 

This act was soon found to require explana- 
tion and amendment ; for the payment of the 
aforesaid duties having been considered in the 
colonies as an exoneration from giving security 
not to go to any foreign market in Europe ; it 
was provided by the 7th and 8th W. III. c. 22. 
that, notwithstanding the payment of the duties 
in question, the same security should be given as 
was required by former acts ; and it was enacted 
and declared, that no commodities of the growth 
or manufacture of the plantations, should, on 
any pretence whatsoever, be landed in Ireland or 
Scotland, unless the same were first landed in 
England, and had paid the rates and duties 
wherewith they were there chargeable by law. 

By the same act it is declared, that no goods 
or merchandise whatever shall be imported into, 
or exported out of, any British colony or planta- 
tion, but in ships built in England, Ireland, or 
the plantations, wholly owned by English sub- 
jects, and navigated as before ; and provisions are 
established concerning the registering of ships, 
to prevent the fraud of passing foreign-built 
ships as English ; together with various regula- 
tions to prevent counterfeit certificates, and frauds 
in the import and export to and from the colo- 
nies ; for all which, reference must be made to 
the act at large, which is systematic and compre- 
hensive in a high degree. 

These acts therefore, and some intermediate 
ones, which it is not necessary to particularise, 
may be considered as supplemental to the navi- 
gation act, and they form altogether the founda- 
tion of our colonial code ; most of the subsequent 
acts now in force, being framed in the same 
spirit, and intended to enforce and strengthen 
the system ; with some few alterations and excep- 
tions only, which however do not extend to any 
great and substantial change in the principle or 
groundwork. 


It may be, however, necessary to quote the 
chief additions, alterations, and exceptions, so 
far as the British sugar islands are principally 
concerned. 

By statute 3 and 4 Ann, c 5. rice and melasses 
were put into the enumeration, and by c. 8. Irish 
linens, laden in Ireland in English built shipping, 
navigated according to law, were admitted into 
the plantations. 

By 7 Ann, c. 8. Jesuits bark, and all other 
drugs, are permitted to be imported into Great 
Britain from the British plantations, on payment 
of the same duties as if imported directly from 
the place of their growth. 

By 13 Geo. I. c. 15. and 7 Geo. II. c. 18. 
cochineal and indigo were allowed for a certain 
time to be imported from any port or place, in 
British or other ships ; which acts were after- 
wards renewed, and are now in force. 

By 3 Geo. II. c. 28. rice was permitted, under 
certain conditions, to be carried from S. Carolina 
to any port of Europe s. of Cape Finisterre ; a pri- 
vilege afterwards extended to N. Carolina and 
Georgia. 

By 4 Geo. II. c. 15. non-enumerated goods, 
(viz. goods not enumei’ated in the 12th of Cha. II. 
c. 18.) are admitted to be imported directly into 
Ireland from the colonies, notwithstanding the 
7 and 8 of W. III. c. 22. Hops, by a subsequent 
statute, are excepted out of this indulgence. 

By 12 Geo. II. c. 30. sugars, under cetain re- 
gulations and restrictions, are permitted to be 
carried immediately from the British plantations 
to any port or place s. of Cape Finisterre, and 
also to any foreign port of Europe in licensed 
ships, which are to call first at some port in Great 
Britain. This was considered as a great indul- 
gence, but the conditions and regulations on 
which it was granted were so strict and nume- 
rous, as to defeat in a great measure the intention 
of the legislature. 

By 4 and 5 Geo. III. sect. 27. British planta- 
tion coffee, pieinento , and cacao nuts are put into 
the enumeration ; as are likewise whale- fins, raw 
silk, hides, and skins, pot and pearl ashes ; and 
by sect. 28. security is required that no iron, 
nor any sort of wood called lumber, the growth, 
production, or manufacture of any British colony 
or plantation, shall be landed in any port of Eu- 
rope except Great Britain; an exception however 
was afterwards made by 5 Geo. III. c. 45. by 
which iron might be carried to Ireland, and lum- 
ber to Madeira, the Azores, or any part of Eu- 
rope s. of Cape Finisterre. 

By 5 Geo. III. c. 39. bond is required to be] 


WEST INDIES. 


303 


[given in the British plantations, that no rum or 
other spirits shall be landed in the Isle of Man ; 
and by the 6 Geo. III. c. 52. security is required 
for all non -enumerated goods, that the same shall 
not be landed at any port of Europe to the n. of 
Cape Finisterre, except in Great Britain, and (by 
a subsequent law) Ireland. 

By 5 Geo. III. c. 52. any sort of cotton wool 
may be imported in British-built ships from any 
country or place, duty free. 

By the 6 Geo. III. c.49. was established the 
measure of opening free ports in Jamaica and 
Dominica. By this act, live cattle, and all man- 
ner of goods and commodities whatsoever (ex- 
cept tobacco J, the produce of any foreign colony 
in America, might be imported into Prince Ru- 
pert’s Bay and Rosseau in Dominica, and into 
Kingston, Savanna-la-Mar, Montego Bay, and 
Santa Lucia in J amaica, from any foreign colony 
or plantation in America, in any foreign sloop, 
schooner, or other vessel, not having more than 
one deck. This act was temporary, but was af- 
terwards continued, until materially altered by 
the 27 Geo. III. c. 27. wherein, among sundry 
other regulations, two more ports are opened in 
addition to the former, viz. St. George, in the 
island of Grenada, and the port of Nassau, in the 
island of New Providence, one of the Bahamas, 
into which cotton wool, indigo, cochineal, drugs 
of all kinds, cacao , logwood, fustick, and other 
dye woods, hides, and tallow, beaver, and all 
sort of furs, tortoise-shell, mill timber, maho- 
gany, &amp;c. horses, asses, mules, and cattle, being 
the growth or production of any colony or plan- 
tation in America, belonging to or under the do- 
minion of any foreign European sovereign or 
state, and all coin and bullion, &amp;c. may be im- 
ported in any foreign sloop, schooner, or other 
vessel, not having more than one deck, and not 
exceeding the burthen of 70 tons, and provided 
also that such vessel is owned and navigated by 
the subjects of some foreign European sovereign 
or state. It is permitted also to the same de- 
scription of persons and vessels to export from 
these parts British plantation rum, Negroes, and 
all manner of goods that had been legally im- 
ported, except naval stores and iron. The fo- 
reign articles thus permitted to be brought into 
the free ports by this act, may be exported again 
to Great Britain or Ireland ; and bv a subsequent 
law (30 Geo. III. c. 29.) the restriction in re- 
gard to the tonnage of foreign vessels is taken 
off, but these vessels are still limited to one deck. 

The next great measure was, the opening the 
plantation trade to the people of Ireland, which 


was first partially done by the 18 Geo. III. c.55. 
and more fully by the 20 Geo. III. c. 10. under 
which they enjoy the like unlimited intercourse 
with the colonies, both in respect of import and 
export, as Great Britain; on condition only that 
the goods so imported and exported are made 
liable to equal duties and drawbacks, and subject 
to the same securities, regulations, and restric- 
tions as in Great Britain ; a condition to which 
the parliament of Ireland consented, by passing 
an act imposing duties on the imports, conform- 
able to those of Great Britain. 

The next and most important treaty of com- 
merce and navigation with these islands was that 
of the American Intercourse Bill, which was 
brought in by the Right Hon. William Pitt, 
Chancellor of the Exchequer, March 1783. 

u A Bill for the provisional establishment and 
regulation of trade and intercourse between 
the subjects of Great Britain and those of 
the United States of North America. 

“ Whereas the following 13 provinces of N. 
America, namely, New Hampshire, Massachu- 
setts Bay, Rhode Island, and Providence Plan- 
tations, Connecticut, New York, New Jersey, 
N. Carolina, Delaware, Maryland, Virginia, 
Pennsylvania, S. Carolina, and Georgia, have 
lately been solemnly acknowledged by his Ma- 
jesty to be, and now are, free, independent, and 
sovereign States, by the name and description of 
the United States of America : 

u Be it therefore enacted and declared by the 
King’s Most Excellent Majesty, by and with the 
advice and consent of the Lords Spiritual and 
Temporal, and Commons, in this present Parlia- 
ment assembled, and by the authority of the 
same, that all statutes heretofore made to regu- 
late the trade and commerce between Great Bri- 
tain and the British Plantations in America, or 
to prohibit any intercourse and commerce be- 
tween Great Britain and the territories now 
composing the said United States of America, 
wholly and absolutely cease : 

“ And whereas, whilst the aforesaid 13 pro- 
vinces were annexed to and constituted a part 
of the dominions of Great Britain, the inhabitants 
of the said provinces enjoyed all rights, fran- 
chises, privileges, and benefits of British subjects 
born in Great Britain, as well in respect to the 
trade and commerce with Great Britain as in 
other instances ; and in consequence thereof the 
ships and vessels of the said inhabitants, being 
navigated in like manner as British ships and 
vessels are by law directed to be navigated, were] 


304 


WEST INDIES. 


[admitted into the ports of Great Britain, with 
all the privileges and advantages of British-built 
ships : 

“ And whereas, by the several laws now exist- 
ing for regulation of the trade and commerce of 
Great Britain with foreign States, the subjects of 
the latter are, as aliens, liable to various com- 
mercial restrictions, and also to various duties 
and customs at the ports of Great Britain, which 
hitherto have not been applicable to, or demand- 
able from, the inhabitants of the several pro- 
vinces now composing the said United States of 
America : 

“ And whereas it is highly expedient that the 
intercourse between Great Britain and the said 
United States should be established on the most 
enlarged principles of reciprocal benefit to both 
countries; but, from the distance between Great 
Britain and America, it must be a considerable 
time before any convention or treaty for esta- 
blishing and regulating the trade and intercourse 
between Great Britain and the said United States 
of America, upon a permanent foundation, can 
be concluded : 

“ Now, for the purpose of making a temporary 
regulation of the commerce and intercourse be- 
tween Great Britain and the said United States 
of America, and in order to evince the disposi- 
tion of Great Britain to be on terms of the most 
perfect amity with the said United States of Ame- 
rica, and in confidence of a like friendly disposi- 
tion on the part of the said United States towards 
Great Britain ; Be it further enacted, That from 
and after the the ships 

and vessels of the subjects and citizens of the said 
United States of America, with the merchandises 
and goods on board the same, shall be admitted 
into all the ports of Great Britain in the same 
manner as the ships and vessels of the subjects 
of other independent sovereign States ; but the 
merchandises and goods on board such ships or 
vessels of the subjects or citizens of the said 
United States, being of the growth, produce, or 
manufacture of the said United States, shall be 
liable to the same duties and charges only, as the 
same merchandises and goods would be subject 
to, if they were the property of British subjects, 
and imported in British built ships or vessels, na- 
vigated by British natural-born subjects. 

“ And be it further enacted, That during the 
time aforesaid, the ships and vessels of the sub- 
jects and citizens of the said United States, shall 
}je admitted into the ports of his Majesty’s islands, 
colonies, or plantations, in America, with any 
merchandises or goods of the growth, produce, or 


manufacture, of the territories of the aforesaid 
United States, with liberty to export from his 
said Majesty’s islands, colonies, or plantations in 
America, to the said territories of the said United 
States, any merchandises or goods whatsoever ; 
and such merchandises and goods, which shall be 
so imported into, or exported from, the said Bri- 
tish islands, colonies, or plantations, in America, 
shall be liable to the same duties and charges 
only, as the same merchandises and goods would 
be subject to, if they were the property of British 
natural-born subjects, and imported or exported 
in British-built ships or vessels, navigated by- 
British seamen. 

“ And be it further enacted, That during all 
the time herein-before limited, there shall be the 
same drawbacks, exemptions, and bounties, on 
merchandises and goods exported from Great 
Britain into the territories of the said United 
States of America, as are allowed in the case of 
exportation to the islands, plantations, or colo- 
nies, now remaining, or belonging to the crown 
of Great Britain, in America. 

“ And be it further enacted, That all ships 
and vessels belonging to any of the citizens or 
subjects of the said United States of America, 
which shall have come into any port of Great 
Britain since the together 

with the goods and merchandises on board the 
same ships and vessels, shall have the full benefit 
of this act.” 

The terms of this intercourse of temporising, 
but necessitous, policy, were soon abrogated by 
the 28 Geo. III. c. 6. which took effect the 4th 
of April 1788, whereby it is enacted, “ That no 
goods or commodities whatever shall be imported 
or brought from any of the territories belonging 
to the United States of America, into any of his 
Majesty’s W. India islands (in which descrip- 
tion the Bahama Islands, and the Bermuda, or 
Somers Islands, are included) under the penalty 
of the forfeiture thereof, and also of the ship or 
vessel in which the same shall be imported or 
brought, together with all her guns, furniture, 
ammunition, tackle, and apparel ; except tobacco, 
pitch, tar, turpentine, hemp, flax, masts, yards, 
bowsprits, staves, heading, boards, timber, shin- 
gles, and lumber of any sort ; horses, neat cattle, 
sheep, hogs, poultry, and live stock of any sort; 
bread, biscuit, flour, pease, beans, potatoes, wheat, 
rice, oats, barley, and grain of any sort, such 
commodities, respectively, being the growth or 
production of any of the territories of the said 
United States of America : And that none of the 
goods or commodities herein before excepted,] 


WEST INDIES. 


renumerated, and described, shall be imported or 
brought into any of the said islands from the ter- 
ritones of the said United States, under the like 
penalty of the forfeiture thereof, and also of the 
ship or vessel in which the same shall be so im- 
ported or brought, together with all her guns, 
furniture, ammunition, tackle, and apparel, ex- 
cept by British subjects, and in British-built 
ships, owned by his Majesty’s subjects, and na- 
vigated according to law.” By another clause, 
“ none of the aforesaid articles are to be brought 
from any of the foreign islands, under the like 
penalty, except in times of public emergency and 
distress, when the governors of any of our islands, 
with the advice and consent of the council, may 
authorise the importation of them by British sub- 
jects in British-built ships for a limited time.” 
Such was the law as it then stood with regard to 
the import of American articles into the British 
West Indies. — Concerning the export of British 
West Indian produce to the United States, it was 
permitted to export, in ships British-built and 
owned, any goods or commodities whatsoever, 
which were not, at the time of passing the act, 
prohibited to be exported to any foreign country 
in Europe, and also sugar, melasses, coffee, cocoa- 
nuts, ginger, and piemento; bond being given 
for the due landing of the same in the United 
States. 

It was not till the year 1796, that Great Bri- 
tain consented to give up any of her carrying 
trade to and from these islands. This privilege 
was first partially ceded to the United States by 
the treaty of amity, commerce, and navigation, 
concluded at London, November 19, 1794, and 
finally ratified by the American house of repre- 
sentatives on April SO, 1796. — Article XII. of 
that treaty is expressed in the words following : 
“ His Majesty consents, that it shall and may be 
lawful, during the time hereinafter limited, for 
the citizens of the United States to carry to any 
of his Majesty’s islands and ports in the West 
Indies from the United States, in their own ves- 
sels, not being above the burthen of 70 tons, any 
goods or merchandises, being of the growth, ma- 
nufacture, or produce of the said States, which it 
is or may be lawful to carry to the said islands 
or ports from the said States in British vessels ; 
and that the said American vessels shall be sub- 
ject there to no other or higher tonnage duties or 
charges than shall be payable by British vessels 
in the ports of the United States ; and that the 
cargoes of the said American vessels shall be sub- 
ject there to no other or higher duties or charges 
than shall be payable on the like articles if im- 
vql. v. 


305 

ported there from the said States in British 

vessels. 

u And his Majesty also consents, that it shall 
be lawful for the said American citizens to pur- 
chase, load, and carry away in their said vessels, 
to the United States, from the said islands and 
ports, all such articles, being of the growth, ma- 
nufacture, or produce of the said islands, as may 
now by law be carried from thence to the said 
States in British vessels, and subject only to the 
same duties and charges on exportation to which 
British vessels and their cargoes are or shall be 
subject in similar circumstances. 

“ Provided always, that the said American 
vessels do carry and land their cargoes in the 
United States only; it being expressly agreed 
and declared, that, during the continuance of this 
Article, the United States will prohibit and re- 
strain the carrying any melasses, sugar, coffee, 
cocoa, or cotton, in American vessels, either from 
his Majesty’s islands or from the United States, 
to any part of the world, except the United 
States, reasonable sea-stores excepted. 

“ Provided also, that it shall and may be law- 
ful, during the same period, for British vessels 
to import from the said islands into the United 
States, and to export from the United States to 
the said islands, all articles whatever, being of 
the growth, produce, or manufacture of the said 
islands, or of the United States respectively, 
which now may by the laws of the said States be 
so imported and exported ; and that the cargoes 
of the said British vessels shall be subject to no 
other or higher duties or charges, than shall be 
payable on the same articles if so imported or ex- 
ported in American vessels. 

“ It is agreed that this Article, and every mat- 
ter and thing therein contained, shall continue to 
be in force during the continuance of the war in 
which his Majesty is now engaged ; and also for 
two years from and after the day of the signature 
of the preliminary or other articles of peace by 
which the same may be terminated. 

“ And it is further agreed, that at the expira- 
tion of the said term, the two contracting parties 
will endeavour further to regulate their com- 
merce in this respect, according to the situation 
in which his Majesty may then find himself with 
respect to the West Indies, and with a view to 
such arrangements as may best conduce to the 
mutual advantage and extension of commerce.” 

It will be thus found from the above outlines, 
that this British system of navigation embraces 
two distinct objects ; first, the augmentation 
of its naval strength, by an entire exclusion of] 
n, n 


306 


WEST INDIES. 


[foreign shipping from the plantation trade, (and 
which, with the small exception last mentioned, 
she has invariably effected); secondly, the secur- 
ing to herself all the emoluments arising from 
her colonies, by a double monopoly over them : 
viz. a monopoly of their whole import, which is 
to be altogether from Great Britain ; and a mo- 
nopoly of all their export, which (as far as it can 
serve any useful purpose to the mother-country) 
is to be no where but to Great Britain. On the 
same idea, it was contrived that they should send 
all their products to her, raw and in their first 
state ; and that they should take every thing from 
her in the last stage of manufacture. 

West India Free Ports. — The act of the 45th 
George III. c. 57. enumerates and consolidates 
the several acts for the institution of free ports in 
the British West Indies : it incites — the 6th 
Geo. III. c. 49. establishing free ports at Do- 
minica and Jamaica, for a limited period ; the 
I3th Geo. III. c. 73. and the 14th Geo. III. c. 4. 
continuing the acts of 6th Geo. III. in force to 
the year 1780 ; the 21st Geo, III. c. 29. leaving 
the privilege of Dominica, as expired, but con- 
tinuing the free ports of Jamaica to 1787 ; the 
27th Geo. III. c. 27. continuing the privilege to 
Jamaica, reviving it for Dominica, under greater 
restrictions, and further extending it to the ports 
of Nassau in the Bahamas, and to George Town 
in Grenada; the 33d Geo. III. c. 50. adding the 
port of St. John’s in Antigua; and the 42d 
Geo. III. c. 102. making a free port of Road 
Harbour in Tortola. 

The 45th Geo. III. c. 57. is entitled, “ An 
act to consolidate and extend the several laws 
for allowing the importation and exportation of 
certain goods and merchandise into and from cer- 
tain ports in the West Indies.” It enacts, “ that 
wool, cotton-wool, indigo, cochineal, drugs of all 
kinds, cocoa, logwood, fustic, and all woods for 
dyers’ use, hides, skins, tallow, beavers, furs, 
tortoise-shell, hard woods, mahogany, and all 
cabinet woods, horses, asses, mules, and cattle, 
being the growth or produce of any of the colo- 
nies or plantations in America, or of any country 
on the continent of America, under the dominion 
of any foreign European sovereign or state ; and 
that all coin and bullion, diamonds and precious 
stones, may be imported into the 

Ports of Islands of 

Roseau, - - - Dominica. 

Kingston, - - - 5 

Savannah, - - &gt; Jamaica. 

Santa Lucia, - - I 


Ports of 
Montego Bay, 
Port Antonio, 
Nassau, - - 

Pitt’s Town, - 
Principal Port, 
George’s Town, 
St. John’s, 

Road Harbour, 
Kingston, 

St. Josef, - - 
Scarborough, 




Islands of 

Jamaica. 

New Providence. 
Crooked Isle. 
Bermuda. 
Grenada. 
Antigua. 

Tortola. 

St. Vincent. 
Trinidad. 
Tobago. 


And the above enumerated articles are to be im- 
ported in any foreign sloop, schooner, or other 


vessel not 


having 


more than one deck, bein« 


owned and navigated by persons inhabiting any 
of the said colonies or country of America, any 
law, usage, or custom to the contrary, notwith- 
standing. 

By section 2, tobacco, under certain regula- 
tions, is added to the articles allowed for im- 
port. 

By sect. 7, foreign sugars and coffees may be 
imported to Nassau in the Bahamas. 

By sect. 7, other articles imported than those 
enumerated, or in other vessels than as described, 
incur forfeiture of ship and cargo 

By sect. 8, an export of rum from the above 
free ports is allowed, and of negroes brought in 
British ships from Africa ; and of all goods le- 
gally imported, that is, from Great Britain, or 
British American colonies, with exception to 
masts, yards, bowsprits, pitch, tar, turpentine, 
and iron : but no export can be made to a Bri- 
tish island or settlement, unless that of live cat- 
tle ; for, 

By sect. 9, the enumerated articles, as im- 
ported, are restricted in export from the said re- 
cited free ports to Great Britain, in British ships 
navigated according to law, as under provision 
of the 12th of Charles II. &amp;c. &amp;c. 

By sect. 13, East India goods are especially 
prohibited in this trade ; and lastly, by this act 
all former acts are repealed. 

The policy is observable in this law, which 
reconciles a freedom of trade Avith the system of 
colonial monopoly, and a partial infringement of 
the letter with the more essential spirit and pur- 
pose of the Navigation Acts ; which restricts the 
import to raw materials, and makes them pay- 
able by manufacture ; and which limits the fo- 
reign carrying trade to sloops and schooners, 
taking the return trade in larger British ships ; 


providing in either 
naval power. 


case, 


against 


a nursery of 


WEST INDIES. 


307 


[The enumerated articles, with exception to 
cattle and live stock, and hard woods for mills 
and building - , are ill suited for use and home con- 
sumption in any island; and the privileged colo- 
nies are mere factors for the mother-country, 
with the exception stated, and with that of rum 
being allowed in the export : these, however, 
are great advantages ; and to these, from the 
very business and factory, may be added others, 
of increased population, of a greater resort of 
shipping, of an influx and choice of British 
goods, of more wealthy merchants, a circulation 
of specie, and resource and accommodation to the 
landed interest. 

The only provision in this law which appears 
objectionable, is that which, in certain instances, 
allows the import of foreign colonial produce. 
In countries growing the like articles, the dis- 
tinction of foreign and native sugars, or coffee, 
cannot be kept up ; the protecting duty is a mere 
incentive to fraud ; the mark on package, parti- 
ally made, or not, is no security, and custom- 
house oaths are unhappily proverbial. The Bri- 
tish colonies, restricted in both purchase and sale, 
to dealings with the mother-country, are entitled, 
as far as is consistent with the interests of the 
parent state, to a reciprocity, and to exclusive 
possession of the home-market, for disposal of 
their produce; and this they can no longer be 
secure of, when the imports of foreign colonial 
produce, is extended to islands furnishing the 
like commodities. 

In proof of the validity of these observations, 
we find that Dominica, which had been estab- 
lished a free port in 1767, had been deprived of 
that privilege in 1778, in as much as the per- 
mission to import foreign colonial produce was 
found to have operated in an inverse ratio to any 
emolument to the parent state ; and when the 
privilege of a free port was again allowed to 
Dominica in 1787, in the form it since continues, 
that produce was excepted from the enumerated 
imports : and the objection in this quarter re- 
moved. 

But the island of Tortola, by the 46th Geo. 
III. cap. 72, still enjoys the privilege, subject to 
the advice and authority of his majesty’s privy 
council, of importing all foreign colonial pro- 
duce, in the same manner as does also the port 
of Nassau, in New Providence; and this, with 
the other Virgin Isles, being a sugar colony, is 
thought to be guarded against the export to 
Great Britain, by an estimate of the native pro- 
duce having been taken at 5,880,000 lbs. of sugar, 
or 4000 hogsheads ; and by the order, that no 


greater quantity coming from Tortola, shall be 
admitted, on duties, as British sugars. This, 
however, was much too large an allowance ; the 
sugar, produce of Tortola, and the Virgin Isles, 
not exceeding, on a past average, from 1799 to 
1804, 31,088 cwt. ; viz. only 3,481,856 lbs. and 
2400 hogsheads. 

But, however, this privilege of importing colo- 
nial produce is alleged to have been given to 
Tortola, from a conception that Great Britain 
might thence acquire a carrying trade of the 
coffees yet gathered by the negroes of Hayti ; 
but then it must have been with prejudice to the 
growing settlements at Jamaica; and this, with 
the sugar trade, is open to all those objections, 
on the part of the British Colonies, which we 
have before stated. 

Grenada is peculiarly well situated for an easy 
run to the island of Margarita, as a depot for 
the Caracas, and generally for mercantile adven- 
ture on the n. coast of S. America. From Gren- 
ville Town, in this island, the trade with the 
Spanish Main was, in 1792, carried on to a very 
considerable extent ; being to the amount of 
£. 600,000 value in exports of printed cottons, 
hardware, and other British manufactures. In 
1788, Grenada exported to foreign settlements 
1598 African slaves ; but has since dropt that 
branch of commerce, and is an example that the 
trade generally is not dependent on such an 
article in the assortment of cargo. 

Upon the whole, with regard to the institution 
of free ports, it may be observed that those of 
Jamaica are calculated to command the trade 
within the Gulf ; those of the Bahamas, and of 
Grenada, the intercourse with the n. and 5. ex- 
tremities of the chain of British Islands, and 
those of Tortola, Antigua, Dominica, and St. 
Vincent’s, such communication, as where a more 
central depot from various causes may be de- 
sirable. 

We proceed now to the consideration of ports 
of commercial enterprise. 

Ports of Commercial Enterprise . — Of these, the 
first that demands attention is the free port of 
St. Josef, in Trinidad, well adapted for carrying 
on a considerable traffic with the opposite coast, 
for the supply of the wealthy and populous dis- 
tricts far inland, by a road and passage, however 
lengthened or intricate. Under the present cir- 
cumstances of difficulty in approaching the im- 
mediate coasts of Cumana and the Caracas from 
the open seas, the trade hath actually taken this 
channel, and succeeded in a very considerable 
export of British goods. The traffic, to the' ex-1 
r r 2 


308 


WEST INDIES. 


[tent it is capable of, is most practicable and 
safe ; it is carried on in small vessels, or even in 
boats, traversing or coasting the Gulf of Paria ; 
and on the continental side, running up creeks 
and rivers, and delivering small but frequent 
cargoes, and altogether forming an important 
and valuable branch of commerce, but which 
may possibly shift to another course by sea, as 
opportunity offers ; not but that the navigation 
to the s. must take an offing, and Atlantic voyage, 
as it cannot hugg a leeward coast, rendered the 
more dangerous from currents influenced by the 
stream of the Orinoco, and other causes. 

Tobago, from its situation in lat. 11° and to 
windward of Trinidad with its e. hills forming 
the s. promontory or bluff-head of the great 
Gulf of Mexico, hath eminent facilities of trading 
within the bay, from its harbour of Courland 
coursing s. of Grenada, on Cumana and the Ca- 
racas ; whilst, on the other side, a square-rigged 
vessel may run, without a tack, from Queen’s 
Bay, in Tobago, to the very mouth of the Ori- 
noco, on the e. coast of S. America ; and with 
equal facility of voyage, return to the free port 
of Scarborough ; nor is any other island so con- 
veniently placed as a depot, having in view a 
trade with Guayana, and to the river Amazon 
and Brazil. 

But Tobago besides advantages for trade and 
communication with S. America, such as have 
been described, hath others, in intercourse with 
whatever sovereign power in Europe it may be 
subjected to. 

Lying in lat. 11°, a course from Europe gain- 
ing the trade-winds, and between the tropics, 
might be taken by French vessels in a direction 
s. of the ordinary navigation by British ships ; 
and so eluding that naval force, might form 
depots in Tobago, of arms and troops, which 
might be put in action before even the arrival 
was known to leeward, and in the British Islands ; 
an object of the greatest import, and which seems 
not to have been overlooked in the articles of 
the late treaty, restoring to France her W. India 
colonies. 

It is, further, well worthy of remark, that the 
mountainous e. division of Tobago has, on ex- 
perience, proved to be healthy, in proportion as 
the low lands to the w. have been found the con- 
trary ; and whilst the noble harbour in the n. e. 
quarter of the island, called Man o’ War Bay, 
offers a rendezvous to ships of war and trans- 
ports, with depth of water to the very beach, and 
tranquil as a mill-pond ; the amphitheatre of 
hills forming and sheltering the bay, and fertile 


to their very summit — render it the most healthy 
station, with every accommodation of wood and 
water, for troops that may be landed. 

Considering the danger to which shipping, nnd 
therewith the royal navy, is exposed in the W. 
India seas, at particular times of the year, and 
especially from the 1st of August to November, 
denominated the hurricane season, the fact is of 
importance, that no instance of hurricane hath 
been known to affect Tobago. In the year 1780, 
Barbadoes, only 2° n. was desolated by a tem- 
pestuous whirlwind, which destroyed people, 
buildings, and every ship throughout the W. In- 
dies ; whilst Tobago remained quiet and safe from 
the destructive vortex. 

In the year 1782, the late Marquis de Bouillie 
made a most interesting report to his govern- 
ment, of the importance of Tobago as a military 
and naval station, and which was supposed to 
have influenced the Court of France, in so 
earnestly making its acquisition a condition of the 
then treaty. 

CHAP. IV. 

Intercourse of the British TV. Indies with Ame- 
rica , and in particular with the British Pro- 
vinces of Canada , Nova Scotia , and Newfound- 
land. — intercourse and Trade of the United 
States of America with the British TV. Indies . — 
British Shipping employed in the W. India 
Trade. — Shipping belonging to the several Ports 
of Great Britain, from 1791 to 1812. — Passage 
outwards to the TV. Indies. — Passage homewards 
from the TV. Indies. 

Intercourse of the British TV. Indies with Ame- 
rica , and particularity with the British provinces of 
Canada , Nova Scotia, and Newfoundland. — It has 
been contended, and is to be wished, that what- 
ever is required for the use of the British islands, 
should be furnished in preference, or indeed ex- 
clusively, by the Canadas, Nova Scotia, or New- 
foundland. On this point, the means of provid- 
ing the articles required, and the comparative ex- 
pedition and facilities of conveyance, recur for 
consideration, in like manner as on the alterna- 
tive of supply from Europe, or from America at 
large. 

The obstructions and inconveniences to com- 
merce between the W. Indies and more northern 
provinces of America, are those of nature ; and 
will and must operate in creating a preference 
from islands to the w. and s., of dealing with 
those countries which offer a readier access and 
intercourse. Jamaica would never, by choice,} 


WEST INDIES. 


309 


[apply to New Brunswick, for what it might pro- 
cure from Philadelphia. 

Moreover, to the disadvantages of longer and 
more perilous navigation may he added, the oc- 
casional difficulties of trading at all seasons with 
the Canadas at least, under embargoes from frost 
and climate in the higher latitudes. 

But impediments or inconveniences of naviga- 
tion apart, the British provinces of Nova Scotia 
and Newfoundland (excepting the latter, as a 
fishery ) have never yet appeared, from the trials 
that have been made, to be in a state of popu- 
lation and settlement, or generally in a condition 
of country, to furnish the articles required. In 
the debates of the House of Commons, July 1806, 
on the subject of the American intercourse, it 
was strongly contended by an able and intelligent 
member, who had lately presided at the Board of 
Trade, ‘ that the British continental provinces 
could and would supply all the provisions and 
lumber required by the sugar colonies, if their 
trade was not checked by the competition allowed 
to the United States.’ 


The removal of such competition is undoubt- 
edly most desirable, but the effort must be gra- 
dual, and known rather in the effect than in the 
cause. That the British provinces could be 
brought to export all the articles that their W. 
India brethern might require, is at least proble- 
matical. This end might, however, as far as one 
measure offers, be attained by that principle of 
political economy having for its basis the encou- 
ragement of the one, and the depression of the 
other, until the wants and the supplies of each 
should become equal and reciprocal : but whe- 
ther this, or any other plan be more feasible, it 
is not in our province here to discuss. If it be 
true that the exclusion of the United States from 
all intercourse with the British W. Indies be a 
great desideratum , much remains to be done. 
The importation from the N. American colonies, 
compared with that from the States, has always 
been strikingly small. Reverting, in the first 
instance, to the year 1788, we find it was as 
follows : 


An ACCOUNT of the Number of Ships, and their Tonnage, which have been employed in the 
Trade between the British Islands in the West Indies and the British Colonies in America, in the 
Year 1788, specifying the Articles imported from these Islands to the British Colonies in America, 
and the Quantity of Fish exported to the West Indies from Newfoundland. — Presented to the House 
of Commons, March 18, 1790. 




From W. Indies to British Provinces. 

To W. Indies. 

Ships, in- 
wards. 

Tons. 


Measure. 

Quantity. 

Fish, 

Barrels. 

Fish, 

Quintals, 

153 

14,009 

Indian corn - - 

Chocolate - - - 

Cocoa - - - - 

Coffee - - - 

Ginger - - - - 

Pimento - - - 

Sugar - - 

Mahogany - 
Lignum vitae - - 

Hides - - - - 

Limes - - - - 

Melasses - - - 

Piue-apples - - 

Pitch and tar - - 

Bread-Hour - - 
Onions - - - - 

Salt * - - - - 

Rum - 

Shooks, hogsheads 
Staves - - 
Cotton wool - - 

bushels - 
lb. - - 
cwt. - - 

cwt. - - 

lb. - - 
lb. - - 
cwt. - - 

logs - - 

tons - - 

number - 
barrels - 
gallons - 
dozen - - 
barrels - 
barrels - 
lb. - - 
bushels - 
gallons - 
number - 
number - 
lb. - - 

335 

6,767 

121 cwt. 1 qr. 181b. 

794 cwt. 101b. 
1,470 
582 

9,285 cwt. lqr. 21b. 

51 

6| 

255 

227 

53,944 

12 

770 

281 

10,000 

93,328 

493,844 

150 

25,500 

2,250 

8031 

23,196 

1 


* From the Bahama salt pits, probably for the fisheries of Newfoundland,] 


310 


WEST INDIES. 


[Supposing the item of 281 barrels of flour im- 
ported to the British continental provinces from 
the W. Indies, to be a mere casuality, and re- 
serve of ships’ provisions ; yet, from this com- 
mercial return, it appears that, in 1788, the Ca- 
nadas and Nova Scotia, under every advantage 
of trade and navigation, furnished no bread-flour 
to the W. Indies ; they could not even furnish 
the neighbouring fisheries of Newfoundland ; or 
wherefore else was Mr. Jenkinson’s act (the 
25th Geo. III. cap. 1.) passed, to admit the im- 
port of flour from the United States as a resource 
of necessity to the people of Newfoundland ? 

The export of 25,500 staves from the W. 
Indies, was probably for the package of New- 
foundland fish ; and this shews that even lumber 
was not furnished at the time by Nova Scotia, in 
quantities sufficient for sparing a full supply even 
to the great island in its vicinity, and much less 
to the W. Indies. These northern provinces 
have, indeed, since become more peopled, settled, 
and cleared of woods ; and timber has been thence 
exported in considerable quantities, as will ap- 
pear from subsequent returns. But when we 
come to inspect the tables of actual supply fur- 
nished to the sugar colonies by the great coun- 


tries, now the United States, and observe how 
small a proportion, in any one year, the largest 
export of lumber from the British provinces bears 
to the total of what was required, and supplied 
to the sugar colonies, it cannot be doubted but 
the exclusion of a supply from other quai’ters 
ought to be of a slow and lenient operation. 

On the medium of 10 years, from 1793 to 
1803, the supply to the British W. Indies from 
the United States, was annually 164,680 bar- 
rels, each 196 lb. of bread flour ; and, in the 
same period, the average supply from the Bri- 
tish provinces was only 1,570 barrels; whilst 
the supply of flour from Great Britain is limited 
by statute to 3,200 tons, or 32,000 barrels, of 
2 cwt. leaving a deficiency- of this article of life 
of 131,110 barrels, to be supplied by the United 
States, supposing even GreatBritainhenceforward 
to supply its complement, though it has sent little 
or no flour to the the W. Indies for years past ; 
but the British supply taken apart, as supposed 
at all times, the deficiency, if left to Canada 
and Nova Scotia, is of 163,110 barrels of bread, 
wanting for the usual and annual consumption 
of planters, British officers and soldiers, in the W. 
Indies. 


An ACCOUNT of the Quantity of Provisions and Lumber imported into the British West Indies 
(exclusive of conquered Colonies) from the British Continental Colonies. — Return to House of 
Commons, May 5, 1806. 




1773. 

1788. 

1793- 

1797. 

1800. 

1803. 

Corn - - - - 

bushels 




171 

847 

919 

1,518 

Flour and meal - 

barrels, 

2cwt. 

330 

- 

1,656 

1,589 

320 

1,374 

Rice ----- 

barrels 

_ 

- 

- 

20 

- 

68 

2 

Fish, dry - - - 

quintals 

_ 

4,907 

22,196 

99,570 

27,576 

61,258 

12 7,62 

Fish, pickled - - 

barrels 

- 

4,107 

803 

24,827 

9,949 

14,105 

23,865 

Beef and pork - - 

barrels 

- 

57 

- 

349 

241 

181 

922 

Pine boards 

feet 

- 

78,013 

- 

3,618,200 

511,390 

1,039,895 

2,223,179 

Scantling &amp; timber 

tons 

_ 

- 

_ 

324 

39 

- 

186 

Shingles - - - 

number 

- 

61,700 

- 

2,929,150 

464,200 

424,650 

915,544 

Staves - 

n umber 

- - 

9,137 

- 

151,060 

41,350 

173,385 

235,788 


The last year of the above return, to 5th Ja- 
nuary, 1803, was a year of armistice; and the 
consequences of a free and open navigation, as 
no longer obstructed by the enemy, surcharged 
with war freights and insurance, or restricted, 
from apprehensions of the impress service, are 
obvious in the increased exports of lumber and 
of fish : of other provisions there were compa- 
ratively no cargoes at any time. 


Fish is an article from Newfoundland, which 
has, and should have, every encouragement given 
by the mother-country, for its production and 
trade. In the spring of 1806, a bounty was pro- 
posed by government, of 2s. on every quintal of 
fish imported into the W. Indies from Newfound- 
land ; and a duty of 2s. per contra on fish from 
the United States, to be levied in the different 
islands.] 


WEST INDIES. 


311 


[In times of peace, the premium and counter- 
duty would operate advantageously, by securing 
a preference to British fish ; but under the in- 
fluence of a war, the efficacy and use of the mea- 
sure was much abated : for, in fact, much of the 
fish which goes to the W. Indies, freighted in 
vessels of the United States, hath been caught 
on the banks by British fishermen, and sold at 
sea to the Americans, as mere factors and neu- 
tral carriers, to avoid danger from the enemy, in 
going further s. for the disposal of the cargo 
themselves. In this case, the duty paid has acted 
as an abatement on the intermediate bargain ; 
and what is received by one part of the New- 
foundland traders in the islands, has been re- 
funded by others selling on the banks. Com- 
paring the entries in 1800 and 1806, an absolute 
decline of the fishery is not to be presumed in 
the former period of war ; but rather that a 
moiety of the catch offish has been bartered and 
conveyed as just described. The regulation, 
however, of premium and counter-duty, will have 
its good effect in competition, on return of peace; 
can have no serious effect in the interval ; and is 
altogether a measure of good policy and future 
use. 

In regard to lumber, the price of freight on 
each article is so heavy in proportion to the in- 
trinsic value of the article itself, that any sur- 
charge on the former must greatly operate in re- 
duction of the trade ; and in times of war it will 
seek relief by passing to neutral bottoms. In 
times of peace, it appears from the returns of 
1793 and 1803, that a large proportion of planks 
and fir may be exported from the northern Bri- 
tish provinces. 

It is not alone the apprehension of a more 
partial and scanty assortment of supplies from 
the northern countries, which may induce the 
W. Indians to prefer dealing with those of the 
United States, if free so to do ; but because the 
latter, for their home consumption require, and 
take a greater quantity of W. India produce in 
return ; especially rum, which is the general 
medium of traffic, and to be considered as the 
money with which the sugar colonist pays for 
the American stores required for his estate. 


EXPORTS from the British sugar colonies to the 
British provinces in America, Canada, Nova 
Scotia, and Newfoundland.— Return to House 
of Commons, May 5, 1806. 



Rum. 

Sugar. 

Coffee. 

Cotton. 

1787 

Gallons. 

777,360 

Cwt. 

9,019 

Cwt. 

546 

11). 

1,500 

1793 

613,898 

5,106 

603 

8,690 

1794 

525.720 

4,615 

80 

6,304 

1795 

204,965 

3,320 

99 

1,600 

1796 

307,124 

7,332 

514 

1,550 

1797 

486,706 

3,893 

427 

12,850 

1798 

384,953 

4,508 

802 

18,250 

1799 

664,258 

9,933 

1,130 

750 

1800 

186,449 

10,660 

775 

4,274 

1801 

569,691 

10,366 

935 

500 

1802 

584,673 

11,397 

257 

14,950 

,1803 

792,474 

13,906 

1,353 

3,250 


The above returns may be referred to a com- 
parative view, on the taking into consideration 
the next branch of W. India trade, namely, that 
with the United States of America, and of which, 
as a matter in controvery, not less important to 
the mother-country than to its W. India colonies, 
we proceed to treat more largely. 

Intercourse and Trade of the United States of 
America with the British iV. Indies . — It were al- 
most unnecessary hereto state, that the vast extent 
of America, from Penobscot to the borders of 
Florida, slanting from lat. 45°, long. 67', to the 
Savannah, lat, 32°, long. 80 / , and offering above 
1,000 miles of coast, with commodious harbours, 
and mouths of navigable rivers, for the con- 
venience of trade, and concentrating the pro- 
ductions of the interior country, was, previous 
to the year 1773, an immense province of the 
British empire ; unless it were for the sake of 
observing, that up to that period the people of 
this vast tract of continent were British sub- 
jects, sharing in the full rights and privileges of 
the mother-country ; their vessels, by the 14th 
Car. II. cap. 11. were recognized as English- 
built ; and they had free access to the British W. 
Indies, for the supplying from American pro- 
duce, whatever might be required in the islands 
for subsistence and use, with exception to manu- 
factures, and to certain enumerated articles, held 
in reserve by the mother-country. 

The variety of productions, and convenient 
assortment of cargoes, from countries extending 
so widely n. and s., and their facility^ of inter- 
course at all seasons, and in different tracts and] 


312 


WEST INDIES. 


[channels, with the W. Indies, maybe presumed 
to have vested principally, if not exclusively, in 
the Americans (then subjects of Great Britain), 
whatever trade there was with the sugar colo- 
nies, of a description which required to be fre- 
quent and occasional, from the perishable nature 
of the article, and the exigency of its use and 
consumption : we may infer, that previous to 
the revolution and hostilities which commenced 
in 1774, America furnished to the British Islands, 
all, or nearly all, the provisions wanted, and 
other immediate necessaries of life and industry. 
Having then before us a correct return, with the 
amount of the enumerated articles supplied for the 
three years, to 1773 inclusive, we may assume that 
for provisions at least, it is nearly a full and com- 
plete account of all the supplies which the Bri- 
tish sugar colonies required at the time. 

Allowing for a greater or less proportion of 
each commodity to be required, on estimate of 
probable change in the population or circum- 
stances of the W. India settlements, down to the 
present aera, we may, from an enumeration of 
American supplies in 1773, compute the extent 
of trade in various and distinct articles, which 
may be assumed and insisted on by Great Bri- 
tain, as within the policy and system of monopoly 
in commerce with its colonies; or, which may be 
humanely and prudentially relinquished, in de- 
ference to the wants and necessities of its peo- 
ple, and for the advancement of the general in- 
terest, by rendering the resources of subsistence 


and industry safe and sure throughout all the de- 
pendencies of its empire. 

The very interesting document to which we 
refer, has been preserved in the Reports of the 
Privy Council in 1784, and re-printed June 9th, 
1806, by order of the House of Commons. 

The trade which, previous to the year 1774, 
was carried on between the planters of the W. 
Indies and the inhabitants of North America, 
was not a traffic calculated to answer the fan- 
tastic calls of vanity, or to administer gratifica- 
tion to luxury or vice ; but to procure food for 
the hungry, and to furnish materials (scarce less 
important than food) for supplying the planters 
in two capital objects, their buildings, and pack- 
ages for their chief staple productions, sugar 
and rum. 

For the supply of those essential articles, lum- 
ber, fish, flour, and grain, America seems to have 
been happily fitted, as well from internal cir- 
cumstances, as her commodious situation ; and 
it is to a neighbourly intercourse with that con- 
tinent, continued during 130 years, that our sugar 
plantations in a great measure owe their prospe- 
rity ; insomuch that, according to the opinion of 
a very competent judge, Mr. Long, “ if the con- 
tinent had been wholly in the hands of a foreign 
power, and the English precluded from all com- 
merce or intercourse with it, it is a very doubtful 
point, whether, in such case, we should at this 
hour have possessed a single acre of land in the 
W. Indies.” The following is] 


WEST INDIES. 


313 


TAn ACCOUNT of the Total Import from North America into the British W. India Islands, in the 
L Years 1771, 1772, and 1773, taken from an official Account signed by Mr. Stanley, Secretary to 
the Commissioners of the Customs in London, dated 15th March, 1775.— Eor Three Years, end- 
ing 5th January, 1774. N. B. Divide by three, &amp;c. for the Yearly Supply. 




From United 
States. 

From Ca- 
nada and 
Nova Scoda. 

From 

Newfound- 

land. 

Boards and timber - 

feet - - 

76,767,695 

232,040 

2,000 

Shingles - - - 

number - 

59,586,194 

185,000 


Staves ----- 

number - 

57,998,661 

27,350 


Hoops ----- 

number - 

4,712,005 

16,250 

9,000 

Corn ----- 

bushels - 

1,204,389 

24 


Pease and beans - - 

bushels - 

64,006 

1,017 


Bread and flour - - 

barrels - 

396,329 

991 


Ditto ditto - - - 

kegs - - 

13,099 



Rice ----- 

barrels - 

39,912 



Ditto ----- 

tierces - 

21,777 



Fish ----- 

hogsh. - 

51,344 

449 

2,307 

Ditto ----- 

barrels - 

47,686 

646 

202 

Ditto ----- 

quintals - 

21,500 

2,958 

11,764 

Ditto ----- 

kegs - - 

3,304 

609 


Beef and pork - - 

barrels - 

44,782 

270 

24 

Poultry - 

dozen 

2,739 

10 


Sheep and hogs - - 

number - 

13,815 



Oxen ----- 

number - 

3,647 



Horses ----- 

number - 

7,130 

28 


Oil 

barrels - 

3,189 

139 

118 

Tar and pitch - - 

barrels - 

17,024 



Masts ----- 

number * 

157 



Spars ----- 

number - 

3,074 

30 


Shook casks - - - 

number - 

53,857 

40 

141 

Soap and candles 

boxes 

20,475 



Ox-bows and yokes 

number - 

1,540 



House frames - - 

number - 

620 



Iron ----- 

tons - - 

399± 




Rum. Sugar. 

Puncheons, 120 Gallons, Sugar, Hogsh. 13 Cwt. 


The Americans took in return, in 1772 - 

1773 - 

It must not, however, be supposed, that the 
preceding table of supplies furnished to the W. 
Indies from America, previous to the war in 1774, 
comprises the total, in reference to every article 
enumerated. A limited proportion of corn and 
flour must at all times have been freighted from 
Great Britain ; and a very considerable quantity 
of herrings from the British fisheries, was yearly 
furnished, for subsistence of the negroes in the 
W. Indies. Beef and pork, too, may have made 
VOL. v. 


- 32,265 3,776 

- 43,488 5,328 


some part of the cargoes ; but it must be re- 
membered, that it was by an act passed so late 
as the 20th Geo. III. cap. 10. that Ireland was 
admitted to a share in the colonial commerce : 
before 1780, Ireland could not export its beef 

f ork, and butter, direct to th e British W. 
ndies. 

The fact, however, was, that lumber and pro- 
visions were articles generally (though with some 
little exceptions) supplied to' the British islands] 

s s 


314 


WEST INDIES. 


[from America, previous to the war obstructing 
the intercourse and trade, in 1774 ; and hence 
we may be enabled, from a consideration of the 
quantities of each article returned, to form a 
pretty accurate idea of the nature and extent of 
what was required at the time for the subsistence 
and use of the British colonists in the W. 
Indies. 

Great Britain, whilst sovereign of North Ame- 
rica, in relinquishing the provision trade to the 
W. Indies in favour of its colonial dependencies 
on the Continent, seemed to foster the industry 
and agriculture of its people in those distant 
provinces, and at the same time to provide for 
the necessities of its people at home ; for it is 
ascertained, that the corn grown in England, is 
not at all times equal to the home consumption. 
In this, Great Britain conceded therefore a 
branch of export trade, which it was scarcely its 
interest to retain ; but, what was policy, carried 
with it the air of liberal concession ; and national 
pride was satisfied, that in so far relinquishing 
the rights of monopoly in trade with the planta- 
tions, it was a graqtj and not a surrender. On 
the provinces of America being no longer sub- 
ject, but becoming an independent and foreign 
power, under the name of the United States, the 
case was wholly altered. Immediately after the 
treaty of Paris, in 1783, by which the States of 
America were recognized as an independent and 
sovereign power, measures were taken in Lon- 
don to regulate anew the trade between America 
and the sugar colonies. The legislature passed 
an act in June, 1803, impowering the King to 
issue Orders in Council to this effect, under cer- 
tain limitations ; and on July 2, 1803, an order, 
so authorized, was made, 4 that provisions and 
lumber might be carried direct from the Uuited 
States to the British W. Indies, but in British 
ships only, and navigated according to law.’ 

This restriction was by the W. Indians con- 
sidered as a prohibition. February 6, 1804, the 
W. India merchants in London petitioned the 
king and parliament, stating, 44 that the planters 
in the sugar colonies could neither subsist their 
negroes, or provide package for their produce, 
without supplies from America of provisions and 
lumber ; and that a circuitous voyage by British 
ships via America, would not only incur a sur- 
charge of freights and commission, most heavy 
on the purchaser and consumer, but that occa- 
sionally the supply might altogether fail to arrive 
as required, from length and contingencies of the 
voyage and further representing, 44 that the 
medium of ordinary payment in the sugar colo- 
n bs for lumber and provisions was rum, which 


America did, and would take, but which the mer- 
chants of Great Britain would not take, to the 
amount required, not being an article disposable 
in the home market.” 

Government resisted all these circumstances ; 
and, from 1784 to 1793 inclusive, the trade for 
all supplies to the British sugar colonies was re- 
stricted to British shipping ; nor in the event, 
during this period of peace, were the islands so 
distressed, as had been presumed by the peti- 
tioners. The wants of the planters were sup- 
plied, although certainly at a dearer rate ; for 
intermediate trade and factory always has its 
charge. The enhancement of price in the neces- 
saries of life, was, however, not the only griev- 
ance : the supplies were occasionally scanty, as 
well as dear ; and much distress, on this account, 
was alledged. On the other hand, Great Bri- 
tain, during a period of 10 years peace, derived 
advantage from thus enforcing its navigation 
laws: the carrying trade was engrossed by Bri- 
tish ship-owners ; the British merchant had his 
profits of trade and commission on the articles 
supplied ; and, in a much more considerable pro- 
portion than heretofore, the supply was of Bri- 
tish produce, and from the British fisheries. 

The following table will show the state and 
extent of the trade between America and the W. 
Indies, as affected by the regulations instituted 
in 1783, and sustained to 1793, inclusive; and 
evince how far Great Britain can at any, and the 
most favourable period, set limits to the com- 
merce and intercourse which Nature, in oppo- 
sition to British interests, seems to have pointed 
out, as suitable and belonging to the Continent 
of America and the W. India islands. With 
some allowances in exception, we may admit them 
for purposes of comparison and general inference, 
to show all that was required in the W. Indies, 
as supplied from America in the year 1773 ; and 
all that could be subtracted from that supply, 
and therefore, practically, all to be furnished by 
Great Britain, or by its American provinces, in 
1792. In a second, and other point of view, wo 
may examine the returns as exhibiting, from the 
access of trade to America in the latter years, 
how much of that trade Great Britain forewent 
and lost, by a subsequent relaxation of the letter 
of its navigation acts, under and by the instruc- 
tions given by the executive ministers in Eng- 
land to governors of the colonies, that u during 
the war, as necessity shall require, they may 
issue proclamations, admitting an import to the 
plantations, of lumber and provisions from Ame- 
rica, in American vessels.”] 


WEST INDIES. 


315 


( Provisions and Lumber imported into the W. Indies (exclusive of the Conquered Colonies) from the 

United States of America. 


Return to House of Commons, May 5, 1806. 



Measure. 

1773. 

1793. 

1797. 

1800. 

1803. 

Corn .... 
Flour and meal . 
Rice .... 
Beef and pork . 
Fish, dry. . . 

Fish, pickled 
Pine boards, &amp;c. 
Timber . 
Shingles . . 

Staves . . 

bushels 

bushels 

do. &amp;c. 

barrels 

quintals 

barrels 

feet . . 

tons . . 

number 

number 

401,463 

136,509 

35,081 

14,927 

7,167 

68,341 

25,589,232 

19,862’068 

19,332,880 

241,986 

130,677 

12,797 

140 

5,025 

426 

14,647,724 

784 

23,471,922 

6,864,400 

333,762 
178,167 
9,116 
1 1,306 
33,934 
18,956 
10,766,826 
4,287 
22,990,300 
6,498,634 

445,069 

163,998 

13,052 

24,503 

29,169 

17,979 

23,161,441 

6,997 

33,280,408 

12,306,793 

647,858 

431,504 

9,393 

49,203 

61,124 

15,256 

29,960,623 

7,807 

39,357,828 

13,519,435 


It appears from the column 1793 of the pre- 
ceding return, that Great Britain or Ireland, in 
times of peace, can furnish all the beef and pork; 
and that Newfoundland and the home fisheries 
supply most of what is required of the important 
article, fish ; but bread, flour, and rice, (most 
essential to the subsistence of the planters and 
negroes in the W. Indies) seem in no case, and 
at no time, to have been fully provided, except- 
ing from America. Of oak staves, too, as it 
appears, England can furnish a considerable part 
of the supply. 


In specifying the articles as imported into these 
islands, of later years, it would be desirable to 
ascertain more exactly the proportion exported 
into them from other parts comparatively with 
the United States, and more particularly from 
the British continental colonies, as being also the 
immediate subject of this chapter. This then, 
with the quantity which is taken by the specific 
islands, will be seen by] 


s s 2 


TAn ACCOUNT of the principal Articles of Provision and Lumber imported into the British West Indies, and Conquered Colonies in 
the West Indies, in the Years 1804, 1805, and 1806 : distinguishing each Year, each Island or Colony respectively, and the several 
Countries from which such Articles were imported. 


3 16 


1806. 

Other 

Countries. 

WEST I] 

^ o 

w tO to 

.c 

3 

CQ 

N ] 

rH 

09 

0 I E S. 

rH © 39 GO *H co 

. Tf © Cl r-4 v-i rH 

&lt;n ©9 *0 -0 rj&lt; lO 

5 « 

r— i 

*o 

*o 

United State of j 
America. 

13 cT sT tcT oT &lt;s&lt;r tc~ 

~ tO 09 CO rl rl n rH 

3 T* 

CQ 

386,256 

G9ir5Tfi09©i009t^Q9 09 39tOC009N. 
■^N^HtO^COH^CONNr-H- 
09r}^0qcq60©^©09^C0O. -0^ r- 

«r£oo'c6o9Srr-rcd''-^^rH'*03it^GOi&gt;r 

" !C N H r ^ 09 rH 59 rl rH 

3 

397,966] 

British Continen- 
tal Colonies. 

Bushels. 

604 

514 

1,450 

210 

CO 

*&gt; 

*C 

Cwts. 

483 

7 

609 

381 

236 

© 

rH 

tH 

The United 
Kingdom, j 

CVO H CO N CO 1C CO GO ^ Oi H 

jA ^^©^©©^c^iN^ts^^ooco h 
^ oT ^ ic th ^ ■r-T i&gt;T cT cT 

GO *C ©9 r*i go rH vHtH 

3 
CQ 

238,203 

^OO^tO©OCOC^tC © *o 

©«H'vboo©*r5coo9©iotoio -f« — &lt; 

r-l tO ©^ rf rl H Oils © © © 

2 &lt;0 ^ GOOD oT cd' .r-Tr-T 

£ ^ : 

V 

*o 

© 

© 

09 

r}» 

1805. 

Other 

Countries. 

*c to CO o o ^ 

V, CO G9 © 05 

a 00 rl ^ n^rH 

■a: : n Tf rt 

3 
CO 

O 

*&gt; 

Tfi &lt;C © ©9 © to © t&gt; *C © 

rH GOOD©© tOOCO©^ 

^ tc to CO 99 09 f&gt; N. 09 to 

es : • • : t-T ^ : rT 

u 

© 

N 

°X 

©^ 

rH 

United States of 
America. 

COKNNCOUOOOi’OCriHCOO^'O 
^iC'OCO^OiCOTt^i-iiOGO^GOO^ 
^ ^ N Ol Oi OO O N N OO CO 0O 

~ b? y* dy o GO^'^Nd'c^T^tH^c' 

~ CO CO rH ^ rH rH rH rH 

399,526 

tN.tOvHC0tO©C039-^G0&lt;S.tO©rH»O 

©(s»CO*Orl09CO©*0-Hf^CO©©r^ 

C^r-^o^tc © ^ O^O^GO in 60 to 09 ©^ 

. TjT irT rT eT 39* o£ tS CO T* t}T r-T ©~ ©*~ 

•JS ^ © rH 09 © 09 rH CO rH tH 09 

£ rn 

U 

GO 

GO 

«9 

British Continen- 
I tal Colonies. 

to GO O'. O Tji O O 

CO O'* co to ^ CO to o 

© rH ©9 rf *0^0 09 

.c J • j | ! • I 

3 

CQ 

3,096 

r (Q « N *0 © © © 

GO © £&gt;• ©9 *C © GO ^ *0 

h ’I' h Tp GO TP GO 

o 

© 

rH 

09 

The United 
Kingdom. 

^CO'T'T’54”^GOCOG»G4'3V— - l£) a- 

»C^*Oril?)iS®«OlNiO^COf}Cn(n 

rH 09 

wioto't&gt;Tcrt&gt;G &lt;, risr&lt;o«&lt;r *£ &lt;&amp; t* 

09 &lt;39 rH rH rH 

3 
CQ 

09 

to 

*rT 

r?&lt; 

0*0*0*00© *0 0© *0*0 *0*0 

rH CO tO 09 tO rH tO rH © ©&lt;N ^ © 

COHH ^©ooqn to © 

«2G0' S 3T 39oT oTv-T 

&amp; T* : : 

u 

*o 

lO 

©^ 

GO 

o 

CO 

rH 

Other 

Countries. 

Bushels. 

1,897 

510 

680 

1,300 

130 

115 

4,632 

to CO tQ tJ« *0 

09 09 i&gt; to *0 © 

^ GO GO 39 _ 1C rl 

^ : : : : ©? • • : «o* • j 

o 

6,656 

United States of 
America. 

tOG9CO'OGOt^tC05TH'^Tf'06»GO i O&gt; 
O^G9C9COH^r&lt;T^cj)OCOS40*C 
©^ 3) co &lt;©^ *n tq^ co to^to co go co t&gt;- t&gt;. o- 
. ©to go ^©"^©f ©9^0 *&gt;T rjT *&gt;T 

— t^.Q9 rl N ©9 rH 31 rl rH 39 

a 

CQ 

432,786 

NNiO'0©'^GOCOCC©‘C'ON(sO 
HiO^iT. rJlHrlCONNCOOl 39Hrji 

tOGO“co'39'»0 V rH't^'^iOQ934io'© ©^ 
A CO © n 09 &lt;0 09 rH ^ © 39 rH 

£ 

u 

568,207 

British Continen- 
tal Colonies. 

Bushels. 

2,025 

811 

1,111 

101 

84 

24 

to 

*c 

rH 

Cwts. 

52 

264, 

773 

1,021) 

1,373 

26 

19 

700 

9 

to 

CO 

09^ 

The United 
Kingdom. 

CO^C9COtOOlCC^tOC9NCG4CO(0( 
a h- &gt;c o a a ^ a h iC co -c co h 
w O^co to 10^09 r Oifir^ON 

^ IO o CO co H (?) to N GO rH CO CO GO to 

^ rH rji rH 39 r* rH 

« 

165,540 

©*0*0©*0*0*0©©100© © *o 

©nTftCN&amp;)(J9CH tO^ 09 tO 

CO ©_ rH Ci_ tO vHhJ. CO 

2 (NIN HH 

£ ^ : 
u 

1C 

GO 

1C 

co' 

©9 

Species and Islands. 

i 

Corn. — A ntigua 

Barbadoes 
Dominica . 
Grenada ... 
Jamaica .... 
Montserrat 

Nevis 

St. Kitts ... 
St.Vincents 

Tortola 

Trinidad ... 
Demerara.. 
St. Lucia... 
Surinam .... 
Tobago 

Total... 

Bread, A Antigua .... 
Floor, f Barbadoes 
and 6 Dominica.. 
Meal. ) Grenada ... 

Jamaica.... 

Montserrat. 

Nevis 

St. Kitts ... 
St.Vincents 

Tortola 

Trinidad ... 
Demerara.. 
St. Lucia... 
Surinam .... 
Tobago 

Total... 


WEST INDIES 


317 



[The ACCOUNT of Provisions and Lumber imported into the British West Indies— continued. 




WEST INDIES. 


SO 

o 

CO 

rH 


"o a 
cj c 

•H &lt; 


.£ , T‘C'f5COCOiOCOCO^COCi'OCO'£iO 
=&gt; o co^ at © 

&amp; co trT 


vo go th 

in ^ VQ CO^HO»GO(N'OCOif 5 '^ 
£2 O-rTr^ rT oT 9^ H 

^ GO 

CQ 


t: o o : 


OH 


■- y 


J to (O T}f CO O N *b N 3 ^ CO « 'O 

ccOriHino th © io ^ © © *v © 

a a- &lt;c q pj 'O a n co a» s in 

aeT-H « oTfcT cT tC irT *h oh 

GO r( r( . rH . rH 


rtCOOOO OOO © © OH © © 


i&gt; r}« i- CO VO 
OiOH'Oh 
GO CO &lt;39 


UO GO VC 00 rti 
&lt;o CO 'O 

Ot n CO 


rH tv *o ^ O 

rH Ot AO CO 
GO 


th © tv © K 


s e 

'e O 

J5 *o 

P ba 

&lt;U .5 

£ w 


VO GO 
rH tV 

VO 


t&gt; © 
O GO 
03 OH 


*•0 CO O 
OH GO CO 
Jv CO 


T}1 o 
© Tj&lt; 
GO CO 


tO 

o 

CO 


*o £ 

55 &lt; 


*n -n ^ &lt;c &gt;o go co o o n r-i 

GO O GO tv ,hOi^*OHON^N 
O tv CO 0&gt; ^ Hj« ^ VO ^ «0 00 


0000000000^000 60 


NCO^OriStOHOCOOlNOOC 
(MOOOlCO'O^OiGONCOHODrri 
■^GO NrHTHiHW^^^'O^Tii^CO 
w* GO th rH rH T 71 OH 




rJG003^rHOnoo)not&gt;- 
c GO 'O -&lt; CO rf&lt; tv rH O 

"3 ^ ^ tv^ T-^ OH O 

G 5 1 th' irT go' CoT VO - rT GO* 


: UO^OOOOKOO 

! iO rH 

I GO 


id CO CO D O 
n CO N O N 
CO OH th t£© 
VO rjT OH* fH to 


Ot)QOCO 


GO'Old'OClHHO^ 
O Oi H r Oi (St ri CO 
COVOiOCOGO^VOCOrH 

; tjT gT 


CO CO O) ^ h 

k co *n r&lt; 
CO CO CO CO o 


£ s 

e -2 
p u, 

&lt;U C 

e* 


*! o *o W 00 

c H Id Ot ^ H 

"3 *0 © 

&amp; 


ooooeoiovoo* 


'CNO^i'OONCO COCO VO CO 

rHCOOHOHOHrHiOt^CO GOSH VO &gt;0 

■ OH rH CO rH rH CO^CO ^ rH rji 

•0 rH . r-T 

TP * 


o 

CO 


-o g 

oj 0 


C5 1 * TjT 


jot^coinin^ino^NOOinNin 
GrfCtCONSiinGOnJtCOrrlrHClO 
’3 m, »n ’o *n in ^ *n *n n a o: co ^ 

O? r-T co^ go" rT ngT co*' GfT tnT vd t&gt;T iff 


OOOCO-^OOVOOOOCOVOOO 

. OH tv © 

: OH oh to 


! &lt;3 


o^ionHcoNocoinrHcoonvo 

VONCOO^OnCOONNN rH iO © VO 
Ol O'* 'O CO tH lO VOCOtvnOHrHCOCOC'. 


_• o *o ©H VO 


GO rh O — 

vo © rfi go 

OH^O^ rH i&gt; 

to l o' r-T 


CO r Tr -t H 
OlH®)COOl 
OH ©H th © 
^ GO' ^ 

P rH 


CO 
tv at 
©H CH 


cO'oncoooNCO 

OHOHtJ&lt;©iOGOiOCO© 
• OH OH 60 rH tv OH 
3 OH GO*' th' 


£ B 

c o 

» "5, 


vocooa-coooor-. aoivovooh 

iHTHOOO^Orlrl^ ri tH th GO 

CO tv th © rH 


O'OONQVOCO O ^ to JO O 
tO r- JO CO 


S 


S«« ; : 2 

tu © .£ J2 ^ h 

• — 1 "C 3 TJ CJ 4 &gt; 
^ CJ •£ C 3 *2 3 

5 s = Sc' 

&lt;i5o^ c? 


« a&gt; * ,, ab.2- 
til ^ «© c© *2 ©&gt; £ 
13 r£ « s 5 


gw 


&gt;r:sEw.sj 




cu r "o b .s — 

S’o-sSS* ; £u««S«Ev 
«s .S £©•— 50 C’^r'O qj 3 cS tx 
.£P-§ £ c «o e -2 |v; ‘hT £ *3 c lJ a a 
•■s ■£ E § s S = m -e3 

&lt;KOO&gt;ii§ZM!eEiHfl»»]Ei 


S j 
2 « 
a 

Oh 


WEST INDIES 


319 



\ 


[The ACCOUNT of Provisions and Lumber imported into the British West Indies— continued. 


320 


WEST INDIES. 



1804 . II 1805 . || 180 G. 


WEST INDIES. 


o o o o 
o o o o 
a. o_ 

o' o' TH 
rl! 0 N 


*8 6 

.3 &lt;q 


^ 0000 ^ 000 * 000-^00 
0*0 000 ) 00 t^ 00 t &gt;00 
■t ^ N O ft O, H O, O ft N O r O^ 

-Tin ^co ©"CD ^ CO CO r-&gt; 
•V r^^COCO^OlCOH H |Q &gt;1 Ifi o 
£ O r H ^'0^*0 CO iO ^ GO o 

co co' co o-f i&gt;T th' go' go' sT 


O T-H 

O t&gt;- 
O t- 


o o 

O 

o 


o o 
o o 
o o 


o O *&gt;. O* O O C o O — 31 O O £• 

C^COOCOCOOO'OOOt-f-OOCO 

o t&gt; co o co o ^co .o^io q 'O q h 

G-f 3 ^ t-T cT w“ # ' N- th th 0 0 O CO CO CO 'O 
d»OQ 4 CO© 40 l-HOO'OGO -^001 O ”T 
^OiOt'wi^H^'O’t 00 ji n O 


O 'O o o o 

o 01 o CO &lt;0 

10 T 1 *0 00 ^ 

G-T o' CO 

• 01 rH "F 

? 04 


o t: 
•5 c 

O S 


000000000000000 

O*OCO-HOOOOO^Oi- 0 )OO *0 
C G &lt;0 O) CO O r O r X N O^ ^ N ^ o GO 

— T 1.0 tjT th 04 co ^ ^ oT iff o' r-T -h~ cr? cT 

o go *n *0 a&gt; n 50 oj co h o &lt;o o o 00 

£ GOGOG^GO^CG^ CD CD ^34 G^ £&gt;^ ^ GO 

sT 0 D t^T ®4 CO th' t-T go' -H GO tH 


o 00 

o 00 

o 

o : co • • • • • «o to 

Z * ri c© O 

TH 


OiOOOG'iOOOOiC-^^'^tO^O 

01 G» 000 .* 00010 ^ 0000 GO 

o 01 o o^o ©^ 6 ^^G^a^&lt;oso v t&gt;© v 

.O^CO'wo'GO'fsTarGro'GOrH'cO'rH^fNO 

O H^rO^^-HCON^HO^&gt;f. TH 

k; CO Ct 00 &lt;D rl rl Tf &lt;0 CO ’© GO £&gt; 

oT 


000 000 

000 000 

0/0 0^ CC^ ©^ ©^ 

O '© 04 -r-T 10 

■w* r -1 O O . ^ tH 


000 o 
000 o 
000 o 


0000000 

■O CO «0 O CD O O 
Cl O ^ H ^ C&gt; N 
go' tH '^T .o' gT go' oT 
; 04 GO rH CO 


o 00000 
o 00000 
O^ O^N^nO^D, 

-cT cT 10 ri 

.GO . GO 


1 9 


Z * T^I 


■a a 


oocoooooooooooo 

OOOOCOOOOOOO'OOO^ 
^ ^ t ^ °r O^ t ^ O r O^ N 
O^THCO^HT^GT^^OtfSoTGl'oOGr 

G&gt; O GO 04 C CO O 1 O CO ri N ^ K CO CO 

“ *9 CO CO GO i-O 04 GO *&gt; Ol GO &lt;0*0 O^ 04 o_ 

o h »o h th't-t -^'go'gT qT 

(H tH 


CO^ON.^OO 34 o O O 04 GO C4 
OOiOOCOOO'OOOiOOGO-^rH 
N OjO^COCO ‘iOOD^CO^cOO ~ CO ©^ 

in' tj*' go oC tjT cT gT cn tsT b*T go o nT gcT 

rj* go O go t&gt;- CO O *n fN. 01 go f&gt; CO GO r- 

. 10 CO *0 H CO-^O rt ^ H H CO 

5 CO t-T 


O rH o O rfi 
C T r? o Ct 
co r o co © -^ 

t&gt; go G4 &lt;*T cT 


9 s ^ 
i&gt; cT 


5 s 


a t. 

&lt; *3 

I a 


^ 2 2 

t^OWrt^'aco 

•3 2 -a fsgi S g 

0 i 5 ° » jG ;•? ; - S"o 


OJ C 3 


: 2 • . • _ !- a • • 

_ g 0 ) :j 3 uca«goe© 

§■5 «'=S «;; = oS S i S ^ 


5 S &lt;s ^ -S Si ; = 2 •= % j c 5 

« *. 5 £ I o | 3 -C I -| i 


VOL. V. 


T T 


321 


3*22 


WEST INDIES. 


[The exports direct, of West India produce to America, in return for provisions and lumber im 
ported, remains to be shewn. 


EXPORTS direct from the West Indies to the United States of America, of Four Staple Articles. 



Rum. 

Sugar. 

Coffee. 

Cotton. 


1773 

1774 

Galls. 

3,869,800 

5,218,560 

Cwts. 

49,088 

69,225 

Cwts. 

2,863 

lbs. 

202,200 

| Before the separation of the 
i United States of America. 

1787 

1793 

1,575,105 

536,353 

20,127 

9,336 

3,155 

836 

3,000 

| British Navigation Acts in force. 

1794 

1793 

1796 

1797 

1798 

1799 

1800 
1801 
1802 
1803 

2,265,177 

2,106,883 

3,267,280 

2,197,450 

1,972,985 

3,201,209 

2,761,384 

3,638,021 

3,925,595 

4,198,154 

37,606 

67,845 

100,033 

54,867 

47,172 

106,679 

90,800 

46,855 

50,258 

113,447 

4,586 

22,231 

21,828 

13,538 

19,421 

8,093 

7,125 

12,596 

14,907 

19,916 

74,369 

49,282 

47.400 
86,817 

59.400 
31,800 
12,350 

3,000 

Trade licensed by proclamation, 
s in American vessels of one 
deck. 

-J 


VALUE of the above Exports in 1803. 




Quantity. 

Value. 

Rum, at 5s. current, or 3s. sterling per gallon, and joe the cask, 
Sugar, as 40s. sterling per cwt. nett from the plantation, 

Coffee, at 4 1. sterling per cwt. extra freight, and ditto, - 
Cotton, at Is. ditto, ditto, - -- -- -- -- - 

Sundries, melasses, pimento, ginger, &amp;c. &amp;c. ------ 

galls. 

cwts. 

cwts. 

lbs. 

4,198,154 

113,447 

19,916 

£. 

708,960 

226,894 

79,664 

150,000 

Total value of exports, 

— 

1,165,518 


A comparative view of the nature and quan- other places in question, and to Great Britain, 
tity of the articles exported from these islands to will appear by the following document, being] 


WEST INDIES. 


323 


[An ACCOUNT of the Quantities of Rum, Sugar, Coffee, and Cotton-Wool, exported from the 
British West India Islands, from the 5th of January 1793 to the 5th of January 1803 ; so far as 
the same can be made up : — Distinguishing each Year ; and, the Quantities to the United States, 
to the British Colonies on the Continent of America, and to Great Britain respectively. 



United States of 
America. 

British Continenta 
Colonies. 

Great Britain. 

Total. 

Rum, 1793 

Gallons . 
536,353 

Gallons. 

613,898 

Gallons. 

3,756,800 

Gallons. 

4,907,051 

1794 

2,265,177 

525,720 

2,806,623 

5,597,520 

1795 

2,106,883 

204,965 

1,861,886 

4,173,734 

1796 

3,267,280 

307,124 

1,993,350 

5,567,754 

1797 

2,197,450 

486,706 

1,595,008 

4,279,164 

1798 

1,972,98 5 

384,953 

3,866,138 

6,224,07 6 

1799 

3,201,209 

664,258 

2,404,982 

6,270,449 

1800 

2,761,384 

186,449 

3,283,392 

6,231,225 

1801 

3,638,021 

569,691 

3,940,859 

8,148,571 

1802 

3,925,595 

584,673 

4,166,113 

3,790,868 

8,676,381 

1803 

4,198,154 

792,474 

8,781,496 

Sugar, 1793 

Cwt. 

9,336 

Cwt. 

5,106 

Cwt. 

2,115,308 

Cwt. 

2,129,750 

1794 

37,606 

4,615 

2,099,700 

2,141,921 

1795 

67,845 

3,320 

1,672,774 

1,743,939 

17 96 

100,033 

7,332 

1,709,219 

1,816,584 

1797 

54,867 

3,893 

1,577,921 

1,636,681 

1798 

47,172 

4,508 

1,963,922 

2,015,602 

1799 

106,679 

9,933 

2,511,858 

2,628,470 

1800 

90,800 

10,660 

2,312,537 

2,413,997 

1801 

46,855 

10,366 

2,902,737 

2,959,958 

1802 

50,258 

11,397 

3,401,711 

3,463,366 

1803 

113,447 

13,906 

2,759,126 

2,886,479 

Coffee, 1793 

866 

603 

90,547 

92,016 

1794 

4,586 

80 

136,341 

141,007 

1795 

22,331 

99 

122,370 

144,800 

1796 

21,828 

514 

71,744 

94,086 

1797 

13,538 

427 

100,982 

114.947 

1798 

19,421 

802 

144,852 

165,075 | 

1799 

8,093 

1,130 

123,036 

132,259 

1800 

7,125 

775 

172,474 

180,374 

1801 

12,596 

935 

185,828 

199,359 

1802 

14,907 

257 

214,984 

230,148 

1803 

19,916 

1,353 

152,614 

173,883 

Cotton-Wool, 1793 

lbs. 

lbs. 

8,690 

lbs. 

9,164,893 

lbs. 

9,173,583 

1794 

74,369 

6,304 

8,392,502 

8,473,175 

1795 

49,282 

1.600 

11,624,613 

11,675,495 

1796 

47,400 

1,550 

8,805,463 

8,854,413 

1797 

86,817 

12,850 

6,818,486 

6,918,153 

1798 

- - - 

18,250 

7,891,582 

7,909,8 32 

1799 

59,400 

750 

7,469,731 

7,529,881 

1800 

31,800 

4,274 

10,575,275 

10,611,349 

1801 

12,350 

500 

11,248,164 

11,261,014 

1802 

3,000 

14,950 

8,781,941 

8,799,891 

1803 

. . . 

3,250 

5,647,365 

5,650,615 


Custom-House, London, May 5, 1806. WILLIAM IKYING.] 


T T 2 


324 


t 


WEST INDIES. 


[By the act passed in July 1806, in regulation 
of the future intercouse between America and the 
W. Indies, under orders to be issued by the King 
in council, sugar and coffee were expunged from 
the list of enumerated articles before licensed for 
the trade, with a view of securing a monopoly to 
the mother- country, but the intent of which, it is 
feared, must have been considerably counter- 
acted by the proximity and easy access of the fp- 
reign islands of Guadaloupe and Martinique. 

For a further account of the Exports, particu- 
larly to Great Britain, the reader is referred to 
the next Chapter. 

British Shipping employed in the TV. India 
Trade . — The navigation acts, and particular re- 
strictions on British ships navigated according to 
law, if freighted with colonial produce, having 
been already under our consideration, our pre- 
sent intention is to form such an arrangement of 
official documents, as may shew the extent of 
British shipping employed in the W. India trade; 
and its progressive increase not only in the num- 
ber, but in the additional tonnage and dimension, 
of ships. 


On this head, however, it may be proper to 
direct the reader’s attention to the average size 
of the ships, and to the nature of their voyage, 
with a comparative view of other branches of 
British shipping and navigation. 

The W. India ships will appear to be of a size 
suited to the employment of seamen in the line 
of practice and knowledge of their business, 
which may best fit them for future service in 
ships of war; whilst yet the dimensions of the 
shipping are not such as to require the largest 
oak timber, and deprive the public dock-yards in 
any degree of that resource which is yearly dimi- 
nishing, and more difficult to procure. 

The navigation from five to eight weeks, or 
five months out and home, has the advantage 
over more-distant voyages, by returning the crews 
at certain periods within the year, for national 
service, if eventually so required : at the same 
time carrying the seamen through various cli- 
mates in so short a period, and in so frequent 
succession, enures their habits, and fits them to 
bear the fatigues of duty in every quarter of the 
globe. 


Comparative RETURN, for the Years 1787, per Report to Privy Council, 1788; and for 1804, 

per Return to House of Commons, March 8, 1805. 


Shipping Inwards: 

1787. 

1804. 

- 

Shijis. 

Ships. 

Tods. 

Ships. 

Tons. 

For Great Britain, to London, - - - 

Liverpool, - - 



252 

70,418 

326 

104,312 

143 

I 




Bristol, - - - 

71 

} 253 

49,585 

188 

52,009 

Lancaster, - - 

39 

f 



Port Glasgow 1 
and Greenock, j 

— 

70 

12,022 

84 

17,932 




575 

132,025 

598 

174,253 

For Ireland, - - to Dublin, - - - 
Cork, - - - - 

— 

— 

* 

29 

6,526 

— 

— 

— 

18 

2,403 

Belfast, - - - 

— 

— 

— 

5 

752 . 

From British W. Indies, - 

— 

— 

— 

650 

183,934] 


W EST INDIES 


325 


[Comparative Tonnage, and Size of Ships, in the West India Trade, at different Periods. 



1787. 


1804. 


Results, 1804-5. 


Ships. 

Tons. 

Medium 
T ons 
each. 

Ships. 

Tons. 

Medium 

Tons 

each. 

In- 
crease 
Number 
oi' Ships. 

Increase of 
Tonnage. 

Increase 
of Size 
of Ships 
in Tons. 

London 

252 

70,418 

279 

326 

104,312 

324 

74 

33,894 

45 

Out-ports - 

25 3 

49,585 

197 

188 

52,009 

277 

d. 65 

2,424 

80 

Scotland - 

70 

12,022 

170 

84 

17,932 

242 

14 

5,910 

■ 72 


575 

132,025 

- - 

598 

174,253 

- - 

23 . 

42,228 

- - 


West India Shipping to Great Britain and Ireland, inward and outward, 1804. Return to House 

of Commons, March 18, 1805. 

Irish Trade with the West Indies. 





In war 

d. 


Outward. 


Ships. 

Ships. 

Tons. 

Tons each. 


Ships. 

Dublin - - - - 

j Irish - 
( British 

12 

17 

| 29 

6,526 

224 

Irish - 
British 

- 17 

- 10 

1 27 

Cork - - 

| Irish - 
I British 

10 

S 

} 18 

2,403 

134 

Irish - 
British 

- 25 

- 95 

l 120 

Belfast - - - - 

Irish 

- - 

3 

610 

203 

Irish - 

- 5 

} 0 

Waterford, &amp;c. 

Irish 

- 

2 

142 

71 

British 

- 1 



52 

9,681 

- - 

- 

- 

150 


The greater number of ships clearing outward their passage to the sugar colonies, for their as- 
from Ireland to the W. Indies, is to be attributed sortment of butter, salted beef, pork, &amp;c. 
to British ships ( via Cork especially) calling, on 


Recapitulation of Shipping inward in 1804, from the Sugar Colonies. 



Ships. 

Tons. 

Seamen. 

Medium 
Tons each. 

Great Britain - - 

598 

174,253 

13,256 

288 

Ireland 

52 

9,681 

840 

192] 

I otal British W. Indies 

650 

183,934 

14,096 


From conquered colonies - 

82 

13,746 

1,500 


General total - - - 

732 

197,680 

15,596 



326 


WEST INDIES. 


[From the above Tables it appears that the total tonnage employed between Great Britain and the 

West Indies, was, viz. 

Shipping Inwards. Tong 


England and Scotland, in 1804 - - - 

Ireland ---------- 

- - - 174,253 

- - - 9,681 

183,934 

132,025 

England and Scotland, in 1787 - - - 

Ireland, no Import permitted - - - 

- - - 132,025 



Increase of tonnage inwards in 18 years - - - 


51,909 


being equal to more than one-fifth of the whole 
of the tonnage inwards of 1787, exclusive of 
13,746 tons from the conquered colonies. 

The seamen employed in the year 1804, were, 
as may be seen above, 15,596 — the present num- 
ber (0814) including those employed in the na- 
vigation between the different islands may not 
be over-rated by Mr. Colquhoun at 25,000 ; 
which, allowing an equal number of tons to 


each man, as was the case in 1804, raises the 
present tonnage to upwards of 316,000 tons, be- 
ing an increase of import shipping for the whole 
of the W. Indies of more than one-third in the 
last 10 years. 

In 1804-5, the British shipping in the export 
trade to the W. Indies, was officially returned to 
the House of Commons in March 1805, as fol- 
lows : 



Ships. 

Tons. 

Average Tons 
each Ship. 

Seamen. 

From London - - - - 

350 

107,100 

306 

8,400 

Outports - 

257 

70,532 

276 

5,140 

Scotland - 

101 

25,048 

248 

1,818 

Ireland - - - - 

129 

33,900 

275 

2,322 

Totals - - - 

837 

236,510 

- - - 

17,680 


Thus the total Shipping employed between Great Britain and her West India Colonies, in their 

repeated voyages, were 




Tons. 

Seamen. 

Tons. 

Seamen. 

in 1804 - - - 

J Inwards - - 

1 Outwards 

197,680 

236,510 

15,596 
l 17,680 



Total 


Tons. 

Seamen. 

434,190 

33,276 

in 1814 - - - 

r Inwards - - 

\ Outwards 

316,090 

334,431 

25,000 

25,000 



Total ------ 




650,521 

50,000 

Total increase - - - 




216,331 

16,724 


So that the shipping between Great and the 
W. Indies may be computed, in round numbers, 
to have increased one-third in the last 10 years. 

Shipping belonging to the several ports of Great 
Britain, from 1791 to 1814. — The above was the 


amount of tonnage employed from the year 1787, 
including the repeated voyages of the men and 
vessels. A comparative view of the proportion 
this navigation has borne and bears to the whole 
of the shipping of Great Britain, will appear by] 


WEST INDIES. 


327 


fc* 

TJ cd 

a; 0) 

ugp 

s-g 

a? 

o 

cS 

3 © 
to _C 
3 

&lt;M 

£ ° 
Si! 

c_ S 

o © 

S-&gt; 
O , 

S -=! 
* ° 
^co 

© 

H3 -3 

a ■*■&gt; 
a a 
~ o 

CD *&gt; 

bC ^ 
rt .3 
= ^ 
5 5 
HW 
, -a 

S* C/3 
&lt;D -w 

f « 

O © 

-w 

a 

3 'S 
o o 

g cc 

^1 
22 P* 

2a 

-w o 

£ &lt;D 

^ w 
o 

&lt;U ^3 

in •+-&gt; 

O O 

lu 0) 

O b€ 

S 3 © 

^"© 

S ^ 
a -+j 

J 

© ' M 

■£ oT 

5 *- 1 2 
o ™ 

W C/3 

H 22 

D be 

O-S 

CJ cfl 

be 


O 

&lt; 

a 


o 

H 


33 

a 

C3 


_a .© 

'" 33 

co (3 

a i— t 

.2 *» 

C/3 

Cd k 5 &gt; 

|£ 
J 2 «-( 

Pile 

-a f 

cc Cfl 

VC.g 
M a 


v* 

° a 

a&gt; cd 

42 -3 

C/3 c 

'-h g 

33 ~ 

a ^ 

cd 


© 


a’ © 
■3^ 

• r ^ 
pq 8 ^ 
^ a 

■+S s- 

rt tu 

© 3 

eo 


iO'HHrjiooiooif5t&gt;T}((oioaoci^f-uoieoioNo 

, - | Oioc)CO'- , raoo'HioiO'-HioceoG^t&gt;0‘Cia'#!5o 

0Oi-&lt;O0’-&lt;CO©COGlG)COb'G100t^b-©a0i-&lt;©'-&lt;ir3© 

NX005CO'H^aiiOCOai^COOONONi&gt;O^G^in 

HHOJfHMG^G^CNGO^^^iO^iOiO^iOOOCOO 

imI 1 _ ■. — .— . ! ■ .. r— * r— l — 1 mM * P_J ■— « - I —. 1 i 


C0C0'?PGl00©G100'^a0b-'*i&lt;oa0G'l^'-&lt;O3'-&lt;'!tl^tia3 
UlUJOIOO'tOOGOl'^IMMOtMOO^W'-'Ol'^^O 
00^ 0^03^00^ 

i-ToT'-h' ©'gT ao" ocT'Sh" gi" -T ed' wf t&gt; oo'^ cd' &lt;T ©'•■*' acf 

H 01000 h«-!OiO- l 'H^UOO(»OQO(MNI&gt;U^b- 

iT3 103 103 103^ 10^ O CO G^G^Q^G^GO^CO^t# 

&gt;— — &lt; r— i i—i i—i &gt;—i ' — (i— i r-i t— ' i— i Gl Gl Gl Gl G! Gl Gl Gl Gl Gl Gl Gl 


lOjO^tN^^WOl^^OOm^-H^oO^iyKON 
ijM&gt;|0300)NOCCC)0!&gt;05b" p HiOQOC)^l&gt;000 
o^c^cqaq^© © © gi aqao^^^oq^b^© i-^gi^o '-^b^i— i r-i 
ioT o' o' o' o' t-d o t&gt; b- ad' C3 cTcTt-T g? Gif gi" o' ‘-o' cd' -jT-i^r 


GO'^t^^aoG'}^C3io3GiiooaoaooO}'-&lt;t-'^oo'&lt;^o 

00000t^0300’-i000l^i03— 11-^000-— i(3!t&gt;MQ0G&gt;( 

©^® i 03 &gt;— &lt; c^aq^o o o^Q^i-^cqc^G} 00003^^30 

O O' b~ o' 103 103" 103" 1T3 icP ifT 103 103 »03 lof iffT lO'T ioT 10^ ioT ioT 


ONOrjUC3C5’-tN^®(J}O'-&lt;OOi03^Cl^Oi03Tf( 
03OG)OOt&gt;XQ0W©00Oi&gt;OO'!((Oi03Oi03‘f3O 
(J)if3!&gt; — Ni03i-03XG^W^®ONi03C30000«'-i 

cT oT t- 103 'cco' cg' 03 s cT ^ ^ o' 00 " cc o' o' o' ao' ad'ad'oTi&gt;' 

OOOOi03if3it3'ii^‘Gif3iO)iOiO)i03i03‘03it3iOif3it3iO 


OCO'— 'OC3XXOjC303C0Oi0)^(&gt;OX^i03O0(3 

NO®O0Us^3)G)OOt!3OOON0)O«(M03 

r-H^(r-Hr- l 0000 C 300000000 '— !— 1MI— 


O^Oi&gt;i03O®'^G&lt;OOOOWN^iO'-iG&gt;l&gt;iO'H 

ooc3t^ao^'-'OaoaoaoaoG&lt;C30^oao^ioaot^ 

G^^^t^C3G^G^i03C3i03'^i03i^'^'3iG^i03OO'-HO03 

r\ «&gt;. r\ 

000003O'-^C0^Tiiif3Ot^t^'^'^i03C0C000G0'^'^'!ii 

1^*^ r^mJ 1 r* ■ ! 


)&gt;-03G03'-Ha3G^O^G'iaOi^^G^C3C&lt;30'^COCOO(3G^aO 
iG3rt&lt;— HCOi03t&gt;OG^'^i03C3^©OiG30C3G'J©aOi03© 
i03GGl0i(^G^l'^©©t^'^00©a0i03©aDt''^ l ©C&lt;3^O 

^*^rsrN#N*&gt; 

OC3"iC3NX— 1 ©^^ 00 © ^ © CO ^ *03 (&gt;• O 

©©&gt;^co-^i03©t^.©^0)CNao©©aoao©©:— gh--^ 
^-1 r-H Qv( Gt 0^1 Gi ^ I— "I ^ G5 Gl) G 1 ) Gi 


io»o30^ooaoaDOt^oio3'— iTji^ot'Oxoao© 

OOTf©'-(l^^-&gt;C3io3©t&gt;-aOO'— i-^GJOi— 'OiojiOGlL-^ 

o^o^aq^G^co o ^o &lt;©_© g^g^ aq^aq^cq oo n c^c^gj s ^o &gt; '^ 
— ^ r-T t— T gT gT gT gT gT gT cof cd' coT gT G f cof gT gT goT ctT oof cd" go' 


b'CG^c&lt;3t^t&gt;aoGi(©G)aoaO'^"io30co©'-iG)ao© 

'-GO'lTf('^OGi'H©r-03 0r-'G&lt;l&gt;GGOOO'H'CO 

^c^cq^— ' £&gt; 0 &lt; 3 ©ao^t-r-io 3 G! ih « qqi&gt; oo^q^t^ 

G} co cd' gT ad' gT o' 03 ^ ^ ■— T t&gt;T &lt;— ^ rjT r^t~t^©a 0 '— &lt;-^G &lt;'^ 1 

© © © © © © © © r— I G( G1) c&lt;3 CO CO CO G&lt;3 CO oo ^ 3(H r*&lt; 


Ol&gt;-’-'t^^i03'—i{&gt;aDaDa0'3iG}©C&lt;3©Ot^'^'—' 

CO © CO O © co 103 O 0 - O 00 O 103 © 00 O Gf co G&gt; i—i 
O O © 103 © O O © O Gl ^ CO Tfi © O co © ^ o 


i - b- 
I O G&lt; 
k O^ 

o'o - gJ © - o'ctT -^ r co - o' co" cd' o*' i"*' x 103 gTcTi— &lt; — ■ g n ) x o 

^oao©o©'©^©^co^Gi— iCOGICOt-i-iiOCC© 

co co 00 00 co T*t tjjh 103 o i&gt; ao cqc^o^c^cqcq'-^'-^^-GG^ 

1*1 t*i 1*1 1*1 1*1 1*1 i*i 1*1 *^ 1*1 i*i r* 1*1 G* O') Gl G( Gl Gl Gl Gl Gl 


' 4 iG)©G} 03 ©©© 0 ©t~iC 3 COC 30 C 3 &gt;C 3 ©i-Ht'-iC 3 © 
OOOOioGl— i00i03©©Gl00Cj©©OC0t~l&gt;©GlTfiGl 

© gi ^ Gi co co ^oq^L^cq^i^cqoq^G^Gr G^-^oq^cqirq 
gT co' CoT cd' co~ CoT co" co" co" rtT ioT o' b-" l- &lt;&gt;■' cc 00" 00" 00" cd qT co" 

Ml 1 — 4 — — 1 &gt;— t &gt;•&gt;* r— ( f»— ( P-H ^—1 r-H r-H P— ! r™H r-H r-H f— ( — h l»( r — 1 i-H 


-GlCO^i030bXGO"i&amp;lCO^!OOb®GOi-iGl 
C 3 C 3 C 3 C 3 C 3 C 3 C 3 C 3030 ©©©©©©©©©— i i— &lt;— t 
t&gt; t&gt; b&gt; i." 1 - b- t&gt; b« 00 00 r /) 00 &lt;M 00 00 CX) 00 CO 00 OC 00 


11m Number of Vessels, Tons, and Men, for this Year, is estimated on a Medium of the Years 1808 and 1810.] 


328 


WEST INDIES. 


[In concluding our notice of the tonnage of the 
W. India shipping, it is generally to be ob- 
served, that in proportion to the value of the 
articles laden, the freight of the export is 
greater than that of the import trade. Charged 
on bulk comparatively, as on value or weight of 
the article, it operates to a third, to a half, or 
even to the full value, of sundry exports. Of 
hoops for binding hogsheads, all of which are 
supplied from Great Britain, the cost and freight 
are nearly equal. From examination of various 
and actual invoices of stores sent to the planta- 
tions, Sir William Young computes the freight 
(in time of war) as at least one-fourth of the in- 
voice ; and on the total export, to a yearly 
value of six millions ; the freight is then 
£• 1,500,000. This is a great interest; but no 
less beneficial to the W. Indian than to the Bri- 
tish ship-owner, since the former were not a 
saving freight paid outwards, and the ship came 
to the islands light, or in ballast, would have a 
proportional surcharge to pay on the freight of 
his produce home. 

Passage Outwards to the JV. Indies. — Having- 
cleared the British Channel, a westing is to be 
preferred, or w. s. w. course, to long. 12', to 
clear Cape Finisterre, and avoid the being em- 
bayed in Biscay, or afterwards, under contin- 
gency of w. gales, closing on the coast of Por- 
tugal, where the W. India fleet, under convoy of 
the Apollo, was in great part wrecked and lost 
in 1801. Having made long. 13°, lat. 44°, steer 
e. or w. of Madeira ; the latter, wind serving ; 
but holdingsouthing in preference, for gaining the 
e. or trade-winds, prevalent from lat. 24°, but 
general and certain between the tropics, from lat. 
22°, and s. Trades gained, course direct for Bar- 
badoes, lat. 13° 3 '. long. 59° 48'. 

Passage Homeward from the TV. Indies.- — Pack- 
ets or convoys taking departure from Tortola, lat. 
!8° 28 / . long. 64° 43', take northing, to clear the 
trade-winds ; safest to prefer northing to lat. 30°, 
for variable winds, and w. probable ; then run n. 
w. to lat. 40° long. 45°. Clear of the great bank 
of Newfoundland, and thence catching prevalent 
w. winds, hold course w. n. w. to n. of Azores, or 
Western Isles; and from lat. 43°, long. 30°, 
slant n. n. e. to open British Channel, in lat. 49°, 
long. 12° ; long. 8°, heave the lead, &amp;c. &amp;c. 

Numerous fleets under convoy, in time of war, 
from bad sailing vessels, and others going less 
near to the wind between the tropics, will take a 
more direct northing, or may even lose a de- 
gree of longitude, whilst clearing the trades ; and 
if e. then prevalent, may near the Banks of 


Newfoundland, and encounter heavy seas and 
gales : this the Jamaica convoys are most ex- 
posed to. Packets, and single merchantmen, ac- 
cording severally to the ability of ship and 
crew, will make e. from their departure. A pas- 
sage homeward of the packet may be estimated 
at five weeks ; of a single laden ship, at six 
weeks ; and of convoy, at eight weeks. 

CHAP. Y. 

Tables and Accounts of imports and exports 
of w. india staples. — Sugar. 

Tables and Accounts of imports and exports 

of OTHER W. INDIA STAPLES, VIZ . — 1. Rum. 

2. Coffee. — 3. Cocoa. — 4. Pimento. — 5. Cotton 
Wool. — 6. Dye Woods, Sfc. 

Later Accounts of the quantity and value of 
imports and exports. — 1. Quantity and value 
of the principal articles imported from the Bri- 
tish and foreign TV. India islands , 1805, 1807, 
1810, and 1812. — 2. Official value of exports 
from Great Britain to the island of St. Do- 
mingo, 1809 and 1813. — 3. Official value of 
exports from Great Britain to Africa, 1810 and 
1812. — 4. Account of the colonial staples import- 
ed into Great Britain, for the year 1809, distin- 
guishing the countries from whence imported. 

Tables and Accounts of imports and exports 
of w. india staples. — Sugar. 

In treating of the staples of the W. India islands, 
it will not be expected in this place that we are 
about to enter into their botanical history. Our 
present object is to attempt to show how those 
productions have been nurtured, by the great de- 
mand they have invariably experienced, ever 
since the soil of these colonies was first found to 
be beneficial to their growth. Nothing, perhaps, 
will better conduce to this object than a separate 
and distinct consideration of the several articles 
as exported ; and first, with regard to sugar. 

Previously to the year 1760, the quantity of 
this article imported, from the W. India colonies 
into Great Britain, never exceeded much more 
than 1,000,000 of cwts. ; but, since that period, 
it has progressively increased in a very consider- 
able degree, as the following table will specify ; 
being] 


WEST I N D I E S. 


32# 

[An ACCOUNT of the Quantity of British Plantation Sugar imported into England, between 
the Years 1698 and 1754, and thereafter into Great Britain to the Year 1760; also, an Ac- 
count, for the same Periods, of the Quantity of Raw and Refined Sugars exported : distinguishing 
each Year, and the Raw from the Refined. 



Imported. 

Raw Sugar 
exported. 

Refined Sugar 
exported. 


Imported. 

Raw Sugar 
exported. 

Refined Sugar 
exported. 

Years 

Quantity. 


Quantity 


Quantity. 


Years. 

Quantity. 


Quantity. 


Quantity. 



Cwt. qrs. 

lbs 

Cwts. qrs. 

lbs 

Cwts. qrs. 

lbs- 


Cwt. q 

IS. 

lbs. 

Cwt. qrs. 

lbs. 

Cwt. r 

rs. 

lbs. 

1698 

427,573 

2 

25 

182,325 

2 

4 

14,302 

0 

20 

1730 

818,277 

1 

12 

95,832 

0 

1 

21,077 

2 

26 

1699 

489,326 

1 

7 

165,391 

3 

16 

17,644 

2 

23 

1731 

822,844 

O 

5 

15 

121,904 

3 

18 

16,511 

3 

18 

1700 

435,465 

1 

21 

133,917 

3 

11 

3,475 

1 

17 

1732 

1,001,784 

2 

0 

102,274 

0 

5 

27,008 

2 

5 

1701 

259,062 

3 

6 

4 . 5,036 

1 

5 

2,908 

2 

24 

11733 

695,679 

3 

9 

44,932 

0 

8 

13,275 

0 

26 

1702 

408,914 

0 

1 

84,016 

2 

26 

621 

1 

25 

1734 

903,634 

2 

22 

69,899 

2 

25 

21,070 

1 

0 

1703 

315,837 

2 

12 

133,713 

1 

8 

1,329 

0 

15 

1735 

877,591 

0 

24 

58,569 

3 

26 

19,706 

2 

24 

1704 

370,157 

1 

7 

71,822 

1 

7 

690 

3 

18 

1736 

550,900 

1 

10 

40,779 

o 

17 

11,331 

o 

6 

1705 

335,873 

3 

3 

107,217 

0 

16 

1,846 

2 

23 

1737 

864,252 

1 

0 

49,437 

1 

6 

9,197 

1 

23 

1706 

388,267 

3 

26 

131,832 

2 

25 

2,156 

2 

13 

1738 

951,073 

3 

4 

63,149 

0 

o 

O 

15,881 

g 

10 

1707 

377,107 

2 

11 

64,180 

3 

6 

2,365 

1 

18 

1739 

706,947 

0 

8 

67,144 

2 

16 

15,046 

i 

0 

1708 

397,570 

3 

12 

74,377 

3 

23 

924 

0 

18 

1740 

886,124 

1 

0 

68,450 

0 

o 

■ 19,449 

3 

15 

1709 

507,662 

1 

21 

117,075 

2 

5 

2,146 

2 

21 

174] 

731,410 

3 

11 

50,231 

0 

10 

12.599 

3 

24 

1710 

366,394 

1 

26 

82,142 

2 

24 

1,800 

2 

16 

1742 

895,134 

1 

26 

151,126 

o 

O 

11 

26,624 

3 

14 

1711 

423,541 

0 

1 

119,567 

1 

8 

8,579 

2 

18 

1743 

724,411 

2 

14 

58,198 

0 

19 

17,687 

0 

2 

1712 

503,528 

1 

8 

184,609 

0 

12 

3,493 

1 

10 

1744 

655,199 

3 

0 

78,344 

3 

9 

17,689 

0 

11 

1713 

512,221 

3 

0 

158,996 

3 

6 

3,482 

3 

5 

1745 

753,472 

1 

19 

92,826 

2 

22 

13,616 

3 

27 

1714 

617,414 

Q 

O 

11 

143,337 

1 

13 

4,481 

o 

&lt;2 

14 

1746 

608,458 

2 

14 

51,935 

1 

15 

10,111 

0 

1 

1715 

684,759 

2 

16 

161,941 

3 

3 

4,549 

0 

1 

1747 

982,588 

2 

13 

115,727 

I 

11 

10,801 

3 

21 

1716 

763,175 

3 

14 

290,179 

2 

11 

9,993 

0 

2 

1748 

933,271 

3 

9 

127,921 

1 

0 

30,928 

2 

2 

1717 

566,885 

0 

1 

124,375 

1 

13 

13,188 

1 

9 

1749 

915,344 

2 

5 

107,964 

0 

22 

21,846 

o 

O 

15 

1718 

544,634 

0 

25 

167,622 

0 

20 

3,644 

2 

19 

1750 

825,936 

2 

0 

43,769 

3 

6 

22,325 

2 

15 

1719 

706,385 

o 

O 

20 

121,778 

0 

9 

3,106 

o 

«2 

7 

1751 

825,121 

1 

16 

35,712 

2 

16 

13,508 

3 

20 

1720 

497,611 

0 

21 

66,743 

3 

11 

3,786 

2 

25 

1752 

1,114,084 

o 

O 

26 

55,687 

2 

6 

11,224 

3 

7 

1721 

616,941 

0 

9 

83,609 

2 

5 

5,245 

2 

2 

1753 

859,131 

2 

12 

42,818 

2 

17 

12,298 

1 

15 

1722 

660,766 

2 

9 

63,479 

1 

7 

4,914 

2 

12 

1754 

1,202,679 

3 

14 

110,853 

0 

26 

14,364 

2 

I 

1723 

729,133 

2 

13 

110,088 

1 

11 

5,177 

2 

19 

1755 

1.051,265 

3 

6 

206,336 

g 

0 

30,017 

Q 

2 

1724 

851,952 

2 

25 

147,408 

2 

1 

6,293 

3 

5 

1756 

1,230,843 

0 

20 

70,625 

0 

9 

16,758 

0 

23 

1725 

668,346 

1 

9 

146,915 

3 

22 

8,414 

2 

7 

1757i 

1,145,628 

2 

3 

220,824 

o 

14 

62,771 

3 

0 

1726 

645,158 

0 

1 

112,699 

3 

21 

11,073 

3 

1 

175s; 

1,199,682 

2 

26 

174,234 

0 

9 

107,626 

2 

10 

1727 

972,240 

0 

1 

210,320 

o 

23 

29,134 

1 

4 

1759 

1.374,720 

2 

5 

143,683 

1 

23 

58,650 

3 

18 

1728 

994,761 

3 

24 

158,746 

2 

13 

13,686 

1 

2 

1760 

1,491,317 

o 

O 

16 

393,324 

0 

13 

108,891 

i 

7 

1729 

1,024,078 

2 

3 

167,980 

1 

12 

14,538 

0 

23 












With the gradually increasing importation port. This will appear by' the following table, 
about this period, we find that the home con- being] 
sumption kept pace pretty equally with the ex- 


*OL. V. 


U tJ 


.130 


WEST INDIES. 

j An ACCOUNT of the Quantity of Sugar imported from the W. India Colonies into Great Britain, 
in the under-mentioned Periods, from 1761 to 1811, both inclusive, with the Quantity exported in 
the same Periods ; distinguishing the Export to Ireland, from the Export to all other Parts ; and 
expressing the Sugar in Cwts. after reducing the Refined into Raw, on the principle of 34 to 20; 
also the Quantity remaining for the Consumption of the British Empire. 


Periods. 

Imported. 

Exported. 

Remaining fur 
the Consump- 
tion of Great 
Britain and 
Ireland. 

To Ireland. 

To other Parts. 

&gt; 

Total. 

1761 

1762 - - - - 

1763 --- - 

1764 .... 

1765 - - - - 

Cwts. 

1,517,727 

1,428,086 

1,765,838 

1,488,079 

1,227,159 

Cwts. 

130,811 

100,483 

159,230 

125,841 

152,616 

Cwts. 

444,228 

366,327 

398,407 

371,453 

191,756 

Cwts. 

575.039 

466,810 

557,637 

497,294 

344,372 

Cwts. 

Annual average of five years - 

1,485,377 

133,796 

354,434 

488,230 

1,130,943 

1771 - - - - 

1772 - - - - 

1773 - - - - 

1774 - - - - 

1775 - - - - 

1,492,096 

1,829,721 

1,804,080 

2.029,725 

2,021,059 

207,153 

189,555 

200,886 

224,733 

272,638 

82,563 

48,678 

37,323 

55,481 

190,568 

289,716 

238,233 

238,209 

280,214 

463,206 


Annual average ----- 

1,835,336 

218,993 

82,922 

301,915 

1,752,414 

1781 - - - - 
! 1782 - - - - 

1783 - - - - 

1784 - - - - 

1785 - - - - 

1,080,848 

1,374,269 

1,584,275 

1,782,3S6 

2,075,909 

162,951 

96,640 

173,417 

142,139 

210,939 

114,631 

49,816 

177,839 

222,076 

223,204 

277,582 

146,456 

351,256 

364,215 

434,143 


Annual average ----- 

1,579,537 

157,217 

157,513 

314,730 

1,422,024 

1791 - - - - 

1792 - - - - 

1793 - - - - 

1794 - - - - 

1795 - - - - 

1,808,950 

1,980,973 

2,115,308 

2,330,026 

1,871,368 

141,291 

115.309 

145.223 

153,798 

147,609 

267,397 

508,821 

360.005 

792,364 

551,788 

408,688 

624,130 

505.228 

946,162 

699,397 


^Annual average ----- 

2,021,325 

140,646 

496,075 

636,721 

1,525,250 

1801 - - - - 

!. 1802 - - - - 

1803 - - - - 

1804 - - _ - 

1805 - - - - 

1806 - - - - 

3,729,264 

4,119,860 

2,925,400 

2,968,590 

2,922,255 

3,673,037 

113,915 

179,978 

144,646 

153,711 

153,303 

127,328 

862,892 

1,747,271 

1.377,867 

762.485 

808,073 

791,429 

976,807 

1.927,249 

1,522,513 

916,196 

961,376 

918,757 


Annual average ----- 

3,389,734 

145,480 

1,058,336 

1,203,816 

2,331,398 

1809 . _ - - 

1810 - - 

! 1811 - - - - 

3,974,185 

4,759,423 

3,897,221 

272,943 

102,039 

335,468 

1,223,748 

1,217,310 

355,602 

1,496,691 

1,319,349 

690,870 


Annual average of three years - 

4,210,276 

236,816 

932,153 

1,168,970 

3,288,122 


Inspector General’s Office, Custom House, London. WILLIAM IRVING.] 


WEST INDIES. 


331 


[From whence it is further observable that the 
average consumption of Great Britain has always 
been more than two thirds of the quantity of 
sugar imported, and that the exportation to 
foreign parts, except in the unnatural check ex- 
perienced from the continental system, has been 
always ready to take off the influx, however 
much it may have exceeded the demand for the 
home supply. 

Of the quantity imported in the three last 
mentioned years, it may be necessary to state, 
that only a stipulated proportion was admissible 
into British consumption, to the exclusion of that 
imported from some of the conquered colonies; the 
particulars of which we subjoin in the following- 
statement, calculated at the same time to shew 
the comparative quantity of the article in question 
yearly imported from the E. Indies. 


An ACCOUNT of the Quantity of Sugar im- 
ported into Great Britain in each of the three 
Years ending January 5, 1812; distinguishing 
that which was imported from the E. Indies, 
and from those Colonies in the W. Indies whose 
Produce is admissible into British Consump- 
tion, from that which was imported from the 
other Conquered Colonies. 


Years 
ending 
Jan. 5 

From Colonies 
the Produce of 
which is admis- 
sible into Brit 
ish Consump- 
tion. 

From Colonies, 
the Produce of 
which is not ad- 
missible into 
British Con- 
sumption. 

From the 
East 
Indies. 

Total 

Quantity 

imported. 

1810 

1811 

1812 

Cwts. 

3,394,185 

3,771,060 

3,647,142 

Cwts. 

580,813 

988,363 

250,079 

Cwts. 

26,200 

49,240 

20,322 

Cwts. 

4,001,198 

4,808,663 

3,917,543 


Custom House. WILLIAM IRVING. 

The relative quantity imported from the different 
islands will appear by the annexed 


ACCOUNT of the Quantity of Sugar imported into Great Britain, in three Years, ending July 1812, 
distinguishing eleven principal Islands of the Old British Colonies, from whence the same was 
imported, an Amount of the Sugar on hand on the 5th of January of each Year ; the Net Pro- 
duce of Duties on the Import (after deducting the Payments made to the Excise) and the Rate of 
the same per Cent, in each Year. 



Years ending 5th of January. 


1810 

1811 

1812 

Antigua - - 

Barbadoes - ----- 

Dominica ------ 

Grenada ------- 

Jamaica ------- 

Montserrat ------ 

Nevis - -- -- -- - 

St. Kitt’s ------- 

St. Vincent’s ------ 

Tortola ------- 

Trinidad ------- 

Cwts. 

106,779 

139,721 

52,603 

210,068 

1,504,631 

21,915 

60,872 

166,055 

202,957 

12,695 

157,866 

Cwts. 

192,621 

181,440 

62,362 

215,886 

1,611,429 

41,113 

87,393 

168,101 

197,304 

34,000 

166,627 

Cwts. 

164,824 
155,513 
45,030 
194,409 
1,785,005 
22 97 1 
46.509 
142,821 
200,583 
19,388 
104,591 

Total - -- -- -- - 

2,636,162 

2,958,276 

2,881,042 

Total on hand ----- 

979,849 

1,759,132 

1,854,698 

! 

Net produce of Duties - - 

Ditto per cwt. ----- 

£. s. d. 

3,373,995 2 1 
1 4 10 

£. s. d. 

3,117,330 8 10 
1 1 Of 

£. s. d. 

3,339,218 17 5 
1 3 2] 


u u 2 


33*2 


WEST INDIES. 


[More specific Tables for the year ending January 5, 1813, are desirable : we therefore give an 
ACCOUNT of the Quantity of Sugar imported into Great Britain, in the Year ending 
January 5, 1813 ; specifying the Quantity imported from each of the Colonies, whose Produce is 
admissible into Home Consumption, from the Islands of Martinique, and of Guadaioupe, from the 
E. Indies, from Ireland ; and also, the Quantity of Prize Sugar. 


From whence imported. 


Sugar admissible into 
Home Consumption at 
the British Plantation 
Duties. 

Sugar not admissible 
into Home Consump- 
tion at the British Plan- 
tation Duties. 

East India 
Sugar. 


Total Quantity 
imported. 



^Antigua - - 



Cwts. 

187,882 

qrs. lbs. 

0 17 

Cwts. 

79 

qrs. 

0 

lbs. 

17 

Cwts. qrs. 

lbs. 

Cwts. 

187,961 

qrs. 

l 

lbs. 

6 


Barba does - 

- 

- 

136,196 

2 3 







156,196 

2 

3 

Cfl 

CD 

Dominica 

- 

- 

53,236 

3 2 







53,236 

3 

2 


Grenada 

- 

- 

210,516 

0 12 







210,516 

0 

12 


Jamaica - - 

- 

- 

1,455,954 

2 8 







1,455,954 

2 

8 

■£ / 

Montserrat - 

- 

- 

33,057 

2 3 

430 

0 

5 




33,487 

2 

8 


Nevis - - - 

_ 

- 

57,107 

1 1 







57,107 

1 

1 


St. Ivitt’s 

- 

- 

149,847 

2 26 

857 

3 

11 

- - - 

- 

- 

150,705 

2 

9 

' CO 

St. Vincent’s 

- 

- 

194,597 

3 1 

635 

3 

18 




195,233 

2 

19 

*rj 

Tortola - - 

- 

- 

35,568 

1 25 







35,568 

1 

25 

CQ 

Trinidad - - 

_ 

- 

118,407 

0 11 

4 

0 

0 




118,411 

0 

11 


^Bahamas - - 




362 

3 

20 

- - - 

- 

- 

362 

3 20 

CO 

^Demerara 



227,817 

0 27 







227,817 

9,084 

0 

27 

O 

Berbice - 

- 

- 

9,082 

3 27 

1 

0 

17 

- - 

- 

- 

0 

16 

o 

St. Lucia 

- 

- 

55,016 

1 1 

86 

0 

17 

- - 

_ 

- 

55,102 

1 

18 

o 

Surinam - - 

- 

- 

95,962 

3 8 







95,962 

3 

8 

-a 

Tobago - - 

- 

- 

122,778 

1 6 







122,778 

1 

6 

o 

Sh 

St. Thomas - 

- 

- 

34,061 

2 11 

645 

0 

22 




34,706 

3 

5 

o 

a 

St. Croix 

- 

- 

353,272 

3 9 

12 

1 

21 

- - 

- 

- 

353,285 

1 

g 

a 

Martinique - 

- 

- 

1 

3 20 

80,300 

1 

3 

- - - 

- 

- 

80,302 

0 23 

o 

O 

\Guadaloupe 

- 

- 

1 

1 22 

20,000 

3 

16 




20,002 

1 

10 

The East Indies - 








72,607 

1 

8 

72,607 

1 

8 

Ireland - - - 

- 

- 

103 

0 25 

4,159 

2 

19 

_ _ 

- 

- 

4,262 

3 

16 

Other Countries - 

- 

- 

978 

1 20 

16,692 

3 

3 

217 

2 

20 

17,888 

3 

15 

Prize Sugar - - 





14,819 

2 

14 

61 

0 

4 

14,880 

2 

18 

1 

Total 

- 

3,551,449 

0 5 

139,088 

0 

7 

72,886 

0 

4 

3,763,423 

0 

16 


The Quantity of SUGAR exported from Great Britain to all Parts in the same Year (reducing the 
Refined into Muscovado by the customary Rule) and distinguishing the Quantity exported to 
Ireland, was 


Raw Sugar ------ 

Refined Sugar (reduced to its proportionate Quan- ) 
tityofRaw) ------------ J 


Quantity of Sugar exported. 

f 

To 

Ireland. 

To other 
Countries. 

Total. 

Cwts. 

236,385 

Cwts. 

437,928 

Cwts. 

674,313 

70,407 

413,442 

483,849 

306,792 

851,370 

1,158,162] 


WEST INDIES. 


333 


[The AMOUNT of Duties paid on Sugar, in the same Year, together with the Amount of Drawbacks 
and Bounties on Sugar exported, and the Payments made to the Excise on account of Sugar used 
in the Distilleries and in the Breweries ; distinguishing the Amount of each) was as follows : 



Gross Receipt of 
Duties. 

Drawbacks 

paid. 

Drawbacks 

paid. 

Paid to the Excise 
on account of Sugai 
used in the Distil- 
leries. 

Net Produce. 

Year ending Ja- 7 
nuary 5, 1813 - j 

£. s. d. 

5,105,685 19 7 

£. s . d. 

109,953 3 7 

£. d. 

696,184 15 3 

£. s. d. 
211,335 1 6 

£. d. 

4,088,212 19 3 


Note . — -The sum of £.211,335 Is. 6d. is exclusive of the duties arising on sugar used in the distille- 
ries for the quarter ending January 5 last, amounting to £.148,273 4s. not yet paid over to the 
Excise, which sum being deducted from the net produce as above stated, reduces the actual net pro- 
duce of the sugar duties in the year ending January 5, 1813, to £.3,939,939 15s. 3d. including the 
duties on sugar used in the breweries, the quantity of which is not required to be taken by the 
officers of the revenue, and cannot therefore be stated. 

Custom House, London, April 27, 1813. WILLIAM IRVING. 


The net duty on sugar is properly estimated on 
the home consumption and the price of the duty. 
The latter has been, of late years, exceedingly 
flourishing, and particularly in consequence of 
the prohibition of the distillation from corn. It 
is seen by the above tables that the price of the 


duty per cwt., for the three years ending 1812, 
was, as to the quantity admissible into British 
consumption, from 21 to about 25 shillings the 
cwt. The following table will show the progres- 
sive increase from the year 1791. 


TABLE of the Prices, Charges, and Proceeds of a Hundred Weight of Sugar, at different Periods, 

from the work of Sir William Young. 



Ex-Duty. 

Included 

Duty. 

Charges. 

Net Proceeds. 

Actual Sales per Hogshead, 
net. 


Gazette 
Price per 
Cwt. 

Sale Price. 

Duty. 

Mercan- 

tile. 

Total. 

Per Cwt. 

Per Hogshead 
of 13 Cwt. 

Sugars, 

Tobago. 

Sugars, 

St. Vincent’s. 


S. 

d. 

S. 

d. 

s. 

d. 

S. 

d. 

S. 

d. 

5. 

d. 

£• -v- 

d. 

£• 

s. 

d. 

£■ 

. 9 . 

d. 

1791 

55 

0 

.67 

4 

12 

4 

8 

6 

20 

10 

46 

6 

30 4 

6 

0 

0 

0 

31 

8 

0 

1 792 

57 

0 

69 

4 

12 

4 

8 

6 

20 

10 

48 

6 

31 10 

6 

0 

0 

0 

32 

6 

0 

1793 

58 

0 

70 

4 

12 

4 

12 

0 

24 

4 

46 

0 

29 18 

0 

21 

15 

0 

27 

16 

0 

1794 

39 

0 

54 

0 

15 

0 

12 

0 

27 

0 

27 

0 

17 11 

0 

16 

6 

0 

20 

16 

0 

1795 

62 

5 

77 

5 

15 

0 

12 

6 

27 

6 

49 

11 

32 4 

7 

30 

0 

0 

35 

15 

0 

1796 

62 

0 

77 

0 

15 

0 

12 

6 

27 

6 

44 

6 

32 3 

6 

28 

5 

0 

34 

0 

0 

1797 

64 

0 

81 

6 

17 

6 

13 

0 

30 

6 

51 

0 

33 3 

0 

30 

18 

0 

37 

0 

0 

1798 

66 

8 

86 

0 

19 

4 

13 

0 

32 

4 

53 

8 

34 17 

8 

34 

8 

0 

37 

18 

0 

1799 

55 

0 

75 

0 

20 

0 

13 

6 

33 

6 

41 

6 

26 19 

6 

15 

0 

0 

23 

18 

0 I 

1800 

54 

0 

74 

0 

20 

0 

13 

6 

33 

6 

40 

6 

26 6 

6 

21 

10 

0 

23 

16 

0 

1801 

44 

0 

64 

0 

20 

0 

14 

0 

34 

0 

30 

0 

19 10 

0 

19 

2 

0 

21 

4 

0 

1802 

34 

0 

54 

5 

20 

0 

14 

0 

34 

0 

20 

5 

13 5 

5 

14 

18 

0 

18 

14 

0 

1803 

43 

0 

67 

0 

24 

0 

10 

0 

34 

0 

33 

0 

21 9 

0 

18 

10 

0 

28 

0 

0 

1804 

53 

6 

80 

0 

26 

6 

14 

0 

40 

6 

39 

6 

25 15 

6 

22 

0 

0 

27 

10 

0 

1805 

49 

0 

76 

0 

27 

0 

14 

6 

41 

6 

34 

6 

22 8 

f&gt; | 

16 

0 

0 

22 

17 

0 

1806 

41 

0 

68 

0 

27 

0 

15 

0 

42 

0 

26 

0 

16 18 

°] 








334 


WEST INDIES. 


[Having- thus seen the quantity of sugar im- netted on the same, it may be desirable, by way 
ported and exported, with the amount of duty of showing the distribution of the trade, to insert 


An ACCOUNT of the Quantity of Bonded Sugar, remaining in the Warehouses on January 5, 1813, 
at the several Ports in Great Britain, to which the Warehousing Act extends. 




Quantity of Sugar remaining in the Warehouses, January 5, 1813. 



British Plantation. 

Foreign Plantation. 

East India. 

Total. 



Cwts. qrs. lbs. 

Cwts. qrs. lbs. 

Cwts. qrs. lbs. 

Cwts. qrs. lbs. 


[London ----- 

342,920 2 16 

419,257 0 15 

55,657 3 27 

1,017,835 3 2 

s 

Liverpool - - - - 

50,170 0 4 

72,224 0 18 

- 

122,394 0 22 

f) 

Bristol ----- 

11,628 1 4 

1,275 3 26 

- 

12,904 1 2 

£ 

Lancaster - - - - 

7,165 2 14 

730 0 19 

- - - - 

7,895 3 5 

o 

C/3 

Whitehaven - - - - 

285 0 9 



285 0 9 

O 

Hull ------ 

89 0 12 

3,432 0 3 

_ - - _ 

3,521 0 15 

ft 

, Newcastle - - - - 

983 0 27 

- 

- 

983 0 27 

Ports of Scotland - - - 

60,164 1 9 

36,744 3 15 

. - - _ 

96,909 0 24 


T otal - - 

673,406 1 11 

533,664 1 12 

55,657 3 27 

1,262,728 2 22 


Custom House. WILLIAM IRVING. 


The following documents of the exports from, and imports into Ireland, with the duties, &amp;c. 
will close the account of the valuable staple under consideration. 

Accounts respecting Sugar. 

Ireland. 

1 . 

An ACCOUNT of the Quantity of Sugar exported from Ireland to all Parts, in the Year ending 
January 5, 1813; reducing the Refined into Muscovado, according to the customary Rule ; and 
distinguishing the Quantity exported to Great Britain. 


0 


Sugar exported. 



To 

Great Britain. 

\ 

Total 

Export to all 
Parts. 

Sugar - - 
Refined - 

reduced into Muscovado - - - 

Cwts. 

5,362 

113 

Cuts. 

22,097 

698 


Total Exports - - 

5,475 

23,695 


Custom House, Dublin, ) WM. MARRABLE, 

April 27, 1813. S Inspector General Imports and Exports.] 


WEST INDIES. 


335 


2 . 

[An ACCOUNT of the Quantity of Sugar imported into Ireland, in the Year ending January 5, 18 13; 
specifying the Quantity imported from each of the Colonies, whose Produce is admissible into 
Home Consumption from the Islands of Martinico and Guadaloupe, from the East Indies, and 
from Great Britain ; and the Quantity of Prize Sugar. 

Muscovado. 

Cwts. 


Great Britain - - - - 
Antigua ------ 

Barbadoes - - - 

Demerai-a - - - - - 

Grenada - - - - - 

Jamaica ------ 

Newfoundland - 
St. Croix - - - - - 

St. Kitt’s 

St. Lucia - - - - - 

St. Vincent’s - - - - 

Surinam ------ 

Trinidad - - - - - 

Martinique - - - - - 
Guadaloupe - - - - 

East Indies - - - - 

No Prize Sugar imported. 


231,245 
32,6 14f 
26,160 
13,471i 
1,645 
42,5 17| 
1,48 If: 
13,222 
6,467f 
5,260 
8,599 
13,995 
22,761 
1,765 
579f 


Total Import - - - 421,784f 


Custom House, Dublin, 
April 27, 1813. 


1 


WM. MARRABLE, 

Inspector General Imports and Exports. 


An ACCOUNT of the 


April 21, 1813. 


3. 

Quantity of Bonded Sugar, January 5, 1813, in the several Ports of Ireland, 
to which the Warehousing Act extended. 

61,476 cwt. 

W. HOWARD LEE, 

Exam r of Sm v rs and Landw rs Books. 


4. 

An ACCOUNT (so far as relates to the Excise Department) of the Amount of Duties paid on Sugar 
in Ireland, in the Year ending January 5, 1813, specifying the Amount of Drawbacks and Bounties 
on Sugar exported, and the Payments made to the Excise on Account of Sugar used in the Distil- 
leries and Breweries ; distinguishing the Amount of each. 


Year ending. 

Duties paid on 
Sugar. 

On Sugar exported. 

Payments made to the Excise on 
Account of Sugar used in 

' ~x 

Drawbacks Bounties 
paid. paid. 

f 

Distilleries. 

Breweries. 

January 5, 
1833. 

The Examiner of Customs furnished 
these tliree Columns of the Account. 

None. 

No account of the 
Brewery is kept 
in this Depart- 
ment. 


The Chief Commissioners 
of Excise, &amp;c. Stc. See. 


I 


JAMES VANCE, 

E r Excise Office, 
May 10, 1813.] 


338 


WEST INDIES. 


[An ACCOUNT of the Amount of Duties paid on Sugar in Ireland, in the Year ending January 5, 
1813, specifying the Amount of Drawbacks and Bounties on Sugar exported, and the Payments 
made to the Excise on Account of Sugar used in the Distilleries and Breweries; distinguishing the 
Amount of each. 


Year. 

Ending January 5, 1813. 

Amount of Duly 
paid on 

Sugars imported. 

Amount of Duty 
Drawback on 
Sugars exported. 

Amount of Bounty 
paid on 

Irish Sugars exported. 

Muscovado - - - - - 

East India - - - - - 

British refined - - - - 

£. s - d- 
519,412 10 7\ 
2,814 12 10 
115,913 16 2f 

£■ s. d. 
j- 5,106 10 9f 

£ s- d. 

280 1 3 


Custom House, Dublin, ? " SAMUEL AVALKER, 

April 29, 1813. A Examinator of Customs. 


Other W. India Staples . — We now proceed to 1. Rum. 4. Pimento. 

the consideration of the other W. India staples. 2. Coffee. 5. Cotton TVool. 

The increased value and amount of their ira- 3. Cocoa. 6. Dt/e Woods , fyc. 

ports into Great Britain will be evident by the 
following tables, viz. 

1. Rum. 

An ACCOUNT of the Quantity of Rum imported from the W. India Colonies into Great Britain, 
in the under-mentioned Periods, from 1761 to 1806, both inclusive, with the Quantity exported in 
the same Periods ; distinguishing the Export to Ireland from the Export to all other Parts. 


1 

Periods. 

Imported. 

E xported. 

/r To Ireland. 

To other Parts 

Total. V 

1761 - 

1762 - 

1763 

1764 - - 

1765 - - 

Annual average of five years ------ 

1771 

1772 

1773 - 

1774 - - - - 

1775 ----- r - 

Annual average - -- -- -- -- - 

1781 --------- 

1782 --------- 

1783 --------- 

1784 - - - 

1785 --------- 

Annual average 

Gallons. 

1,011,149 

1,120,512 

1,310.679 

1,878,405 

2,587,829 

Gallons. 

10 

9.710 

365,336 

851,160 

1,291,779 

Gallons. 

11,827 

44,138 

97,693 

55.970 

63,179 

Gallons. 

11,837 

53,848 

463,029 

907,130 

1,354,958 

1,581,714 

503,599 

54,561 

558,160 

2.728,565 

2.284,163 

2,282,544 

1.890,290 

2,498,241 

1,932,086 

368,672 

598,931 

393.926 

494,090 

144,243 

273,301 

301,810 

295,206 

347,258 

2,076,329 

641,973 

900.741 

689,132 

841,348 

2,336,760 

757,541 

272,363 

1,029,904 

1.372,653 
1,740,352 
2,011.861 
1,994,432 
3,563 53 7 

95,588 

110,841 

885.796 

314,185 

550,117 

129,987 

413,387 

600,062 

202.872 

468,621 

225,575 

524,228 

1,546,758 

517,057 

1,018,738 

2,136,567 

391,305 

375,166 

766471] 



WEST INDIES. 


337 


[An Account of the Quantity of Rum imported— continued. 


Periods. 

Imported. 

Exported. 

"‘To Ireland. 

To other Parts. 

Total. ^ 


Gallons. 

Gallons. 

Gallons. 

Gallons. 

1791 - - - - 

2,421,199 

443,187 

353,801 

796.988 

1792 - - 

3,026,455 

167,862 

409,463 

577.325 

1793 

3,756,789 

112,146 

304,417 

416,563 

1794 

2,926,232 

267,867 

714,587 

982,454 

1795 - - 

1,889,842 

92,482 

218,299 

310,781 

Annual average - -- -- -- -- - 

2,804,103 

216,709 

400,113 

616,822 

1801 

4,417,765 

732,784 

585,104 

1,317,888 

1802 --------- 

4,685,290 

325,023 

1,010,551 

1,335,574 

1803 - - - 

3,954.770 

75,206 

598,596 

673,802 

1804 

2,756,329 

90,806 

1,060,777 

1,151,583 

1805 - 

3,586,635 

92,903 

743,462 

836,365 

1806 

3,570,774 

184,148 

803,694 

987,842 

Annual average 

3,828,593 

250,145 

800,364 

1,050,509 


Custom House. WILLIAM IRVING, 


The following was the Quantity of Rum imported in the Years 1809 and 1810 ; distinguishing the 
Islands and Colonies from which the Import was made. 



1809. 

1810. 


1809. 

1810. 

Antigua - - - 

Barbadoes - - - - 

Dominica - - - - 

Granada - - - - 

Jamaica ------ 

Montserrat - - - - 

Nevis - - - - - 

St. Kitt’s - - - - 

St. Vincent’s - - - 

Tortola - - - - - 

Trinidad - - - - 

Bahamas - - - - 

Bermudas - - - - 

Gallons. 

143,223 

19,764 

56,356 

642,310 

3,470,250 

51,132 

52,478 

343,075 

243,461 

16,852 

208,677 

26 

Gallons. 

77,092 

7,909 

39,397 

546,895 

3,428,452 

48,880 

67,010 

220,886 

200,795 

7,711 

87,741 

11 

Demerara - - - - 

Berbice ----- 
St. Lucia - - - 
Surinam - - - 

Tobago - - 

Curagoa - - - - 

St. Thomas - 
St. Croix - - - - 

Martinique - - - - 

Guadaloupe - - - 

Mariegalante - 
St. Martin’s - - - 

St. Eustatia - - - 
Conquered Islands and 
Colonies - - - - 

Gallons. 

353,370 

20,355 

21,632 

17,928 

525,327 

106 

28,745 

181,594 

1,110 

Gallons. i 

98,442 

6,193 

11.416 

2,580 

337,433 

24 

1,400 

236,307. 

13,617 

764 

British West Indies - 

5,247,604 

4,732,779 

1,150,167 

708,17 6 [ 


Custom House. WILLIAM IRVING.] 


VOL. V. 


X X 


338 


WEST INDIES. 


[2. Coffee. 

An ACCOUNT of the Quantity of Coffee imported from the West India Colonies into Great 
Britain, in the under-mentioned Periods, from 1761 to 1806, both inclusive, with the Quantity 
exported in the same Periods ; distinguishing the Export to Ireland from the Export to all other 
Parts. 


Periods. 

Imported. 


Exported. 


/ 

To Ireland. 

To other Parts. 

Total. 

17 61 ------ 

Cwt. 

44,962 

Cwt. 

261 

Cwt. 

33,453 

Cwt. 

33,714 

1762 - 

77,720 

333 

68,428 

66,129 

68,761 

1763 - - - - 

71,253 

246 

66,375 

1764 - - - - - - 

21,041 

279 

29,528 

29,807 

1765 - - - - - - 

31,569 

310 

25,032 

25,342 

Annual average of five years ------- 

49,309 

285 

44,514 

44,799 

1771 - 

40,026 

851 

38,392 

39,243 

1772 ----------- 

62,206 

925 

54,432 

55,357 

1773 

44,745 

63 

48,776 

48,839 

1774 ----------- 

58.164 

42 

65,737 

65,779 

1775 - - 

54,935 

24 

40,098 

40,122 

Annual average - -- -- -- -- -- 

52,015 

381 

49,487 

49,868 

1781 - - - - - 

12,783 ' 

52 

13,228 

13,280 

1782 ----------- 

22,482 

- 

25,303 

25,303 

1783 - - - - 

17,272 

142 

21,477 

21,619 

1784 ----------- 

41,147 

1 

39,878 

39,879 

1785 ----------- 

37,036 

44 

38,100 

38,144 

Annual average - - -- -- -- - 

26,144 

48 

27,597 

27,645 

1791 - - - - - 

40,736 

27 

33,903 

33,930 

1792 - - - 

69,017 

46 

52,798 

52,844 

1793 ----------- 

90,547 

31 

94,484 

94,515 

1794 ----------- 

191,828 

126 

150,390 

150,516 

1795 ------ 

181,744 

52 

190,991 

191,043 

Annual average ----------- 

114,774 

56 

104,513 

104,569 

1801 ----------- 

525,964 

384,364 

92 

420,289 

420,381 

1802 - 

62 

473,098 

47 3,160 

1803 ----------- 

157,453 

99 

173,521 

173,620 

1804 - - - - . 

328,013 
289, 89S 

35 

240,470 

246,505 

1805 _ . - 

49 

304,098 

304,147 

1806 ----------- 

497,739 

460 

387,163 

387,623 

Annual average - ---------- 

363,905 

1 33 

334,106 

334,239 

Custom-House. 


WILLIAM IRVING.] 


WEST INDIES. 


339 


[The following was the Quantity of Coffee imported in the Years 1809 and 1810, distinguishing the 
Islands and Colonies from which the Import was made. 



1809. 

1810. 


British 

Plantation. 

Foreign 

Plantation. 

British 

Plantation. 

Foreign 

Plantation. 


Cwt. 

Cwt. 

Cwt. 

Cwt. 

Antigua - -- -- -- -- -- -- - 

309 

3,983 

40 

2,164 

Barbadoes - -- -- -- -- -- -- 

3,471 

1,345 

308 

9 

Dominica - -- -- -- -- -- -- 

32,540 

1,096 

27,185 

23 

Grenada -------------- 

2,892 

234 

1,193 


Jamaica - -- -- -- -- -- -- - 

Montserrat - -- -- -- -- -- -- 

214,415 

1,635 

232,308 

4,186 

Nevis - 


31 

18 


St. Kitt’s - -- -- -- -- -- -- 

433 

71 

136 

75 

St. Vincent’s - -- -- -- -- -- - 

248 

- 

327 


Tortola - -- -- -- -- -- -- - 


1,138 

9 

674 

Trinidad - -- -- -- -- -- -- 

3,696 

2 

2,713 


Bahamas - -- -- -- -- -- -- 

Bermudas ------------- 

8 

9,143 

988 

“ 

4,345 

British West Indies - - - - - 

258,012 

19,666 

264,237 

11,476 

Demerara - -- -- -- -- -- -- 

24,528 


45,480 

698 

Berbice - -- -- -- -- -- -- - 

17,665 

- 

22,582 


St. Lucia - 

7,993 

- 

10,011 


Surinam - -- -- -- -- -- -- - 

57,58 1 

368 

38,731 


T obago - -- -- -- -- -- -- - 

3 

. 

9 


Curatjoa - -- -- -- -- -- -- - 

205 

28,481 

700 

29,466 

St. Thomas - -- -- -- -- -- -- 

523 

18,876 

1,488 

59,354 

St. Croix - 

297 

1,479 

31 

Martinique 

- 

24,495 

- 

31,991 

Guadaloupe - -- -- -- -- -- - 

- 

- 

376 

21,712 

Mariegalante - -- -- -- -- -- - 

St. Martin’s - -- -- -- -- -- - 

St. Eustatia ------------ 




1,491 

Conquered islands and colonies - - 

108,795 

73,699 

1 19,408 

144,712 

Custom-House. 


WILLIAM IRVING.] 


x x 2 


340 


WEST INDIES. 


An ACCOUNT of the Quantity of Cocoa imported from the West India Colonies into Great Britain, 
in the under-mentioned Periods, from 1761 to 1806, both inclusive ; with the Quantity exported in 
the same Periods ; distinguishing the Export to Ireland, from the Export to all other Parts. 



WEST INDIES. 


54 1 


[4. Pimento. 

An ACCOUNT of the Quantity of Pimento imported from the West India Colonies into Great 
Britain, in the under-mentioned Periods, from 1761 to 1806, both inclusive ; with the Quantity 
exported in the same Periods ; distinguishing the Export to Ireland from the Export to all other 
Parts. 


Periods. 

Imported. 


Exported. 


r To Ireland. 

To other Parts. 

Total. ^ 

1761 - - - 

lbs. 

351,285 

lbs. 

14,082 

lbs. 

538,510 

lbs. 

552,592 

17 62 --------- 

1,541,230 

5,698 

760,405 

766,103 

17 63 --------- 

1,114,702 

6,964 

1,149,239 

1,156,203 

1,587,941 

1764 - - - 

1,587,400 

13,671 

1,574,270 

1765 - - - 

1,142,974 

11,067 

839,361 

850,428 

I 

Annual average of five years ------ 

1,147,518 

10,296 

972,357 

982,653 

1771 --------- 

1,793,154 

8.952 

1,633,692 

1.642,644 

1772 

1,450,575 

31,762 

1,392,176 

1,423,938 

1773 - - - - 

2,282,071 

6,306 

2,306,695 

2.313,001 

1774 - - - 

786,815 

5,564 

716,496 

722,060 

1775 - 

2,530,939 

3,457 

2,543,591 

2,547,048 

Annual average - -- -- -- -- - 

1,768,710 

11,208 

1,718,530 

1,729,738 

1781 - - - 

951,262 

4,248 

899,427 

903,675 

1782 --------- 

454,954 

- - - 

558,098 

558,098 

1783 --------- 

917,542 

404 

860,334 

860,738 

1784 _ - - 

1,134,254 

_ _ 

947,976 

947.976 

1785 - - . - 

3,282,198 

14,910 

2,823,093 

2,838,003 

Annual average - - -- -- -- -- 

1,348,042 

3,912 

1,217,786 

1,221,698 

1791 

1,159,134 

751 

724,807 

725,558 

1792 - - - . 

1,900,739 

681 

1,310,089 

1,310,770 

1793 - - - - 

1, 087,416 

82 

963.611 

963,693 

1794 - - . 

1,279,883 

5,805 

1,512,632 

781,868 

1,518.437 

1795 --------- 

1,263,818 

7,151 

789,019 

Annual average - -- -- -- -- - 

1,338,198 

2,894 

1,058,601 

1,061,495 

1801 --------- 

1,676,542 

6,393 

1,235,845 

1,242,238 

1802 --------- 

658,503 

14,222 
23,485 ' 

847,570 

861,792 

1803 - - 

1,133,477 

941,589 

965,071 

1804 --------- 

2,239,032 

10,14 g 

1,189,392 

1,199,534 

1805 --------- 

540,933 

M7 1 
13,23" 

817,053 

823,223 

1806 - 

2,109,678 

1,501,491 

1,514,724 

Annual average - -- -- -- -- - 

1,393,027 

12,274 

1,088,823 

1,101,097 j 

- — — ; 


Custom House. 


WILLIAM IRVING.] 


342 


WEST INDIES. 


[The following was the Quantity of Pimento imported in the Years 1809 and 1810; distinguishing 
the Islands and Colonies from which the Import was made. 



1809. 

1810. 

Antigua - -- -- -- -- 

Barbadoes -------- 

Dominica - 

Granada - - -- -- -- 

lbs. 

lbs. 

Jamaica - - - ----- 

2,219,367 

2,392,964 

Montserrat - -- -- -- - 

Nevis - - -- -- -- - 

St. Kitt’s - - -- -- -- 

St. Vincent’s - ------ 

Tortola --------- 

Trinidad - -- -- -- - 

Bahamas - - - -- -- - 

Bermudas - -- -- -- - 

00 

Ot 

1-0 

2,227 

British West Indies ----- 

2,220,895 

2,395,191 


No pimento was imported from the conquered colonies in these years. 

Custom House. WILLIAM IRVING. 

5. Cotton Wool. 

An ACCOUNT of the Quantity of Cotton Wool imported from the West India Colonies into Great 
Britain, in the under-mentioned Periods, from 1761 to 1806, both inclusive; with the Quantity 
exported in the same periods ; distinguishing the Export to Ireland, from the Export to all other 
Parts. 


Periods. 

Imported. 

^To Ireland. 

Exported. 
To other Parts. 

Total. 


lbs. 

lbs. 

lbs. 

lbs. 

1761 

2,995,705 

165,688 

166,485 

332,173 

1762 -------- 

3,713,604 

123,780 

43,291 

167,071 

1763 -------- 

2,606,594 

52,848 

198,644 

251,492 

1764 - - 

3,660,037 

182,864 

30,874 

213,738 

1765 -------- 

3,715,793 

66,316 

12,476 

78,792 

Annual average of five years ------ 

3,338,346 

118,299 

90,354 

208,653 

1771 -------- 

2,270,279 

7,571 

46,912 

54,483 

1772 -------- 

2,287,616 

5,830 

34,423 

40,253 

1773 -------- 

2.4 18,333 

11,398 

15,060 

26.458 

1774 

3,174,964 

1,050 

323 

1,373 

1775 -------- 

2,784,832 

1,652 

8,238 

9,890 

Annual average --------- 

2,587,204 

5,500 

20,991 

26,491] 

.... . ■ - J 


WEST INDIES. 343 


[An Account of the Quantity of Cotton Wool imported — continued. 


Periods. 

Imported. 

Exported. 

^To Ireland. 

To other Parts. 

Total. 


lbs. 

lbs. 

Ibs. 

lbs. 

1781 

3,136,913 

94,023 

2,765 

96,738 

1782 -------- 

6,311,929 

614 

283,301 

283,915 

1783 -------- 

6,100,191 

3,000 

2,408 

5,408 

1784 -------- 

6,874,961 

197,451 

3,566 

201,017 

1785 -------- 

8,230,761 

187,929 

797 

188,726 

Annual average of five years ----- 

6,130,951 

96,603 

58,567 

155,170 

1791 -------- 

12.330,109 

57,070 

42,221 

99,291 

1792 -------- 

12,576,874 

476,629 

343,850 

820,479 

S 7 93 -------- 

9,164,893 

191 452 

300,168 

491,620 

1794 

10,337,245 

162,670 

95,321 

257,991 

1795 1 - - 

13,604,175 

316,034 

168,153 

484,187 

Annual average - -- -- -- -- - 

11,602,659 

240,771 

189,942 

430,713 . 

1801 -------- 

19,957,307 

1,200 

195,282 

196,482 

1802 - - 

16,284,857 

30,291 

135,371 

165,662 

1803 

7,036,104 

1,522 

- - 

1,522 

1804 

20,535,574 

- 

23,632 

23,632 

1805 - - - 

16,226,344 

- 

43,638 

43,638 

1806 - - 

17,712,344 

- - - 

27,814 

27,814 

Annual average - -- -- -- -- - 

16,292,088 

5,502 

70,956 

7 6,458 


Custom House. WILLIAM IRVING. 


The following was the Quantity of Cotton Wool imported in the Years 1809 and 1810, distinguish- 
ing- the Islands and Colonies from which the Import was made. 



1809. 

1810. 


1809. 

1810. 

Antigua - 

Barbadoes - - - 

Dominica - 
Grenada - - - - 

Jamaica - - - - 

Montserrat - 
Nevis - - - - - 

St. Kilt’s - - - - 

St. Vincent’s - - - 

Tortola - - - - 

Trinidad - - - - 

Bahamas - - _ - 

Bermudas - - - - 

lbs. 

112,016 

1,359,823 

75,425 

1,155,979 

1,886,748 

29,455 

17,463 

112,327 

230.822 

158,167 

1,171,506 

1,139,793 

21,656 

lbs. 

39,880 

1,453,738 

59,742 

788,362 

1,798,172 

48,313 

11,160 

26,853 

171,032 

250,797 

883,384 

1,348,828 

9,095 

Demerara - 
Berbice - 
St. Lucia - - - - 

Surinam - - - - 

Tobago - ---- 

Curatjba - 
St. Thomas - - - 

St. Croix - - - - 

Martinique - - - 

Guadaloupe - - - 
Mariegaiante - - - 

St. Martin’s - - - 

St. Eustatia - - - 

lbs. 

4,012,257 

1,874,196 

114,839 

1,068,770 

48,791 

427,268 

387,476 

610,903 

57,453 

lbs. 

7,331,122 

1,656,057 

127,009 

1,543,765 

11,818 

230,770 

355,467 

174,294 

296,523 

42,570 

1,810 

5,081 

British W. Indies - 

7,471,180 

6,8S9,356 

Conquered Islands 7 
and Colonies - ) 

8,601,953 

11,776,286 


Custom House. WILLIAM IRVING.] 


344 


WEST INDIES. 


[6. Dye Woods, S?e. 

An ACCOUNT of the Value of Dye Woods, 
and other Miscellaneous Articles, excepting 
Sugar, Coffee, Rum, Cocoa, Pimento, and Cot- 
ton, imported from the W. India Colonies into 
Great Britain, from the Year 1791 to the 
Year 1805, both inclusive; distinguishing: each 
Year. 


1791 ------ 218,159 

1792 196,990 

1793 ------ 151,020 

1794 ------ 148,272 

1795 ------ 169,366 

1796 ------ 269,470 

1797 ------ 496,340 

1798 - 366,981 

1799 ------ 509,406 

1800 ------ 703,086 


1801 ------ 523J32 

1802 - 287,974 

1803 253,418 

1804 331,621 

1805 244,764 


WILLIAM IRVING. 

It will be seen by the following table, founded 
on the documents contained in the finance ac- 
counts presented yearly to parliament, and com- 
piled by Mr. Colquhoun that the produce im- 
ported from the British W. India colonies in 
the course of five years, namely the years end- 
ing January 1, 1809, 10, 11, 12, and 13, yielded 
a net revenue to the Exchequer, after deduct- 
ing the expenses of collection, amounting to 
£.32,928,216. 


Amount of Net Duties of Custom and Excise on the following Articles imported from the West India 
Colonies into Great Britain and Ireland, in the Years ended January 5, 1809, 10, 11, 12, and 13. 



Year ended, Jan. 5, 
1809. 

Year ended, Jan. 5, 
1810. 

Yearended,Jan.5, 

1811. 

Year ended, Jan. 5, 
1812. 

Year ended, Jan. 5, 
1813. 

Total. 


Great 

Britain. 

Ireland. 

Great 

Britain. 

Ireland. 

Great 

Britain. 

Ireland. 

Great 

Britain. 

Ireland. 

Great 

Britain. 

Ireland. 

1 Sugar 

£. 

3,813,315 

£. 

497,241 

£. 

3,246,586 

£. 

505,995 

£. 

3,014,074 

£. 

348,741 

£. 

2,868,232 

£. 

467,949 

£. 

3, 580,223 

£. 

522,227 

£, 

18,869,583 

2 Rum 

1,897,136 

162,266 

1,897,514 

548,068 

2,115,282 

173,311 

1,620,454 

77,378 

1,627,269 

149,818 

10,269,096 

3 Molasses 

698 

626 

3,074 

238 

998 

97 

2,270 

83 

7,354 

120 

15,558 

4 Coffee and Cocoa 

239,792 

7,150 

178,911 

10,966 

168,140 

6,825 

206,103 

15,458 

239,124 

14,759 

1,087,318 

5 Cotton 

231,208 

11,950 

526,720 

26,234 

592,480 

27,208 

466,635 

30,466 

426,971 

17,849 

2,357,750 

6 Ginger 

3,650 

584 

3,472 

311 

2,235 

428 

3,808 

1,123 

2,405 

780 

18,796 

7 Pimento 

8 Tamarinds 

6,217 

955 


8,489 

1,439 

576 

7,431 

1,365 

423 

9,594 

1,633 

1,078 

4,734 

1,482 

778 

39,340 

6,774 

9 Castor Gil 

479 


1,407 


2,572 


2,601 


5,194 


12,253 

10 Fustic 

2,045 


4,146 


5,275 


7,197 


5,271 


23,934 

11 Logwood 

2,434 


2,404 


3,387 


4,792 


5,146 


18,162 

12 Mahogany 

21,391 

1,085 

24,044 

1,638 

50,583 

2,212 

51,772 

2,281 

50,761 

3,965 

209,652 


*6,224,300 

680,902 

5,898,206 

1,094,026 

5,963,742 

559,245 

5,245,181 

595,816 

5,955,954 

710,296 

32,928,216 


* These duties are exclusive of sundry small articles, as arrow-root, sweetmeats, &amp;c. &amp;c. not amounting to ,£.1000 each, and not 

particularly specified in the finance accounts. 


Having thus given, in the preceding tables, an 
account of the annual imports into Great Britain, 
and exports from the W. India colonies from 
1761 to 1806 inclusive, and having detailed the 
imports of each island and colony, respectively, 
for the two years 1809 and 1810; and also hav- 
ing exhibited the net revenue arising from the 
importation, for the last five years, it remains to 
give a more general or abstract view of the im- 
portance of those productions. This will best be 
effected by the following tables, which, whilst 
they show the quantity, exhibit also the value of 


the articles in question ; whereby the reader 
may, by an easy approximation or comparison 
with the tables of official value of imports and 
exports in a subsequent chapter, be hereafter 
enabled to judge of the comparative increase or 
decrease of the article produced, the annual con- 
sumption of Great Britain, the value of each 
island or colony, and, by a further reference from 
th ose tables, the importance of the W. India 
colonies, compared with others in the possession 
of this empire.] 


WEST INDIES. 


345 


j* Later Accounts of the Quantity and Value of Imports and Exports. 

0.)— Quantity and Value of the principal Articles imported from the British and Foreign West India 
Islands; 1805-1807; and 1810— 1812. 

(2.) — Official Value of Exports from Great Britain to the Island of St. Domingo ; 1809—1813. 

(3 .) — Official Value of Exports from Great Britain to Africa ; 1810 — 1812. 

0.)— Account of the Quantity of Colonial Staples imported into Great Britain, for the Year 1809 ; 
distinguishing the Countries from whence imported. 

(1.) 

An ACCOUNT of the Quantity and Value of the principal Articles imported from the British and 
Foreign West India Islands , for the Three Years ending 5th January 1808, and the Three Years 
ending 5th January 1812 ; distinguishing each Year. 



IMPORTS into Great Britain from the West Indies ; 1805, 1806, 

1807. 


British Islands. 

Conquered Colonies. 

Foreign West Indies. 

Total. 


/ 

Quantity. 

Official Value. 

r 

Quantity. 

\ 

Official Value. 

Quantity. 

\ 

Official Value. 

Quantity. 

Official Value. 

1805. 

Coffee - Cwts. 
Cotton - Lbs. 
Rum - Galls. 
Sugar - Cwts. 

219,873 

5,681,565 

3,372,911 

2,583,072 

£■ 

1,461,160 

207,758 

303,821 

3,522,165 

76,946 

11,048,706 

214,208 

352,264 

£■ 

536,787 

384,907 

20,115 

480,550 

1,606 

569,104 

142 

37,816 

je- 

ii, 241 
18,377 
12 
51,996 

2,98,425 

17,299,375 

3,587,261 

2,973,152 

£■ 

2,009,188 

6,11,042 

323,948 

4,054,711 

Total - - 

- - 

5, 494,904 

- 

1,422,359 

- - 

81,626 


6,998,889 

1806. 

Coffee - Cwts. 
Cotton - Lbs. 
Rum - Galls. 
Sugar - Cwts. 

280,846 

7,084,619 

3,305,738 

3,206,977 

1,901,059 

258,663 

301,035 

4,375,727 

219,483 

11,789,950 

260,021 

475,937 

1,510,355 

415,056 

25,310 

648,625 

5,254 

609,254 

37 

31,417 

33,424 

20.275 

3 

42,884 

505,583 

19,483,823 

3,565,796 

3,714,331 

3,444,838 

693,994 

326,348 

5,067,236 

Total - - 

- - 

6,836,484 

- -] 

2,599,346 

- - 

96,586 

- 

9,532,416 

1807. 

Coffee - Cwts. 
Cotton - Lbs. 
Rum - Galls. 
Sugar - Cwts. 

216,835 

7,039,933 

4,068,875 

3,016,036 

1,449,199 

256,998 

363,754 

4,115,390 

107,851 

12,634,711 

374,739 

474,098 

742,844 

454,640 

33,104 

648,659 

54,220 

1,251,221 

14,870 

1,084 

3,79,542 

41,644 

1,239 

1,491 

378,906 

20,925,865 

4,458,484 

3,491,218 

2,571,585 

753,282 

398,097 

4,765,540 

Total - - 

- - 

6,185,341 

- 

1,879,247 


423,916 

- 

8,488,504] 











VOL. v 


y r 


WEST INDIES. 


3 4(5 


1810. 

Coffee - Cwts. 
Cotton - Lbs. 
Rum - Galls. 
Sugar - Cwts. 

Total - - 
1811. 

Coffee - Cwts. 
Cotton - Lbs. 
Rum - Galls. 
Sugar - Cwts. 

Total - - 
1812. 

Coffee - Cwts. 
Cotton - Lbs. 
Rum - Galls. 
Sugar - Cwts. 

T otal - - 
Note. — The E 

Custom] 

I 27 th 

[IMPORTS into Great Britain from the West Indies, 1810, 1811, 1812. 

/ 

British Islands. 

Conquered Colonies. 

Foreign West Indies. 

\ 

Total. 

Quantity. 

\ 

Official Value. 

Quantity. 

Official Value. 

/ 

Quantity. 

Official Value. 

Quantity. 

\ 

Official Value. 

275,715 

6,886,097 

4,732,781 

2,964,689 

£. 

1,718.007 

261,340 

433,332 

4,042,428 

204,123 

11,778,945 

708,177 

1,389,316 

£■ 

1,661,125 

438,349 

62,452 

1,893,735 

218,111 

582,955 

27 

108,516 

£■ 

1,492,048 

22,358 

o 

O 

148,520 

757,949 

19,248,597 

5,440,985 

4,462,521 

£ 

4,874,180 

722,047 

495,787 

6,084.683 

- - 

6,455,107 

- 

4,058,661 

- - 

1,662,929 

- 

12,176,697 

173,560 

4,930,012 

6,082,006 

2,883,097 

1,157,340 

192,182 

536,861 

3,938,119 

286,451 

13,346,114 

856,458 

871,378 

1,928,303 

467,894 

75,432 

1,185,986 

43,125 

588,657 

135 

25,682 

285,487 

22,796 

12 

34,846 

503,136 
18,864,783 
6,93 8,599 
3,780,157 

3,371,130 
682,872 
• 612,305 

5,158,951 

- 

5,824,502 

- 

3,657,615 

- - 

343,141 

- 

9,825,258 

179,588 

1,268,002 

5,176,012 

2,654,741 

1,176,845 

160,808 

458,139 

3,625,094 

188,795 

11,414,502 

1,285,401 

999,047 

1,227,452 
419,125 
1 19,482 
1,356,673 

3,954 

45,951 

498 

21,201 

1,484 

685 

372,337 

15,728,455 

6,461,413 

3,654,286 

2,425,498 

581,417 

577,621 

4,982,452 

- - 

5,420,886 

- 

3,122,732 

- - 

23,370 

- 

8,566,988 

locuments, containing the particulars required for the year 1813, were unfortu- 
nately destroyed at the late fire at the Custom-Houe, in London. 

douse, London, WILLIAM IRVING, 

June, 1814. Inspector General of Imports and Exports.] 


WEST INDIES. 


347 


[( 2 .) 

An ACCOUNT of the Quantity and Value of Goods exported from Great Britain to St. Domingo , 
for the last Fixe Years , so far as the same can be made out; distinguishing British Manufactures 
from Foreign Articles exported. 



Official Value of Exports from Great Britain to 
the Island of St. Domingo : 


/ 

1809. 

1810. 

1811. 

1812. 

\ 

1813. 

British Produce and Manufactures - 
Foreign and Colonial Merchandise - 

£ 

591,935 

107,128 

£■ 4 
105,684 
54,422 

£■ 

43,163 

3,520 

£ 

15,109 

2,760 

£■ 
* - 

* Total Exports - - - - 

699,063 

160,106 

46,683 

17,869 

- 


* Note. — The books, containing the particulars of the several articles exported to St. Do- 
mingo, having been destroyed by the late fire at the Custom House, for the years 1809, 1810, 
and 1811 ; and also, the whole of the documents for the year 1813: the Inspector General is 
unable to make a complete return in terms of the above mentioned order for those years. The 
exports to St. Domingo, in the year 1812, consisted of British cottons and linens, and a few 
other articles of inconsiderable value. 

Custom-House, London, WILLIAM IRVING, 

27th June, 1814. Inspector General of Imports and Exports. 


(3.) 

An ACCOUNT of the Quantity and Value of the Exports from Great Britain to Africa (exclusive of 
the Cape of Good Hope ) in the last Three Years ; distinguishing each Year. 



Official Value of Exports from Great 
Britain to Africa : 


1810. 

1811. 

1812. 

British Produce and Manufactures 

Foreign and Colonial Merchandise - - - _ _ 

£■ 

167,877 

81,741 

£. 

93,924 

66,824 

£ 

122,328 

106,645 

Total Exports 

249,618 

160,748 

228,973 


A ote. The books containing the particulars of the several articles exported to Africa, hav- 
ing been destroyed by the late fire at the Custom-House, for the years 1810 and 1811 • and 
also, the whole of the documents for the year 1813 : the Inspector General is unable to 
make a complete return in terms of the above-mentioned order of the Honourable House of 
Commons, but has submitted below, an Appendix, containing the quantities and official values 
of the several articles exported from Great Britain to Africa, in the year 1812; which is the 
°fdy year within the period required, for which the complete return can be made. 

C ^7?l?Tm?p S i e Ri L r nd0n ’ WILLIAM IRVING, 

1 June, 1814. Inspector General of Imports and Exports.] 


y y 2 


348 


WEST INDIES. 


[APPENDIX. 

An ACCOUNT of the Quantities and Official Values of the several Articles exported from Great 
Britain to Africa (exclusive of the Cape of Good of Hope) in the Year 1812. 



Year 1812. 


/ 



Quantity. 

Official Value. 



£ 

55,083 

Guns -------------- 

No. 

7,807. 

5,855 

Gunpowder - -- -- -- -- -- 

Hs. 

372,740. 

11,260 

Iron, Wrought and Unwrought ----- 

Cwts. 

9,889. 

8,763 

Piece Goods of India - -- -- -- - 

Pieces. 

76,562. 

65,603 

Rum -------------- 

Gallons. 

55,847. 

16,754 

Tobacco ------------ 

Lbs. 

302,238. 

5,667 

Woollens - -- -- -- -- -- - 


12,746 

Sundries - -- -- -- 


47,242 

T otal - - - 


£. 228,973 

Custom House, London, 
2?th June, 1814. 




(4.) 


ACCOUNT of the Quantity of Colonial Staples imported into Great Britain , in the Year 1809 ; dis- 
tinguishing the Countries from whence imported. 


| 

Sugar. 

Coffee. 

Cotton. 

Rum. 

Pimento. 


Cwts. 

Cwts. 

lbs. 

Gallons. 

lbs. 

South of Europe - -- -- -- -- 

Ireland, Guernsey, and Jersey - - - - 

United States of America ------ 

British West India Islands ------ 

Conquered Islands and Colonies - - - - 

Foreign West Indies ------- 

1 Foreign Colonies in America ----- 

1 East Indies - -- -- -- -- - 

Africa - -- -- -- -- -- - 

Prize ------ 

13,910 

2,650,371 

1,029,206 

58,085 

175,301 

21,264 

53,060 

2,128 

281,585 

182,494 

168,865 

16,046 

2,844 

77 

53,867 

9,754,688 

1,166,095 

32,604,438 

7,608,847 

8,601,953 

889,910 

21,150,927 

10,927,122 

3,406 

104,896 

5,334,801 

1,150,168 

1,792 

31,571 

122 

11,593 

4,533 

2,220,895 

776 

Total ------ 

4,001,197 

707,906 

92,812,282 

6,530,047 

2,226,204] 

Custom-House. 







WEST INDIES. 


349 


[CHAP. VI. 

Introduction , — Trade between Great Britain and 
the British plantations , the TV. Indies, and 
N. and S. America, but exclusive of those 
colonies now the United States , from 1697 to 
1759. — Trade between Great Britain and her 
colonies in N. America, exclusively of those now 
the United States, for 53 years, from 1760 to 1812, 
inclusive. — Trade of Great Britain with the Bri- 
tish and Foreign TV. Indies, and Foreign Ameri- 
ca, for 53 years, from 1760 to 1812, inclusive . — 
Results of the foregoing tables. — Trade of the 
TV. Indies and America with Great Britain com- 
pared with that to other parts. — Account of the 
official value of the imports and exports between 
Great Britain and the British TV. Indies ( in- 
cluding the conquered islands and colonies ) in the 
years 1809 and 1810; distinguishing each island 
and colony ( Table A.) — Account of the real value 
of exports from Great Britain to all parts of the 
world, in the seven years ending 1811, distin- 
guishing British produce and manufactures from 
foreign and colonial merchandise ; and distin- 
guishing the amount to the N. of Europe, to 
Spain, to Portugal, to other parts of Europe, to 
Asia, to Africa, to the United States of America, 
and to all other parts of America (Table B.J — 
Account of the value of all imports to, and all 
exports from, Great Britain , in the years 1805, 


1806, 1807, 1808, 1809, 1810; distinguishing 
each year, the real from the official value ; and 
also the imports from, and exports to, the Con- 
tinent of Europe, the TV. Indies, America, Afri- 
ca, Asia and Ireland respectively ( Table C.) 

Introduction . — Though much has been written, 
and innumerable are the authors who have treated 
on the subject of trade, it is questionable whe- 
ther, in an abstract sense, any more real or solid 
information has been given to the public than in 
the tables published by Sir Charles Whitworth. 
With some necessary illustrations and many ad- 
ditions it is, therefore, proposed that this chapter 
on the general imports and exports of Great Bri- 
tain should consist. The importance of the W. 
Indies and America, in a commercial view, is 
generally appreciated ; but it is questionable 
whether it has been so to the extent it may have 
deserved. Many able treatises have been written 
on the subject ; but their information will be 
found, for the most part, of a passing and tem- 
porary nature. The specific relations of a colony 
or country with itself and with others is only to 
be estimated by reverting to the whole period of 
the intercourse that has existed between them. 
This the reader may be enabled to do with the 
colonies and countries in question, by the follow- 
ing documents. 


Trade between Great Britain and the British Plantations, the West Indies, and North and 
South America, but exclusive of those Colonies now the United States, from 1697 to 1759. 



Imports. 

Exports. 

Imports 

Excess. 

Exports 

Excess. 


Imports. 

Exports. 

Imports 

Excess. 

Exports 

Excess. 

1697 

340,928 

150,006 

191,528 

606 

1716 

1,182,154 

534,217 

738,294 

90,357 

1698 

649,956 

331,598 

328,600 

10,242 

1717 

1,421,499 

614,580 

894,745 

87,826 

1699 

673,117 

354,921 

319,335 

1,139 

1718 

1,037,150 

628,036 

623,710 

214,596 

1700 

842,030 

345,070 

496,960 


1719 

958,843 

362,948 

683,085 

87,190 

1701 

756,659 

355,882 

402,430 

1,653 

1720 

1,198,821 

323,114 

952,854 

77,147 

1702 

489,838 

267,128 

223,530 

822 

1721 

932,235 

381,233 

690,229 

139,227 

1703 

693,137 

297,264 

395,873 


1722 

1,120,339 

644,727 

809,283 

333,671 

1704 

506,583 

313,795 

230,111 

37,323 

1723 

1,204,042 

680,152 

838,892 

315,002 

1705 

709,273 

359,486 

450,384 

100,597 

1724 

1,430,264 

628,607 

051,954 

150,297 

1706 

553,321 

305,609 

285,441 

37,729 

1725 

1,491,860 

889,829 

1,064,329 

462,298 

1707 

628,362 

317,170 

340,255 

29,063 

1726 

1,277,857 

453,123 

945,380 

120,646 

1708 

608,247 

359,864 

300,010 

51,627 

1727 

1,195,297 

399,297 

914,018 

118,018 

1709 

669,945 

446,946 

297,670 

74,671 

1728 

1,621,920 

577,118 

1,236,113 

191,311 

1710 

806,459 

260,186 

577,880 

31,607 

1729 

1,647,850 

640,250 

1,202,505 

194,905 

1711 

570,924 

287,254 

335,148 

51,478 

1730 

1,870,150 

808,945 

1,320,626 

259,421 

1712 

720,681 

355,369 

399,148 

33,836 

1731 

1,639,337 

446,092 

1,308,962 

115,717 

1713 

833,790 

510,751 

448,546 

125,507 

1732 

1,511,706 

649,148 

1,152,466 

289,908 

1714 

885,465 

534,925 

524,760 

174,220 

1733 

1,820,107 

441,566 

1,509,481 

130,940 

1715 

1,031,456 

623,765 

711,332 

303,641 

1734 

1,305,850 

491,330 

974,374 

159,854] 


.150 


WEST 


INDIES. 


[Trade between Great Britain and the British Plantations — continued. 



Imports. 

Exports. 

Imports 

Excess. 

Exports 

Excess. 


Imports. 

Exports. 

Imports 

Excess. 

Exports 

Excess. 

1735 

1,662,304 

576,827 

1,240,086 

154,609 

1749 

1,644,538 

911,940 

934,976 

202,378 

1736 

1,664,477 

611,290 

1,250,217 

197,030 

1750 

1,718,821 

699,959 

1,047,153 

28,291 

1737 

1,156,268 

550,310 

830,009 

224,051 

1751 

1,701,680 

820,070 

936,973 

55,363 

1738 

1,634,485 

510,550 

1,300,044 

176,109 

1752 

1,730,032 

880,548 

878,871 

29,387 

1739 

1,882,098 

556,392 

1,532,801 

207,095 

1753 

2,077,531 

1,092,842 

1,083,196 

98,507 

1740 

1,470,014 

851,760 

936,459 

318,205 

1754 

1,792,463 

856,275 

949,001 

12,813 

1741 

1,653,033 

1,082,187 

989, 167 

418,321 

1755 

2,238,981 

913,084 

1,353,536 

27,639 

1742 

1,382,621 

1,141,523 

712,197 

471,099 

1756 

1,941,680 

962,791 

1,026,467 

47,578 

1743 

1,654,789 

914,757 

1,092,924 

352,892 

1757 

2,046,047 

1,067,620 

1,137,644 

159,217 

1744 

1,361,388 

588,469 

995,107 

222,188 

1758 

2,022,615 

1,176,942 

994,011 

148,338 

1745 

1746 

1747 

1,141,605 

1,236,174 

1,063,234 

585,141 

968,637 

837,048 

757,409 

660,354 

572,646 

180,945 

392,817 

346,460 

1759 

2,186,143 

1,351,815 

970,290 

135,962 


80,700,423 

38,820,647 

51,444,499 

9,564,723 

1748 

1,799,952 

960,569 

1 ,192,720 

353,337 



Excess of Imports &lt;£. 

41,879,776 


Up to this period the balance of trade against 
England with her colonies in America and the 
W. Indies, had never exceeded about a million 
and a quarter. The first considerable import 
was in theyear 1715, when it arose to £.1,031,456, 
having been in the previous year only £.885,465 ; 
and since that time the annual amount continued 
much higher than that of any equal number of 


precedingyears, reaching, in 1730, to £.1,870, 150; 
though it shortly after fell to and continued, up 
to the year 1753, at nearly an average of one 
million and an half annually. On the whole it 
was remarkable for its steadiness during the en- 
tire period of 63 years, the average annual ex- 
cess of imports over the exports having been 
to the value of £.664,758. 


Trade between Great Britain and her Colonies in North America, exclusively of those now the 
United States, for 53 years, from 1760 to 1812 inclusive. 



Imports. 

Exports. 

Imports 

Excess. 

Exports 

Excess. 


Imports. 

Exports. 

Imports 

Excess. 

Exports 

Excess. 

1760 

35,364 

177,040 


141,676 

1777 

119,790 

1,638,591 



1,518,801 

1761 

50,689 

349,524 

- 

298,835 

1778 

130,900 

1,029,033 


- 

898.133 

1762 

68,779 

213,059 

_ 

144,280 

1779 

134,723 

841,839 

- 

- 

707,116 

1763 

427,824 

225,339 

202,485 

- 

1780 

119,550 

836,841 

_ 

_ 

717,291 

1764 

84,409 

343,301 

. 

258,892 

1781 

118,929 

535,601 

- 

_ 

416,672 

1765 

93,781 

337,476 

_ ’ 

243,695 

1782 

222,861 

701,661 

- 

- 

478,800 

1766 

103,823 

451,726 

_ 

347,903 

1783 

149,973 

732,312 

- 

_ 

582,339 

1767 

101,869 

270,975 

_ 

169,106 

1784 

177,733 

705,150 

- 

- 

527,417 

1768 

94,774 

182,432 

_ 

87,658 

1785 

204,009 

651,235 

- 

- 

447,226 

1769 

103,626 

262,442 


158,816 

1786 

197,258 

748,251 

- 

. 

550,993 

1770 

104,047 

372,399 

_ 

268,352 

1787 

241,673 

850,459 

- 

- 

608,786 

1771 

99,403 

317,760 

_ 

218,357 

1788 

246,021 

835,939 

- 

- 

589,918 

1772 

128,545 

352,792 

- 

224,247 

1789 

226,844 

809,084 

_ 

- 

582,240 

1773 

121,145 

429,096 

- 

307,951 

1790 

229,562 

766,983 

- 

- 

537,421 

1774 

135,479 

437,330 

. 

301,851 

1791 

236,796 

831,246 

- 

- 

594,450 

1775 

124,579 

657,395 


532,816 

1792 

248,244 

1,055,830 

- 

- 

807,586 

1776 

118,532 

828,187 

- 

709,655 

1793 

200,384 

822,408 



622,024] 


WEST INDIES. 

[Trade between Great Britain and North America — continued. 


351 



Imports. 

Exports. 

Imports 

Excess. 

Exports 

Excess. 


Imports. 

Exports. 

Imparts 

Excess. 

Exports 

Excess. 

1794 

233,812 

868,325 

. 

634,513 

1806 

330,092 

950,663 

. 

620,571 

1795 

287,067 

913,335 

- 

626,268 

1807 

449,730 

1,061,128 

- 

611.398 

1796 

238,512 

927,667 

- 

689,155 

1808 

826,989 

1,125,059 

- 

298,070 

1797 

243,974 

958,746 

- 

714,772 

1809 

678,361 

1,748,116 

- 

1,069,755 

1798 

273,010 

1,130,588 

- 

857,578 

1810 

885,046 

1 ,844,559 

- 

959,513 

1799 

255,157 

1,403,323 

- 

1,148,166 

1811 

802,163 

1,909,689 

- 

1,107,526 

1800 

346,375 

895,063 

- 

548,688 

1812 

719,683 

1,419,019 

- 

699,336 

1801 

558,805 

1,300,169 

- 

741,364 

1813 

* 



1802 

1803 

429,354 

327,960 

1,582,235 

1,082,144 


1,152,881 

754,184 






- 


13,759,313 

43,642,389 

202,485 

30,085,561 

1804 

1805 

377,790 

293,515 

1 056,461 
865,364 

” 

678,671 

571,849 


202,485 


Excess of Exports for 53 years to 1812 

* The documents for this year were destroyed at the late fire at the Custom-House 


- - £. 29,883,076 

WILLIAM IRVING. 


Trade of Great Britain with the British and foreign west indies, and foreign America, 

for 53 years, from 1760 to 1812. 



Imports. 

Exports. 

Imports 

Excess. 

Exports 

Excess. 


Imports. 

Exports. 

1760 

2,286,104 

1,375,750 

910,354 


1789 

3,765,189 

1,478,704 

1761 

2,445.585 

1,088,153 

1,357,432 


1790 

3,710,340 

1,613,999 

1762 

2,590,014 

1,404,654 

1,185,360 


1791 

3,435,698 

2,222,867 

1763 

3,274,479 

1,156,500 

2,117,979 


1792 

3,963,769 

2,521,139 

1764 

2,453,462 

933,479 

1,519,983 


1793 

4,220,889 

2,234,248 

1765 

2,298,723 

1,049,165 

1,249,558 


1794 

5,258,526 

3,333,214 

1766 

2,835,311 

1,079,912 

1, 755,399 


1795 

4,626,095 

2,434,620 

1767 

2,733,907 

1,088,810 

1,645,097 


1796 

4,634,790 

3,592,633 

1768 

3, 005,550 

1,22 1,192 

1,784,358 


1797 

5,177,094 

3,274.385 

1769 

2,793,916 

1,304,400 

1,489,516 


1798 

6,220,416 

5,634,130 

1770 

3,240,982 

1,344,224 

1.896,758 


1799 

6,962,376 

5,855,774 

1771 

2,772,274 

1,196,112 

1,576,162 


1800 

8,308,750 

3,932,766 

1772 

3,370,894 

1,435,780 

1,935,114 


1801 

11,056,376 

4,701,010 

1773 

2,785,273 

1,332,946 

1,452,327 


1802 

10,235,20! 

3,979,258 

1774 

3,508,957 

1,448,310 

2,060,647 


1803 

6,487,160 

2,573,338 

1775 

3,595.878 

1,818,276 

1,777,602 


1804 

8,165,274 

4,722,435 

1776 

2,749,288 

1,261,562 

1,487,726 


1805 

7,390,329 

4,126,510 

1777 

2,750,205 

1,265,189 

1,485,016 


1806 

9,918,378 

5,368,226 

1778 

2,868,337 

1,089,324 

1,779,013 


1807 

9,007,516 

5,475,581 

1779 

2,711,733 

1,150,563 

1,561,170 


1808 

10,742,052 

7,585.572 

1780 

2,450,585 

1,624,348 

826,237 


1809 

11,036.043 

8,776,404 

1781 

1,923.020 

1,024,859 

898,161 


1810 

12,809,244 

7,357.398 

1782 

2,518,379 

1,530,917 

987.462 


1811 

12.286,576 

7,169.742 

1783 

2,861,503 

1,6 77,641 

1,183.862 


1812 

9,958,742 

8,882,301 

1784 

3,358,544 

1,099,038 

2,259,506 


' ISIS 



1785 

4,113,826 

1,079,668 

3,034,158 





1786 

3,291,955 

1,168,394 

2,123,561 



215 764,772 

124,471,885 

1787 

3, 527,372 

1 ,445,71 1 

2,081,661 





1788 

4,012,490 

1,469,979 

2,542,511 



Jhxcess oi imports tor o 


Imports 

Excess. 


2,286,485 

2.096.311 

1.212.831 
1,442,630 
1,986,611 

1.925.312 
2,191.475 
1,042,157 
1,902,709 

586,286 

1,106,602 

4.375,984 

6,355,366 

6,255,943 

3.913.832 
3442,839 
3,263,819 
4,550,152 
3,531,935 
3,156,480 
2,259,639 
5 451,846 
5,116,834 
1,076,441 


91, 292,887 


Exports 

Excess. 




352 


WEST INDIES. 


[ Results of the foregoing tables . — Taking the exports, with the N. American colonies, and 
aggregate amounts of the two preceding tables, the W. Indies, for the last 53 years, have been 
we find that the total value of imports and as follows : 



Imports. 

Exports. 

Imports Excess. 

Exports Excess. 

North American colonies - - - - - 

British and Foreign West Indies - - 

13,759,313 

215,764,772 

43,642,389 

124,471,885 

202,485 

91,292,887 

30,085,561 

£• 

229,524,085 

168,114,274 

91,495,372 

30,085,561 


Making the total excess of imports £.61,409,811, 
for 53 years ; which, at an annual average, gives 
£.1,158,675, being an increase of the annual 
average of the former period of 63 years, in- 
cluding the whole of America and the W. In- 
dies, except the United States, of £.493,917, or 
nearly double the amount of the annual average 
of the said period. 

But what chiefly excites our attention in the 
two last tables is, that the colonies of N. 
America appear, with the exception of the year 
1763, invariably to have thrown a balance into 
the hands of the parent state, whilst the inter- 
course with the AY . Indies seems to have left 
one to be provided for. The fact, however, is, 
that in the latter instance, the apparent balance 
against this country was in reality a remittance 
of property belonging to its subjects ; and in the 
former, the balance in favour of it arose from a 
constant transfer of British capital to America : 
not but that great exceptions are, in either case, 
to be allowed, as will appear by the subsequent 
illustration of the subject. 

It may be also worthy of remark, that, whilst 
the excess of exports to the N. American co- 
lonies has been so regular up to the lastest 
period, as that, taking the average of the last 
12 years, it has amounted to only nine millions 
and a quarter, the three average periods of 12 
years each preceding being upwards of six mil- 
lions and an half, which is as about nine to six 
in favour of the last 12 years — the excess of 
imports from the W. Indies in reference to the 
same data, has given an increase of as about five 
to one, or £.51,985,638 to £.11,942,224, in fa- 
vour of the last 12 years ending 1812 — and it 
will be evident that, differing as both the tables 
do in their result, they distinctively and unitedly 
bear testimony to the vigour which, under all 
circumstances, domestic or foreign, the British 


commerce with that hemisphere has never failed 
to have been directed. 

Trade of West Indies and America with Great 
Britain , compared with that to other parts. — An- 
other view of the importance of this intercourse 
will be evident from its comparison with that of 
Great Britain with other parts. 

Confining ourselves, in the first instance, to 
the W. India islands, we find that if we take the 
total amount of imports from, and exports to 
those colonies at their real value, it will be equal 
to one fourth of the aggregate commerce of the 
United Kingdom. An observation thus gene- 
ralised, is, however, far from affording a just 
medium for estimating the value of a commercial 
intercourse, but, as far as it goes, it bears ample 
testimony of the value of such colonies to the 
parent state. 


British West India Colonies and Conquered Colo- 
nies, (1812.) 


Realvalueofim- 


dom, (so esti- 
mated by C 
quhoun) - 


dom, (so esti 
mated by Col- 
quhoun) - 


British W. Iii- 

Conquered 

Totals. 

dia Colonies. 

Colonies. 

-10,387,144 

e 

5,346,971 

15,734,115 

- 5,979,940 

2,50 2,562 

8,482,502 

- 16,367,084 

7,849,533 

24,216,617] 


WEST INDIES. 


333 


[Official value of imports into the 
United Kingdom, from all parts, 

1812, (as by table in General Pre- 
face) - - 28,595,426 

Official value of exports from the 
United Kingdom, to all parts, 

1812, (as by table in General Pre- 
face)' --------- 43,243,173 

71,838,599 

Add three eighths to bring the same 

to real value* ------ 27,009,473 


£.98,843,072 

Although to determine the real value of an in- 
tercourse with any particular country, in all its 
branches, would require a very diffuse and elabo- 
rate treatise ; there are, nevertheless, somegene- 

To the United States --------- 

To America and the W. Indies ------ 

To all other parts - -- -- -- -- - 


ral principles or facts of a very satisfactory and 
leading nature to authorize us in our conclusions. 
Thus, in comparing the specific amount of British 
manufactures and merchandise exported to one 
part with that exported to another, it is evident 
that the part to which the greater quantity is 
exported, affords, so far, the most lucrative trade 
to this country ; and, in striking the general 
balance of the real value of the imports and the 
exports, it is obvious that the country throwing 
the largest into the hands of Great Britain, is 
the one, whose intercourse is, in that light, most 
advantageous. On both these principles then, 
it will be seen how much more highly the com- 
merce of the W estern hemisphere is to be esti- 
mated than that of all the rest of the world. 

By the table B (infra) it appears that the real 
value of the British manufactures exported for 
seven years, ending 181 1, was £.300,808,330, viz. 

Seven Years. Annual average. 
r £ y. £■ £• 

■ ; ; ~ 9)’g74’745 1 151,784,399 21,683,485 
- - - ’ 149,023,931 21,289,1 33 


Giving an excess of exports of British manufactures to the ) ~ g jqq 4gg 394 050 

Western Hemisphere of - ---------- j &lt;&amp;•&gt; 5 ’ 

Considering abstractedly the amount of foreign proportion taken by America and the W. Indies 
and colonial produce re-exported from Great is very considerable ; being about one sixth of 
Britain, we find by the table B (infra) that the the whole of such re-export ; as will thus appear. 

Re-export of Foreign and Colonial Merchandise to all Parts. 

Seven years, ending 1811 . Annual average- 


To the United States - - - 

To America and the W. Indies 
T o all other parts - - - - 


1,757,014 

9,058.011 

65,626,805 


£■ 

J 1,545,00 3 
9,375,258 


Totals 76,441,830 10,920,261 

But the real balance of trade derived by Great parts, may be precisely estimated from the official 
Britain in her intercourse with the Western table C (infra). By this it appears, that 
-Hemisphere, compared with that with all other 

Seven years, ending 1811 . t Annual average. 


* 

The real value of the exports to the United States and W. Indies, was - 176,782,145 25,254,591 

The real value of the imports from idem idem - - - - 146,568,763 20,938,394 

Giving a balance in favour of Great Britain of - - ------ 30,213,382 4,316,197 


The real value of the imports from all other parts, was - - 265,782,232 - 37,968,890 

The real value of the exports to idem idem - - 219,230,804 - - - - 31,318,686 


Giving a balance against Britain of - ------- 46,551,428 6,650,204 

And shewing the difference of value between the trade of the Western 

Hemisphere and that of all other parts to Great Britain, to be - - - 76,764,810 10,966,401 


* The proportion of real to official value appears from returns made to the House of Commons, and presented by Mr. Irving^ 
April, 8, 1806. 13y these it seems that the real is to the official value as 40 to 25, or 8 to 5. 

t The imports and exports of the year 1811 are averaged at those for 1810.) 

VOL. V. Z L 


354 


W EST INDIE S. 


[We shall conclude the interesting subject of that such as are engaged in statistical calculations 
this chapter, with the following authentic tables, will derive much valuable information, 
already referred to, and from which, it is hoped, 

Table (A.) 


ACCOUNT of the Official Value of the Imports and Exports between Great Britain and the 
British West Indies (including the conquered Islands and Colonies,) in the Year 1809 and 1810; 
distinguishing each island and colony. 



1809. 

1810. 


Official Value of 

Official Value of 


Imports. 

Exports. 

Imports. 

Exports. 


£ 

£■ 

£■ 

£ 

Antigua - -- -- -- -- -- 

198,121 

216,000 

285,458 

182,392 

Barbadoes - -- -- -- -- -- 

288,412 

450,760 

311,400 

271,597 

Dominica - -- -- -- -- -- 

315,584 

161,291 

282,002 

39,686 

Grenada - -- -- -- -- -- 

439,453 

189,800 

388,936 

173,366 

Jamaica - -- -- -- -- -- 

4,068,897 

3,033,234 

4,303,337 

2,303,579 

Montserrat ----------- 

35,407 

10,460 

62,462 

16,816 

Nevis - -- -- -- -- -- - 

89,062 

20,500 

126,443 

11,764 

Saint Kitt’s - -- -- -- -- - 

266,064 

132,845 

253,611 

89,362 

Saint Vincent’s - -- -- -- -- 

307,829 

82,408 

295,509 

96,872 

Tortola - -- -- -- -- -- 

33,399 

52,009 

61,520 

6,612 

Trinidad - -- -- -- -- -- 

328,512 

579,719 

300,999 

357,073 

Bahamas - -- -- -- -- -- 

133,515 

504,567 

108,483 

481,372 

Bermudas - -- -- -- -- -- 

11,648 

34,279 

1,137 

36,613 

British West Indies - -- -- -- -- 

6,515,903 

5,467,872 

6, 781,299 

4,067,104 

Demerara - -- -- -- -- -- 

550,871 

278,998 

\ 778,404 

346,783 

Berbice ------------ 

193.663 

49,662 

191,556 

51,785 

Saint Lucia - -- -- -- -- - 

120,431 

35,569 

193.743 

43,830 

Surinam - -- -- -- -- -- 

630,028 

257,211 

496,934 

244,197 

Tobago - . ---------- 

226,824 

70,585 

201,169 

70,787 

Cura&lt;joa - -- -- -- -- -- 

241,675 

316,696 

236,181 

263,996 

Saint Thomas - -- -- -- -- - 

194,121 

886,810 

437,030 

862,585 

Saint Croix - -- -- -- -- - 

435,378 

84,964 

422,033 

89,949 

Martinique - -- -- -- -- - 

519,817 

496,360 

635,664 

791,773 

Conquered Islands and Colonies ----- 

3,112,808 

2,476,855 

4,146,740 

2,866,535 

Total 

9,628,711 

7,944,727 

10,928,039 

6,933,639 

Custom-House. 

1 


JOHN GLOVER.] 



WEST INDIES. 


355 


W 

w 

rJ 

M 

&lt; 

H 


tB 

^ a; i 

C3 c/j Ph 

CD is ° 

r* G 3 

■a SW 

flj ' 

&gt; £&lt;o- 

o £ o 

‘'"Sic 

« 

■ h .2Ph 
c 5 — 

• S O QJ 

/o-S 

2 O ° 

| IS.j 

^3 «■% s 


cd 


&lt;d 'c v r _ 

s.spsf^ 

o o O O 

03 PH Ph cn 


~ - O 
as B -&gt; 
Ph o 


- 

rt 

~PH 


, , ca g ^ 

1 8&amp;S 

3^o 

a 5 °' ■ 


.5 o 


cfl&lt;£ „ n 

•= g ^ 

pq « p 'c 
5 § 
g_-W “ 

s- ^2 , S 

O C ^4-H © 

S °T 

£ o£ § 
o « -C e 
o-&lt; 

. ?£&lt;S 

1^-S 

CUJ3 

r 1-- o 
H .ts - k- 

§ ^is 

-s -«d ^ 

[&gt;■ ^ O) 

_ '3 o&gt; -= 

? w&gt;5 ^ 

"-5 bD + ’ &gt; 

£•- c a 

•— '■q *2 cj 

pJ3 .5 

c £ * 

EL&lt;J 

o 


QJ 

"rt 

cc 

QJ 


z; sc 
H oo .£ 
"£ 

— : b/M 

Z) q "O 

O -a tj 
O C = 
O ® ea 


2 

CO 

&lt; 

o 


O 

£ 


a. 

x 

« 


Gi 


®3 

^ *0 1H H T}( tM 

*t N &lt;0 N 50 t» 

OirtCOON^lf) 

oi io go in h in ci 
co o Ct n *n S GO 
H N N O Q1 N GO 

r-j rH rH GO ©9 09 O 
GO 00 &lt;0 ^ ri O 39 
H CO GO N N Tf 'O 

t o 

£5 

OD D rl ‘O 

O^NCO^N- 

O ^ ^ X G-l CT- O) 

o &lt;0 39 r CO TjH GO ©» 
CO C CO N 39 09 

o o o O l&gt; o 

O'. CQ r 39 O'. 39 09 

O ©9 00 GO rH O GO 
r- O -fi 09 O t&gt; 09 

&lt;1 

i- «T5 O r O O" Gs T}I 
-ft jo ^ Cd 

o aT o &lt;39 atT ©&gt; 09 

r-t rH ri rH 

rH CO O 09 GO 39 GO 
in An in rt&lt; 'o go ^ 

« C 

"3 ©,-C « 

C3 CO tO H &lt;£ O 

i“ tO ^ N r*i ^ CO 
^ Cj ^ CO &lt;3^’ tH 'O 

CO GO GO 'O N « r}( 
'll Oi N CO N ^ N 

s *n go h in o 

GO H GO GO GO N 
00 GO 09 iO 09 O AO 

r in N O go N N 

£ S g’s 

5 5 r. 

H N O H rjH C 
N N GO (T&gt; rH -J 1 GO 
N CO -}&lt; -O C C&gt; 

&lt;n oi •t rH oi d ^ 
CO O H CO rl -t o 

N o oi »n co o oi 

bd td GO GO GO GO 50 
lT. 00 in t&gt; 50 GO Tfi 

A-O 00 GO rH CO GO CO 

j= P 3 «y 

o&lt; 

N O' O &lt;0 00 ‘O n 

r( rl H rH th H 

rH rt H©i 

00 rH rH 00 Oi !&gt;• 39 
H rl ri r H ri 

t; 

5*0 ?* 

CO 50 Oi O &lt;39 GO 
O 00 H GO O ‘ft O 
N *0 N O) 

Q GO 09 N. CO GO rf* 
GO GO ©&gt; 39 GO CO GO 
*0 O r}&lt; T-i ©9 C9 O 

09 rH ©9 GO CO AO 

to *n go &lt;o co h 

09 &lt;n 09 co n go 09 

© s S 

&lt;u 2 £ 

H ffi ’O n CO O rl 

T-l 00 Tji lfO) ^ ^ 

C GO CO CN Cj CO 

Kti GO — ( TH €9 go" go 
CO N- ‘O go O 09 GO 
^ Tj&lt; ©9 &lt;39 ©9 

GO Afi ©9 O r td 

^1 GO O. o GO H N 
rfi 00 O GO rf ©J 00 

£ 50 &lt; 

H 

rl O) r - *5 b» O »~i 

H H H tH 


rH ©9 ©9 l-O N rH rH 
rH rH rH rH 


O Tf CO &gt;0 H GI 

GO ’O G) *(0 CO rf&lt; 

ON^rtrjiOS 

incoNOiooco 
09 09 O GO 39 CO «0 
CO ©» 39 O ^ co CO 

ao 39 in ^ 39 th in 

AO -fi 09 N H N 

09 O (S rH 00 C9 O 

&lt; 

'O cd ifS to 'O 

«o ^ ^ go o cr. co 
T-&lt; O 'O co *o CO 

OHNN^OO?) 

o oi *n co n oi n 

©i tH tH 

GO *d 39 O GO G0 r 09 
iO AO 39 3» br 09 O 
rH GO O CO O'* GO TF 


rH 


r- 


i!0 GO go G&gt; go Tp 

CO Oi OJ G) CO GC O^ 
&gt;C CO G* 00 CO GO rl 

^ 09 'O O CO 09 O. 
GO CO GO Cl O O N 

n Cl H 09 GO N N 

co rji &lt;N cn o &lt;n h 

Tj&lt; GO 09 rH -* ts. 

N 00 CC 00 rf C 09 

&lt; 

^ fs — i 

C CO O GJ 'O O- ^ 
Oi CTk CO iTO CO O'. CT&gt; 

JsT tH GO GO" 39 09 39 
O 39 09 09 ©9 CO &lt;39 
©9 GO rl tH tH tH r-&lt; 

h o. in cd o r t&gt; go 

rH AO lO rH C9 rH GO 
n 39 AO N Cl H o 


39 O'! GO CO 0* ®9 09 


GO cd GO GO 39 GO GO 

cO^rt 

£»n,s 

10 O CO O CC GO G! 
C. Ci 00 O H GO 

N ^ O) C GO ‘O N 

CO Tjl ^ ^ O -9 
'O O N H Cl IT) GO 
AO ©i 39 GO ©9 09 09 

GO O 31 ^ 09 09 

GO IO N 09 Oi GO 09 
GO &lt;0 39 go ao rfi go 

T3 *£ &lt;U 'P 

J~ £ § 

oa go ~f cd co 

c. o GO N H G&lt; 

CMOC CO ^ G» O 

c r}T id is j&gt;T o r GO 

O O GO Cl H 1C 03 
rf GO C9 O r-l aO rl 

o GO cd rH GO nd © 
O rH O N GO GO ri 
't 00 O Oi AO N 59 

£ w 3 5? 
C M 

GO ‘O *0 *o 

tH tH rH ©T ©9 t-5 ©9 

GO *0 td t&gt; td AO r td 

T3 .*■ CJ 
§£* 
* w -M 

CO ^ tN. tH .o *h CO 
N CO GO ^ O') Oi GO 

go oi go h h io a» 

CO rH 09 O GO GO ©9 
N 39 in 09 H N (M 
TfG i&gt;. CO 39 o 39 

GO *0 GO rH rH K © 
AO © Ol O r ’O Cl 

rH rH rfi ©J 00 GO 

«“ S 

no rt 

^ ’S ^ 

©i ' tc go cd go O' ^ 

- If! rl GO &lt;0 O *0 
r}- o CTi iO Oi 39 rf 

-h th co go cd ^ cd 
GO ©&gt; o GO 09 CO co 
r-l ©9 rfi 39 TfH ri Oi 

00 aO ^ go co" cd 

N N 39 GO AO Oi 09 
AO 39 90 CO rji CO GO 






TfG ©9 39 39 ©) -O CO 
c N *0 39 G9 rl O 
G0NOHO3JN 

go n ci 'n o n in 
N &lt;0 H {■&gt;. rH »n 
O rH c o &lt;0 rH 

O Oi H N 05 GO 03 
AO rjG ©) GO © GO aO 

go *n 39 »h © oo co 

3 

O 

0^-0 ^ od O 
tJg C N 3J O O &gt;0 

co k a&gt; Tt&lt; co go r o 

od in 09 o r o Tt 

09 39 39 ^ 

rH rH ri GO Cl AO 

bd td © r © r rj’ 00 rb 
©&gt; it&gt; N. © 39 39 'O 
© rH GO rH 39 rH 

cu 

rH tH tH 


39 rH rH 39 %£ 


O O GO 'O HO C&gt; H 
H N CD go Cl O 59 
O "t co GO GO GO CO 

O in ©) N O T}1 

AO GO CO CO »C rH 
GO 00 GO GO GO An 

© *0 00 GO AO th ao 
go © GO AO Hjl 39 GO 
GO CO *0 © © C9 03 

73 

cJT 

N CN ra oi' N N O 

^ CO &lt;39 iT&gt; &lt;V O CO 
co GO ^ 39 

09 09 r o n n d in 
GO 39 i&gt; iO AO GO GO 
r-l 39 GO GO ©9 

GO 39 AO *o go" id 

00 GO © rH GO ’’■f 09 
rH H H © N ^ 


©9 H tH 


rH GO rH rH 

«*- T3 
° 3 cy 
JS w « 

Cl G) ^ N O CO 
CO C f O GO co O'. 00 
GO tF cri in CO CO 

o in s co &lt;o go go 
ci n gc ci ^ &gt;n o 
O N O 4 ‘O t 

Tf&lt; Tj&lt; 09 ©1 GO © rH 
O 03 39 GO 03 ^ © 

GO l&gt; aO 09 © © 

J^S? 

s '^" 

cd ©V id 39 09 co 

rl N 03 O O O Gi 

GO aO tH ^ 

cT t&gt; atT 39 lO i&gt; tH 

rH go GO 09 O in ^ 
co *n to go n in oc 

C0^ 00 39 CO^ rH 09 

GO* 'atT atT cd cd' go' t-h' 

td 00 ©" rH rjf td CO 
h}&lt; 39 rH go K *0 00 

© rf&lt; co rr iq co 

go go" cT atT cd go 

ri rH r rH rH 


a^ 3 GO N CO Cl O H 
C O O O O T-» -rH 
co CO CO CO CO CO co 

H h ri t*G rl fi rl 

An 'o n co ci o h 
O C C O O - -9 

CO CO CO CO 00 CO CO 
rl H H rl ri ri r 

aO © N- 00 © © rH 

© © © © © «H y-i 

CD CO 00 CO 00 00 CO 

rl H rl H ri ri H 


A J 

V J 

V . _ _ J 


V — “V 

Y 

Y 


•sa.iniOBjniiBjvi pile 
aDnpojj; qsijijg 

*asrpuBqojai\[ 
l^iuo |03 uSiajo^x 

•syodxg iBjoj, 


K 

E 


7 Z 2 


WILLIAM IRVING.] 


356 


WEST INDIE S. 


[TABLE (C.) 

ACCOUNT of the Value of all Imports into, and all Exports from, Great Britain, in the Years 1805, 
1806, 1807, 1808, 1809, and 1810; distinguishing each Year; the real from the official Value; 
and also, the Imports from and the Exports to the Continent of Europe, the West Indies, America, 
Africa, Asia, and Ireland respectively. 


Official Value of Imports. 








Total of five 


1805. 

1806. 

1807. 

1808. 

1809. 

1810. 

years, from 








1806. 

Continent of Europe 

10,008,649 

8,197,256 

7,973,510 

4,210,671 

9,550,538 

12,476,137 

42,408,112 

Ireland and Isles of) 








Guernsey, Jersey &gt; 

3,113,549 

3,352,907 

3,606,416 

4,072,284 

3,693,169 

3,702,119 

18,426,895 

and Man -) 








Asia ----- 

6,072,313 

3,755,397 

3,401,701 

5,853,461 

3,366,343 

4,709,868 

21,086,770 

Africa ----- 

106,845 

115,948 

122,048 

143,276 

184,651 

257,387 

823,310 

America - - - - 

2,125,702 

2,453,455 

3,611,194 

2,536,969 

4,641,513 

5,909,771 

19,152,902 

West Indies - - - 

7,390,329 

9,918,378 

9,007,516 

10,742,052 

11,036,043 

12,809,244 

53,513,233 

The Whale Fisheries 

360,217 

306,628 

294,421 

295,888 

275,636 

323,240 

1,495,813 

Prize Goods - 

1,167,024 

735,938 

837,852 

1,774,752 

1,024,516 

948,369 

5,321,427 

Total 

30,344,628 

28,835,907 

28,854,658 

29,629,353 

33,772,409 

41,136,135 

162,228,462 



Official Value of 

Exports. 











Total of five 


1805. 

1806. 

1807. 

1808. 

1809. 

1810. 

years, from 








1806. 

Continent of Europe 

15,465,430 

13,216,386 

12,689,590 

11,280,490 

23,720,540 

19,605,964 

80,512,970 

Ireland and Isles of) 








Guernsey, J ersey &gt; 

4,019,481 

3,847,124 

4,307,415 

4,932,184 

4,920,224 

3,644,609 

21,651,556 

and Man - - -) 








Asia - - - - 

1,669.214 

1,936,955 

1,884438 

1,933,224 

1,647,628 

1,717,119 

9,119,364 

Africa - - - - - 

990,575 

1,433,152 

797,740 

532,841 

705,979 

484,082 

3,953,794 

America - - - - 

8,037,335 

10,725,341 

9,411,808 

8,289,956 

10,516,125 

13,060,688 

52,003,918 

West Indies - - - 

4,126,510 

5,368,226 

5,475,58 1 

7,585,572 

8,776,404 

7,357,398 

34,563,181 

Total 

34,308,545 

36,527,184 

34,566,572 

34,554,267 

50,286,900 

45,869,860 

201,804,783 


Custom House. WILLIAM IRVING.] 


WEST INDIES. 


357 


[TABLE (C.) 

ACCOUNT of the Value of all Imports into, and all Exports from, Great Britain, in the Years 1805, 
1806, 1807, 1808, 1809, and 1810; distinguishing each Year ; the real from the official Value; 
and also, the Imports from and the Exports to the Continent of Europe, the West Indies, America, 
Africa, Asia, and Ireland, respectively. 


Real Value of Imports. 


1805. 

1806. 

1807. 

1808. 

1809. 

1810. 

Total of five 
years, from 
1806. 

Continent of Europe 
Ireland and Isles of) 
Guernsey, J ersey &gt; 
and Man - - -) 

Asia - - - - - 

Africa - - - - - 

America - - - - 

The West Indies 
The Whale Fisheries 
Prize Goods - - - 

Total 

21,744,762 

6, 278,857 

9,187,539 

193,034 

4,641.488 

9,505,673 

663,535 

1,367,258 

17,855,524 

6,645,337 

7,147,447 

226,396 

5,153,098 

12,126,289 

608,206 

859,410 

17,442,755 

6,9 90,907 

8,037,906 

242,747 

7,515,643 

11,715,963 

521,240 

1,033,829 

8,905,099 

8,342,453 

7,549,329 

374,306 

4,933,679 

13,007,670 

544,567 

2,061,595 

19,821,601 

7,471,018 

7,441,245 

383,926 

9,625,489 

13,392,831 

500,515 

1,214,707 

28,120,148 

7,436,506 

9,306,516 

535,577 

12,316,798 

15,158,675 

566,967 

1,096,883 

92,145,127 

36,886,221 

39,482.437 

1,762,952 

39,544,707 

65,401,425 

2,741,495 

6,266,424 

53,582,146 

50,621,707 

53,500,990 

45,718,698 

59,851,332 

74,538,061 

284,230,788 

Real Value of Exports. 


1805. 

1806. 

1807. 

1808. 

1809. 

1810. 

Total of five 
years, from 
1806. 

Continent of Europe 
Ireland and Isles of4 
Guernsey, J ersey &gt; 
and Man - - -) 

Asia - 

Africa - - - 

America - - - - 

The West Indies 

Total 

20,435,940 

6,400,363 

3,111,748 

1,156,955 

13,073,075 

6,931,050 

17,547,243 

5,813,650 

3,259,834 

1,655,042 

16,358,102 

8,395,010 

15,420,514 

7,032,272 

3,555,39 2 
1,022,745 
14,679,814 
8,771,924 

13,983,123 

7,971,694 

3,718,813 

820,194 

12,172,014 

11,303,908 

27,190,337 

7 ,565,599 

2,990,440 

976,872 

14,932,108 

12,362,356 

24,224,567 

5,675,464 

3,117,075 

693,911 

18,521,979 

10,379,413 

98,365,784 

34,148,679 

16,641,554 
5,168,764 
76,664,017 
51,21 2,611 

51,109,131 

53,028,881 

50,482,661 

49,969,746 

36,017,712 f 

32,702,409 

282,201,409 


Custom House. 


WILLIAM IRVING.] 


358 


WEST INDIES. 


[CHAP. VII. 

Population and African slave trade. — Abolition of 
the A frican slave trade ; being a succinct account 
of all the persons , whose writings or labours have 
conduced to that important event. 

Population and African slave trade. — With any 
inquiry respecting the population of the W. 
India islands, the extent and nature of the slave 
trade have been invariably identified ; and 
their joint consideration, in this instance, will, 
from the nature of the official documents about 
to be quoted, appear most desirable. 

The following account of the white inhabi- 
tants, free negroes, and slaves, in the French 
islands is extracted from the statement of Mons. 
Neckar; but it is thought that the negro slaves 
were doubled before the commencement of the 
French revolution. 



Whites. 

Free Blacks. 

Slaves. 

St. Domingo* in 1779 

32,650 

7,055 

249,098 

Martinico in - - - 1776 

11,619 

2,892 

71,268 

Guadaloupe in - - 1779 

13,261 

1,382 

85,327 

St. Lucia in - - - 1776 

2,397 

1,050 

10,752* 

Tobago (supposed 




to be the same 




as St. Lucia) - 

2,397 

1,050 

10,752 

Cayenne (S.A.) in 17S6 

( 1,358 

- - 

10,539 


[63,682 

13,429 

437,736 


Reverting to the slave trade, the following 
series of tables will give a full and clear under- 
standing of its progress, actual extent, and pro- 
bable decline. A succint account of the persons 
whose writings and labours have led to the im- 
portant event of its abolition, as far as it has been 
effected, will close this chapter. 


Population of the British West Indies. 


1787. j 

Report Privy Council, 1788. j 

1805 t. 

Edwards’s Hist, and Ret. H. C. &amp;c. 

1813. 

Estimate by Colquhoun. 


European 

White 

People. 

Free People 
of Colour. 

Slaves. 

White 

People. 

People of 
Colour. 

Slaves. 

AYhite 

People. 

People of 
Colour. 

Slaves. 

Jamaica - - - 

Barbadoes - - 

Antigua - - - 

(St. Kitt’s - - 

iNevis - - - 

[Montserrat - - 

(Tortola, &amp;c. &amp;c. 
(Grenada - - 

Dominica - - - 

St. Vincent’s 
Trinidad - - - 

Bahamas - - - 

Bermudas - - 

Honduras - - 

23,000 

16,127 

2,590 

1,912 

1,514 

1,300 

1,200 

996 

1,236 

1,450 

4,093 

2.229 

1.230 
1,908 

140 

260 

180 

1,125 

445 

300 

256,000 

64,405 

37,808 

20,435 

8,420 

10,000 

9,000 

23,926 

14,967 

11,853 

28,000 

15,000 

3.000 
1,800 
1,300 

1.000 
1,300 
1,100 
1,594 
1,600 
2,261 

9,000 

2,130 

1,300 

198 

150 

250 

220 

800 

2,822 

450 

3,275 

280,000 

60,000 

36,000 

26.000 

8'000 

9.500 
9,000 

20,000 

22,083 

16.500 
19,709 

30.000 

15.000 

3.200 

1.200 
500 
444 
300 
800 
800 

1,280 

2,700 

3,600 

5,000 

170 

10,000 

3.000 
1,400 

500 

250 

200 

400 

1,600 

1,500 

1,172 

8,559 

3,300 

200 

1.000 

350,000 

59,506 

36.000 

30.000 

15.000 

10.000 
10,000 
32,603 

24.000 
27,156 
21,831 

10.000 

5.000 

3.000 

Total 

49,762 

10,569 

465,276 

58,955 

21,967 

524,205 

64,994 

33,081 

634,096 


* The population of the Spanish division of Hispaniola at present amounts to about 104,000 persons of all ages, of whom about 
3 ),000 are slaves. 

t The table for 1787 is official ; that for 180.5 is founded on actual returns from Dominica, St. Vincent’s, and Tobago, on Colonel 
Draper’s Report for Trinidad, &amp;c. and for the rest on estimates by Mr. Edwards, Mr. M‘Kinnen,&amp;c. and from general information 
compiled by Sir Wui, Young. For Jamaica, the refugees fom St. Domingo, white and mulatto, account severally for the increase in 
each class.] 


WEST 


[Population of the Conquered Colonies, including 
those lately ceded by Great Britain. 


1813. 

Estimate by Colquhoun. 



White 

People. 

People of 
Colour. 

Slaves. 

Tobago - - - - - 

470 

250 

17,000 

St. Lucia - 

500 

350 

24,000 

St. Martin’s - - - - 

350 

250 

3,500 

Martinique - - - - 

10,000 

6,000 

54,000 

Guadaloupe - - - 

12,500 

7,500 

67,500 

Mariegalante - - - 

400 

800 

8,000 

Surinam - - - - - 

3,186 

2,889 

60,000 

Berbice - - - - - 

1,000 

600 

25,000 

Demerara &amp; Essequibo 

4,000 

2,500 

70,000 

Cura^oa - - - - - 

400 

2,000 

5,000 

St. Eustatia - - - - 

100 

250 

1,800 

St. Croix - - - - - 

2,223 

1,164 

28,000 

St. Thomas - - - - 

550 

1,500 

3,000 

St. John’s - - - - 

150 

200 

6,000 

Totals 

35,829 

26,253 

372,800 


Aggregate Population. 



White 

People. 

People ot 
Colour. 

Slaves. 

Total. 

British W. Indies 

64,994 

33,081 

634,096 


Conquered Colo- 
nies, including 
those ceded - 

35,829 

26,253 

372,800 


Total 

100,823 

59,334 

1,006,896 

1,167,053 


N. B. The negro population, or number of 
slaves on each island, is no criterion of its pro- 
duce and value ; inferior lands and soil will re- 
quire more labour, and give less returns. 

Estimate. — In Jamaica, &amp;c. one half hogshead 
sugar per acre ; two-thirds per 
negro. 

Dominica, the same. 

Grenada, three-fourths hogsh. per 
negro and acre. 

Antigua, one third hogsh. per acre, 
and one half per negro. 


INDIES. 359 

St. Kitt’s, one hogsh. per acre ; one 
half per negro. 

St. Vincent’s, one hogsh. and one- 
fourth per acre and per negro. 

Tobago, one hogsh. per acre and per 
negro, &amp;c. &amp;c. 


Slave Trade, Coast of Africa. 
Report Privy Council, 1788. 

From what parts of Africa, by all Nations. 


1788. 

Slaves. 

Price of 
each on 
Coast of 
Africa. 

The Gambia ------- 

700 

) £ 

Isles Delos, and vicinities - - - 

1,500 

£&gt; 16 

Sierra Leone to Cape Mount - - 

2,000 

) 

Cape Mount to Cape Palmas - - 

3,000 

}“ 

Cape Palmas to Apollonia - - - 

1,000 

Gold Coast - -- -- -- - 

10,000 

} 18 

Quita and Papoe ------ 

1,000 

Whydah - ------- 

4,500 

f 15 

Porto JN ovo, Epea, and Bedagrie - 

3,500 

Lagos and Benin ------ 

New and Old Calabar, and Came- 

3,500 

14 

rons - -- -- -- -- 

Gaben,Loango,Melimba, and Cape 

21,500 

13 

A 

Benda - ------- 

14,000 

I 

Majumba, Amboin, and Mitsoules 

1,000 

1 10 

Loango, St. Paul’s, and Benguela 

7,000 

) 


74,200 



Of the above 74,200 slaves, it was estimated, 


in 1788, that 

British traders took from Africa - 36,000 

French --------- 18,000 

Dutch - -------- 4,000 

Danes - - -- -- -- - 2,000 

Portuguese - -- -- -- - 12,000 

American -------- 2,200 


74,200 

The number of negroes really exported from 
their native country, subsequently to the year 
1788, was estimated by the best authorities, at the 
time ofthe more serious agitation of the abolition 
namely, about 1792, at 80,000 annually.] 


360 WEST INDIE S. 


[Imports of Slaves to British West Indies, comparative in the Years 1787 and 1803. 


1787. 

Medium of four years, from Report of Privy Council. 

1803. 

Medium of two years, from Return to 
the House of Commons, April 5,1805. 


Imports. 

Reexports. 

Retained. 

Imports. 

Exports. 

Retained. 

Jamaica ----- 

10,451 

3,619 

6,832 

7,662 

2,402 

5,200 

Barbadoes ----- 

367 

5 

362 

1,050 

28 

1,022 

Antigua ----- 

768 

100 

668 

434 

100 

334 

St. Kitt’s - - - - - 

658 

102 

556 

971 

124 

847 

Nevis, &amp;c. - - - 

544 

- 

544 

228 

- 

228 

Tortola ----- 

120 

- 

120 

438 

259 

179 

Dominica ----- 

6,203 

4,960 

1,243 

550 

34 

516 

Grenada ----- 

2,583 

170 

2,413 

1,097 

2 

1,095 

St. Vincent’s - - - - 

1,825 

300 

1,525 

1,540 

- 

1,540 

Tobago ----- 

1,400 

- 

1,400 

172 

- 

172 


24,919 

9,256 

15,663 

14,142 

2,949 

11,193 

Bahamas ----- 




2,523 

2,230 

293 

Trinidad ----- 




4,516 

33 

4,483 

To conquered colonies - 

- - 

- 

- 

7,164 

- - 

7,164 

Total slave trade 

24,919 

9,256 

15,663 

28,345 

5,212 

23,133 


From the above returns it appears, that the 
slave trade by British traders had, in 15 years, 
from 1787 to 1803, increased in Africans im- 
ported, to the number of 3,436 slaves ; and, 
deducting - the supply to the conquered colonies, 
Demerara, Surinam, &amp;c. had decreased in the 
number of slaves to British islands, 3,738. 

It further appears, that “ subtracting Bahama, 
made in 179 1 a free port, and becoming a mere depot 
of trade to foreign settlements ; and further sub- 
tracting Trinidad, ceded to the British crown by 
the treaty of peace, 1802,” the ancient British 
sugar colonies, in the latter period, 1802-3, 

Slaves. 

Imported less slaves from Africa - - 10,777 

Re-exported fewer slaves to foreign set- 
tlements - - -- -- -- - 6,307 

Retained fewer slaves for cultivation, &amp;c. 4,47 0 


Total supply of slaves, 1787, retained 

for cultivation ------- 15,663 

Total supply of slaves, 1802, retained 
for cultivation, including for Trini- 
dada 4,483 slaves - ------ 15,676 


A comparison of the returns made bv the 
privy council, on an average of four years, to 
1787, has been exhibited with the returns, 1802-3; 
because to the period of 1787, the abolition of 
the slave trade had not been so far agitated, as 
to have had any influence on the trade. With 
other views of the subject, and especially as to 
the re-export of slaves in foreign or British ships, 
we have next to insert the returns made to the 
House of Commons by the inspector-general, 
Mr. Irving, for the years 1787 and 1788: w hen 
first, after the peace of 1783, Grenada, Dominica, 
and St. Vincent’s, had recovered a full credit to 
re-people their plantations, ravaged by the hurri- 
cane of 1780 ; and when Grenada had com- 
menced its valuable export trade to Caracas and 
the Spanish Main. Dominica was the slave-factor 
for Guadaloupe.] 


WEST INDIES. 


361 


[An ACCOUNT of the Number of Ships, with their Tonnage, which have entered, in the Years 
1787 and 1788, in the several British West India Islands from Africa, with the number of Negroes 
which were imported on board the same in each Year ; together with the number of Negroes which 
were exported, distinguishing each Island, and whether exported in Foreign or British Ships. 

1787. 



Arrivals from 
Africa. 



Negroes exported. 



Countries. 

Nnmber of 
Vessels. 

Tonnage. 

Total num- 
ber of Ne- 
groes im- 
ported. 

To Foreign 
West Indies 
in Foreign 
Bottoms. 

To Foreign 
West Indies 
in British 
Bottoms. 

To the 
States of 
America. 

Total Num- 
ber ex- 
ported. 

Negroes re- 
tained for 
cultivation. 

Jamaica - - - 

16 

2,696 

5,682 

16,59 

92 

29 

1,780 

3,902 

Barbadoes - - 

7 

831 

713 

- 

85 

- 

85 

628 

Antigua - 

5 

388 

562 

- 

77 

25 

102 

460 

St. Kitt’s - - - 

5 

645 

1,095 

- 

185 

- 

185 

910 

Nevis - - - - 









Montserrat - - 









Tortola - 

2 

273 

143 

- 





Dominica - - - 

25 

3,640 

5,709 

1,655 

233 

130 

2,018 

3,691 

St. Vincent’s 

12 

1,767 

3,361 

- 

660 

- 

660 

2,701 

Grenada - 

13 

1,943 

3,713 

257 

279 

_ 

536 

3,320 

Bahamas - - - 









Total 

85 

12,183 

20,978 

3,571 

1,611 

184 

5,366 

15,612 


1788. 



Arrivals from 
Africa. 



Negroes 

exported. 



Countries. 

Number of 
Vessels. 

Tonnage. 

Total num- 
ber of Ne- 
groes im- 
ported. 

To Foreign 
West Indies 
in Foreign 
Bottoms. 

To Foreign 
West Indies 
in British 
Bottoms. 

To the 
States of 
America. 

Total Num- 
ber ex- 
ported. 

Negroes re- 
tained for 
cultivation. 

Jamaica - - 

20 

3,862 

6,131 

2,391 

66 

10 

2,467 

3,664 

Barbadoes 

8 

801 

1,099 

- 

356 

6 

362 

737 

Antigua - - 

3 

311 

570 

- 

63 

. 

63 

507 

St. Kitt’s - - - 





300 

- 

300 


Nevis - - - - 









Montserrat - - 









Tortola - - - 

2 

83 

143 






Dominica - - - 

24 

4,275 

6,383 

3,404 

1,249 

- 

4,653 

1,730 

St. Vincent’s 

10 

1,975 

2,522 

- 

670 


670 

1,852 

Grenada - 

30 

4,484 

7,436 

945 

1,598 

- - 

2,543 

4,893 

Bahamas - 

1 

130 

211 






Total, 1788 

98 

15,921 

24,495 

6,740 

4,302 

16 

11,058 

13,383] 


VOL. V. 3 A 


362 


WEST INDIES. 


[SHIPS Cleared Out from Great Britain for the Slave Trade on the Coasts of Africa, under Limita 

tions, by Acts passed 1789-1799, &amp;c. 



London. 

Bristol. 

Liverpool. 

Total. 

Each Ship. 


Ships. 

Slaves 

allowed. 

Ships. 

Slaves 

allowed. 

Ships. 

Slaves 

allowed. 

Ships. 

Slaves. 

Medium Slaves. 

1787 

26 

- - 

22 

- - 

73 

- - 

121 

36,000 

494 

1795 

14 

5,149 

6 

2,402 

59 

17,647 

79 

25,198 

317 1 

1796 

8 

2,593 

1 

393 

94 

29,425 

103 

32,411 

315 

1797 

12 

4,226 

2 

801 

90 

29,958 

104 

34,984 

336 

1798 

8 

2,650 

3 

1,433 

149 

53,051 

160 

57,104 

356 

1799 

17 

5,582 

5 

2,529 

134 

47,517 

156 

55,628 

356 

1800 

10 

2,231 

3 

717 

120 

37,844 

133 

34,722 

261 

1801 

23 

6,347 

2 

586 

]«§■ 

30,913 

147 

37,846 

259 

1802 

30 

9,011 

3 

704 

122 

31,371 

155 

41,086 

266 

1803 

15 

3,616 

1 

355 

83 

29,954 

99 

24,925 

253 

1804 

18 

5,001 

3 

798 

126 

31,090 

147 

36,899 

244 

10 years 

- 

46,405 

- - 

10,718 

- ' 1 

323,770 

- 

380,893 

- - 


During the above periods, this table shows the 
greatest possible extent of the slave trade, as 
allowed by law; and supposing the whole num- 
bers to be procured and taken from Africa, then 
for the years 1802-3, there will be freighted, 
average number, on board each ship, 260 slaves ; 
which number will be carried in mind, for refer- 
ence to the following table of arrivals in the W. 
Indies, and the mortality in passage thereon to 
be computed. 

From the above table it appears, 

That Bristol had of itself nearly abandoned the 
slave trade : 

That London, to the year 1798, was abandon- 
ing the trade ; but that soon after, the consignees 


of the conquered colonies of Demerara, &amp;c. began 
to speculate on extending those great continental 
settlements, and carried the same into effect, by 
the annual transport and supply to these foreign 
provinces, of 5389 African slaves in 1801, and of 
a much larger number in the preceding years ; 
as we may justly infer from the sudden increase 
and extraordinary extent of the slave trade, in 
the years 1798 and 1799. 

Lastly, it appears, That Liverpool, from 1787 
to 1804, had more than doubled its share of the 
slave trade, and actually possessed six-sevenths 
of the whole trade, as carried on by British 
traders.] 


WEST INDIES. 


363 


[Arrivals from Africa, and Slaves Imported into the West Indies, 1802 and 1803. 
Return House of Commons, April 5, 1805. 


■ - 


1801- 

-2. War. 


1802-3. Peace. 

Ships. 

Slaves 

imported. 

Slaves 

exported. 

Slaves 

retained. 


Slaves 

imported. 

Slaves 

exported. 

Slaves 

retained. 

Jamaica - - 



32 

8,933 

2,712 

6,221 

_ _ 

6,391 

2,092 

4,299 

Barbadoes - 

- 

_ 

4 

684 

- - - 

684 

- - 

1,395 

56 

1,339 

Antigua - - 



3 

578 

- _ _ 

578 

- - 

289 

200 

89 

St. Kitt’s 

- 

- 

5 

1,187 

158 

1,029 

- _ 

755 

189 

566 

Nevis 








238 

- - _ 

238 

Tortola - - 

- 

- 

1 

226 

175 

51 

- - 

649 

442 

207 

Dominica 

- 

- 

4 

603 

- - - 

603 

- - 

497 

67 

430 

St. Vincent’s 

- 

- 

5 

981 

- _ _ 

981 

- - 

2,098 

- - - 

2,098 

Grenada 

- 

_ 

5 

1,082 

- - _ 

1,082 

- . 

1,112 

4 

1,108 

Tobago - - 



1 

172 

- - - 

172 

- _ 

- - - 

- - - 

_ - - 

Trinidad 

- 

_ 

18 

4,695 

65 

4,630 

_ - 

4,336 

- _ - 

4,336 

Bahamas 

- - 

- - 

11 

2,845 

2,279 

566 

- - 

2,200 

2,181 

19 




90 

21,986 

5,389 

16,597 

78 

19,960 

5,231 

14,729 

f Demarara 

- 

- 

13 

5,336 

_ - - 

5,336 





|1 q Surinam 

- 

- 

8 

1,549 

_ - _ 

1,549 





1“ t St. Lucie, 

&amp;c. 

- - 

2 

279 

— 

279 








122 

29,160 

5,389 

23,771 

78 

19,960 

5,231 

14,729 


From the former table, may be computed 

in each ship from Africa - - slaves 260 

By the above table, on arrivals, each ship 245 

Loss on passage, 5 per cent, as less on ar- 
rivals - - - - - - 15 


In reference to the former tables, ships in 

the trade were, 1802 - -- -- - 15 5 

1802, ships arrived in the British W. 

Indies - -- -- -- -- - 122 


Remain ships to account for, as in direct 

trade to foreign settlements - - - - 33 

Thirty-three ships, carrying each 245 
slaves, will carry direct to foreign colo- 
nies ---------- - 8,085 

To British W. Indies ------ 21,986 

To conquered colonies ----- - 7,164 

37,235 


From the two returns of total slave trade, and 
of arrivals, it appears that, on the peace in 1802, 
the trade greatly decreased ; and in 1804, in 
war, again recovered — a matter of curious specu- 
lation l 

It also appears from the foregoing tables, that 
during the period between 1798 and 1800, the 
slave trade had been greatly extended, and which 
is to be attributed to the then speculations of 
settling the vast and rich plains of Demerara; 
which province, on the return to Dutch sove- 
reignty by the treaty of 1802, carried with it a 
vested British capital of many millions, and the 
means of increased produce to supply Europe 
with sugar, portending a serious rivalship in the 
foreign market, to the ancient British colonies. 

British policy was awakened to the mischief, 
and by an act of the legislature, passed May 18, 
1806, limited the supply to conquered colonies, 
and prohibited the trade in African slaves to 
foreign settlements. The portion of the foreign 
slave trade, by this act abolished, was at different 
periods, on a medium average of years, as fol- 
lows :] 


3 a 2 


WEST INDIES. 


364 


[1787. The African trade, by the British, 

was for slaves ------ 36,000 

Of this number the British colo- 
nies retained ------ 15,862 


Supplied to foreign settlements - 20,138 


1802. The African traHe by the British, 

was for slaves ----- 36,621 
Of which the British colonies re- 
tained ------- - 15,973 


Supplied to foreign settlements - 20,648 


Details of foreign trade abolished, on estimate 
from 1802. 

Per slaves direct to foreign settle- 


ments from Africa ----- 8,085 

Per slaves re-exported from British 

islands - -- -- -- - 5,399 

Per slaves to conquered colonies - 7,164 


20,648 

In conclusion, it is to be remarked that the 
present negro population in the British W. 
Indies alone, is still, notwithstanding the aboli- 
tion of the slave trade, so extensive as to amount 
to upwards of 650,000, though it has been for 
years past, from causes independent of the abo- 
lition, in a retrogade state. In Trinidad, in the 
year ending December 31, 1811, out of a black 
population of 21,143 the deaths amounted to 3| 
per cent — 742, and the births only to 533. In 
Grenada, the diminution has been still greater ; 
since by an official return, made in the year end- 
ing January 31, 1812, on a black population of 
23,602 the deaths were 819, and the births only 
339 ; and in domestic and other labour the deaths 
were 206 and the births 139, making a decrease 
upon the whole of 553, after deducting the births. 
According to this rate of diminution, the slave 
population would be annihilated in about 40 
years. 

Abolition of the African Slave Trade ; being a 
succinct account of all the persons whose writings 
or labours have conduced to that important event. 

As slavery has been coeval with the world, 
and as its influence has been felt and acknow- 
ledged in every clime and nation, the slave trade, 
in the sense in which we here use it, is of very 


limited or abstract importance. But, considered 
in itself, even this portion of a barter so uncon- 
genial to the best feelings of human nature, is 
one calculated to excite the most implicit atten- 
tion ; the causes too that have led to its abolition 
are well worthy of being recorded as the fairest 
feature that adorns the annals of Christianity. 

Reverting to the benign inculcations of this 
doctrine, we find that even before the seventh 
century, the Goths, Normans, Franks, Saxons, 
and Spaniards, had gradually enlarged the liber- 
ties of their slaves, and that from that period to 
the beginning of the thirteenth century, the pro- 
gress towards general emancipation had become 
evident, whilst the conversion of all Western 
Europe from personal servitude and feudal ser- 
vices is known to have been the gradual work of 
the 13th, 14th, 15th, and part of the 16th cen- 
turies. 

It were not necessary to assert, that the slave 
trade , the immediate object of our consideration, 
began in the century last-mentioned, were it not 
desirable to shew that the system of slavery 
itself was not, as might otherwise be supposed, 
of an entirely new origin ; or rather that it had 
a precedent in the established usage of nations 
long before the organized exportation of negroes 
from Africa to the W. Indies was adopted. 

It is no ungrateful task to retrace the actions 
of men, whose lives have been devoted to charity 
and benevolence towards their fellow creatures ; 
there is no heart so hardened, but, in pouring 
over their virtues in the page of the historian, 
will involuntarily claim an association with the 
charitable principles by which they were directed, 
whilst the man of more kindly feelings, tracing 
in each line the congenial assimilation of every 
wish, hope, thought, and expectation, identifies 
the exertions of his precursors with his own, 
and dwells upon them with a rapture that gilds 
the brightest scenes of his existence. 

In justice, then, to the early precursors of the 
slave trade, and to the individuals of the present 
day who have tended by their private intei’est or 
public authority to its abolition, this short memo- 
rial* shall be traced. 

The first objection publicly announced to the 
African slave trade was in the year 1516, by a 
man in an official capacity, Cardinal Ximenes, 
who was holding the reins of government as an 
inter-regnum between Ferdinand V. and Chai’les 
Y. So eai'ly as the year 1503, a few slaves had 


* The public are already iti possession of Mr. Clarkson’s elaborate and interesting history on this subject : 
those who are acquainted with it, will find a great part of the following information to be a digest of that valuable 
authority.] 


WES T INDIES. 


365 


[been sent from the Portuguese settlements in 
Africa to the Spanish colonies in America; Fer- 
dinand, it is believed, was ignorant of the pirati- 
cal manner in which the Portuguese had procured 
them ; but at his death, Bartholomew de las 
Casas, the bishop of Chiapa, with a re-acting 
principle' of humanity, intreated Ximenes to 
establish a regular system of commerce in the 
persons of the native Africans. In justice to 
this excellent man, whose humane and charitable 
spirit was proverbial, (and of which numerous 
testimonies are recorded in almost every place 
in this Dictionary, that seemed to have been 
honoured with his presence), it should be remem- 
bered, as his apologists say, that he was most 
anxious at the same time, “ that a code of laws 
should soon be established in favour both of 
Africans and of the natives of the Spanish settle- 
ments, and that he flattered himself, that being 
about to return and live in the country of their 
slavery, he could look to the execution of it ” — 
which, had he been enabled to do, the African 
slave trade, it was thought, might so have altered 
its features, as to have become rather an honour 
than a disgrace to mankind, as it might have 
been the cause of doing that in reality which was 
first alleged to procure its toleration, — of con- 
verting millions to the Christian faith, whilst 
their individual suffering would have been soft- 
ened down to the mitigated curse to which fallen 
man is universally indebted. 

Ximenes, as we have seen, rejected the bishop’s 
proposal, as “ judging it unlawful to consign 
innocent people to slavery at all.” 

Through ignorance of its nature, Charles V. 
on coming to the throne, encouraged the slave 
trade. In 1517, he granted a patent to one of 
his Flemish favourites, containing an exclusive 
right of importing four thousand Africans into 
America : but he lived long enough to repent of 
what he had thus inconsiderately done ; for in 
the year 1542 he made a code of laws for the 
better protection of the unfortunate Indians in 
his foreign dominions ; and he stopped the pro- 
gress of African slavery, by an order that ail 
slaves in his American islands should be made 
free. This order was executed by Pedro de la 
Gasca, and manumission took place as well in 
Hispanola as on the continent. 

About the same time, Pope Leo X. exerted 
himself, much to his honour, in behalf of the 
poor sufferers, and declared, “ that not only the 
Christian religion, but that nature herself cried 
out against a state of slavery.” 


From Spain and Italy we proceed to England. 
The first importation of slaves from Africa by 
the British was in the reign of Elizabeth, in the 
year 1562. Elizabeth expressed herself inimical 
to this commerce, in the most unqualified terms ; 
she said, as we learn from 4 Hill’s Naval History,’ 
that “ it would be detestable, and call down the 
vengeance of heaven upon the undertakers 
but, notwithstanding this assertion, the trade 
continued to be carried on : a circumstance that 
can only be accounted for by the probable pains 
taken by those concerned in it, to keep her igno- 
rant of the truth. 

Louis XIII. was the next who, at least, pro- 
fessed himself inimical to this trade. Labat, a 
Roman missionary, in his account of the isles of 
America, mentions that he (the king) was very 
uneasy when about to issue the edict, by which 
all Africans coming into his colonies were to be 
made slaves, and that this uneasiness continued, 
till he was assured that the introduction of them 
in this capacity into his foreign dominions was 
the readiest way of converting them to the prin- 
ciples of the Christian religion. 

Thus far, then, we may presume that this 
traffick would not have been suffered to exist, 
but for the ignorance of those in authority of its 
nature ; that there was at its commencement a 
suspicion, a caution, a fear, both as to its unlaw- 
fulness and its effects. 

The next forerunners of this dignified work 
were men of a humbler class, and their numbers 
increased with the goodliness of their under- 
taking. In the year 1640. and for some years 
following, the nature of the trade and of the 
slavery was but little known, except to a few in- 
dividuals who were concerned in it ; but about 
the year 1670, we find an able treatise published 
by Morgan Godwyn, a clergyman of the estab- 
lished church, entitled ‘ The Negroes and In- 
dians Advocate.” In this he lays open the situa- 
tion of the oppressed people, of whose sufferings 
he had been an eye witness, and does not fail to 
call forth the compassion of the rdader. His 
work is curious, as having been the first under- 
taking in England expressly in favour of the 
cause. 

Richard Baxter, a celebrated divine amongst 
the Nonconformists, was the next advocate. In 
his 4 Christian Directory,’ published about this 
time, he gives advice to those masters in foreign 
plantations, who have negroes and slaves ; lie 
sets forth the heinousness of the traffic, and at 
last proposes several queries, which he answers] 


36(j 


W E S T INDIE S. 


[in a clear and forcible manner, shewing the in- 
consistency of the custom, with a due regard to 
spiritual concerns on the part of those engaged 
in it. 

This 4 Directory’ was followed by Thomas Try- 
on’s 4 Friendly Advice to the Planters, in three 
parts.’ The first of these was, 4 A brief Treatise 
of the principal Fruits and Herbs that grow in 
Barbadoes, Jamaica, and other Plantations in the 
West Indies.’ The second was, 4 The Negroes 
Complaint, or their hard Servitude, and the Cru- 
elties practised upon them by divers of their 
Masters professing Christianity.’ And the third 
was, ‘ A Dialogue between an Ethiopian and a 
Christian, his Master, in America.’ In the last 
of these, the author examines the commerce and 
slavery of the Africans by the touchstone of 
reason, humanity, justice and religion. 

Some circumstances that had actually occurred 
in the colonies were brought into public notice 
by the representation of the Tragedy of Orinco, 
written by Southern, in the year 1696, and was 
the means of making many converts to the growing 
cause of African emancipation. 

The next author, Dr. Primatt, in his 4 Disser- 
tation on the Duty of Mercy, and on the Sin of 
Cruelty to Brute Animals,’ takes occasion to 
advert to the subject of the African slave trade, 
and argues that the difference of the colour of a 
skin can give no authority for power or depend- 
ence, but that 44 whether a man be white or 
black, such lie is by God’s appointment ; and, 
abstractedly considered, is neither a subject for 
pride, nor an object of contempt.” 

This writer was followed by the celebrated 
Montesquieu, who says, 44 Slavery is not good 
in itself. It is neither useful to the master, nor 
to the slave. Not to the slave, because he can 
do nothing from virtuous motives. Not to the 
master, because he contracts amongst his slaves 
all sorts of bad habits, and accustoms himself to 
the neglect of all the moral virtues. He be- 
comes haughty, passionate, obdurate, vindictive, 
voluptuous, and cruel and he further adds, 
44 it is impossible to allow the negroes are men, 
because, if we allow them to be men, it will 
begin to be believed that we ourselves are not 
Christians.” 

In the same tone of reasoning Hutchinson, in 
his 4 System of Moral Philosophy,’ wonders how 
men, professing the Christian religion, 44 can hear 
such computations made about the value of their 
fellow men and their liberty, without abhorrence 
and indignation !” 


Foster, in his 4 Discourses on Natural Re- 
ligion and Social Virtue,’ calls this slavery, 44 a 
criminal and outrageous violation of the natural 
rights of mankind.” 

But no efforts were heretofore marked with 
greater success, in stamping a strong feeling of 
abhorrence at this traffic, than those of Sir 
Richard Steele, in his affecting story of 4 Inkle 
and Yarico.’ 

In 1735, the cruelties practised on the slaves 
by the white people, and the iniquitous dealings 
of the latter, were strongly depicted by Atkins, a 
surgeon in the navy, in the publication of his 
4 Voyage to Guinea, Brazil, and the W. Indies.’ 

The poetic effusions of Pope, Thomson, and 
Savage, in the cause of the Africans are well 
known ; they were, probably, not without their 
due effect. 

Amongst the other authors, up to the year 
1766, we have to mention Wallis, in his 4 System 
of the Laws of Scotland ;’ the Rev. Griffith 
Hughes, in his 4 Natural History of Barbadoes ;’ 
Edmund Burke, in the pamphlet usually ascribed 
to him, 4 The Account of the European Settle- 
ments ;’ the poet Shenstone ; Dr. Hayter, Bishop 
of Norwich, in a 4 Sermon preached before the 
Society for the Propagation of the Gospel ;’ 
Dyer, in his poem, called 4 The Fleece ;’ Malachi 
Postlethwaite, in his 4 Universal Dictionary of 
Trade and Commerce ;’ Thomas Jeffry, in his 
! Account of N. America ;’ Sterne, in his account 
of the negro girl, in his 4 Life of Tristram Shan- 
dy ;’ Rousseau ; and, lastly, Bishop Warburton, 
who, in his sermon preached in the above-men- 
tioned year, before the society for the propaga- 
tion of the gospel, made this the principal sub- 
ject of his discourse. 

Having thus far proceeded in exhibiting the 
litei'ary exertions of such as have advocated the 
Negroes cause, it will be necessary to revert to 
some circumstances that led others to act in their 
defence. 

Before the year 1700, it was customary for 
planters, merchants, and others resident in the 
W. Indies, on coming to England, to bring with 
them their slaves. Now it was thrown out, that 
according to the English law, a slave, on being 
baptized, becomes free ; in consequence of which 
most of those that came over, prevailed upon- 
some pious clergyman to baptize them. The 
owners, thus circumstanced, knew not what to do. 
They were afraid of taking away their slaves by 
force, and they were equally afraid ot bringing 
any of the cases before a public court. In this] 


WEST INDIES. 


367 


[dilemma, in 1729, they applied to York and Tal- 
bot, the attorney and solicitor-general for the 
time being, and obtained the following- opinion 
from them. — “ We are of opinion that a slave by 
coming from the W. Indies into Great Britain or 
Ireland, either with or without his master, does 
not become free ; and that his master’s right and 
property in him is not thereby determined or 
varied, and that baptism doth not bestow freedom 
on him, nor make any alteration in his temporal 
condition in these kingdoms. We are also of 
opinion, that the master may legally compel him 
to return again to the plantations.” This legal 
opinion, delivered in 1729, was made as public 
as possible by the interested parties : runaway 
slaves were now advertised in the same manner 
as in the land of slavery ; and they were put up 
to auction, some by themselves, and others with 
horses, chaises, and harness. These and other 
circumstances which it would be tedious to men- 
tion, first produced that able and indefatigable 
advocate, Mr. Granville Sharp, who is to be 
distinguished from all those who preceded him, 
as being not only a writer , but an actor in the 
cause. 

The first instance in which this philanthropist 
had an opportunity of exerting his benignity, was 
in the year 1765, in the case of Jonathan Strong, 
a slave, who had been brought over from Bar- 
badoes,by his master, Mr. David Lisle. The un- 
fortunate negro having, by severities experienced 
at the hand of his merciless possessor, become 
useless, was left by him to go whither he pleased. 
He applied accordingly to Mr. William Sharp, 
the surgeon, for his advice, as to one who gave 
up a portion of his time to the healing of the 
diseases of the poor. It was here that Mr. Gran- 
ville Sharp, the brother of the former, saw him. 
In process of time he was cured, and Mr. Gran- 
ville Sharp, pitying his hard case, supplied him 
with money, and afterwards got him a situation in 
the family of Mr. Brown, an apothecary, to carry 
out medicines. 

In this new situation his old master recognized 
Jonathan looking robust and healthy, and imme- 
diately formed the design of possessing him again. 
Accordingly, having found out his residence, he 
had him seized, and conveyed, without any war- 
rant, to the Poultry-compter, where he was sold 
by his master to John Kerr, for £-30. Strong, 
in this situation, sent, as was usual, to his god- 
fathers, John London and Stephen Nail, for their 
protection. They went, but were refused admit- 
tance to him. At length he sent for Mr. Gran- 


ville Sharp, who was also refused access. The 
latter, however, obtained a hearing before the 
Lord Mayor, when he answered with great spirit 
and firmness the opinions of York and Talbot, 
and maintained it to be an axiom of the British 
constitution — 44 That every man in England was 
free to sue for and defend his rights, and that 
force could not be used without a legal process,” 
leaving it to the judges to determine, whether an 
African was a man. This, though several other 
instances might be quoted, must suffice to shew 
the ability and exertions of Mr. Granville Sharp. 
Emboldened by his example, others enlisted them- 
selves in the cause of humanity ; and Lord Mans- 
field, who had been biassed by the opinion of 
York and Talbot, began to waver, in consequence 
of the different pleadings he had heard upon the 
subject. Happily, in November 1769, a case 
occurred, which was made useofforthe determina- 
tion of this important question ; namely, 44 Whe- 
ther a slave, by coming into England, became 
free ?” 

In order that time might be given for ascer- 
taining the law fully on this head, the case was 
argued at three different sittings. First, in Jan- 
uary, 1772; secondly, in February, 1772; and 
thirdly, in May, 1772. And that no decision 
otherwise than what the law warranted might be 
given, the opinion of the judges was taken upon 
the pleadings. The great and glorious result of 
the trial was, 44 that as soon as ever any slave 
set his foot upon English territory, he became 
free.” Thus ended the great case of Somerset, 
which, having been determined after so delibe- 
rate an investigation of the law, can never be 
reversed whilst the British constitution remains. 

Of Mr. Sharpe, we shall say no more at pre- 
sent, than that he felt it his duty, immediately 
after the trial, to write to Lord North, then 
principal minister of state, warning him, in the 
most earnest manner, to abolish immediately both 
the trade and the slavery of the human species 
in all the British dominions, as utterly irrecon- 
cileable with the principles of the British Con- 
stitution, and the established religion of the land. 

Another literary coadjutor, to whom the above 
enormities had given birth, was Thomas Day, 
the celebrated author of 4 Sandford and Merton.’ 
In the year 1773, he published a poem, which 
he wrote expressly in behalf of the oppressed 
Africans, and to which he gave the name of the 
4 Dying Negro.’ 

About this time, also, the first edition of the 
4 Essay on Truth’ made its appearance,, in which] 


368 


WEST INDIES. 


[Dr. Beattie took an opportunity of vindicating 
the intellectual powers of the Africans from the 
aspersions of Hume. 

In the year 1774, John Wesley gave to the 
world his work entitled ‘ Thoughts on Slavery.’ 
In 1776, the Abbe Froyart brought out, at Paris, 
his 4 History of Loango and other Kingdoms of 
Africa,’ in which he did ample justice to the 
moral and intellectual character of the natives of 
those regions. 

The first motion for the abolition of slavery 
was made by Mr. David Hartley, then member 
for Hull, and the son of Dr. Hartley, who wrote 
the 4 Essay on Man.’ His motion was, 44 That 
the slave trade was contrary to the laws of God 
and the rights of man.” It was seconded by Sir 
George Saville, and, although it failed, it had the 
advantage of having been brought forward by 
men of irreproachable characters, and to whom 
no motive of party or faction could be imputed. 

Thus, including Dr. Adam Smith, who had 
written as early as the year 1759, his 4 Theory 
of Moral Sentiments,’ and who, in 1776, in his 
4 Wealth of Nations,’ had shewed in a forcible 
manner (for he appealed to the interest of those 
concerned) the dearness of African labour, or the 
impolicy of employing slaves ; with the ‘ Origin 
of Ranks,’ by Professor Millar, we have a fair 
compendium of the efforts, literary or personal, 
that had been employed in this cause up to the 
year 1766. 

From this time to the year 1782, three other 
coadjutors are to be recorded, viz. Dr. Robert- 
son, in his 4 History of America,’ and in his 
£ History of Charles the Fifth;” — the Abbe Ray- 
nel, in his 4 Account of the Laws, Government, 
and Religion of Africa,’ giving a detail of the 
produce of it, of the manners of its inhabitants, 
of the trade in slaves, and of the manner of pro- 
curing them, with several other particulars re- 
lating to the subject. 

In the year 1783, we find Mr. Sharp coming 
again into notice, and exerting himself in an af- 
fair, the knowledge of which, in proportion as it 
disseminated, produced many most zealous ad- 
vocates amongst all disinterested persons in its 
favour. The affair alluded to was that of the 
ship Zong, wherein Gregson and others of Liver- 
pool tried to recover the loss of property in cer- 
tain negroes that were thrown over board by the 
captain (Collingwood), who, upon the plea, that 
60 of them had already died, and that several 
were ill and were likely to die, proposed to James 
Kelsall, the mate, and others, to throw many of 


them overboard ; stating, 44 that if they died a 
natural death, the loss would fall upon the owners 
of the ship, but that if they were thrown into the 
sea it would fall upon the underwriters. He se- 
lected, accordingly, 132 of the most sickly of the 
slaves. Fifty-four of these were immediatly 
thrown overboard, and 42 were made to be par- 
takers of their fate on the succeeding day. In 
the course of three days afterwards the remain- 
ing 26 were brought upon deck to complete the 
number of victims. The first 16 submitted to be 
thrown into the sea ; but the rest, with a resolu- 
tion that might have done honour to a bettercause, 
would not suffer the officers to touch them, but 
leaped after their companions, and shared their 
fate. These facts, which came out at the trial, 
were taken down in short-hand through a writer 
procured by Mr. Sharp, and a wide circulation 
of them in print was the consequence. 

In the year 1784, Dr. Gregory produced his 
4 Essays Historical and Moral,’ in which he took 
an opportunity of disseminating a circumstantial 
knowledge of the slave trade, and an equal ab- 
horrence of it at the same time. The Rev. Gil- 
bert Wakefield, and the Rev. James Ramsay, in 
the above year, published, the former a Sermon, 
and the latter an Essay, in which every advan- 
tage was taken of the enormities that had come 
to light. The other works of Mr. Ramsay were, 
4 An Enquiry into the Effects of the Abolition of 
the Slave Trade in 1784 4 A Reply to Personal 
Invectives and Objections in 1785 :’ 4 A Letter 
to James Tobin, Esq. in 1787 ;’ 4 Objections to 
the Abolition of the Slave Trade, with Answers;’ 
4 An Examination of Harris’s Scriptural Re- 
searches on the Illicitness of the Slave Trade,’ in 
1788 ; and 4 An Address on the proposed Bill 
for the Abolition of the Slave Trade,’ in 1789. — 
In short, this amiable man, from the time when 
he first took up the cause, was engaged in it 
till his death, which was not a little accelerated 
by his exertions. 

‘ In the year 1785, Monsieur Necker, in his 
celebrated work on the French Finances, was the 
first to throw out the idea of a general compact, 
by which all the European nations should agree 
to abolish this trade, and he then indulges in the 
hope that it might even take place in his gene- 
ration.. 

In the same year, other coadjutors came for- 
ward, but in a manner distinct from any that 
had hitherto been pursued. These were George 
White, a clergyman of the establisl ad church, 
and Messrs. Chubb, who, suggested to the mayor] 


WEST INDIES. 


369 


Inf Bridgewater the propriety of petitioning par- 
liament for the abolition of the slave trade. A 
petition was accordingly presented by the Hon. 
Ann Poulet, and Alexander Hood, Esq. who were 
the members for the town of Bridgewater. It 
was ordered to lie on the table. 

In the year 1786, Captain J. Smith defended 
the calumnies against the assertions of Ramsay, 
and he stated, that he had seen those things, 
whilst in the W. Indies, that that author had as- 
serted to have existed. Captain Smith, with the 
much-admired poet (Cowper), were the two last 
of those forerunners who exerted themselves in 
this cause up to the end of the year 1786. 

The next year, 1787, was principally remark- 
able for the zeal and exertions of the Quakers, 
particularly oftlieir leader George Fox. Through 
his influence, and with the assistance of others of 
the same sect, a public reprobation of the trade 
had been made in their regular yearly meetings 
so early as the year 1696, and had continued to 
be reiterated at subsequent periods. These meet- 
ings were composed of persons in whom, to 
judge of the sentiments they expressed, the prin- 
ciples of humanity seemed to have been fostered 
into the most luxuriant growth, but of whom, 
from their numbers, it would be impossible in 
this short treatise personally to speak. The en- 
comiums due to their individual efforts must be 
paid to their society at large : for it is but jus- 
tice to say, that what with their petitions to par- 
liament, their circulation of books, the numbers 
of persons that became labourers and connected 
themselves in behalf of the Negroes, and their 
having formed the first association ever esta- 
blished in England for the purpose of its aboli- 
tion, — the Quakers have invariably proved them- 
selves the steadiest enemies to this trade, and the 
firmest friends to the suffering Africans. 

The first meeting of the special association just 
alluded to, was held on J uly 7, 1783 : it con- 
sisted of the following persons, in alphabetical 
order — 

William Dillwyn, Thomas Knowles, M.D. 

George Harrison, John Lloyd, 

Samuel Hoare, Joseph Woods. 

In referring back to the efforts of the Quakers, 
and of others united with them in the same ob- 
ject, we must not, however, omit to state, though 
briefly, the labours of the ordinary meeting for 
Pennsylvania and the Jerseys, who took up the 
subject in 1696, and continued it with unabating 
ardour till 1787, and that the same were crowned 
by bringing round to their views five other meet- 

vol. v. 


ings; namely, those of New England, New York, 
Maryland, Virginia, and of the Carolinas and 
Georgia, who, in process of time, followed their 
example. 

The cause of liberty was thus daily increasing, 
when a work was published in the United States 
which seemed directly to lead to the end at which 
so many were aiming. This work, entitled 4 A 
sex*ious Address to the Rulers of America, on 
the Inconsistency of their Conduct respecting 
Slavery ; forming a Contrast between the En- 
croachments of England on American Liberty 
and American Injustice in tolerating Slavery,’ — 
which appeared in 1783, was particularly instru- 
mental to the abolition of this traffic. The legis- 
lature began to feel the inconsistency of the prac- 
tice of the slave tx-ade, and so quickly had the 
sense of this inconsistency spread, that, when the 
delegates met from each state to consider of a 
federal union, there was a desire that the aboli- 
tion of the slave trade should be one of the arti- 
cles in it. This, however, was opposed by the 
delegates from N. and S. Carolina, Virginia, 
Maryland, and Georgia, the five states that had 
the greatest concern in slaves. But even these 
offered to agree to the ai'ticle, provided a condi- 
tion was annexed to it (which was afterwai'ds 
done), that the power of such abolition should 
not commence in the legislatui'e till the first of 
January 1808. 

In consequence then of these circumstances, 
the society of Pennsylvania, the object of which 
was 44 For promoting the Abolition of Slavery 
and the Relief of Free Negroes unlawfully held 
in Bondage,” became so popular, that, in the 
year 1787, it was thought desirable to enlai-ge it. 
Accordingly sevei'al new members were admitted 
into it, and the celebrated Dr. Franklin was ap- 
pointed pi’esident. Nor was this all ; the exam- 
ple of the Quakers was no longer confined to 
persons of their own persuasion : other societies 
sprang up, consisting of a similar union of per- 
sons in New Yoi'k, Connecticut, New Jersey, 
Delaware, Maryland, and other states, for the 
same object, who mutually corresponded and per- 
sonally communicated with each other for the 
promotion of it. 

Thus far the abolitionists may be considex-ed 
in four classes : the first consisting of persons in 
England, of various descriptions : the second, of 
the Quakers in England : and the third, of the 
Quakei’s in the United States ; and, afterwards, 
of an union with those of others on the same 
continent. 

Of the fourth class, the fix'st was Dr. Peckard,] 

o „ 

O B 


370 


WEST INDIES. 


[vice-chancellor of the university of Cambridge, a 
man who had distinguished himself in the earlier 
part of his life by certain publications on the in- 
termediate state of the soul, and by others in 
favour of civil and religious liberty. He had 
more than once taken occasion to reprobate the 
slave trade in his sermons ; and in 1785, being 
by virtue of his office required to give subjects 
for Latin disputations, he proposed the follow- 
ing 4 Anne liceat Invitos in Servitutem dare ,’ or, 

4 Is it right to make slaves of others against their 
will ? ’ This proposition, which might have had 
only the effect of producing some ingenious and 
useful essays, was, however unintentionally, the 
direct cause of putting into motion one of the 
strongest and most active springs with which the 
cause had hitherto been impelled. Mr. Thomas 
Clarkson was at this time senior bachelor in the 
university, and conSequently qualified to write. 
The want of materials and information were soon 
supplied by the most energetic and indefatigable 
research, and his essay which had been dictated 
equally by the heart as by the understanding, was 
honoured with the first prize. The same senti- 
ments of humanity did not cease to actuate his 
thoughts both night and day. Being accidentally 
thrown into the way of Mr. James Phillips, book- 
seller of George-yard, Lombard- street, he was 
encouraged for the good of the cause to publish 
his essay, when he gave it the title of 4 An Essay 
on the Slavery and Commerce of the Human Spe- 
cies, particularly the African,’ &amp;c. This was 
ushered into the world in 1786, that is about a 
year after it had been read in the Senate-house 
in its first form. 

Mr. Clarkson, shortly after this, succeeded in in- 
teresting the feelings of several noblemen and gen- 
tlemen, amongst whom were, Mr. Bennet Lang- 
ton, the friend of Dr. Johnson, Edmund Burke, 
and Sir Joshua Reynolds, who, upon reading the 
pamphlet, became a zealous and active coadjutor, 
and continued so to the end of his life. Such 
was also precisely the case with the humane 
Dr. Baker, who at that time did the duty of May 
Fair Chapel, of which an unusual proportion of 
the congregation consisted of persons of rank 
and fortune. Lord and Lady Scarsdale became 
friendly to the cause: the latter promised to 
promote it by every means in her power, even at 
the expense of dissatisfying some relations who 
had interests in the W. Indies ; and the former 
gave his assurance, that should the subject ever 
come before the House of Lords, it should have 
his constant support. 

Certain things, it appeared to Mr. Clarkson, 


were in this state of the business necessary to be 
done : — 1st. To distribute the work as widely as 
possible amongst members of parliament.— 2dly. 
To wait personally upon many of them,— and, 
3dly. To endeavour to increase his own know- 
ledge, so as to be enabled to answer the various 
objections that might be advanced on the other 
side of the question. He was accordingly, at the 
requestofMr. Richard Phillips, introduced by Mr. 
Sheldon to several members of parliament. This 
Richard Phillips was the cousin of James Phil- 
lips above mentioned. Sir Herbert Mackworth, 
when spoken to by the former, offered his ser^ 
vices. He went about to many of his friends in 
the House of Commons, and others, from day to 
day, to procure their favour in the cause. Lord 
Newhaven was applied to, and distributed some. 
Lord Balgonie (now Leven) took a similar 
charge. The late Lord Hawke took his share of 
the distribution amongst the members of the 
House of Lords ; and Dr. Porteus, Bishop of Lon- 
don, became coadjutor in the same work. 

The first of the members personally visited by 
Mr. Clarkson, was Sir Richard Hill, who espoused 
the cause. The next was Mr. Powys, who after 
having his scruples satisfied as to the truth of 
some of the assertions of the abolitionists, busied 
himself in distributing their books. It should 
here be observed, that this distribution had 
hitherto kept pace with the personal exertions of 
all those just alluded to. It was begun by Mr. 
Langton, who either wrote or called upon those 
to whom he sent them ; and was followed up by 
Dr. Baker, Lord and Lady Scarsdale, and Sir 
Charles and Lady Middleton. Mr. Wilberforce, 
on the subject being mentioned to him, frankly 
stated, that it was one that had often employed 
his thoughts, and that it was near his heart. — 
Occasional meetings soon began to be held at his 
house, consisting of a few friends in parliament, 
who might converse on the subject. The per- 
sons present at the first meeting were, Mr. Wil- 
berforce, the Hon. John Villiers, Mr. Powys, 
Sir Charles Middleton, Sir Richard Hill, Mr. 
Granville Sharp, Mr. Ramsay, Dr. Gregory 
(who had written on the subject, as before men- 
tioned), and Mr. Clarkson. The latter here read 
a paper giving an account of the light he had 
collected in the course of his inquiries, which 
gave rise to many useful observations, and led 
to the necessary measure of forthwith fixing cer- 
tain other evenings, as well as mornings, for the 
purpose of transacting the business in question. 

About this time, a dinner was given at Mr. 
Langton’s, at which an object of the first con-] 


WEST INDIES. 


[sequence was attained : it was no less than a 
pledge of Mr. Wilberforce “ to bring- forward 
the measure in parliament, when he was better 
prepared for it, and provided no person more 
proper could be fouhd and this was followed 
by a promise, both from Mr. Hawkins Brown and 
Mr. Windham, to give it their fullest support. — 
Mr. Clarkson was now anxious that a general 
society should be formed for the abolition of this 
trade ; and succeeded in procuring the following- 
persons to be on the committee : 

Granville Sharp, 

William Dilhvyn, 

Samuel Hoare, 

George Harrison, 

John Lloyd, 

Joseph Wood, 

Thomas Clarkson, 

Richard Phillips, 

John Barton, 

Joseph Hooper, 

James Phillips, 

Philip Sansom. 

All these were present at the first meeting. 
Granville Sharp, who stands at the head of the 
list, and who, as the father of the cause in Eng- 
land, was called to the chair, may be considered 
as representing the first class of forerunners and 
coadjutors, as it has been before described. The 
five next, of whom Samuel Hoare was chosen as 
the treasurer, were they who had been the com- 
mittee of the second class, or of the Quakers in 
England, with the exception of Dr. Knowles, 
who was then dying, but who, having heard of 
the meeting, sent a message exhorting it to pro- 
ceed. The third class, or that of the Quakers in 
America, may be considered as represented by 
William Dilhvyn, by whom they were afterwards 
joined to the rest in correspondence. The two 
who stand next, may be considered as represent- 
ing the fourth, as having been instrumental in 
raising most of the members of that class. Thus 
on the 22d of May, 1787, the representatives of 
all the four classes, of which we have been giv- 
ing- a short history from the year 1516, met to- 
gether, and were united in this committee ; a 
committee, which, labouring afterwards with Mr. 
Wilberforee as a parliamentary head, contributed 
under Providence, in the space of 20 years, 


371 

to put an end to the great and crying evil of the 
slave trade. 

The committee having been thus constituted, 
a person of intelligence, activity, and zeal for the 
cause was still wanting to collect information 
and witnesses to support the abolition. A more 
staunch and able friend to the cause could not be 
found than Mr. Clarkson, who fortunately volun- 
teered his services, and immediately set out upon 
one of the most difficult commissions with which 
any one could be entrusted. It would be impos- 
sible to do justice to the benevolent intentions of 
this man, by endeavouring to follow him in his 
various labours and difficulties at Bristol, Liver- 
pool, and Lancaster, in his discoveries of the 
scandalous modes of procuring seamen for the 
slave trade, of defrauding them in their wages ; in 
his search after documents, his admeasurement of 
ships employed in the service, and in bringing to 
light, in short, all the secret transactions in 
which the traffic was involved. He had the ad- 
dress to soon lay the foundation of petitions at 
Worcester and at Chester : on his arrival at 
Liverpool he collected specimens of African pro- 
duce, accounts of imports and exports, muster- 
rolls, accounts of dock-duties, and iron-instru- 
ments used in the trade. 

In the mean time the committee had not been 
remiss in their part at home : they had dispersed 
a great number of circular letters, giving an ac- 
count of their institution in London, and its 
neighbourhood. The Quakers were accordingly 
the first to notice this institution ; and they paid 
it a great compliment in their yearly epistle : 
after this it was taken up by the Baptists. In 
answer to the circulars which were sent both to 
America and to all parts of England, a generous 
and decisive correspondence with the wishes of 
the committee, had been now manifested by per- 
sons whose rank and talents were calculated to 
grace and strengthen their cause. It was in con- 
sequence of the increase of business, which oc- 
curred through this general correspondence, that 
Robert Barclay, John Vickris Taylor, and Josiah 
Wedgwood, Esquires, were added to the com- 
mittee ; and it was then resolved, that any three 
members might call a meeting when necessary. 
During sittings, which were held from the middle 
of December of this year to the 18th January, 
1788, the business of the committee had so in- 
creased, that a further addition to their number 
was deemed indispensable, and accordingly James 
Martin, and William Morton, Esquires, members 
of parliament, and Robert Hunter, and Joseph] 
3 b 2 


372 


WEST INDIES. 


[Smith, Esquires, were elected members. The 
press was kept continually at work, and in the 
course of a few months no less than 30,000 small 
tracts and pamphlets were published to enlighten 
the public mind : add to which, the personal in- 
terference of the committee in releasing negroes, 
unjustly detained, gave a more undeniable tes- 
timony of their sincerity in the cause they had 
undertaken. 

By the beginning of May in this year, several 
petitions had been sent into parliament, praying 
for the abolition of this trade ; and, without fur- 
ther delay, the King’s Privy Council were directed 
to make inquiries into its nature and extent. 
With a view to interest Mr. Pitt, as the premier, 
in their favour, previously to the meeting of the 
council, Mr. Clarkson was deputed to wait upon 
him, and was fortunate enough to procure in him 
a firm and steady co-operator. Equal success at- 
tended him on his introduction to Mr. now Lord 
Grenville, who expressed himself as having al- 
ready experienced a warm feeling in behalf of 
the injux-ed Africans. 

Upon the opening of the examinations before 
the Privy Council, things seemed to go against 
the abolitionists for a time, owing to the cir- 
cumstance of the Liverpool delegates having- 
been examined first; but the prejudice that the 
council entertained was at length counteracted. 

Two - thirds of the session had now passed: 
the eyes of the committee were on Mr. Wilber- 
force : but he had been for some time much in- 
disposed, and a speedy l'ecovery was not to be 
calculated on. Thus situated they waited as pa- 
tiently as they could till the middle of April, 
when they were relieved from their doubtful 
situation by an unexpected message from Mr. 
Pitt, who desired a conference with their chair- 
man. In about a week after this conference, in- 
telligence was received that a motion on the sub- 
ject would be submitted to the House of Com- 
mons in a few days. The day fixed was the 9th 
May. Mr. Pitt, who opened the debate, spoke 
decidedly in favour of the abolition ; but thought, 
as the sessions was so far advanced, and as there 
might be a want of proper materials for the full 
information of the House, a future discussion 
would be desii-able. Mr. Fox sided with the mi- 
nister : the propriety of the abolition was so 
congenial with his feelings that had he not heard 
that the business was likely to have been brought 
forward by so able an advocate as Mr. Wilbei- 
force, he had resolved himself to have made it 
the subject of a motion : he could not, however, 


see the necessity of delaying the question till the 
next session. A very long and animated debate 
ensued, and the question was deferred. Sir Wil- 
liam Dolben had, nevertheless, the perseverance 
and humanity to endeavour to lessen, in the in- 
terim, the horrors of the middle passage : he ac- 
cordingly brought in a bill to that effect; the 
examination of evidence ensued, which was found 
to be both inconsistent and false. After a se- 
cond debate in the Lower House, the bill was 
taken up to the Lords, where it met with the 
most vexatious delays and opposition ; and after 
having been carried backwards and forwards to 
both Houses, it was at length finally passed. 

Upon the report of the Privy Council being 
laid upon the table in the next year, a considei-a- 
ble debate took place ; but it was eventually 
agreed, that 12 propositions should be deduced 
from the report, and reserved for future discus- 
sion. The day having arrived, the opponents 
refused to argue from the report : they now re- 
quired more evidence ; and, upon this being- 
granted and introduced, such doubts and delays 
were occasioned as to cause a postponement of 
the consideration of the subject to the next ses- 
sion, though a renewal of Sir William Dolben’s 
bill was again provided for. 

The period between the year from July 1790 
to July 1791, was chiefly remarkable for the sen- 
sation the proposed abolition had made in France. 
This was much heightened by the presence of 
Mr. Clarkson, who had visited that country for 
the express purpose of feeding the flame that 
had burst forth. He found, on his arrival, that 
several committees, friendly to the negroes, had 
been formed, consisting in paid of deputies of co- 
lour, and that these had been opposed by counter 
attempts of the committees of the white colonists. 
After several interviews with the Duke de la Ro- 
chefoucauld, the Marquis de la Fayette, and Mira- 
beau, who strongly espoused the cause, and went 
so far as to canvass the National Assembly in its 
behalf, and just as a meeting of these and other 
eminent chai’acters had been agreed upon as a 
preliminary step in the business, circumstances 
of a more domestic and important nature, con- 
nected with the resolution, dispelled the flatter- 
ing expectations that had been formed, and Mr. 
Clarkson had the moi'tifieation of returning to 
England without further accomplishment of his 
favourite object. 

In the same year a motion was brought into 
the House of Commons, to resume the hearing 
of evidence in favour of the abolition : such per-] 


WEST INDIES. 


373 


[sons as were inimical and interested put in prac- 
tice all their machinations, and the cause had 
to struggle against many cruel circumstances of 
the times previous to the day of decision. Mr. 
Wilberforce, whose eloquence had made a strong 
effect on the House in all the former debates on 
this interesting question, at length, on the 18th of 
April, made his celebrated motion for stopping all 
further importation of slaves from Africa : he 
argued it as indispensably necessary not only on 
the score of morality and religion, but of sound 
policy. The motion was lost by a majority of 
163 to 88. 

The meeting of the committee for the abolition 
after this defeat was solemn and impressive : they 
came to a resolution of giving their thanks to 
‘ the illustrious minority of the House who stood 
forth the assertors of British justice and huma- 
nity,’ and particularly to William Wilberforce, 
Esquire, for his unwearied exertions to remove 
so great an opprobrium from the national cha- 
racter ; and lastly, that they considered the late 
decision as a delay rather than as a defeat. 

With this impression the committee began 
immediately to strengthen themselves by an ac- 
cession of power, and they accordingly elected 
Sir William Dolben, Baronet, Henry Thornton, 
Lewis Alexander Grant, and Matthew Montague, 
Esquires, who were members of parliament, and 
Truman Harford, Josiah Wedgwood, Isaac 
Esar, and John Clarkson, of the Royal Navy, as 
members of their own body. 

Another attempt of the abolitionists, made in 
parliament this session, met with a better fate: this 
was the establishment of the Sierra Leone Com- 
pany, the object of which was to colonize a small 
portion of the coast of Africa. They who were 
to settle there were to have no concern in the 
slave trade, but to discourage it as much as pos- 
sible : they were to endeavour to establish and 
to promote cultivation in its neighbourhood by 
free labour ; and it was expected that the per- 
sons w ho were generally fixed upon for colonists 
should be such negroes, with their wives and fa- 
milies, as should abandon their habitations in 
Nova Scotia. 

Before the next session, the cause had grown 
so popular in the country, that many families 
had voluntarily left off the use of sugar. Ac- 
cordingly the motion for the abolition, when re- 
newed this year, passed the House of Commons, 
though the commencement of its influence was 
postponed till the year 1796. The resolution, 
upon being carried to the Lords, met w ith a very 
great opposition, especially from Lord Thurlows 


then Lord Chancellor, and Lord Liverpool and 
Mr. Dundas, who were also in the Cabinet ; and, 
upon the suggestion of the former, it was agreed, 
that further evidence should be heard, when the 
consequence was that the whole question was 
deferred to the next session. 

In the next year (1793), a motion was made in 
the Commons, to renew the resolution of the 
preceding year ; but this being lost, a new mo- 
tion was made, having for its object the abolition 
of the foreign slave trade, which also shared a 
similar fate. 

Whilst the cause seemed thus to be at a stand 
in parliament, it had to regret a serious loss in 
one of the committee, who had hitherto been its 
chief support out of doors. Mr. Clarkson, 
whose unremitting labours the abolitionists can 
never justly appreciate, had now, worn out with 
anxiety and exertion, the mortification to see 
himself (as he expresses it) 4 borne out of the 
field, where (he) had placed the great honour 
and glory of (his) life.’ For many years he had 
constantly some book or other to write for the 
good of the cause, besides a voluminous cor- 
respondence to keep up with 400 persons. He 
had, moreover, travelled more than 35,000 miles 
in search of evidence, and a great part of these 
journies in the night. 

But to return to our history, Mr. Wilberforce, 
in the month of February, 1795, again moved 
for leave to bring in a bill for the abolition of the 
slave trade. 'It was opposed, however, by Sir 
William Young, and lost by a majority of 78 to 
57. In the year 1796, Mr. Wilberforce renewed 
his efforts in the Commons, but asking leave for 
the abolition in a limited time. This motion 
was opposed as before ; but on a division, there 
were for it 70, aud against it only 74. 

In 1797, a palliative system was proposed by 
Mr. C. Ellis, which had for its object to recom- 
mend it to the colonial assemblies to adopt such 
measures as might appear to them best calcu- 
lated to ameliorate the condition of the negroes, 
and thereby to remove gradually the slave trade. 
This was opposed, however, by Mr. Wilberforce, 
Mr. Pitt, and others, but was at length carried 
by a majority of 99 to 63. 

In 1798, Mr. Wilberforce’s favourite motion 
was again lost, though by a very small majo- 
rity, the numbers being 87 to 83. In 1799, be- 
ing undismayed by his frequent disappoint- 
ments, he renewed his motion ; but which, after 
a long debate, was lost by a majority of 83 to 
74. In the same sessions Mr. Thornton brought 
in a bill to confine the slave trade within certain i 


374 


WEST INDIES. 


[limits, alleging that the commercial prospects of 
the SierraLeone Company were impeded through 
want of such regulations. This bill, after hav- 
ing carried two divisions, passed through all its 
stages ; but when it was introduced into the 
Upper House, petitions were renewed against 
it ; and at length, after considerable delay, it 
was lost by a majority of 68 to 61, including 
personal votes and proxies. 

Between the years 1799 and 1805, various 
motions were made ; though Mr. Wilberforce, 
seeing that it would be useless, after these re- 
peated trials, to proceed immediately upon the 
same grounds, allowed the years 1800, 1801, 
1802, and 1803, to pass over without any further 
parliamentary notice than the moving for certain 
papers; during which he assured the House, that 
lie had not grown cool in the cause, but that he 
would agitate it in a future season. 

In the year 1804, the period fixed upon for 
renewed exertion, the committee elected James 
Stephen, Zachary Macaulay, Henry Brougham, 
Esquires, and William Phillips, into their own 
body. Four other members also, Robert Grant 
and John Thornton, Esquires, and William Man- 
ser and William Allen, were afterwards added to 
the list. On the 30th March, Mr. Wilberforce 
asked leave to renew his bill for the abolition of 
the slave trade, which, after some very long de- 
bates, was opposed in its last stage by Sir Henry 
Young, Mr. Dickenson, G. Rose, Addington, 
and Dent, and supported by Mr. Pitt, Francis, 
and Barham, and at last carried by a majority of 
69 to 36. It was then taken up to the Lords ; 
but on a motion of Lord Hawkesbury, the dis- 
cussion of it was postponed to the next year. 

The session being ended, the committee for 
the abolition increased its number by the elec- 
tion of the Right Honourable Lord Teignmouth, 
Dr. Dickson, and Wilson Birkbeck, as members. 

In the year 1805, Mr. Wilberforce renewed Ids 
motion of the former year, but was negatived 
by an amendment for postponing it till that day 
six months, by a majority of 77 to 70, but this 
was owing to the unlucky absence of some of 
those members who were its firmest supporters. 

Previously to the next session it was thought 
right, by the abolitionists, to arm themselves with 
fresh witnesses in case the House of Lords might 
require to hear evidence on the general subject. 
Mr. Clarkson, who had fortunately recovered 
from his indisposition, was ready to step forth on 
this important mission, which he executed with 
great success. 

Lord Grenville and Mr. Fox having been 


called to the head of the executive government 
on the death of Mr. Pitt, which took place in 
January, 1806, the cause was ushered into par- 
liament under new auspices. Sir A. Pigott, the 
attorney general, brought in a bill on the 31st 
March, to give effect to a proclamation issued in 
a former year by his Majesty, by which British 
merchants were, (with some exceptions) forbid- 
den to import slaves into the colonies, which 
had been conquered by the British arms in the 
course of the war. The second object of this 
bill was to prohibit British subjects from being- 
engaged in importing slaves into the colonies of 
any foreign power, whether hostile or neutral ; 
and the third was, to prohibit British subjects 
and British capital from being employed in carry- 
ing on a slave trade in foreign ships ; and also 
to prevent the outfit of foreign ships from Bri- 
tish ports. This bill passed through both Houses 
with great majorities : but the last and most de- 
cisive measure was that proposed by Mr. Fox on 
the 10th of June, tending in its consequences to 
effect the total abolition of the slave trade : his 
motion was, ( that this House, considering the 
African slave trade to be contrary to the prin- 
ciples of justice, humanity, and policy, will, with 
all practicable expedition, take effectual mea- 
sures for the abolition of the said trade, in such 
a manner, and at such a period, as may be 
deemed advisable.’ The motion having been 
seconded by Sir Ralph Milbank, was most ably 
supported by Mr. Wilberforce, Sir Samuel Ro- 
mily, and Lord Henry Petty. Mr. Windham 
also stood forw ard in the cause ; and Mr. Fox, 
having taken a view of all the arguments ad- 
duced by the opponents to the cause, and having 
given an appropriate answer to each, the House 
divided, when there appeared for the resolution 
114, and against it but 15. 

Immediately after this division, Mr. Wilber- 
force moved an address to his Majesty, praying, 
‘ that he would be graciously pleased to direct a 
negociation to be entered into, by which foreign 
powers should be invited to co-operate with his 
Majesty in measures to be adopted for the aboli- 
tion of the African slave trade.’ 

This address being carried without a division, 
the Lords met on the 24th of June, to consider 
of the resolution and address. The Earl of 
Westmoreland proposed that both counsel and 
evidence should be heard against them ; but his 
proposition was over-ruled. 

Lord Grenville immediately rose, and made a 
most brilliant speech, in which he exhibited in 
their truest colours the inhumanity, injustice, and] 


WEST INDIES. 


375 


[ impolicy of the slave trade : he was followed on 
the same ground by Mr. Erskine, then Ldrd Chan- 
cellor, Dr. Horsley, Lord Holland, Earl Stan- 
hope, Earl Grosvenor, Lord Ellenborougli, and 
Earl Spencer. The question being put on the 
resolution, the same was carried by a majority of 
41 to 20. The same address also to His Majesty, 
which had been agreed upon by the Commons, 
was directly afterwards moved. This also was 
carried, but without the necessity of a division. 

It was now almost universally believed that 
the slave trade had received its death wound ; 
and it being feared that extraordinary exertions 
would, in the interim, be made by the slave mer- 
chants, the Commons enacted “ that from and 
after August 1, 1806, no vessel should clear out 
for the slave trade, unless it should have been 
previously employed by the same owner or 
owners in the said trade, or should be proved to 
have been contracted for previously to June 10, 
for the purpose of being employed in that trade*. 

It is in the remembrance of all, that in the 
month of October of this year, Mr. Fox, one of 
the oldest and firmest friends of the cause, was 
numbered with the dead. When he was waited 
upon by the committee in 1788, his language was, 
“ that he would support their object to its fullest 
extent, being convinced that there was no remedy 
for the evil but in the total abolition of the 
trade,” words of which his subsequent conduct 
evinced the sincerity. 

At length the session of 1807 commenced. 
Lord Grenville, contrary to the practice hitherto 
adopted, resolved to bring the question first be- 
fore the Lords. Accordingly, on January 2, he 
presented a bill, called “ an Act for the Abolition 
of the Slave Trade but he then proposed only 
to print it and to let it lie upon the table. On 
the 4th, no less than four counsel were heard 
against the bill. On the 5th the debate com- 
menced. 

Lord Grenville opened the debate by a very 
luminous speech. He was supported by the 
Duke of Gloucester, the Bishop of Durham, (Dr. 
Barrington) the Earls Moira, Selkirk, and Ross- 
lyn, and the Lords Holland, King, and Hood. 
The opponents of the bill were the Duke of 

* Between March 8, 1808 and August 29, 1809, 40 vessels 
were brought into ports of the British colonies, and condemned 
therein under the several acts for the abolition of the slave trade. 
The number of slaves on board were 6,267 : average in each 
vessel, 156. Of these 1,473-were inlisted, 184 entered the navy, 
1,603 were apprenticed, and 116 were received by the governor 
for the civil department of government. (Colonial Department, 
Downing Street.) 


Clarence, the Earls Westmoreland and St. Vin- 
cent, and the Lords Sidmouth, Eldon, and 
Hawkesbury. 

The question being called for at four o’clock 
in the morning, it appeared that the personal 
votes and proxies, in favour of Lord Grenville’s 
motion, amounted to 100, and those against it 
to 36. 

On February 10 the bill was carried to the 
House of Commons. On the 20th, counsel were 
heard against it ; after which, by agreement, the 
second- reading took place. On the 23d, the 
question being put for the commitment of it, 
Lord Viscount How ick (now Earl Grey) spoke 
forcibly in its favour, and was supported by Mr. 
Roscoe (member for Liverpool,) Mr. Lushington, 
Mr. Fawkes, Lord Mahon, Lord Milton, Sir 
John Doyle, Sir Samuel Rotnilly, Mr. Wilber- 
force, and Earl Percy ; the latter of whom wished 
that a clause might be inserted in the bill, by 
which all negro children, born after January, 
1810, should be made free, thus bringing a gra- 
dual emancipation in the train of this general 
abolition. 

These having spoken, it appeared, on a divi- 
sion, that there were for the question 283, and 
against it only 16. 

After this it was moved in a committee by Sir 
C. Pole, that the year 1812 should be substituted 
for the year 1807, as the time when the trade 
should be abolished. This amendment produced 
a long debate, which was carried on by Sir C. 
Pole, Mr. Fuller, Hiley Addington, Rose, Gas- 
coyne, and Bathurst on one side ; and by Mr. 
Ward, Sir P. Francis, General Vyse, Sir T. Tur- 
ton, Mr. Whitbread, Lord Henry Petty, Mr. 
Canning, Stanhope, Perceval, and Wilberforce 
on the other. At length, on a division, there ap- 
peared to be 125 against the amendment, and for 
it only 17. The bill enacted “ that no vessel 
should clear out for slaves from any port within 
the British dominions after May 1, 1807, and 
that no slave should be landed in the colonies 
after March 1, 1808. 

On March 16, after Mr. Hibbert, Captain Hu- 
bert, Mr. T. W. Piumer, Mr. Windham, and 
Lord Castlereagh had spoken against the ques- 
tion that the bill be read a third time, it was 
passed without a division. 

The bill had now to travel back to the Lords, 
and much anxiety was expressed lest it should 
not be ultimately passed before the dissolution of 
the existing ministry, it being rumoured that the 
new officers Were already appointed. The ut-j 


37t5 


WEST INDIES. 


[most dispatch was however used in the printing. 
An informality in the words “ county, territory, 
or place,” which, if not rectified, might defeat 
the purposes of the bill, was found to exist, and 
the bill was consequently, on the 24th, again 
brought before the Commons. 

The next day, at half past 1 1 in the morning, 
His Majesty’s message was delivered to the dif- 
ferent members of the ministry, that they were 
then to wait upon him to deliver up the seals of 
their office ; and, a commission for the royal 
assent to this bill having been obtained, this ad- 
ministration had the satisfaction to witness its 
consummation, as they were in the act of resign- 
ing their respective functions. 

Thus far we have seen what has been effected 
by the exertions of this country towards the abo- 
lition of the slave trade. “ It was (said Mr. Pitt, 
in his speech on the resolutions moved by Mr. 
Wilberforce in May, 1789, alluding to the expec- 
tations from foreign powers), highly becoming 
Great Britain to take the lead in such a virtuous 
and magnificent measure ; and I cannot but have 
confidence that they will be inclined to share the 
honour with us, or be pleased to follow us as 
their example.” It will be interesting for us now 
to record how far this prophetic surmise was well 
or ill founded. 

It will be remembered that, on the appearance 
of a party friendly to the cause in France in the 
year 1791, Mr. Clarkson visited that country in 
the hopes of embodying the spirit then manifest, 
and of securing its co-operation in the general 
cause ; but that, upon the bursting forth of the 
revolution, he found it expedient to hasten home. 

At this time the colony of St Domingo was in 
a very disturbed and unsettled state, and had 
sent deputies of colour to vindicate their rights 
in the National Assembly about to be held in 
France. These, after remaining three months in 
that country, were obliged to return without 
effecting the object of their mission, and the con- 
sequence was a civil war between the white in- 
habitants and the people of colour of that de- 
voted island, which caused as it were, by force, a 
general emancipation, and led to the decree of 
the national convention of February 5, 1794, 
whereby slavery was abolished in this colony. 
This, then, must be considered as a forced con- 
cession, rather than as a gratuitous favour, on 
the part of the mother country ; it was a political 
magnanimity, which Buonaparte disclaimed and 
wished to lay aside, in 1802, when he proposed 
to annul that decree. 


Thus far with regard to France the slave trade 
had received but a temporary and partial aboli- 
tion : with Spain and Portugal nothing on that 
score had been even agitated up to the period of 
its absolute annihilation by the British, as we 
have just shown, in the year 1807. Indeed, the 
coast from Sierra Leone to the river Nunez, a 
part where the slave trade was carried on with 
great vigour, having for the most part been de- 
prived of this traffic, the small Portuguese settle- 
ment of Bissao, lying within the same limits, 
instead of furnishing a small number of slaves, as 
it used annually, to Brazil, became the empo- 
rium of the slave trade in that part of Africa. 
The most obvious preventative is to be looked 
for by the cession of Bissao to the British crown ; 
but (even if the Portuguese were ready to con- 
sent) there are some very serious objections, as 
well on account of the expense as of the loss of 
men which every establishment in Africa must 
occasion. 

But the principal scene of the slave trade be- 
gan to show itself on the coast of Whydah, the 
Bight of Benin, Gaboon, and the Portuguese set- 
tlements in Congo and Angola. According to 
the general opinion of the best informed Spa- 
niards and Portuguese, the annual importation 
from all these places into Brazil was, in the be- 
ginning of 1810, considered at a moderate com- 
putation to amount to 40,000, and into Havannah 
and Cuba to an equal number. 

Although the slave trade was ostensibly pro- 
hibited by law in the United States, January 
1, 1808, yet it is strongly suspected that the mer- 
cantile interests of that country has, of late years, 
succeeded in deriving from it a very lucrative 
return ; not to mention the circumstance of slaves 
being acknowledged there as such at this day. 
The wise method adopted by Admiral Cochrane, 
for emancipating the negroes of that country, has 
been no less wise than expedient. In the pre- 
sent year (1814) whilst off the Bermuda stations, 
he offered personal freedom, and a settlement in 
the British possessions, to all of that unhappy 
race who were disposed to put themselves under 
British protection. The effect of this measure 
was immediately most extensive. Upwards of 
700 negroes arrived immediately at Bermuda, 
and 2 or 3,000 it was said, including women and 
children, immediately prepared themselves to 
proceed to Halifax, where encouragement was 
offered to the men by employment at the wages 
of a dollar a day. 

The Swedish is almost the only government] 


WEST INDIES. 


377 


[by whom the slave trade has not been encou- 
raged and authorized. It was therefore no diffi- 
culty, on the part of that administration, to give 
to His Britannic Majesty the following answer, 
in a separate article of their treaty of concert and 
subsidy, signed at Stockholm, March 3, 1813, 
namely, “ to forbid and prohibit, at the period of 
the cession, (of Guadaloupe) the introduction of 
slaves from Africa into the said island, and the 
other possessions in the W. Indies, and not to 
permit Swedish subjects to engage in the slave 
trade.” 

It is a pleasing anomaly in political economy 
to see how nations, though at variance with each 
other in private interests, have sometimes agreed 
in those in which the benefit t&gt;f mankind has been 
the question. A more striking instance cannot 
be given than in the relations between Denmark 
and Sweden. Determined as have been the 
counsels of these two governments, in stipulating 
for their individual interests, they have mutually 
conceded the advantages of the traffic in slaves to 
the warning and supplicating voice of Great Bri- 
tain. Thus we have already seen the determi- 
nation of Sweden, and thus we find Denmark 
avowing as follows, in the eighth article of the 
treaty of peace, entered into with His Britannic 
Majesty, January 14, 1814. 

“ His Majesty the King of the United King- 
dom of Great Britain and Ireland, and the Bri- 
tish nation, being extremely desirous of totally 
abolishing the slave trade, the King of Denmark 
engages to co-operate with his said Majesty for 
the completion of so beneficent a work, and to 
prohibit all his subjects in the most effectual 
manner, and by the most solemn laws, from taking 
any share in such trade.” 

The stipulations on this subject elicited by 
Great Britain from France are neither of so de- 
cisive nor of so pleasing a nature ; for, by the 
first additional article of the definitive treaty of 
peace and amity between His Britannic Majesty 
and His most Christian Majesty, signed at Paris, 
May 30, 1814, we find that 

“ His Christian Majesty concurring, without 
reserve, in the sentiments of His Britannic Ma- 
jesty, with respect to a description of traffic re- 
pugnant to the principles of natural justice and 
of the enlightened age in which we live, engages 
to unite all His efforts to those of His Britannic 
Majesty, at the approaching congress, to induce 
all the powers in Christendom to decree the abo- 
lition of the slave trade, so that the said trade 
shall cease universally, as it shall cease dedni- 

TOL. V. 


tively, under any circumstances, on the part of 
the French government, in the course of five 
years ; and that, during the said period, no slave 
merchant shall import or sell slaves, except in 
the colonies of the state of which he is a subject.” 
This reserve must certainly be considered less 
creditable to France than to Great Britain, and 
to those countries whom she has prevailed upon 
to follow her generous example. By a circular 
of the royal customs, dated August 29, 1814, 
France, in pursuance of the above stipulations, 
established a monopoly of this traffic in her own 
favour. By that document u French ship owners 
were informed that the slave trade, to the French 
colonies in the W. Indies, was restored, and that 
the transport was restricted to French bottoms.” 
The decree, issued by the Prince of Orange 
(also at the instigation of Great Britain) for the 
abolition of the slave trade, June 13, 1814, will 
close this memoir. 

a We, William, by the Grace of God, Prince 
of Orange Nassau, Sovereign Prince of the 
United Netherlands, &amp;e. &amp;c. &amp;c. 

u FIaving heard the report of our secretary of 
state for foreign affairs, relative to the contents 
of a note received by him from the ambassador 
of Great Britain, bearing date the 7th inst. and 
tending to obtain our prompt and effectual as- 
sistance, in the measures which Great Britain 
has already adopted for herself, and earnestly 
recommended to other European powers, with 
regard to the slave trade. 

u And as we are desirous to embrace every 
opportunity to afford His Royal Highness the 
Prince Regent of Great Britain proofs of our 
amicable sentiments, and of our readiness to con- 
tribute, as much as possible, to the attainment of 
His views : 

u Have decreed, and do decree, 

“ Art. I. — Henceforward no ships or vessels 
destined to convey Negroes from the coast of 
Africa, or from any islands belonging to that 
quarter of the globe, to the continents, or to the 
islands of America, shall be cleared out or expe- 
dited from any of the harbours or roads within 
the territory of the United Netherlands. The 
financial department being specially ordered to 
^take such precautions that Our intentions, in this 
respect, be complied with. And that no ship or 
vessel be cleared out, which, from its equipment, 
or from other circumstances, may lead to a sup- 
position of its being destined to the aforesaid] 
3 c 


573 


WEST INDIES. 


[purpose, or of being any way connected with the 
slave trade. 

“ Art. II. — It shall be signified to the general 
government of the coast of Guinea, that in none 
of the forts, offices, or possesions within the 
limits of that command, any ships or vessels 
destined or equipped for the slave trade, shall be 
admitted. And also, that no inhabitants of that 
country, or any other persons in the vicinity of 
those ports or offices, shall be sold or exported 
as slaves ; and to such ships or vessels, in case 
they navigate under foreign colours, notice shall 
be given of the existing prohibition, and they 
shall forthwith be ordered to put back to sea ; 
whilst such vessels belonging to the inhabitants 
of the Netherlands shall be seized, and a report 
thereof made to the commercial and colonial de- 
partment.” 

“ Art. III. — Copies of this decree shall be 
sent to the commercial end to the colonial de- 
partments, that they may respectively attend to 
the execution of the same ; and also to our secre- 
tary of state for foreign affairs, who is ordered to 
communicate the contents of these presents : — 

“ (1.) To the ambassador of Great Britain, in 
answer to his aforesaid note ; adding, that at the 
eventual negotiations relative to the restitution 
of the Dutch colonies, we shall not be averse 
from having inserted in the treaty such an arti- 
cle, as shall continue to bind the government of 
this state to the perpetual observance of the 
aforesaid measures, and to the effectual prohibi- 
tion of the slave trade. 


“ (2.) To the boards of trade, for the informa- 
tion of the trading part of the inhabitants. 

Given at the Hague, June 15, 1814, 

And of our Reign the First, 

(Signed) William. 

By order of His Royal Highness, 

The Secretary General of State, 

(Signed) A. R. Falck. 

CHAP. VIII. 

Aggregate Value of the Productions of the TV. 

India Colonies. — General View of the present 

State of the TV. India Colonies. 

The important subject of this chapter has 
undergone the consideration of authors of the 
first abilities, and has moreover, more than any 
other, been elucidated by the investigation of 
persons in official capacities : in the former case 
we have the works of Mr. Bryan Edwards, Sir 
William Young, and Mr. Colquhoun ; and in the 
latter, the well-known report of the Privy Coun- 
cil on the slave trade in 1788. It shall be our 
endeavour from these authorities, to throw to- 
gether, in as clear and perspicuous a manner as 
possible, some of the leading documents, whereby 
to form a just estimate of the value of the W. 
Indian colonies, the public and private property 
therein vested, and their general apportionment 
and distribution amongst the several European 
powers at the present day. 


Jamaica - 
Barbadoes - 
Antigua - - 

St. Christopher's 
Nevis - 
Montserrat - - 

Virgin Isles 
Grenada - - 

St. Vincent 
Dominica - - 

Trinidad - - 

Bahamas - - 

Bermudas - - 

Honduras - - 


Aggregate Value of the Productions of each Colony. 

(Estimate by Colquhoun.) 

Annual Average 
of Productions. 


11,109,661 

- - - - - 1,270,863 

- - - - - 898,220 

753,528 

375,182 

- - - - - 211,160 

- - - - - 201,122 

- - - - - 935,782 

- - - - - 812, 0S1 

- - - - - 561,858 

735,017 

- - - - - 269,806 

- - - - - 175,560 

- - - - - 146,700 


18,516,540. 


Tobago ------- 

St. Lucia ------ 

St. Martin’s - - - - - 

Martinique - - - - - 

Guadaloupe - - - - - 

Marigalante - - - - - 

Surinam ------ 

Berbice ------- 

Demarara and Essequibo 
Cura^oa ------ 

St. Eustatia - 

St. Croix ------ 

St. Thomas - - - - - 

St.John’s ------ 


Annual Average 
of Productions 
(including Cattle.) 

£. 

516,532 

595,610 

46,615 

- 1,785,923 

- 1,803,384 

113,597 

- 1,520,957 

629,461 

- 2,23 8,529 

19,457 

26,112 

729,473 

21,976 

148,300 


10,195,926 

18,516,540 


- 28,712,466] 


Total 


WEST INDIES. 


379 


[Whence' it appears that the productions of the 
Old British W. Indies are about double the 
amount in value of those of the conquered islands 
and colonies ; and it will presently be seen that 
the value of either differ greatly, as compared to 
the general estimated value of the respective 
colonies. Thus, for instance, the total amount 
in sterling of the estimated value of the old Bri- 
tish colonies is taken at ^0.100,000, and that of 
the foreign or conquered colonies at £.75, 000, 
whereby the annual average productions of the 
former may be averaged in round numbers, at 
about one-fifth, and that of the latter at about 
one-seventh of the total value of the British and 
conquered colonies respectively. 

Valuation of British Property vested in the British Sugar Colonies. 


Report Privy Council, 

1788. 


Estimate, by Colquhoun, 1813. 




Lands. 

| 

Patented Estates, as taxed per Acre. 

Negroes. 

Cultivated. 

Unculti- 

vated. 

Negroes. j 

| 

Jamaica - -- -- -- -- - 

Barbadoes - - 

Antigua - -- -- -- -- - 

St. Kitt’s - -- -- -- -- 

Nevis - -- -- -- -- - 

Montserrat --------- 

Virgin Isles - -- -- -- - 

Dominica - -- -- -- -- 

St. Vincent’s - -- -- -- - 

Grenada - -- -- -- -- 

Trinidad - - - - -- -- - 

Tobago - -- -- -- -- - 

Bahamas - -- -- -- -- 

Bermudas - -- -- -- -- 

Honduras - -- -- -- -- 

1,860,000 

106,470 

69,277 

43,726 

30.000 
38,400 

23.000 
100,000 

25.000 

89.000 

28.000 

300,100 

60.000 

36.000 
26,100 

13.000 
9,500 
9.000 

22,083 

25.000 
25,000 
29,709 
14,883 

Acres. 

809,450 

101,470 

44,838 

30,126 

15.000 

12.000 
12,000 
86,436 
50,000 
50,000 
27,275 

50,000 

12,500 

Acres. 

1,914,812 

5.000 

15.000 
13,600 

6.000 
9,000 
9,000 

100,000 

54,286 

30.000 
1,500,000 

150,000 

! 

350,000 1 
59,506 j 

36.000 

30.000 

15.000 

10.000 
10,000 } 

24.000 
27,156 
32,603 
21,831 

10.000 

5.000 

3.000 


2,414,873 

560,375 

1,301,095 

3,806,698 

634,096] 


Having ascertained the value and proportion 
of the productions, we proceed to take a 

General view of the present state of the JV. India 
colonies . — On this subject it will be necessary, in 
the first place, to refer to the valuation made, 
as already observed, in the year 1788, by the 
committee on the slave trade. That valuation 
was formed on two principles, and the results of 
each being nearly similar, it is fair to presume 
they were not very far from the truth. In the 
following table the number of Negroes is taken 
from the latest authority, by way of contrasting 
it with one of the principles on which that va- 
luation was founded in the Report. 


3 c 2 


380 


WEST INDIES. 


[The above estimate, in the report of the Privy 
Council, was considered as data for the following- 
valuation : 

V alue oi560,375Negroes.at 50/.each£.28,018,750 
V alue of lands, buildings, and stock, 

double that of Negroes - - - 56 , 057,500 

Value in towns, stores, and shipping 2,500,000 

£.86,556,250 

Mr. Bryan Edwards, in 1792, valued 
the capital vested in J amaica alone, 
at then - -- -- -- - £.39,000,000 

Income, according to the said report, 
gave other premises of valuation as 
follow : 

On produce and net income of - £.6,944,142 

At 12 years’ purchase ----- 12 

£.83,329,704 

In the preceding table the value of the Negroes 
is taken at the lowest rate. The extent of pa- 
tented land admits not of an accurate computa- 
tion of medium value per acre, and the averages 
on which the statement in the report was found- 


ed w ere liable to be erroneous. Much of the 
land was uncultivated, and much scarcely culti- 
vable : besides w hich, lands and soils not only vary, 
as productiv e of the staple articles in quantity, but 
likewise in quality, inasmuch as five cwt. of 
sugar from St. Vincent’s is equal in value to six 
cwt. from Tobago. Upon the whole, however, 
the valuation of the land has been considered 
fair and unobjectionable, and has invariably af- 
forded the data on which subsequent estimates of 
the same nature with regard to those colonies 
have been founded. 

Nevertheless, since the period of the above 
report having been made, many circumstances 
have conduced to alter the value of the colonies 
in the western hemisphere. The works of de- 
fence and public buildings, as well as private, in 
each colony, have of late years experienced a 
considerable increase ; the value of the Negroes 
has been inhanced by the abolition of the slave 
trade : more lands have been brought into culti- 
vation, and the worth of every article of con- 
sumption and furniture, agricultural or domes- 
tic, has been increased. Following, therefore, 
the principles of valuation laid down by Mr. 
Colquhoun, we may thus state the 


General Value of the British and Foreign (or Conquered) West India Colonies. 
(Estimated by Colquhoun, 1812.) 


British Colonies. 

£■ 

Negroes 634,096 at 551 . each ----- - 34,875,280 

T , ) Cultivated - 1,301,095 24,357,520 ) no nm 71 c 

Lands { Uncultivated 3,806,698 3,644,198 j 1S 

Build- f Public ----- 3,193,0007 91 nqn 

ings. 1 Private ----- 18,559,090) * 1 &gt;' a “&gt; uau 

Stock - -- -- -- -- -- -- 7,630,740 
Towns and stores -------- - - 7,054,500 

Shipping - 240,036 

Coin - 460,500 

£.100,014,864 


Foreign (or Conquered) Colonies. 

£~ 

20,504,000 

^000 

(SSS. : 8®H»} n ’ 180 ’ 000 

-------- 3253,000 

4,980.000 

- - - '264.000 

- - 472,000 

£. 75,220,000] 


[Of the above foreign or conquered colonies Great Britain restored to their former possessors, as follower 
Colonies restored by Great Britain to Foreign Powers, pursuant to Treaty of 30th May, 1814. 


331 


WEST 


I N D 


I E S. 


SS tu* o 
= 2 
cr "c9 

&lt;V 


'-a 

c 

as 


&lt;u 

3 

13 

d 


S « 

&gt; s? 


T3 

3 

ri 


a 

_o 

"re 

§* 

Ph 


O 

S' 0 


Ph "o 

aj ’™ 

r~ ° 
&amp; 


S» 4) 
"B i. 


ooooooooo 

OOOObPOOOO 
OOO— .QOOOOOO 

„ o' .-T G T of &lt;xf d t&gt; of iff 
~0 

^ b «N ri »N 

r— &lt; GO OO P— t »— I 


OCOOOOO So 
OC. OOOOO So 
4 0 0 0,0 O o p .33 o^ 
i o'd o' icf d t&gt; d = of 

^OCW 1 - ( ^ G^'Gr-&lt; 

t- ov ,~ 

&lt;j 


ooooooooo 

■ 22 S C ^ :1 00000 

5 o o^o o^o o o q_ 

“229000000 

-s^qcoooooooi 

Ol i— i CO o bb 

GO go' o' 


OOOOOOOOO 

OOOOOOOOO 

. 0 i 00«000000 

mJO (MOMOiOflOO 

Bp O bP CO O O 

” ■ ' UO &gt;-H GO 


O $&gt;. Bp 

Gvp go' 


GO 


ooooooooo 

OOOOOOOOO 
010 00 ^ 00000 ® 
&lt;N «\ b rs rv «N r \ 

bP b- GO 00 go 40 O 1 — I 
Iflffl &lt;M CO 




s-i-s 


• .2 


f! $&gt;i“J 

-5 -a .5 53 3 r, 
s- ri t- ^ o “ 
« 3 td .3 • 

*3 O S m OC 


ri 3 
O 3 
O 3 
ri .3 

3 3 

O cn 


o 

bP 

Bp 


GO 

Bp 


CT) 

f-H 

b- 


o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

GO 


o 

o 

o 

Bp 

CO 

co 

CM 


o 

o 

co 

CO* 

Of 

Ot 


ri 

o 

H 


Uncultivated. 

OOOOOOO S° 
OOOOO OO = O 
■iooooqo &lt;q.C 3 o^ 
fc o' cf o' o' d'G o'. 5 of 
ioooGop 1 oq ^ - , 
^ t&gt; o&gt; .S 

B 3 
&lt;1 

1 , 759,000 

T 3 

OOOOOOOOO 

o 


M OOOOOOOOO 

o 

&gt; 

2000000000 

o 

2 

^ddddddodcb 

od' 

3 

'C-hO^b-.tp GOO 

GO 

u 

Ol Ol BP 

o 


OOOObPOOOO 
oooooooooo 
Cyq^oo cqoo G&lt;t 

CO t&gt;» ’"■i bh Ol G“t 

GO 

no 

CO 

rv 

OOOOGOOOCOO 

O 

OOOiO(MiOOOOO 

o 

OtO^cOG^tO^fi^ 

f- 

d d d go' 

cf 

r— &lt; t-H 

CM 


4) 

33 


Sb 

ri 


M 

01 


be 

_3 

So 

c 

yo 

13 

&amp; 


£ 


cd 

CO 

a&gt; 

s- 

bo 

CD 

as 

0 

-a 

H 




CO 

CCy 

Bif 


o 

o 


o 

CO 

*cf 

tB 

*ry 

GO 




GO 


O) 03 

cn o 

gi o 


«j aj 
0) -w 

* P 

S cn 


u 

13 " HJ 

oj 

C .O 

OJ 

c &lt;u 


o 

u 

03 

c 

ri 

ri 

'o 

cc 

c 

_ri 


3 

o 

o 

PC 

a 

ri 


p 

E3 

0) 

-c 

0-( 

o 


ri 

&gt; 

0) 

ri 

bo 

o 

P 

00 

bo 

&lt;5 


o 

o 

cq 

cf 

gj 

cy 

«&gt; 


o 

'^ ! 3n 

CO 

co" 

Bp 


Bp 

o&gt; 

Bp 

o' 

CO 

‘cy 

GO 




&lt;u 

=5 

&gt; 

CD 

"S 

CD 

CD 

CD 

CD 

c 




o o o 

O O BP 

b- yoydy 
. co'b- T ccf 
CO go C- 

■X^ GG^Bjy 

icTgo'bp' 

d i — i 


O! 

o 

p 

o 


a&gt; 

- s J 


5.2 

O 3 

c ^ 
w O 

ri ° 

^ -S — 

3 3 1 

^ C- 


o 
o 

TO - ^ 


.s 

c5 

&lt;D 

K 


»■ 


® "3 T! 

:-5 2 Si 

0 0 &gt; 

3 3 

0 1 cr 

bq 3 3 

P o o 

Ocjo 


'a 

c U 

gj 3 „ 

fcQD 


cd 




382 


WES 


W E S 


[WEST LAKE lies between Sandy Bay and 
Little Sandy Bay, on Lake Ontario, Upper Ca- 
nada, e. of the Isle de Quinte, and is in the 
township of Sophiasburgh.] 

[WEST LIBERTY, a post-town of Virginia, 
and the capital of Ohio County, is situate at the 
head of Short Creek, six miles from the Ohio. 
It contained, in 1790, above 120 houses, a 
Presbyterian church, a court-house, and goal. 
It lies two miles zo. of the Pennsylvania line, 
eight n. of Wheeling, and 19 zo. of Washington 
in Pennsylvania.] 

[WEST MAIN, the zo. shore of Hudson’s Bay, 
in N. America, is so called, at least that part of 
it called James’ Bay. See East Main.] 

[WESTMINSTER, a township of Massachu- 
setts, situate in Worcester County, was granted 
to those who did service in the Narraganset war, 
or their heirs, in 1728, and was then styled Nar- 
raganset, No. 2. It was incorporated by its 
present name in 1759, and contains 20,000 acres 
of land, well watered. It is situate on the 
height of land between the rivers Merrimack and 
Connecticut, having streams arising in the town, 
and running into both. It is about 55 miles 
from Boston to the n. of a)., and about 22 miles 
n. from Worcester, and contained, in 1790, 177 
dwelling-houses, and 1,176 inhabitants.] 

[Westminster, a township of Upper Canada, 
is situate upon the river Thames, adjoining to 
London.] 

[Westminster, a considerable township of 
Vermont, in Windham County, on Connecticut 
River, opposite Walpole in New Hampshire. It 
contained, in 1790, 1,601 inhabitants. Sexton’s 
River enters the Connecticut in the s. e. corner 
of the township. Here is a post-office 15 miles 
n. of Brattleborough, 14 n. zo. of Keen, in New 
Hampshire, and 44 n. of Northampton in Massa- 
chusetts.] 

[Westminster, the easternmost town of Fre- 
derick County, Maryland, about 18 miles e. n. e. 
of Woodsborough, 23 n. zo. of Baltimore, and 40 
n. by e. of the city of Washington.] 

[WESTMOR E, the westernmost township of 
Essex County, Vermont. Willoughby Lake lies 
in this township.] 

[WESTMORELAND, a county of Virginia, 
bounded n. and e. by Patowmack River, which 
divides it from Maryland, s. e. by Northumber- 
land, s. zo. by Richmond, and zo. by King George. 
It contained, in 1790, 7,720 inhabitants, of whom 
4,425 were slaves. This county has the honour 
of having given birth to George Washington, 
first President of the United States. The court- 


house in this county is on the s. bank of Patovr- 
mack River, 10 miles n. by e. of Richmond, 11 
n. zo. of Kinsale. Here is a post-office.] 

[Westmoreland, a county of Pennsylvania, 
bounded n. by Lycoming, and s. by 'FayettQ 
County, and abounds with iron ore and coal. It 
contained, in 1790, 12 townships and 16,018 in- 
habitants, including 128 slaves. Chief town 
Greensburgh.] 

[Westmoreland, a considerable township of 
New Hampshire, Cheshire County, on thee, bank 
of Connecticut River, between Chesterfield and 
Walpole. It was incorporated in 1752, and 
contained, in 1790, 2,018 inhabitants.] 

[Westmoreland, a township of N. York, in 
Herkemer County, taken from Whitestown, and 
incorporated in 1792. In 1790, it contained 840 
inhabitants, of whom 137 were electors. The 
centre of the town is six miles s. of Fort Schuy- 
ler, and 33 n. zo. of Cooperstown.] 

[Westmoreland, a tract of laud in Pennsyl- 
vania, bounded e. bv Delaware River, zo. by a 
line draw n due n. and s. 15 miles zo. of Wyoming 
on Susquehannah River, and between the paral- 
lels of lat. 41° 40 / n. was claimed by the State of 
Connecticut, as within the limits of their original 
charter, and in 1754 was purchased of the Six 
Nations of Indians by the Susquehannah and 
Delaware companies, and afterwards settled by 
a considerable colony, under the jurisdiction of 
Connecticut. This tract was called Westmore- 
land, and annexed to the county of Litchfield in 
Connecticut. The Pennsylvanians disputed the 
claim of Connecticut to these lands, and in the 
progress of this business there was much warm 
contention, and some bloodshed. This unhappy 
dispute has since been adjusted. See Wyoming.] 
[WESTON, a township of Massachusetts, in 
Middlesex County, 15 miles zo. of Boston. It 
was incorporated in 1712, and contained, in 
1790, 1,010 inhabitants.] 

[WESTON, a township of Connecticut, Fair- 
field County, n. of Fairfield, adjoining.] 

[WESTON’S Islands, groups of Islands in 
James’s Bay ; discovered by Captain Thomas 
James, in his voyage to find out a n. zo. passage.] 
[WEST Point, a strongfortress erected during 
the revolution, on the zo. bank of Hudson’s River, 
in the State of New York, six miles above An- 
thony’s Nose, seven below Fish Kill, 22 s. of 
Ploughkeepsie, and about 47 n. of New York 
city. It is situate in the midst of the high lands, 
and is strongly fortified by nature as well as art. 
The principal fort is situate on a point of land, 
formed by a sudden bend in the river, and com- 


WET 


W H A 


333 


rnands it, for a considerable distance, above and 
below. Fort Putnam is situate a little farther 
back, on an eminence which overlooks the other 
fort, and commands a greater extent of the river. 
There are a number of houses and barracks on 
the point near the forts. On the opposite side 
of the river, are the ruins of Old Fort Constitu- 
tion, with some barracks going to decay. A 
number of continental troops are stationed here 
to guard the arsenal and stores of the United 
States, which are kept at this place. This for- 
tress is called the Gibraltar of America, as by 
reason of the rocky ridges, rising one behind 
another, it is incapable of being invested by less 
than 20,000 men. The fate of America seemed 
to hover over this place. It Avas taken by the 
British, and afterwards retaken by storm, in a 
very gallant manner, by General Wayne. Bene- 
dict Arnold, to whom the important charge of 
this fort was committed, designed to have surren- 
dered it up to the British ; but the treason was 
discovered before the plot was brought to bear. 
About the same time, Major Andre, a most ac- 
complished and gallant officer, was taken, tried, 
and executed as a spy, though Arnold found 
means to make good his escape to the British 
lines.] 

[WESTPORT, a flourishing township of Mas- 
sachusetts, Bristol County, 70 miles s. of Boston. 
It Avas incorporated in 1787, and contained, in 
1790, 2,466 inhabitants.] 

[WEST SPRINGFIELD, a township of Mas- 
sachusetts, Hampshire County, on the w. side of 
Connecticut River, opposite Springfield, about 
22 miles n. of Hartford, and 76 w. s. w. of Bos- 
ton. In the compact part are about 40 dAvelling 
houses, and a Congregational church. The toAvn- 
ship contained, in 1790, three parishes, and 2,367 
inhabitants.] 

[WEST STOCIvBRIDGE, a township of Mas- 
sachusetts, in Berkshire County, adjoining Stock- 
bridge on the w. and has the New York line on 
the n. w. Williams’s River, and its streams, 
Avater the township, and accommodate three iron- 
Avorks, a fulling-mill, a grist-mill, and two saw- 
mills.] 

[WEST TOWN, a township in Chester Coun- 
ty, Pennsylvania] 

[WETEPAHATOES, Indians of N . America, 
a wandering nation, avIio inhabit an open coun- 
try, and raise a great number of horses, which 
they barter to the Ricaras, Mandans, &amp;c. for 
articles of European manufacture. They are a 
Avell-disposed people, and might be readily in- 


duced to visit the trading establishments on the 
Missouri. From the animals their country pro- 
duces, their trade would, no doubt, become valu- 
able. These people again barter a considerable 
proportion of the articles they obtain from the 
Menetares, Ahwahhaways, Mandans, and Rica- 
ras, to the Dotames and Castapanas.] 

WETOCK, a small river of the province and 
colony of S. Carolina, in the district of Onslow, 
It runs s. and enters the sea. 

[WEYBRIDGE, a township of Vermont, in 
Addison County, separated from NeAv Haven on 
the n. and e. by Otter Creek. It contained, in 
1790, 175 inhabitants. Snake Mountain lies 
nearly on the line between this township and 
that of Addison on the an] 

[WEYMOUTH, the Wessagcjscus, or Wes- 
sagusset, of the Indians, a toAvnship of Massa- 
chusetts, a capital, Norfolk County, incorporated 
in 1635. It lies eight miles s. of Boston, and 
employs some small vessels in the mackarel 
fishery. Fore River on the n. w. and Black 
River on the s. e. include near one half of the 
toAvnship. The cheese made here is reckoned 
among the best brought to Boston market. It is 
said to be one of the oldest towns in the State : 
Mr. Weston, an English merchant, having made 
a temporary settlement here in summer, 1622. 
It contained, in 1790, 232 houses, and 1469 in- 
habitants.] 

Weymouth, in the Bay of Massachusetts. It 
is not so considerable as it was. To cross the 
river here there is a ferry, to which passengers 
pay two cents in the day and four at night. 

WEYPULCO, a settlement of Indians of the 
province and colony of S. Carolina; situate on 
the shore of the River Cousa. 

WHALE Point, on the s. coast of the Strait 
of Magellan. It is the extremity which looks to 
the e. of the Island of Louis le Grand. 

Whale Point, another point of land, on the 
e. coast of Newfoundland, between the Island of 
Oyes and the Bay of Taureaux. 

Whale Point, a large sand-bank on the 
coasts of the same island of Newfoundland ; one 
of those Avhere the whale-fishery is carried on ; 
and lying betiveen the grand Bank of Newfound- 
land and that called Green Bank. 

WHALECO VE, an island of N. America, to 
the n. of another island, Avhich is near to it, called 
Lovegrove ; also s. of Brook-cobham, or Marble 
Island, in 63° lat. and is supposed, that by it is 
an easy and convenient pass into the S. Sea. 

[WHALE FISH Island, in the River Esse- 


384 


W H I 


W H I 


quibo, on the coast of S. America, is above the 
Seven Brothers, or Seven Islands, and below the 
Three Brothers.] 

[WHALE Island, at the mouth of McKenzie’s 
river, in the N. Sea or Frozen Ocean, on the n. 
coast of the n. w. part of N. America. Lat. 69° 
14 / ».] 

[WHAPPING’S Creek, a small creek which 
empties through the e. bank of Hudson’s River, 
in the township of Fish-Kill, eight miles s. of 
Poughkeepsie, and 57 n. of New York city. Here 
are two mills, at which considerable business is 
performed. ) 

[WHARTON, a township of Fayette County 
of Pennsylvania.] 

[WHATELY, a township of Massachusetts, 
in Hampshire County, 10 miles n. of Northamp- 
ton. It was incorporated in 1771, and contained 
in 1790, 736 inhabitants.] 

[WHEELING, or Wheelin, a post-town of 
Virginia, situate at the mouth of a creek on the 
c. bank of Ohio River, 12 miles above Grave 
Creek, 8 s. w&lt; of West Liberty, and 46 s. w. of 
Pittsburg. Not far from this place, a wall has 
been discovered some feet under the earth, very 
regularly built, apparently the work of art. 
Quarrels are here frequent, and when tw o per- 
sons light, it is generally (says Mr. Ashe) “ ac- 
cording to the rule of rough and tumble ; a kind 
of combat in which it is law ful for the combatants 
to peel the skull, tear out the eyes, or smooth 
away the nose.”] 

[WHEELOCK, a township of Vermont, in 
Caledonia County, about 20 miles n.zo. of Little- 
ton, and contained, in 1790, 33 inhabitants.] 

[WHEELWRIGHT Gut, at the n. w. end of 
the island of St. Christopher’s in the W. Indies, 
has Willett’s Bay and Masshouse Bay to the e. 
and Courpon’s and Convent Bays to the 5. w. 
There is a sand before the entrance, w hich appears 
to prevent ships from going in.] 

[WHENNUIA, one of two small islands in the 
S. Pacific Ocean, near the island of Otaha.] 

[WHETSTONE Fort, is on the n. side of 
Patapsco River, and w. side of the mouth of Bal- 
timore Harbour, in Maryland. It is opposite 
Gossuch Point, two miles and a half e. from the 
Baltimore company’s iron-w orks, at the mouth of 
Gwinn’s Falls.] 

[WH I P PAN Y, a village of New Jersey, Mor- 
ris County, on a branch of Passaick River, nearly 
five miles n. e. of Morristown.] 

[WHIRL, or Suck, in Tennessee River, lies 
in about lat. 35° 1CK n. and long. 85° dS 7 w. about 
110 miles below Knoxville.] 


[WHITBY, a township of Upper Canada, in 
the e. riding of the county of York. It lies ze). of 
Darlington, and fronts Lake Ontario.] 

[WHITCHURCH, a township of Upper Ca- 
nada, in the e. riding of the county of York, 
fronts to Yonge-street, and lies totheN. of Mark- 
ham.] 

WHITE, a torrent of water of the Island of 
Guadaloupe, which rises in the mountain of Azu- 
frera, or Sulphur, and takes this name from the 
white colour which its waters often assume from 
being impregnated with ashes and sulphur. It 
enters into the River San Luis. 

[White, a river of Louisiana, which joins Ar- 
kansas River, a w ater of the Mississippi, about 10 
miles above the fort, w hich Mr. Hutchins reckons 
550 computed miles from New Orleans, and 
660 from the sea. It has been navigated above 
200 miles in flat-bottomed boats. See Arkansas.] 
[White, a small river, of the N. W. Territory, 
which pursues a n. w. and, near its mouth, a w. 
course, and enters Wabash River, 12 miles below 
the mouth of Chickasaw r River.] 

[White, a river of Vermont, which falls into 
Connecticut River about five miles below r Dart- 
mouth College, between Norwich and Hartford. 
It is from 100 to 150 yards wide, some distance 
from its mouth. Its source is in a spring, which 
by means of Onion River, communicates with 
Lake Champlain. It derives its name from the 
whiteness of its water.] 

[White Bay, on thee, coast of Newfoundland 
Island, in the Machigonis River. Its n. limit is 
Cape d’Argent.] 

[White Cape, or Blanco, on the w. coast of 
New Mexico, is 20 leagues to the n. w. ofHerra- 
dura. This cape, in lat. 10 n. bears with the 
island Canoe, at n. w. by w. and s. e. by e. and 
w ith St. Luke’s Island at n. e. by n. and s. by 
s. being about nine leagues from each.] 

[White Deer, a township of Pennsylvania, 
situate on Susquehannah River.] 

[White Ground, a place in the Creek countrv, 
10 miles from Little Talassee.] 

[WHITEFIELD, a township of Pennsylvania, 
in Westmoreland County.] 

[WHITEFISH Island, at the e. end of Lake 
Superior, a little w. of the Isles aux Rabies, and 
near to which the lake forces its passage by the 
falls of St. Mary.] 

[WHITEFISH Point, in Upper Canada, at 
the e. end of Lake Superior, on the s. shore, near 
to the River St. Mary.] 

[WHITEHALL, a tow nship of Pennsylvania, 
in N orthumberland County.] 


W H I 


W I C 


385 


[Whitehall, a township of New York, 
Washington County, bounded s. by the s. bounds 
of the tract formerly called Skeensborough, and 
n. by the n. bounds of the county. In 1790, it 
contained 805 inhabitants. In 1796, 150 of the 
inhabitants were electors.] 

[WHITE Marsh, a township ofPennsylvania, 
Montgomery County.] 

[White Mountains. See New Hampshire.] 
[WHITEPAINE, a township of Pennsylvania, 
Montgomery County.] 

[White Plains, a township of New York, W. 
Chester County, bounded e. by Mamaroneck 
River, and w. by Bronx River. It contained, in 
1790, 505 inhabitants, of whom 76 were electors, 
and 49 slaves. It is remarkable for a battle 
fought here between the American and British 
forces, October 28, 1796. It is 15 miles e. by n. 
of Kingsbridge, 3 2 n. e. by n. of New York, and 
105 from Philadelphia.] 

[White Point, on the coast of Nova Scotia, is 
about three leagues to the s. w. from Cape Canso, 
and n. e. of Green Point. There is an island off 
the point that shelters Bar Haven.] 

[White Point, on the coast of Cape Breton 
Island, is about a mile 5. w. o Black Cape, near 
the harbour of Louisburg, and the e. point of 
Gabarus Bay.] 

[White Point, in the island of Jamaica, lies e. 
of White Horse Cliffs, about seven leagues e. of 
Port Royal.] 

[White’s Bay, on the coast of Newfoundland. 
Lat. 50° 17' n. Long 56° 15' ay.] 

[White’s River, on the n. e. coast of Jamaica, 
is near the w. limit of Port Antonio.] 

[WHITESTOWN, in Herkemer County, New 
York, on the s. side of Moltawk River, five miles 
s. e of Old Fort Schuyler, and 76 w. of Albany. 
The compact part of this new and flourishing 
town lies on one beautiful street about a mile in 
length, ornamented with trees. The houses are 
generally furnished with water, conducted by 
pipes laid under ground, from the neighbouring 
hills. At present the court-house, meeting house, 
and school-house, are combined in one building ; 
but it is contemplated shortly to erect separate 
and handsome edifices for these several purposes. 
The soil of this town is remarkably good. Nine 
acres of wheat in one field, yielded, on an aver- 
age, 41 bushels of wheat, of 601b. each, an acre. 
This is no uncommon crop. This town and its 
neighbourhood has been settled with remarkable 
rapidity. All that district comprehended between 
the Oneida Reservation, and the German Flats, 

VOL. v. 


and which is now divided into the townships of 
Whitestown, Paris, and Westmoreland, was 
known, a few years since, by the name of Whites- 
town, and no longer ago than 1785, contained 
two families only, those of Hugh White, and 
Moses Foot, esquires. In 1796, there were with- 
in the same limits, five parishes, with as many 
settled ministers, three full regiments of militia, 
one corps of light-horse, all in uniform. In the 
whole, 7359 inhabitants, of whom 1190 were 
qualified electors.] 

[WHITE Wood Island, or De Bois Blanc. 
See Miciiillimakkinak ] 

[WHITING, a township of Vermont, in Addi- 
son County, separated from Leicester, on the e. by 
Otter Creek, and has part of Orwell on the w. 
It contained, in 1790, 250 inhabitants.] 

[WHITTINGHAM, a township of Vermont, 
in the s. w. corner of Windham County, contain- 
ing, in 1790,442 inhabitants.] 

W HITSON, a large bay on the coast of the 
province and colony of Virginia, discovered by 
Walter, who gave it this name in 160.3. In lat. 
41°. 

[WHITSUN Island, in the S Pacific Ocean, 
is about four miles long, and three broad ; and 
so surrounded by breakers that a boat cannot 
land. Lat. 19° 26' s. Long. 137° 56 / w. Vari- 
ation of the needle in 1767, 6° e.] 

WIAMIA, a river of the province and govern- 
ment of Guayana, or Nueva Andalucia, in the 
part possessed by the Dutch, or in the colony of 
Surinam. It rises near the shore of the river 
Marawini, runs s. s. e. and enters the sea between 
that river and the mouth of the river Surinam. 

[WIANDOTS, or Wyandots, an Indian tribe 
inhabiting near Fort St. Joseph and Detroit, in 
the n. a;, territory. Warriors, 200 ] 

[WIAPOCO, or Little Wia, is an outlet or 
arm of the river Orinoco, on the w. side. It has 
many branches, which are all navigable.] 
WIAUT. See Ouyatanon, 

Wiaut Petit, to distinguish it from the for- 
mer, which has the name of Grand, in the pro- 
vince and government of Louisiana. It is situate 
on the s. shore of the river Wabache. 

[WICKFORD, a small trading village in the 
township of N. Kingstown, Rhode Island, and on 
the w. side of Narraganset Bay ; 24 miles s. of 
Providence, and 9 or 10 n. w . of Newport.] 

[WICO, a settlement and establishment of the 
Swedes, in the province of Pennsylvania and 
United States. It is half a mile from the city of 
Philadelphia. 

3 n 


W I L 


W I L 


386 

WIE, a river of the province and captainship 
of Seregipe in Brasil. It is small, rises near the 
coast, turns e. and runs into the Liximai near its 
entrance into the sea. 

Wie, a settlement, in the same province as the 
former river, and situate on its shore. 

Wie, another, a small river of the province of 
Maryland, in the United States, in Queen Anne’s 
County. It runs w. and enters the sea in the 
Bay of Chesapeak. 

[WIESPINCAN, a river of Louisina, which 
empties into the Missisippi, 22 miles above the 
Soutoux Village.] 

[WIGHCOMICO, a short navigable river of 
Maryland, which is formed by Piles and Allen’s 
Fresh, and, running s. empties into the Patow- 
mac, about 35 miles from its mouth. Cob Neck 
forms the n. limits of its mouth.] 

WIGHT, Isle of, in the province and colony 
of Virginia, and one of the colonies of the same. 
It is n. of Nausamund, contains 142,726 acres of 
land, in the two parishes called Warwick Squeek 
and Newport, and has a most abundant stream of 
water. 

[Wight, Isle of, e. end of Long Island. See 
Gardner’s Island.] 

[WILBRAHAM, a township of Massachusetts, 
in Hampshire County, 10 miles e. of Springfield, 
25 7i. e. of Hartford in Connecticut, and 66 w. of Bos- 
ton. It was incorporated in 1763 ; and contained, 
in 1790, two parishes, and 1555, inhabitatns.] 

WILCHASET, a fort of the province of Saga- 
dahoc in the United States, built on the shore of 
the river Sagadahoc. 

WILCOCOMOCO, a city of the province and 
colony of Virginia in N. America. It is small, 
but well situate and well defended. 

WILCOMOCO, a small river of the province 
of Maryland in the United States, in Mary Countv. 
It runs s. and enters the Potowmack, 

Wilcom.oco, another river, also small, in this 
province. It runs s. and enters the sea in the 
Bay of Chesapeak. 

[WILKES, a county of the upper district of 
Georgia, separated from S. Carolina, on thee, by 
Savannah River, and contained, in 1790, 31,500 
inhabitants, including 7,268 slaves. Tobacco is 
the chief produce of this county, of which it ex- 
ported about 3000 hhds. in i788. It is well 
watered, and is famous for a medicinal spring, 
near its chief tow n, Washington ; which see.] 

[Wilkes, a county of Morgan district, in the 
n. w. corner of N. Carolina. It contained, in 
1790, 8,143 inhabitants, including 549 slaves.] 


[Wilkes, a post-town, and chief of the above 
county, 28 miles from Rockford, and 31 from 
Morgantown.] 

[WILKSBARRE, or Wilksburg, a post- 
town of Pennsylvania, and chief town of Luzerne 
County, situated on the s. e. side of the e. branch 
of the Susquehannah. It contained, in 1790, 
a court-house, gaol, and about 45 houses. It is 
47 miles n. e. of Bethlehem, about the same 
distance above Sunbury, and 86 n. by n. w. of 
Philadelphia.] 

[WILLET'S Bay, at the n. w. end of the 
island of St Christopher’s. Willet’s Gut is at 
the s, w. coast of the same island.] 

WILLIAM -FORT, an island and castle of the 
principal channel leading to the port of Boston, 
in the province of New England, of the United 
States. It is the most regular fortress that has 
been built by the English in those countries, and 
is thus called, as having been erected in the time 
of King William III. by Colonel Roemer, a cele- 
brated engineer. It is a league from the city, 
and so advantageously situate, that no vessel can 
approach it without danger of being sent to the 
bottom. It has 100 cannons (20 of w hich were 
given to the province by Queen Anne) arranged 
on a platform, near the surface of the water at 
high tide, so as to prevent any vessel from coming 
round to use her guns against the fortress. This 
is of a square figure, surrounded by a covered 
way, and united by a line of communication from 
the principal gate to a redoubt, and having tw o 
other redoubts towards the great battery, which 
is so near the canal that no vessel can pass with- 
out coming within pistol-shot of it. Some of the 
guns of the fort are 42 pounders. There are in 
this fort four companies of militia, and, although 
in time of peace it is occupied merely by 50 or 
100 men, it has in time of war a regular garrison 
of 500 soldiers, exempt from every other service. 
Besides this force, in 24 hours, they can assemble 
at Boston 10,000 effective men ; and they have, 
to guard against surprise, a signal house erected 
on a rock, at about two leagues distance from the 
city. The signal is made by lowering and hoist- 
ing the flag as many times as to correspond w ith 
the number of the vessels appearing ; and if 
these exceed any moderate number, three guns 
are fired to put the town in arms ; again, if it be 
thought necessary to advise the district, the sig- 
nal house itself is set on fire. Thus, although a 
vessel, under protection of a fog, should venture 
to sail up between the island and the rock, Bos- 
ton has always six hours notice to prepare itself 


W I L 


W I J 


38? 


for its defence ; and, although the said vessel may 
pass the castle, yet it has to encounter two 
batteries at the two extremities, the e. and n . of 
the garrison, which command the whole bay, and 
render a safe entrance to any large vessel impos- 
sible, although merchantmen and smaller craft 
enter the river Charles out of gun-shot. Besides 
the above advantages, it also follows that no pri- 
vateer can take any vessel out of the port, since 
no one is permitted to pass without the governor’s 
leave, nor can this be obtained without the dues 
being paid to the custom-house, and a strict 
scrutiny taking place. 

[William Fort, now called the castle, was blown 
up in 1766, when the British troops evacuated 
Boston, but was soon after, with all its fortifica- 
tions, repaired. The fort that commands the 
harbour is at present furnished with 50 pieces of 
cannon mounted, and above 40 others lying dis- 
mounted.] 

WILLIAMS, a settlement of the island of 
Barbadoes ; in the district and parish of St. Tho- 
mas. 

[Williams, a township of Northampton Coun- 
ty, Pennsylvania] 

[WILLIAM’S SOUND, Prince, on the n . zo. 
coast of N. America. Its e. point is in lat. 60° 
IIP n. and long. 146° 53' zo. and Cape Elizabeth 
which is its zo. point, and the e. point of Cook’s 
River, is in lat. 59° 10 / and long. 152° 15 / .] 

[WILLIAMSBOROUGH, a post town of N. 
Carolina, and capital of Granville County, plea- 
santly situated on a creek which falls into the 
Roanoke. It carries on a brisk trade with the 
back counties, and contained in 1790, between 
30 and 40 houses, a court-house, goal, and flourish- 
ing academy. It is 17 miles from Warrenton, 48 
n . e. of Hillsborough, 56 zo. n . w. of Halifax, and 
407 from Philadelphia ] 

[WILLIAMSBURG, a post-town of Virginia, 
lies 47 miles e. of Richmond, situate between two 
creeks, one falling into James, the other into York 
River. The distance of each landing-place is 
about a mile from the town. During the regal 
government it was proposed to unite these creeks, 
by a canal passing through the centre of the 
town ; but the removal of the seat of government 
rendered it no longer an object of importance. 
It contained, in 1790, about 200 houses, and had 
about 1400 inhabitants. It is regularly laid out 
in parallel streets, with a pleasant square in the 
centre of about ten acres, through which runs the 
principal street e. and zo. about a mile in length, 
and more than 100 feet wide. At the ends of 
this street are two public buildings, the college, 


and capitol. Besides these, there is an Episcopal 
church, a prison, a court house, a magazine, now 
occupied as a market, and a hospital for lunatics, 
calculated to accommodate between 20 and 30 
patients, in separate rooms or cells. The house 
is neatly kept, and the patients well attended ; 
but convalescents have not sufficient room for 
free air and exercise without making their escape. 
Not far from the square stood the governor’s 
house, or palace, as it was called. This was 
burnt during the war, while it was occupied as an 
American hospital. The house of the president 
of the college, occupied also as an hospital by the 
French army, shared the same fate. This has 
since been rebuilt at the expense of the French 
government. In the capitol is a large marble 
statue of Narbone Berkley, Lord Botetourt, a 
man distinguished for his love of piety, literature 
and good government, and formerly governor of 
Virginia. It was erected at the expense of the 
State, some time since the year 1771. The capi- 
tol is little better than in ruins, and this elegant 
statue is exposed to the rudeness of negroes and 
boys, and is shamefully defaced. A late act of 
the assembly authorises the pulling dow'n one 
half of this building, to defray the charge of 
keeping the other half in repair. The college 
of William and Mary, fixed here, was founded in 
the time of King William and Queen Mary, who 
granted to it 20,000 acres of land, and a penny a 
pound duty on certain tobaccos exported from 
Virginia and Maryland, which had been levied 
by the statute of 25 Car. II. The assembly also 
gave it, by temporary laws, a duty on liquors 
imported, and skins and furs exported. From 
these resources it received upwards of ^£.3000 
The buildings are of brick, sufficient for an indif- 
ferent accommodation of perhaps 100 students. 
By its charter it was to be under the government 
of 20 visitors, who were to be its legislators, and 
to have a president and six professors, who were 
incorporated. It was allowed a representative 
in the general assembly. Under this charter, a 
professorship of the Greek and Latin languages, 
a professorship of mathematics, one of moral 
philosophy, and two of divinity, were established. 
To these were annexed, for a sixth profsssorship, 
a considerable donation by a Mr. Boyle of Eng- 
land, for the instruction of the Indians, and their 
conversion to Christianity. This w as called the 
professorship of Brafferton, from an estate of 
that name in England, purchased with the monies 
given. A court of admiralty sits here whenever 
a controversy arises. It is 12 miles e. of York 
Town, 47 e. of Richmond, and 30 n. zo. of Nor- 
3 i) 2 


388 


VV I L 


W I L 


folk. Least heat here, 6° O', mean heat 60° 8' 
greatest heat 98°. Lat. 37° 16' n. Long. 76° 
48' a).] 

[Williamsburg, a County of Virginia, be- 
tween York and James’s Rivers, and was joined 
in the enumeration of inhabitants, in 1790, with 
York County. These together contained 5,233 in- 
habitants.] 

[Williams burg, a township of Massachusetts, 
Hampshire County, on the to. side of Connecticut 
River, having Hatfield on the e. It contained, in 
1790, a handsome Congregational church, 159 
houses, and 1,049 inhabitants. In the year 1760, 
this township was a wilderness. It lies seven 
miles from Connecticut River, eight n. to. of 
Northampton, and 84 to. of Boston.] 

[Williamsburg, a post-town of New York, 
Ontario County, situate on the e. side of Gen- 
nessee River, near where Canaserago Creek 
empties into that river ; 24 miles s. zo. of Canan- 
daigua, 35 n. to. of Bath. It lies n.zo. of Athens 
or Tioga Point.] 

[Wi lliamsburg, called also Jones-town, a 
town of Pennsylvania, Dauphine County, at the 
junction of Little Swatara with Swatara River. 
It has a German Lutheran and Calvinist church, 
and about 80 dwelling-houses. It is 20 miles 
n. e. by e. of Harrisburg. Also the name of a 
township in Luzerne County.] 

[Williamsburg, a village of Maryland in 
Talbot County, five miles n. e. of Easton, and 
four n. zo. of King’s Town.] 

[ WILLIAMSPORT, a post-town of Mary- 
land, Washington County, on the n. side of Pa- 
towmack River, at the mouth of Conegocheague 
Creek, eight miles s. of the Pennsylvania line, 
six s. to. of Hagarstown, 32 n. by e. of Winches- 
ter, in Virginia, 24 s. by zo. of Chambersburg, in 
Pennsylvania, and 127 zo. by 5. of Philadelphia.] 

[WILLIAMSON, a township of New York, 
Ontario County. In 1796, there were 112 of its 
inhabitants electors.] 

WILLIAMSLAND, a country situate on the 
shore of Baffin’s Bay, in the N Continent and 
Arctic region of America. It is found under this 
name in the English maps, although there be no 
description of it given. 

W1LLIAMSTAD, a city and capital of the 
County of Talbot, in the province of Maryland, 
of the United States. It was given this name by 
an act of the assembly of Oxford, and was then 
declared a sea port : at the same time there was 
granted for the use of the public, a portion of 
land for pasturage. 

[WILLIAMSTOWN, a township of Vermont, 


Orange County, on the height of land between 
Connecticut River and Lake Champlain, about 
20 miles from the former, and 30 from the latter. 
It is bounded e. by Washington, and zo. by North- 
field, and contained, in 1790, 146 inhabitants. 
Stephen s Branch, a stream which runs n. to 
Onion River, rises in this township. 

[Williamstown, a mountainous township of 
Massachusetts, in the n. zo. corner of the state 
and in Berkshire County, containing, in 1790, 
1769 inhabitants. It is well watered by Hoosack 
and Green Rivers, the former of which is here 
eight rods wide. On these streams are four 
grist-mills, three saw-mills, and a fulling-mill. 
The main county road passes through it. Colonel 
Ephraim Williams laid the foundation of an 
academy several years since, and endowed it bv a 
handsome donation of lands. In 1790, partly by 
lottery, and partly by the liberal donation of 
gentlemen in the town, a brick edifice was 
erected, 82 feet by 42, and four stories high, con- 
taining 24 rooms for students, a large school- 
room, a dining-hall, and a room for public speak- 
ing. In 1793, this academy was erected into a 
college, by an act of the legislature, by the name 
of Williams’ College, in honour to its liberal 
founder. The languages and sciences usually 
taught in the American colleges are taught here. 
Board, tuition, and other expenses of education 
are very low ; and from its situation and other 
circumstances, it is likely, in a short time, to be- 
come an institution of great utility and impor- 
tance. The first public commencement was held 
at this college in 8eptember, 1795. In 1796, the 
legislature granted two townships of land to 
Williams’ College. There were, in 1796, 101 
students in the four classes in this college, besides 
30 pupils in the academy connected with the col- 
lege. A company was incorporated the year 
above-mentioned, to bring water in pipes into the 
town street. It is 28 miles n. of Great Barring- 
ton, and 97 n. to. of Boston.] 

[Williamstown, a post-town and the capital 
of Martin County, N. Carolina, is situate on 
Roanoke River, and contains but few houses, be- 
sides the court-house and goal. It is 20 miles 
from Blountsville, 19 from Plymouth, and 28 from 
Halifax.] 

[WILLIMANTIC, a small river of Connecti- 
cut, which runs a s. e. course, and uniting with 
Natchaug River, forms the Shetucket at Wind- 
ham ] 

[WILLINBOROUGH, a township of New 
Jersey, situate in Burlington County, on Delaware 
River, about 14 miles from Philadelphia. It has 


VV I L 


W I L 


389 


generally a thin soil, but considerable quantities 
of fruits and vegetables are raised here for the 
Philadelphia market.] 

[WILLINGTON, a township of Connecticut, 
in Tolland County, six miles e. of Tolland, and 
19 n. e. of Hartford, and was settled in 1719. 
The lands are rough and hilly. The earthquake 
on Sunday evening, Oct. 29, 1727, was severely 
felt in this town] 

WILLIS, a small river of the province and 
colony of Virginia in N. America. It runs n.n.e. 
and enters the river James. 

[Willis, a township in Chester County, Penn- 
sylvania] 

[Willis Creek, in Maryland, falls into the 
Patowmack from the n. at Fort Cumberland.] 

[Willis Island, in the S. Atlantic Ocean, is 
near the n. w. end of S. Georgia, and has Bird 
Island to the??, of it. Lat 54° s. Long. 38° 30' an] 

[WILLISTON, a township of Vermont, in 
Chittenden County, joins Burlington on the??, w. 
It contained, in 1790, 471 inhabitants ] 

WILLOUGHBY, Bay of, in the island An- 
tigua or Verde, one of the Caribees ; on the s. e. 
coast, is two leagues long and one at its mouth ; 
although the greater part of this is occupied by 
a sand bank, which runs from n to s., the said 
bank being nearly met by the extremity of Sandy 
Island, so that the entrance here is extremely 
narrow ; not but that ships can pass through, and 
also, when they are in, lie in perfect security, 
excepting near the mouth. On the left side is 
II orse Rock, which stands out of the water, and 
is most conspicuous from the waves breaking 
strongly against it.] 

[Willoughby, Lake, in Vermont, in thetown- 
ship of Westmore. It is about six miles long 
and one broad, and sends a stream which runs n. 
and empties into Lake Memprhemagog, in the 
township of Salem. This lake furnishes fish 
resmbling bass, of an excellent flavour, w eighing 
from 10 to 30 pounds. People travel 20 miles to 
this lake to procure a winter’s stock of this fish.] 

[WILLSBOROUGII, a new settled township 
in Clinton County, New York ; bounded on the 
5. by the town of Crow n Point, on the ??. by the 
s. line of a patent, which includes the river Au 
Sable at its mouth, continuing w. to that part of 
the county of Montgomery, now' called Herkemer 
County. It contained 375 inhabitants in 1790. 
In 1796, there were 1G0 of the inhabitants electors. 
It is a fine champaign, fertile country, inhabited 
by a number of industrious, thriving farmers. 
Its cultivation has been rapidly advancing. In 
this tow n is a remarkable split rock, which is a 


small point of a mountain projecting about 50 
yards into Lake Champlain. This disjointed 
point has, from the appearance of the opposite 
sides, and their exact fitness for each other, 
doubtless been rent from the main rock, by some 
violent shock of nature. It is removed about 20 
feet, and has on its point, a surface of nearly half 
an acre, which has sufficiency of soil, and is 
covered with wood. The height of the rock on 
each side of the fissure is about 12 feet. The 
River Boquet runs through this town a consider- 
able distance, and is navigable for boats two 
miles, where there are falls and mills. This 
town was partly settled before the year 1775. 
It commands a beautiful view of Lake Champlain, 
and lies 220 miles n. of New York city.] 

[WILLS Cove, on the ??. e. side of the isthmus 
of the island of St. Kitt’s, in the W. Indies, to 
the eastward, southerly from N. Friar and Little 
Friar Bays.] 

[Wills Creek, or Caicuctuck, a branch of 
Patowmack River, is 30 or 40 yards wide at its 
mouth, where Fort Cumberland stood. It affords 
no navigation as yet, and runs a short course s. 
On the e. side of it are the mountains of the same 
name, which lay in a direction from n. n. e. to 
s s a;.] 

[M ills town, an Indian village in Ohio, on 
the n e. bank of Muskingum River, 45 miles 
from its mouth, and 10 1 s. w. from Pittsburg, by 
the Indian path through the Indian town.] 

[WILMANTON, in the State of New York, 
stands on W allkill, between New burg and New 
Brunswick.] 

[WILMINGTON, one of the e. maritime 
districts of N. Carolina; bounded ??. e. by New- 
born district, s. e. by the Atlantic Ocean ; 5. w. 
by S. Carolina; and ??. w. by Fayette. It com- 
prehends the counties of Brunswick, New Hano- 
ver, Onslow, Duplin, and Bladen. It contained, 
in 1790, 26,035 inhabitants; of whom 10,056 
were slaves.] 

[Wilmington, a port of entry and post-town 
of N. Carolina, capital of the above district, is 
situate on the e. side of the e. branch of Cape 
Fear or Clarendon River ; 23 miles from Cape 
Fear, and 78 s. w. of Newbern. The course of 
the river, as it passes by the town, is nearly from 
n. to s. and the breadth 150 yards. Opposite the 
town are two islands extending with the course 
of the river, and dividing it irto three channels ; 
they afford the finest rice fields in N. Carolina. 
The town is regularly built, and contained, in 
1790, about 250 houses, a handsome Episcopal 
church, a court-house, and gaol. Having suffered 


390 


W I L 


W I N 


much by two fires, one-fourth of the town, which 
has been rebuilt, is of brick. Its markets are 
well supplied with fish, and all manner of pro- 
visions. A considerable trade is carried on to 
the W. India islands and the adjacent States. 
The exports for one year, ending September 30, 
1794, amounted to 133,531 dollars. Those of all 
the other ports of the state, amounted only to 
177,598 dollars. It is 76 miles s. e of Fayette- 
ville, 133^. 5 . zo. ofEdenton, 127 n. e. of Charles- 
ton, S. Carolina. Lat. 34° IF n. Long. 78° 6' w.] 
[Wilmington, a township of Vermont, in 
Windham County, contained, in 1790, 645 inhabi- 
tants, who are chiefly wealthy farmers. It lies 
on Deerfield River, on the e. side of the Green 
Mountain, on the high road from Bennington to 
Brattleborough, about 14 miles from each. Con- 
siderable quantities of maple sugar are made in 
it ; some farmers make 1000 or 1400 pounds a 
season. The Haystack, in the n. w. corner of 
this township, is among the highest of the range 
of the Green Mountains. It has a pond near the 
top of it, about half a mile in length, round which 
deer and moose are found,] 

[Wilmington, a township of Massachusetts, 
in Midolesex County, 16 miles from Boston. It 
was incorporated in 1730, and contained, in 
1790, 710 inhabitants. Hops, in great quantities 
are raised in this town.] 

[Wilmington, a port of entry and post-town 
of the State of Delaware, and the most consider- 
able town in the State. It stands in Newcastle 
County, on the n. side of Christiana Creek, be- 
tween Christiana and Brandywine creeks, which 
at this place are about a mile distant from each 
other, but uniting below the town, they join the 
Delaware in one stream, 400 yards wide at the 
mouth. The scite of the principal part of the 
town is on the 5. zo. side of a hill, which rises 
109 feet above the tide, two miles from Delaware 
River, and 24 5. zo. from Philadelphia. On the 
n. e. side of the same hill, on the Brandywine, 
there are 13 mills for grain, and about 40 neat 
dwelling-houses, which form a beautiful append- 
age to the town. The Christiana admits vessels 
of 14 feet draught of water to the town ; and 
those of six feet draught, eight miles further, 
where the navigation ends ; and the Brandywine 
admits those of seven feet draught to the mills. 
The town is regularly laid out in squares similar 
to Philadelphia, and contains upwards of 600 
houses, mostly of brick, and 3000 inhabitants. 
It has six places of public worship, viz. two for 
Presbyterians, one for Swedish Episcopalians, 
one for Friends, one for Baptists, and one for 


Methodists. Here are two market-houses, a 
poor-house, which stands on the zo. side of the 
town, and is 120 feet by 40, built of stone, and 
three stories high, for the reception of the paupers 
of Newcastle County. There is another stone 
building which was used as an academy, and was 
supported for some time with considerable repu- 
tation, but by a defect in the constitution of the 
seminary, or some other cause, it has, of late 
been entire!}' neglected as a place of tuition. 
There are, however, nearly 300 children in the 
different schools in town. About the year 1736, 
the first houses were built at this place ; and the 
town was incorporated a few years afterwards. 
Its officers are two burgesses, six assistants, and 
two constables, all of whom ai'e annually chosen. 
For other particulars, see Delaware. Lat. 
39° 4 3' n. Long. 75° 35' a).] 

Wilmington, an island of the N. Sea, near 
the coast of Georgia ; one of those called the 
Georgian, situate between the islands Tiby and 
Wasa. 

[WILMOT, a township of Nova Scotia, Anna- 
polis County, settled from Ireland and New En- 
gland.] 

WILSONS, a small river of the province and 
colony' of S. Carolina ; it runs e. and enters the 
Congary. 

[WILSONVILLE, a town of Pennsylvania, 
newly laid out on the Walenpapeck. at its junction 
with the Lexawacsein, 91 miles n. of Philadelphia. 
Here are already erected fourteen houses, a saw 
and grist mill, and a large building for manufac- 
turing sail cloth. The creek here falls upwards 
of 300 feet, some say 500, in the space of a 
mile : for 17 miles above the falls the creek has a 
gentle current.] 

[WILTON, a township of New Hampshire, 
Hillsborough County, s. zo. of Amherst, adjoin- 
ing, about 47 miles w s. zo. of Portsmouth. It 
was incorporated in 1762, and contained in 1790, 
1 105 inhabitants ] 

Wilton, a small village of the same province, 
in Charleston district, called by some New Lon- 
don. It was founded by the Swiss, under the 
direction of one named Zebabhular,by permission 
of the assembly. It stands on the n. e. shore of 
the river Edisto, and 12 miles from its mouth. 
This town did much mischief to that of Purrys- 
burs - , which is on the frontier of the county, and 
if it had been better established at first, it would 
have drawn a still more numerous population ; 
22 miles distant from it is the fort of Edisto, to 
keep the Indians in subjection : it is 22 miles 5 . e. 
of Charleston. 


WIN 


W I N 


391 


WILTOWN, a settlement of the province of 
Georgia of the United States; at the mouth of 
the river Pompon. 

[WILMACOMACK, a village of New York, 
in Suffolk County, Long Island ; six miles zo. by 
s. of Smithtown, and n. e. of Huntingdon, and 
40 e. by n. of New York city.] 

[WINCHELSEA, an island in the s. Pacific 
Ocean, which appears like three islands. It is 
about 30 miles s. by e. of Sir Charles Hardy’s 
Island.] 

[WINCHENDON, a post-town of Massachu- 
setts, in Worcester County, seven miles n. of 
Gardner, 30 n. n zo. of Worcester, and 53 n. zo. 
by zo. of Boston. This township was formerly 
called Ipswich Canada, until it was incorporated 
in 1764. It is on Miller’s River, and contained 
in 1790, 950 inhabitants. This place was visited 
by a dreadful tornado, October 21, 1795, which 
did considerable damage.] 

[WINCHESTER, a township of Connecticut, 
in Litchfield County, about 12 or 15 miles n. of 
Litchfield.] 

[Winchester, a township of New Hamp- 
shire, in Cheshire County, e. of Hinsdale and 
Port Dummer, adjoining. It is 76 miles w. s. w. 
from Portsmouth, and contains 1209 inhabitants.] 
[Winchester, the chief town of Clarke Coun- 
ty, Kentucky.] 

[Winchester, a township in the county of 
Dundas, in Upper Canada ; it lies in the rear, 
and to the n. of Williamsburgh.] 

[Winchester, or Fredericktown, a post- 
town of Virginia, and the capital of Frederick 
County. It is situate near the head of Opeckon 
Creek, which empties into Patowmack River ; 
about 32 miles s. w. from the celebrated passage 
of the Patowmack through the Blue Ridge. It 
is a handsome flourishing town, standing upon 
low and broken ground, and has a number of 
respectable buildings ; among which are a court 
house, goal, a Presbyterian, an Episcopalian, a 
Methodist, and a new Roman Catholic church. 
The dwelling-houses are about 350 in number 
several of which are built of stone. It is a cor- 
poration, and contained, in 1790, nearly 2000 in- 
habitants. It was formerly fortified ; but the 
works are now in ruins. It is 20 miles e. by s. 
of Romney, 78 n. e. by n. of Staunton, 62 w. n. zo. 
of Washington, in Maryland, 108 n. zo. of Rich- 
mond, 153 from Philadelphia. Lat. 39° 11' 30" 
n. Long. 7S° 2U 30" zo.] 

[WINDGAP, a pass in the Blue Mountains in 
Pennsylvania ; about nine miles s. zo. of Penn’s 
Fort. Although 100 feet higher than the present 


bed of the Delaware, it is thought to have been 
formerly part of the bed of that river. The 
Wind Gap is a mile broad, and the stones on it 
such as seem to have been washed for ages by 
water running over them.] 

[WINDHAM, a county in the s. e. corner of 
Vermont; having the State of Massachusetts s. 
and Connecticut River e. which divides it from 
New Hampshire. It contained, in 1790,22 town- 
ships, and 17,693 inhabitants. Chief towns, New- 
sane and Putney.] 

[Windham, a county in the n. e. corner of 
Connecticut, having the State of Massachusetts n. 
and the State of Rhode Island e. It contained, 
in 1790, 13 townships and 28,921 inhabitants, 
including 184 slaves. Chief town, Windham.] 

[Windham, the capital of the above county, 
and a post town, is situated on Shetucket River, 
12 miles n. by zo. of Norwich, and 20 s. e. of 
Hartford. It contains between 60 and 70 com- 
pact houses, a court-house, gaol, an academy, 
and a Congregational church. The river Willi- 
mantick from the n. zo. and Natchaug from the 
n. meet in the n. zo. part of the township, and 
form the Shetucket, a pleasant river, affording 
plenty of fish, particularly salmon, at some sea- 
sons of the year. The township was settled 
from Norwich, in 1686, and was incorporated in 
1702.] 

[Windham, a township of New Hampshire, 
Rockingham County, is about 16 miles s. zo. of 
Exeter, and 27 from Portsmouth. It contained, 
in 1790, 663 inhabitants.] 

[Windham, a township of the district of Maine, 
Cumberland County. It was incorporated in 
1762, and contained, in 1790, 938 inhabitants.] 

[Windham, a township, in the county of Nor- 
folk, in Upper Canada. It lies in the rear, and 
n. of Charlotteville.] 

WINDMILL Point, on the coast of the pro- 
vince and colony of N. Carolina, within the bay 
of Chesapeak. 

WINDSOR, a city of the province of Georgia 
in the United States ; situate on the shore of the 
river Savannah. 

[Windsor, a township of Nova Scotia, in 
Hants County, near the river St. Croix, which 
empties into the Avon. The rivers Kenetcoot 
and Cocmiguen (so called by the Indians) run 
through this township and empty into the Avon. 
On these rivers are flourishing settlements and 
fertile land. Lime stone and plaister of Paris 
are found here. The lake Potawoek (so called 
by the Indians) lies between the head of St. Mar- 
garet’s Bay and the main road from Halifax 


392 


W I N 


\Y ] N 


to Windsor; the great lake of Shubenaccadie lies 
on the e. side of this road, about seven miles from 
it, and 21 from Halifax.] 

[Windsor, a county of Vermont, bounded n. 
by Orange, s. by Windsor, e. by Connecticut 
River, and w. by Rutland and part of Addison 
County. It contained, in 1790, 22 townships, 
and 15,748 inhabitants.] 

[Windsor, a post town of Vermont, and capi- 
tal of the above county, is situate on the za. bank 
of Connecticut River, 16 miles n. by w. of Charles- 
ton, in New Hampshire, 28 e. by s. of Rutland, 
50 miles n. e. of Bennington. The township con- 
tained, in 1790, 1452 inhabitants. This, with 
Rutland, is alternately the seat of the state legis- 
lature.] 

. [W indsor, a hilly township of Massachusetts, 
in Berkshire County, 20 miles n. n. w. of Lenox, 
and 100 w. by n. of Boston. The county road 
to Northampton passes through it, also the road 
from Pittsfield to Deerfield. It gives rise to Hou- 
satonick and Westfield Rivers, on which are four 
saw-mills and two corn- mills. It was incorpo- 
rated in 1771, and contained, in 1790, 916 inhabi- 
tants. In the gore, adjoining Adams and Wind- 
sor, are about 500 inhabitants ] 

[Windsor, a considerable and very pleasant 
town of Hartford County, Connecticut, on the w. 
side of Connecticut River, about seven miles n. 
of Hartford. Here Windsor Ferry River, formed 
by the junction of Farmington and Poquabock 
Rivers, empties into the Connecticut from the w. 
Windsor Ferry River divides the township into 
the upper and lower parishes.] 

[Windsor, E. See E. Windsor.] 

[Windsor, a township of New Jersey, Mid- 
dlesex County, containing, in 1790, 2,838 inhabi- 
tants, including 190 slaves.] 

[Windsor, a township of Pennsylvania, in 
York County ] 

[Windsor, a post town and the capital of 
Bertie County, N. Carolina ; situate on Cushai 
River, and contains, besides a few houses, a 
court-house and gaol. It is 20 miles w. by s. of 
Edenton, 17 from Plymouth ] 

[WINDWARD Passage, a name given to a 
course from the s. e. part of the island of Jamaica, 
in the W. Indies, and extending for 160 leagues 
to the n. side of Crooked Island in the Bahamas. 
Ships have often sailed through this channel from 
the n. part of it to the island of Cuba, or the 
Gulf of Mexico, notwithstanding the common 
opinion to the contrary, on account of the 
current : vessels in this case keep the Bahama 
shore on board, and meeting the wind in summer 


for the most part of the channel e. with a counter 
current on shore, they push easily through it.] 
[Windward Point, near the e. extremity of 
the island of St. Christopher’s, is the e. point of 
Sandy Hill Bay ; about two miles to the to. n. a?, 
of St. Anthony’s Hill Point ] 

[WINEE, or Black River, in S. Carolina, 
rises in Camden district, and running s. e. through 
Cheraws into Georgetown district, unites with 
Pedee River, about three miles above George- 
town.] 

WINEAU, an island of the N. Sea, near the 
s. w. coast, in Long Bay, close to Cape Cateret. 

WINEKINE, a river of the province and 
government of Guayana, or Nueva Andalucia, 
which runs s. and enters the Orinoco, between 
the Marivany and the Arrewou. 

WINEPISCOCHO, see Winnipissiogee. 
WINGEN, a small river between those of 
Vinian and Clarendon, in the county of this name, 
and province and colony of Carolina. On its 
shore the English have an establishment called 
Charlestown with a tolerable population. 

[WINHALL or Windhall, a township of 
Vermont, in Bennington County, about 18 miles 
n. e. of Bennington. It contained, in 1790, 155 
inhabitants.] 

WINISINIT, a city of the county of Middle- 
sex and Massachusetts Bay, in the United States ; 
situate on the n. side of the bay of Boston, three 
miles from this bay, and to the w. of it having 
Charlestown, the river Mistic intervening. 

[WINLAND,a country accidentally discovered 
by Biron or Biorn, a Norman, in 1001 ; supposed 
to be a part of the island of Newfoundland. It 
was agian visited, and an intercourse opened be- 
tween it and Greenland. In 1221, Eric, bishop 
of Greenland, went to Winland to recover and 
convert his countrymen, who had degenerated 
into savages. This prelate never returned to 
Greenland ; nor was any thing more heard of 
Winland for several centuries.] 

[WINLOCK, or Wenlock, a township of 
Vermont, in Essex County, as. of Minehead.] 
[WINNIPISEOGEE, or Winnipissiokee, a 
lake in New Hampshire, and the largest collec- 
tion of water in the state. It is 18| miles in length 
from 5. e. to n. zo. and of very unequal breadth, 
but no where more than eight miles. Some very 
long necks of land project into it ; and it con- 
tains several islands, large and small, and on 
which rattle snakes are common. It abounds 
with fish from 6 to 20 pounds weight. The 
mountains which surround it, give rise to many 
streams which flow into it ; and between it and 


W I N 


W I N 


393 


the mountains, are several lesser ponds, which 
communicate with it. Contiguous to this lake 
are the townships of Moultonborough on the 
n. za. Tuftonborough and Wolfborough on the 
n. e. Meredith and Gilman town on the s. w. and 
a tract of land, called the Gore, on the s. e. From 
the s. e. extremity of this lake, called Merry 
Meeting Bay, to the n. za. part called Senter Har- 
bour, there is good navigation in the summer, 
and generally a good road in the winter ; the 
lake is frozen about three months in the year, 
and many sleighs and teams, from the circumja- 
cent towns, cross it on the ice. See Aquedocii- 
ton. Winnipiseogee River conveys the waters 
of the lake into Pemigewasset River, through its 
e. bank at New Chester.] 

[WINNEBAGO, a lake oftheN.W. Territory; 
za. of Michigan Lake, and s. za. of Bay Puan, 
into which it sends its waters. It is about 15 
miles long from e. to za. and six wide. It receives 
a large stream from the s. za. called Crocodile 
River. Fox River enters it from the za. and by 
it, through Ouisconsing River, has communica- 
tion with Mississippi River, interrupted by a 
portage of only three miles. The centre of the 
lake lies in about lat. 43° 51' n. and long. 86° 38' 
za. See Ouisconsing and Fox Rivers.] 
[WINNEBAGOES, an Indian nation inhabit- 
ing round the lake of the same name, who can 
furnish 2 or 300 warriors. Their town stands on 
an island at the e. end of the lake, of about 50 
acres extent, and distant from Bay Puan 35 miles, 
according to the course of the river. The town 
contains about 50 houses, which are strongly 
built with pallisades. The land adjacent to the 
lake is very fertile, abounding spontaneously with 
grapes, plums, and other fruit. The people 
raise a great quantity of Indian corn, beans, 

f &gt;umpkins, squashes, melons, and tobacco. The 
ake abounds with fish, and in the autumn or fall, 
with geese, ducks, and teal ; and are very fat and 
well flavoured by feeding on wild rice, which 
grows plentifully in these parts. Mr. Carver 
thinks from the result of his inquiries of the 
origin, language, and customs of this people, that 
they originally resided in some of the provinces 
of Mexico, and migrated to this country about a 
century ago. Their language is different from 
any other yet discovered ; and they converse with 
other nations in the Chippeway tongue.] 

[WINNIPEG, or Winnipeck, a large lake 
of Upper Canada, in the territory belonging to 
the Hudson’s Bay Company, about 284 geogra- 
phical miles n. za. from the Grand Portage, on 
the n. za). side of Lake Superior. It is 236 geo- 

YOTj. v. 


graphical miles in length, (exclusive of Play- 
green Lake, which, in fact, might properly be 
said to be a part of it, and which would add 10 
or 12 miles to the above length) from n. n. za. to 
s. s. e. and of very irregular breadth ; its greatest 
breadth being about 58 miles and its least about 
five, according to a very recent survey. It lies 
between lat. 50° 22' and 53° 57' n., and between 
long. 95° 48' and 99° 12' za. On its za. side it 
has communication with Winnipegoos, or Little 
Winnipeg Lake, by Dauphin River, St. Martin’s 
Lake, and Waterhen River. On its s. side it 
receives the Assineboine, or Red River ; and on 
the s. e. side the river of its name. On the e. 
side it receives Mainwaring’s River, Beren’s 
River, and Poplar River, besides many other in- 
ferior ones. On its za. side, towards its n. end, 
it is entered by the Saskatchuvan, a large and 
navigable river, which has its origin in the Rocky 
Mountains, and is, with Lake Winnipeg, the 
means of many very important water communi- 
cations, the principal of which we shall name. 
On account of its head waters interlocking with 
those of the Oregan or Columbia, it affords, with 
few and short portages, a water communication 
from the S. Sea to Hudson’s Bay, with the addi- 
tion of Port Nelson; and another from the S. 
Sea to the St. Lawrence River, through the Lake 
of the Woods, Lake Superior, Lake Huron, Lake 
Erie, and Lake Ontario ; and also from the S. 
Sea to the Gulf of Mexico, by the 5. branch of 
the Red River and the Mississippi. But there 
is a much shorter communication from the S. Sea 
to the Gulf of Mexico, by the Missourie River, 
whose head waters also interlock with those of 
the Columbia. On the za. of this lake is the ter- 
ritory called Assiniboia, being a grant from the 
Hudson’s Bay Company. Assiniboia is bounded 
on the n. by lat. 52° 2'., on the za. by an ideal 
line drawn from the intersection of lat. 52° with 
the Red River, and in the s. by the boundary 
of the company’s territories, or, as is commonly 
called, by the Height of Land. A settlement has 
been recently formed on Red River by Scotch 
emigrants, and promises to become flourishing. 
The Stony Indians inhabiting the banks of the 
river and the plains to the za. live much on horse- 
back after the manner of the Tartars. The ter- 
ritory about Lake Winnepeg is said by Carver 
and other travellers to be very fertile, producing 
vast quantities of wild rice, and the sugar-tree in 
great plenty. The climate is considerably more 
temperate here than it is upon the Atlantic coast, 
10° farther s.] 

[Winnipeg, Little, a lake which lies za. of the 


394 


W 1 N 


W O A 


former, and has communication with Lake Mini- 
tobah on the s., which last sends the waters of 
both into Winnipeg Lake, in an e. n. e. course. 
It is about 95 miles long and about 23 broad. 
Fort Dauphin is seated on a lake contiguous, on 
the zo. whose waters empty into this lake.] 

[Winnipeg River, runs n. zo. into the lake of 
its name. It is the outlet of the waters of a vast 
chain of lakes ; the chief of which are La Plue or 
Rainy Lake, and Lake of the Woods.] 

[WINNSBOROUGH, a post-town and the 
capital of Fairfield County, S. Carolina; situate 
on a branch of Wateree Creek, which empties 
into the river of that name. It contained, in 
1790, about 25 houses, a handsome court-house, 
a gaol, and a college called Mount Zion College, 
which is supported by a respectable society of 
gentlemen, and has been long incorporated. The 
institution flourishes, and bids fair for usefulness. 
It is 26 miles n. n. zo. of Columbia.] 

[WINSLOW, a post-town of the district of 
Maine, Lincoln County ; situate on Kennebeck 
River, 24 miles n. of Harrington. Fort Halifax 
was built at this place, in 1754, on the point of 
land at the confluence of Sebasticook and Kenne- 
beck Rivers. This town is 65 miles n. by e. of 
Portland. It was incorporated in 1771, and con- 
tained, in 1790, 779 inhabitants, and, in 1797, 
about 1500.] 

[WINTERHAM, a place in Amelia County, 
Virginia. Black-lead is found here; but no 
works for its manufacture are established : those 
who want it go and procure it for themselves.] 
[WINTHROP, a post-town of the district of 
Maine, Lincoln County, between Androscoggin 
and Kennebeck Rivers, about 10 miles from 
each ; five miles e. of Monmouth ; 10 zo. by s. of 
Hallowel, now Harrington court-house. The 
township in which it stands was incorporated in 
1771, and contained, in 1790, 1240 inhabitants.] 
[Winthrop’s Bay, on the n. coast of the 
island of Antigua. Maiden Island, a small isle 
s. s. zo. of Long Island, is due e. of the s. e. point 
of this bay.] 

[WIN TON, a county of Orangeburg district, 
S. Carolina.] 

[Winton, a post town of N. Carolina, and 
capital of Hartford County, qn the s. zo. side of 
Chowan River, a few miles below th£ place where 
Melierrin and Nottaway join their waters. It 
has a court-house and gaol, and a few compact 
houses. It is 12 miles from Murfreesborough, 
13 from the bridge on Bennet’s Creek, and 60 
s. s. e. of Petersburg, in Virginia.] 

[WINYAM, a river of the county of Claren- 


don, in the province and colony of Carolina. It 
has a course of 25 leagues, as far as the Ashley, 
and is capable of admitting large vessels, but is 
inferior to Port Royal; neither has it any settle- 
ments upon it.] 

[WIN YAW Bay, on the coast of S. Carolina, 
communicates with the ocean 12 miles below 
Georgetown. See Georgetown and Pedee 
River.] 

WIOMING. See Wyoming.] 
WISCASSET, a port of entry and post-town 
of the district of Maine, Lincoln County, on the 
zo. side of Sheepscut River, eight miles s. zo. of 
New Milford, on the e. side of Kennebeck River, 
n. e. of Bath, 36 n. e. of Portland. It is a part of 
the township of Pownalborough, and is very flou- 
rishing. It contained, in 1790, a congregational 
church, and about 120 houses. Its navigation is 
greater in proportion to its size and number of 
inhabitants than any part of Massachusetts. A 
gazette is published here, and the county courts 
are held in it. Wiscasset Point is three leagues 
from Cross River. The exports tor one year, 
ending September 30, 1794, amounted to 23,329 
dollars.] 

[WITCHARN Bay, is within the great sound 
in the Bermuda islands, in the W. Indies ; si- 
tuate at the e. part of the bottom or s. part of the 
sound, having two small islands at the mouth 
of it.] 

WITHY-GOOD, a bay of the s. coast of the 
island of Jamaica ; on the shore of which are 
some 40 houses for the convenience of the vessels 
which frequently arrive here. The surrounding 
country is agreeable. 

WITOUPO, a settlement of Indians of the 
province and colony of S. Carolina ; on the shore 
of a river. 

WITUMKI, a settlement of Indians of the 
same province as the former ; on the shore of the 
river Albania. 

[WOAHOO, one of the Sandwich isles, in the 
N. Pacific Ocean, seven leagues n. zo. of Morotoi 
Island. It is high land, and contains 60,000 in- 
habitants ; and has good anchoring ground in lat. 
21° 43 / n. and long. 157° 5P ay.] 

[WOAPANACHKY, the name of the Dela- 
ware nation, in their language.] 

[WOAPO, one of the Ingraham islands, less 
in size than Christiana. The body of it lies in 
lat. 9° 27' s. It bears n. zo. by zo ., about 20 
leagues from Resolution Bay. It w'as called 
Adams by Captain Ingraham ; and a small island 
to the s. of it he called Lincoln. Captain Roberts 
afterwards discovered them, and named them 


woo 


woo 


305 


from his ship and schooner ; the larger, Jefferson, 
and the lesser, Resolution.] 

WOBURN, a city of the county of Middlesex, 
in Massachusetts Bay, between Medford and 
Wilminham ; 10 miles n. of Cambridge, and 

seven n. e. of Lexington. It was incorporated, 
in 1642, by the name of Wooborne, and was till 
then known by the name of Charlestown Village. 
It contained, in 1790, 1727 inhabitants. 

WOKUKAY, a settlement of Indians of the 
prov ince and colony of S. Carolina ; situate near 
the river Coussa. 

[WOLCOTT, a township of Vermont, in Or- 
leans County, s. of Craftsbury, containing, in 
1790, 32 inhabitants. La Moille River runs n. w. 
through it.] 

[WOLF, a small boatable river of Tennesse, 
which runs w. into Mississippi River, about 19 
miles s. of Hatchy River, and 55 from Reelfoot. 
It is 50 yards wide several miles from its mouth, 
which is very near the s. w. corner of the State, 
in lat. 35°.] 

[WOLFBOROUGH, a township of New 
Hampshire, Strafford County, on the e. side of 
Winnipisiogee Lake, and contained, in 1790, 447 
inhabitants. It contains some fine farms, and 
particularly that which formerly belonged to 
Governor Wentworth.] 

[WOLFE Island, in Upper Canada, lies op- 
posite to Kingston and Pittsburgh, in the narrow 
part, where Lake Ontario forces into the St. 
Lawrence.] 

[WOLFORD, a township of Upper Canada, 
lying in the county of Grenville, in the rear and 
to the n. of the townships of Elizabeth Town 
and Augusta, and being washed by the river 
Radeau j 

[WOLVES Islands, lie near Campo Bello 
Island, on the easternmost coast of the district of 
Maine. Between these the soundings are from 
50 to 100 fathoms. Lat. n. 45° 3 / . w. long. 66° 
40'. From Grand Mannan Island to Wolves 
Islands, the course is n. e. by n. three leagues.] 

WOMASCA, a small river of the province 
and country of the Iroques Indians, in Canada. 
It runs n. and enters St. Peter’s Lake of the river 
St. Lawrence. 

[WOMELDORF, a post-town of Pennsyl- 
vania, in Berks County ; situate on the w. side of 
a small stream which falls into Tulpehocken 
Creek. It contained, in 1790, about 40 houses, 
and a German Lutheran and Calvinistic church. 
It is 57 miles n. w. of Philadelphia.] 

WOOD, a settlement of the island of Barba - 
does, in the district of the parish of St. Andrew. 


Wood, two islands of the N. Sea; situate 
within Hudson’s Bay, and opposite the point of 
Comfort. 

Wood, a bay on the n. coast of the Strait of 
Magellan, close to Cape San Isidro. 

[Wood Creek, a sluggish stream which rises 
in the high lands, a little e. of Fort Edward, on 
Hudson’s River; and, after running 25 miles, 
falls into the head of Lake Champlain at Skenes- 
borough. It has a fall at its mouth, otherwise it is 
navigable for batteaux for 20 miles uptoFort Anne. 
On its shores a battle was fought between the 
French and the English, September 8, 1755. 

Wood Creek runs w. and empties into Lake 
Oneida. See Oneida, Onondago, and Mo- 
hawk River.] 

[Wood Island, on the sea-coast of the district 
of Maine, five leagues n. e. of Cape Porpoise, and 
s.w. by s. four leagues of Richman’s Island.] 

[WOODS, Lake of the, in N. America, in 
the territory belonging to the Hudson’s Bay Com- 
pany, is so called from the large quantities of 
wood growing on its banks ; such as oak, pine, 
fir, spruce, See. This lake lies 90 miles s. e. of 
the s. end of Winnipeg Lake. Its length from 
n. to s. is about 60 miles; and of very irregular 
breadth, being in some places 47 miles wide, and 
in other places not more than seven. Its general 
shape is in the form of an S. It is about 178 
miles w. n. w. of the Grand Portage on the n. w. 
side of Lake Superior.] 

[WOODBRIDGE, a post-town of New Jer- 
sey, Middlesex County; on the great road from 
New York to Philadelphia, on a stream which 
falls into Arthur Kull, above Amboy. It is about 
three miles n. by w. of Amboy, 10 s. w. of Eliza - 
beth Town, and 55 n. e. of Philadelphia. The 
township contained, in 1790, 3,550 inhabitants, 
including 256 slaves.] 

[Woodbridge, a township of Connecticut, 
New Haven County, about seven miles n. w. of 
New Haven City.] 

[WOODBURY, a township of Vermont, in 
Caledonia County, 15 or 20 miles w. n. w. of 
Barnet.] 

[Woodbury, a post-town of New Jersey, and 
capital of Gloucester County ; situate near a 
small stream, which empties into the Delaware, 
below Red Bank. It contained, in 1790, about 
80 houses, a handsome brick court-house, a 
Quaker meeting-house, and an academy. Seve- 
ral of the houses are neat and handsome. It is 
nine miles s. of Philadelphia, and 1 1 n. e. of 
Swedesburg. Also, the name of a township of 
Pennsylvania, in Huntingdon County.] 

3 e 2 


39(j 


WOO 


W O R 


[Woodbury, a township of Connecticut, in 
the county of Litchfield, in the United States ; 
settled in 1672. It is situate near the river 
Shepoag, which enters the Stratford ; 15 miles n. 
of Newtown, seven n. e. of New Milford, and 
eight s. no. of Litchfield.] 

[WOODFORD, a county of Kentucky, on 
Ohio River, between Kentucky and Licking 
Rivers. Chief town, Versailles.] 

[Woodford, a township of Vermont, e. of 
Bennington, adjoining. It contained, in 1790, 
60 inhabitants.] 

[WOODHOUSE, a township, in the county 
of Norfolk, in Upper Canada, lying no. of Wal- 
pole, and fronting Lake Erie.] 

[WOODSTOCK, one of the principal towns 
of Windsor County, Vermont. It has a court- 
house and about 50 dwelling-houses. It lies n. 
no. of Windsor, adjoining, and contained, in 1790, 
1,605 inhabitants. Waterquechie River passes 
through the centre of the town, on the banks 
of which stand the meeting house and court- 
house.] 

[Woodstock, a township of New York, in 
Ulster County ; bounded e. by Kingston, Hurley, 
and Marbletown, and no. by Delaware River. It 
contained, in 1790, 1,025 inhabitants, including 
15 slaves. In 1796, according to the State cen- 
sus, 160 of the inhabitants were qualified elec- 
tors.] 

[Woodstock, a small town of N. Carolina, 
on the e. side of Pamplico River.] 

[Woodstock, a considerable and pleasant 
township of good land, in the n. e. corner of Con- 
necticut, Windham County, divided into three 
parishes. This township, which is seven miles 
square, was granted by the general court of Mas- 
sachusetts, November 7, 1683, and was settled 
by 39 families from Roxbury in 1688. This 
town remained under the jurisdiction of Massa- 
chusetts till about the year 1760, since which 
time it has been considered as belonging to Con- 
necticut. It is 52 miles s. no. of Boston, 30 e. of 
Hartford, 24 s. no. of Worcester, 28 .»?. zo. of Pro- 
vidence, and about the same distance n. of Nor- 
wich.] 

[Woodstock, a post-town of Virginia, seat of 
justice and capital in Shenandoah County. It 
contains between 60 and 70 houses, a court-house, 
and gaol. The inhabitants are mostly Germans 
and their descendants. It is 12 miles from Stras- 
burg, 35 from Rockingham court- house, and 70 
zp. from Washington.] 

[WOODSTOWN, a post-town of New Jer- 
sey, Salem County, and contains about 40 or 50 


houses. It is eight miles n. by e. of Salem, 17 n. 
by w. of Bridgetown, and 22 5. s. no. of Phila- 
delphia.] 

[WOODY Point, one of the limits of Hope 
Bay, on the n. zso. coast of N. America, as Break- 
ers is the other. It is in about lat. 50° n. and 
long. 128° t».] 

[WOOLWICH, a township of Gloucester 
County, New Jersey.] 

[Woolwich, a township of Lincoln County, 
district of Maine, on the e. side of Kennebeck 
River, s. of Pownalborough, containing, in 1790, 
797 inhabitants.] 

[WOONSOKET Falls, on Bluestone River, 
in Smithfield township, Rhode Island.] 

[WORCESTER, a large and populous county 
of Massachusetts. It contained, in 1790, 50 
townships, 53 congregational churches, 510,236 
acres of unimproved land, and 207,430 under 
cultivation, and 56,807 inhabitants. It is about 
50 miles in length, from n. to s. and about 40 in 
breadth ; bounded s. almost equally by the States 
of Connecticut and Rhode Island, and n. by the 
State of New Hampshire. On the e. it is bounded 
chiefly by Middlesex 
shire County.] 

[Worcester, a post-town of Massachusetts, 
and capital of the above county. It is the largest 
inland town of New England ; and is situate 
about 36 miles no. of Boston, and 40 e. of Spring- 
field. The public buildings in this town are two 
congregational churches, a court-house, and a 
strong stone gaol. The inhabitants, who, in 
1790, amounted to upwards of 2,000 in number, 
have a large inland trade, and manufacture pot 
and pearl ash, cotton and linen goods, besides 
some other articles. The compact part of the 
town contains about 150 neat houses, situate in 
a healthy vale, principally on one street. Print- 
ing, in its various branches, is carried on very 
extensively in this town, by Isaiah Thomas, Esq. 
who, in the year 1791, printed two editions of 
the Bible, the one the large royal quarto, the 
first of that kind published in America ; the other 
a large folio, with 50 copper plates, besides seve- 
ral other books of consequence. His printing 
apparatus consists of 10 printing-presses, with 
types in proportion ; and he has since been busied 
in printing of Bibles of various smaller kinds. 
His printing apparatus is reckoned the largest in 
America. This township, part of what was called 
Quinsigamond by the Indians, was incorporated 
in 1684 ; but being depopulated by Indian hosti- 
lities, the first town-meeting was held in 1722. 
1 1 is proposed to open a canal between Provi- 


County, and no. by Ha mp- 


W Y A W Y O 397 


dence, in Rhode Island, and this town. Lat. n. 
42° 13'. long-, w. 71° 44'.] 

[Worcester, a township of Pennsylvania, in 
Montgomery County.] 

[Worcester, the s. e. county of Maryland, 
having Somerset County and Chesapeake Bay on 
the w., Sinepuxent Bay on the e., which opens to 
the N. Atlantic Ocean, and Accomac County, in 
Virginia, on the s. It is well watered by Poco- 
moke, Assatigul, and St. Martin’s River. It con- 
tained, in 1790, 11,640 inhabitants, including 
3,836 slaves. Chief town, Snowhill.] 

[Worcester, a township of Vermont, in the 
easternmost part of Chitrendon County, about 25 
miles e. of Burlington.] 

WORSAN, a settlement of the island of Bar- 
badoes, in the district of the parish of St. 
Thomas. 

[WORTHINGTON, a post-town of Massa- 
chusetts, in Hampshire County, 11 miles w. by 
n. of Northampton, 19 e. by s. of New Lebanon, 
in New York State, and 85 w. of Boston. It 
was incorporated in 1768, and contained, in 1790, 
1,1 16 inhabitants.] 

WRENS, Island, of the Straits of Magellan, 
between Sugar-loaf Mountain and the Harring- 
ton Island. 

[W RENT HAM, the Wollomonuppouge of 
the Indians, a considerable township of Norfolk 
County, Massachusetts, on the post-road from 
Boston to Providence, 23 miles s. s. w. of Boston, 
and 16 n. e. of Providence, containing, in 1790, 
1,767 inhabitants ; formerly a part of Dedham, 
incorporated in 1661. There is a curious cavern 
in this town, called Wampom’s Rock, from an 
Indian family of that name, who lived in it for a 
number of years. It is about nine feet square and 
eight feet high, lessening from the centre to about 
four feet. It is surrounded by broken rocks, and 
now serves as a shelter for cattle and sheep, as 
do several others here, formerly inhabited by 
Indians.] 

[WRlGHTSROROUGH, a small settlement 
or village on Little River, a branch of the Savan- 
nah, about 30 miles from Augusta. It was set- 
tled by Joseph Mattock, Esq. one of the Friends, 
who named it after Sir James Wright, then go- 
vernor cf Georgia, who promoted its establish- 
ment.] 

[WRIGHTSTOWN, in Buck’s County, Penn- 
sylvania, four miles n. of Newtown, and four w. 
of Delaware River.] 

[WUNALACHTIKOS, a tribe, the second in 
rank, of the Delaware nation.] 

[WYACONDA, a river of Louisiana, which 


falls into the Missisippi, 34 miles below Riviere 
du Moins.] 

[WYALUSING, a township of Pennsylvania, 
Luzerne County.] 

[WYALUXING Creek, in Luzerne County, 
Pennsylvania, falls into the e. branch of Susque- 
hannah River, from the n. e. and n. w. of Mes- 
hoppen Creek, which is 25 miles s.e. of Tioga 
Point.] 

[WYE River, in Upper Canada, runs from a 
small lake near the n. w. end of Lake Simcoe, 
into Gloucester Bay, Lake Huron.] 

[WYMOA Road, in the N. Pacific Ocean, a 
place of anchorage at Atooi Island, one of the 
Sandwich Islands, in lat. n. 21° 57'. and long. w. 
159° 47'. It is at the s. w. side, and about six 
miles from the w. end of the island. The island 
is about 10 leagues long, and 25 leagues n. w. of 
Woahoo Island.] 

[WYNTON, the chief town of Hertford 
County, Edenton district, N. Carolina.] 

[WYOMING, a general name formerly given 
to a tract of country in Pennsylvania; situate on 
Susquehannah River, above Wilksbarre. In the 
year 1778, the settlement, which was know-n 
under this name, consisted of eight townships, 
each containing five miles square, settled from 
Connecticut, and originally under its jurisdiction, 
and produced great quantities of grain of all 
sorts, fruit, hemp, flax, &amp;c. ; inhabited by about 
1000 families, who had furnished the continental 
army with near 1000 soldiers, besides various 
supplies of provisons, &amp;c. In the month of July 
all these flourishing settlements were reduced by 
the Indians and Tories to a state of desolation and 
horror, almost beyond description. See West- 
moreland. In the vicinity of Wyoming is a 
bed of coal, of the open burning kind, which 
gives a very intense heat. Wyoming Falls lie 
about two miles above Wilkesbarre, and eight 
miles and an half above Nantikoke Falls. Lat. 
n. 41° 14'. long. w. 75° 53'.] 

[WYONDOTTS, or Wiandats, an Indian 
nation residing near Fort Detroit, in the neigh- 
bourhood oftheOttawas and Putaw-atimes, w hose 
hunting grounds are about Lake Erie. The num- 
ber of warriors, 20 years ago, were, Wyondotts 
250, Ottawas 400, Putawatimes 150. Another 
tribe of the Wyondotts live near Sandusky, 
among the Mohickons and Caghnawagas, who 
together have 300 warriors. At the treaty of 
Greenville, in consequence of lands ceded to the 
United States, the latter agreed to pay them a 
sum in hand, and in goods to the value of 1000 
dollars a year for ever.] 


398 


X A C 


X A C 


[WYONOKE Creek, in N. Carolina, lies 
within or about lat. n. 36° 30. The charter of 
Carolina, in 1664, extended the bounds e. as far 
as the n. end of Currituck Inlet, upon a straight 
line w. to this creek.] 

[WYTHE, a county of Virginia, said to be 120 
miles in length, and nearly 50 in breadth ; bounded 
n. by Kanhaway, and s. by the State of N. Caro- 
lina. Its population, in 1790, was included in 
Montgomery County. There are lead mines in 
this county, on the Great Kanhaway, 25 miles 
from the line of N. Carolina, which yield from 50 
to 80 lbs., pure lead, from 100 lbs. washed ore, 


but most commonly 60 to 100. Two of them are 
worked by the public ; the best of which is 100 
yards under the hill ; and although there are not 
more than 30 labourers genei’ally employed, they 
might employ 50 or 60 to advantage. The la. 
bourers cultivate their own corn. Twenty, 25, 
and sometimes 60 tons of lead have been extracted 
from these mines in a year. Chief town, Evan- 
sham. The court-house is on the post-road from 
Richmond to Danville, in Kentucky. It is 30 
miles from Montgomery court-house and 64 from 
Abingdon. A post-office is kept here.] 


X. 


Xacalco, a settlement of the head settlement 
of the district and alcaldia mayor of Zochicoatlan 
in Nueva Espana. It is of a cold temperature, 
situate on the top of a mountain covered with 
trees ; contains 22 Indian families, and is 12 
leagues n. of its capital. 

XACAPIXTLA, a principal or head settle- 
ment of the district of the alcaldia mayor of Cuer- 
navaca in Nueva Espaxia. It contains 338 fami- 
lies of Spaniards, and 50 of Indians, including 
those who inhabit three other settlements of its 
jurisdiction. It has a convent of religious Au- 
gustins, in which is venerated a miraculous image 
of St. John the Baptist, painted on linen. The 
territory of this settlement is very fertile and de- 
lightful, and in it are gathered some cochineal, 
and many fruits. They also grow here many 
magueyes , of which they make pulque, and gather 
a very large harvest of maize. To enter the set- 
tlement you must pass over some very deep ra- 
vines, over which are so many bridges, worthy of 
the greatest admiration, and, indeed, but for want 
of gates, it would be as strong as any fortified 
place. Eight leagues n. of its capital. 

XACOA, San Juan de, a settlement of the 
head settlement of the district of Pinoteca, and 
alcaldia mayor of Xicayan in Nueva Espana. It 
contains 57 families of Indians, employed in cul- 
tivating cochineal, tobacco, and some seeds, and 
is seven leagues n. e. of its head settlement. 

XACOClES, a barbarous nation of Indians, 
who dwell to the n. of the river Paraguay, in 
the territory immediately upon its shores, and 
bounded by the nations of the Xaqueses, Cha- 
neses, and Xarayes. 


XACONA, a principal or head settlement of 
the district of the alcaldia mayor of Zamora in 
Nueva Espana. It is of a mild and dry tempe- 
rature, is half a league long from e. to w., and a 
little less in width from n. to s. t including five 
wards, in which dwell 93 families of Spaniards, 
20 of Mulattoes, and 191 of Indians, who occupy 
themselves in the cultivation of sugar canes, of 
which they make sugar and honey ; in fishing, 
and in the cultivation of various fruits and me- 
dicinal herbs. At a leagues distance to the s. 
is another congregation, which they call De San 
Pedro, w ith 11 families of Spaniards, and five of 
Mustees : where there is a pool of water collected 
from the river for the use of many mills ; and the 
place is also very fertile and abounding in vines. 
On the skirts of a mountain in the same rhumb 
are assembled some other seven Spanish fami- 
lies. The Spanish families inhabiting the head 
settlement of the district are 38, besides 34 of 
Mustees , and 16 of Mulattoes. At half a league’s 
distance from this place some streams of crystal- 
line water gush down from some clefts of a moun- 
tain, which, becoming united, form in the plain a 
large river which passes through the middle of 
the settlement, dividing the same into two parts. 
The shores of this river are covered with very 
shady and lofty trees, amongst which are ash, 
willows, sabines, tarayes, zapotes , guayabos, and 
others. 

This river runs from s. to n. until it becomes 
incorporated with the Grande; and, passing 
through the settlement, it becomes divided into 
several small branches, which take their course 
down the different streets, and having several 


X A G 


X A L 


309 


bridges thrown across them for the convenience 
of passengers ; whilst a regular supply of water 
is afforded to every garden and for all domestic 
purposes. Nor is there a want of irrigation in 
the neighbouring vallies ; for in these there are 
most abundant crops of seeds of various kinds, 
and in their more cultivated parts a variety of 
most exquisite European and American fruits. 

In the settlement is a very good convent of 
Augustins, and in the parish-church of the ward 
of San Pedro is venerated a miraculous image of 
Our Lady, with the title of La Raiz, which, ac- 
cording to tradition, was discovered in the lake or 
sea of Chapala, which is 12 leag;ucs from this spot ; 
and was found at the bottom of an Indian fisher- 
man’s net, who had caught not a single fish, 
whilst the nets of his companions were more than 
usually filled. Information of the event was im- 
mediately carried to the curate, who conveyed 
the image to the church, wherein it was deposited, 
until that a new temple was erected. This image 
is of so singular a construction, as to be formed 
naturally by the roots of a tree. The inhabitants 
of this settlement hold this image in the greatest 
devotion, through the repeated benefits supposed 
to be brought upon them through the influence 
of the Blessed Virgin. 

Xacona, Antigua, a small settlement of 
the same head settlement of the district as the 
former. It has scarcely any vestiges of what it 
was, and its population is extremely small. A 
little more than four leagues s. of its head settle- 
ment. 

XACSAHUANA, a valley of the province and 
corregimiento of Abancay in Peru ; fertile and 
abundant in wheat and cattle, and celebrated for 
the battle between the Licentiate Pedro de la 
Gasca, the governor of Peru, with the King’s 
troops, on the one hand, and Gonzalo Pizarro 
on the other ; when the latter was conquered 
and taken in 1548, the pacification of Peru 
brought about, and the insurgents of that king- 
dom punished. 

XAGALASI, a settlement of the head settle- 
ment of the district of Chixila, and alcaldia mayor 
of Villalta in Nueva Espana. It contains 71 fa- 
milies of Indians, and is 13 leagues from its 
capital. 

XAGUA, Bay of, a settlement of the island 
of Cuba, on the s. coast, with one of the best and 
most capacious ports in the known w orld. It is 
five leagues in circumference, and sheltered from 
all the winds. At its entrance is a castle for its 
defence. The port is between the Port of Tri- 
nidad and the Island of Pinos. 


XAGUEYES, St. Miguel de los, a settle- 
ment of the alcaldia mayor ofCoautitlan in Nueva 
Espana ; annexed to the curacy of the settlement 
of Huchuetoca. 

[XAINTES, Santos, oi-All Saints Islands, 
so named from their being discovered on that 
holy day, by the Spaniards ; on the s. side of the 
island of Guadaloupe, and in its jurisdiction. 
The most w. of these three isles is called Terre 
de Bas, or the Low Island, and the most e. Terre 
de Haut, or the High Island. The third, which 
lies exactly in the middle between the other two, 
is little other than a barren rock, and helps to 
form a very good harbour ; in about lat. 15° 52' n. 
and long. 61° 40' w .] 

XAJUEI, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Caxamarca la Grande in Peru. 

XALA, a district and alcaldia mayor of the 
province and bishopric of Nueva Galicia. The 
district of its jurisdiction is very limited, and al- 
though the territory is fertile and fit for cultiva- 
tion, it produces nothing but maize, through the 
consummate indolence of the natives. It has five 
settlements; which are head settlements of the 
district. The capital, which is of the same name, 
about 10 or 15 miles from the coast of the S. Sea, 
is of a cold temperature, inhabited by 70 fami- 
lies of Mexican Indians, and has in it a convent 
of the religious of San Francisco. [It is 160 
miles s. with a slight inclination to the w. from 
Guadalaxara, and 177 w.s.w. of Valladolid, in 
lat. 18° 33' n. long. 103° 4' ®.] 

The other settlements are, 

Xomulco, Zuatlan, 

Aguacatlan, Mezpa. 

Ixtlan, 

XALAMELCO, a settlement of the head set- 
tlement of the district and alcaldia mayor of Zo- 
chicoatlan in Nueva Espana; situate in a small 
plain at the foot of a lofty mountain. It is of a 
cold temperature, contains 22 Indian families, 
and is three leagues w. of its capital. 

XALAPA, a jurisdiction and alcaldia mayor of 
Nueva Espana. It comprehends eight settle- 
ments, which are head settlements of the district, 
and are named Xalapa, (the capital) 

Coatepec, Santa Maria Tlapay- 

Ixhuacan, coya, 

Xalacinco, Noalingo, and 


Atzala, 


Acula. 


Upon which are dependent the following : 
Xochimalco, Tlacolula, 

Ixlahuacan, San Juan Chapulte- 

Ayahualco, pec, 

T eozelco, San J oseph Pastepec, 


400 


X A L A P A. 


San Pedro Tonayan, San Pedro Tlatatila, 
San Pablo Coapan, Atzalan, 

San Marcos, Altotonca, 

Santa Maria Magda- Santa Maria Tlapa- 
lena, coya, 

Santiago Coaucazin- San Joseph Miahua- 
tla, tlan, 

Asuncion Xilotepec, S. Juan Miahuatlan, 

Chiloyaque, S. Andres Acatlan, 

San Andres Tlanehu- San Antonio Tepe- 


aloyan, 


tlan. 


San Miguel del Sol- Chiconquaso, 
dado, Yecuatla, 

San Salvador, Perote. 

The capital is the town of the same name ; 
situate on the side or extensive skirt of the 
mountain of Macuiltepec, sloping towards the 
so that the town is at the distance of a 
cannon-shot from the mountain itself; also on 
the e. and w. side of the town is a deep ra- 
vine, from which a plain runs on a level with 
the llanura , which extends itself towards the s. 
The temperature is benign, and the territory 
chalky, and in some parts stony, though at a 
small distance from the surface is found a fine 
white sand, and from this, in all the parts of the 
district, gushes forth a pure salutary water, from 
whence arises the name of Xalapan, meaning, in 
the Indian idiom, place of sand and water; the 
Spaniards having suppressed the n for abbrevi- 
ation. The natural elevation of this place to- 
wards the s. and that which is caused by the two 
ravines, exposes it to all the winds, save the n. 
which is kept off by the aforesaid mountain. 
This town was one of the first places conquered 
in this kingdom, and there are some public and 
early documents relative to that event preserved 
in a convent held by the religious of San Fran- 
cisco, who were the first who preached in this 
kingdom. The said convent, which is of mode- 
rate size, was finished in 1555 ; the former, which 
had been built, having been destroyed, though 
some of the ruins are still to be seen. 

The abundance of water derived from streams 
and fountains, although the latter be found low, 
causes the territory to be extremely delightful 
and fertile in all kinds of plants and vegetable 
productions ; but the sloth of the natives will al- 
low them to benefit but little by these advan- 
tages ; and they gather only some maize, which, 
in common, does not exceed what is necessary 
for their consumption. Xalapa contains 243 fa- 
milies of Spaniards, 182 of 3Iustees, and 361 of 
Indians. [Its present population is estimated, 
by Humboldt, at 13,000 souls.] 


Contiguous to the convent, of which we have 
spoken, is the chapel of the order Tercera, and 
there is also another, a convent of the religious 
of La Caridad, with an hospital, open to the sick 
from whatever quarter they come. In its vici- 
nity, or at one league’s distance to the s. e. is a 
devout sanctuary of Nuestra Senora del Chico, 
where there was formerly a sugar-mill of the 
same denomination, and which was thus called to 
distinguish it from another mill at a small dis- 
tance called El Grande ; and, although all the 
others are destroyed, this contributes towards 
the maintenance of the temple, to which flock a 
vast concourse of people, induced by their devo- 
tion to that image. Also, a league to the s. is 
the engine of Pacho, where there was formerly a 
very numerous and wealthy population, and where 
a great quantity of sugar was manufactured. But 
this engine, together with others, is, at the pre- 
sent day, deserted, nothing but two or three ran - 
cherias, or small farms, occupying the spot. 

Whenever the n. winds blow at Yera Cruz, it 
infallibly rains at Xalapa, and this they there 
call the health of the place. This town is fa- 
mous for being the theatre wherein is celebrated 
the fair in the time of the fleets, and where all 
the merchants of the kingdom meet to buy mer- 
chandise and arrange all their affairs ; and it is 
almost incredible how it is, at this season, stocked 
with money and goods, both European and of the 
country. [See a more detailed account of this 
Fair, article Vera Cruz, new matter, head Com- 
merce ;.] It is here too that the famous purgative 
of its name (jalap) is found, the same being the 
root of a plant. Here, also, are many trees of 
liquid amber, which the Indians call ocotzolt, 
from whieh they extract amber, the leaves of the 
tree resembling those of the vine, and which, 
being rubbed betwixt the hands, give forth a very 
singular aromatic smell. 

[Xalapa (Humboldt observes) resembles a for- 
tress at a distance ; for in the early periods of the 
conquest, convents and churches were constructed 
in such a manner as to serve for a defence in case 
of an insurrection of the natives. From this 
convent of St. Francis, at Xalapa, we enjoy a 
magnificent view of the colossal summits of the 
Coffre and the Pic d’Orizaba, of the declivity of 
the cordillera ( towards L’Encero, Otateo, and 
Apazapa), of the river of l’Antigua, and even of 
the ocean. The thick forests of sij/rax, piper , 
melastomata , and ferns resembling trees, especi- 
ally those which are on the road from Pacha and 
San Andres, the banks of the small lake De los 
Berrios, and the heights leading to the village of 


X A L 


X A L 401 


tfuastcpec, offer the most delightful promenades. 
The sky ofXalapa, beautiful and serene in sum- 
mer, from the month of December to the month 
of February wears a most melancholy aspect. — 
During the prevalence of the n. wind, the 
thermometer will descend to 12° or 16°, (63° 
and 60° of Fahrenheit,) and during this period 
( estacion de los NortesJ the sun and stars are fre- 

a uently invisible for two or three weeks toge- 
ler. The richer merchants of Vera Cruz have 
country-houses at Xalapa, in which they enjoy a 
cool and agreeable retreat, while the coast is 
almost uninhabitable, from the mosquitos, the 
great heats, and the yellow fever. In this small 
town is an excellent school for drawing, founded 
within these few years, in which the children of 
poor artisans are instructed at the expense of 
people in better circumstances. The elevation 
of Xalapa above the level of the ocean is 1,320 
metres, (or 4,264 feet). It is 127 miles e. with 
some inclination to n. e. of Mexico ; and 52 
miles n.zo. of Vera Cruz, in lat. 19°29 / n. long. 
96° 54' w.~\ 

Xalapa, another settlement, with the addi- 
tion of De la Sierra, to distinguish it from the 
former. It is of the head settlement of the dis- 
trict and alcaldia mayor of Teutila, in the same 
kingdom ; contains about 1,000 families of In- 
dians, and is of a very hot temperature ; on which 
account its natives sleep in hammocks. The 
church has only one nave, but very large, and 
in it is venerated the image of St. Anthonjq to 
which peculiar devotion is offered. It produces 
some cotton, vaynilla , cacao , maize, and much 
fruit ; is subject to continual tempests of thunder 
and lightning, as being close to the sierra ; and 
is six leagues s. of its capital. 

XALATLACO, Santa Maria de, a settle- 
ment of the head settlement of the district and 
jurisdiction of the city of Antequera in Nueva 
Espaha : situate so close to the same, as to be 
divided only by a river which runs between the 
two towns. It contains 40 families of Spaniards 
and Mustecs , some Mulattoes, and 380 families 
of Indians. It is of a mild and dry temperature, 
but has a very sulphurious and nitrous air ; so 
that the wheat crops yield but little, though the 
soil is at the same time fertile, and very abundant 
in maize and other seeds, as also in cochineal, in 
which consists its principal trade, from the num- 
ber of nopaleras or tunales found here. 

XALAZALA, a head settlement of the dis- 
trict of the alcaldia mayor of Tlapa in Nueva 
Espaha. It contains 60 families of Indians, who 
are employed as day labourers in the ranchos of 
VOL. v. 


its district ; and is two leagues 5. w. of its ca- 
pital. 

XALAZINCO, a head settlement of the dis- 
trict and alcaldia mayor of Nueva Espaha. It is 
of a cold and moist temperature, owing to the 
continual clouds drawn together by the surround- 
ing mountains. Its boundary, although well sup- 
plied with water, consists of clayey soil upon 
sand, from whence its Indian name is derived ; 
but these waters render the district very fertile 
and pleasant. The natives are little given to la- 
bour and agriculture, so that they do not reap 
the fruits which they might ; for, as it is proved 
by experience, whenever they do cultivate the 
land, their crops are exceedingly large. The 
district contains three settlements, which are 
head settlements ; and the population is com- 
posed of 140 families of Spaniards, 200 of Mas- 
tees and Mulattoes, and 600 of Indians. 

XALCOMULCO, a settlement of the alcaldia 
mayor ofXalapa in Nueva Espaha. It contains 
162 families of Indians, who are employed in 
cultivating maize and fruits, as well as in catch- 
ing fish, in the river which runs near to it and 
empties itself into the sea at \ r era Cruz Vieja. 
Six leagues s. e. of its capital, and in this part, its 
jurisdiction terminates. 

XALISCO, a province of the kingdom of 
Nueva Galicia, the most s. part of the audience 
of Guadalaxara. It is laved by the Pacific or 
S. Sea, by this, and by the w. rhumb; bounded 
e. by the province of Guadalaxara and Mechoa- 
can, and is divided from that of Chiametlan by a 
small river, which runs into the sea. It is 50 
leagues in extent, and is most abundant in wheat 
and in silver mines. It was conquered by Nuno 
de Guzman in 1531. — See article Nueva Ga- 
licia. 

Xalisco, a settlement of the head settlement 
of the district of the alcaldia mayor of Tepic, of 
a cold temperature ; contains 90 families of In- 
dians, and a convent of religious of San Fran- 
cisco. This being the first settlement established 
in the kingdom of Nueva Galicia, was the head 
settlement of the province, which is now called 
Guadalaxara. Two leagues s. of its capital. 

XALMINULCO, Santa Ana de, a settle- 
ment of the head settlement of the district of 
Xonacatepec, and alcaldia mayor of Guejozinco 
in Nueva Espana. It contains 10 3 families of 
Indians, and is situate n. of its capital. 

XALOSTOC, a settlement of the head settle- 
ment of the district of Xonacatepec, and alcaldia 
mayor of Cuernavaca in Nueva Espana. 

Xalostoc, S. Pedro de, another settlement, 

3 F 


402 


X A L 


X A L 


in the jurisdiction and alcaldia mayor of Ecate- 
pec, of the same kingdom ; containing 90 Indian 
tamilies. 

XALPA, a settlement of the head settlement 
of the district of Amaqueca, and alcald'ia mayor 
of Zayula in Nueva Espaha. It contains 40 fa- 
milies of Indians, and in its district are various 
estates, producing in abundance wheat, maize, 
and French beans ; there being also added to the 
other branches of its commerce those great quan- 
tities of wood which are cut upon the moun- 
tains. Ten leagues w. of its head settlement, 

Xalpa, another settlement, in the head settle- 
ment of the district of Amatlan, and alcald’ia 
mayor of Tanzitaro. It is of an hot tempera- 
ture ; contains 20 families of Spaniards and Mus- 
tees , and eight of Indians. It abounds in water, 
so that the plantations and gardens of its district 
are always well irrigated. Half a league w. of 
its head settlement. 

X ali’a, another, with the dedicatory title of 
San Raymundo, in the head settlement of the 
district of Quilapa, and alcald'ia mayor of Quatro 
Villas. It contains 116 families of Indians, ad- 
dicted to the cultivation and trade of cochineal, 
seeds, fruits, digging of coal, and cutting of 
wood. Two leagues w. one quarter s. of its 
head settlement. 

XALPANTEPEC, a head settlement of the 
district of the alcaldia mayor of Guauchinango, 
in Nueva Espaha. It contains 132 families of 
Totonacos Indians, including those of six wards 
of its district, and is 20 leagues n. of its ca- 
pital. 

XALPATLAHUACA, a settlement of the 
head settlement of the district of San Luis de la 
Costa, and of the alcald’ia mayor of Tlapa, in 
Nueva Espaha. It is of a hot temperature, and 
contains 82 families, of Mexican Indians : three 
leagues s. e. of its head settlement. 

XALTEANGUIS, a settlement of the alcad’ia 
mayor of Antequera, in the province and bishop- 
ric of Oaxaca. It contains 20 families of In- 
dians, employed in the cultivation of cochineal 
and seeds. 

XALTENGO, S. Pedro de, a settlement of 
the alcadia mayor of Zumpango, in Nueva Es- 
paha. It is of a temperate climate, contains 180 
families of Indians, five of Spaniards, and 12 of 
Mustees, who trade in the seeds which they cul- 
tivate ; but their greater profit consists in the 
pulque, and for this they take the greatest care 
in the cultivation of the magueyes : one league 
n. of its capital. 

XALTEPEC, a settlement of the alcald'ia 


mayor of Nochiztlan. It contains 112 families 
of Indians, who are employed in the trade and 
cultivation of cochineal : is of a moderate tem- 
perature, and three leagues s. of its capital. 

XALTEPETLAN, Santiago de, a settle- 
ment of the head settlement of the district and 
alcald'ia mayor of Guejozinco, in Nueva Espaha. 
It contains 12 families of Indians. 

XALTEPETONGO, a head settlement of 
the district and alcaldia mayor of Tepozcolula. It 
contains 39 families of Indians, who exercise 
themselves in the commerce and cultivation of 
cochineal. 

XALTIPAC, S. Francisco de, a settlement 
of the head settlement of the district of Zenan- 
titlan, and alcald’ia mayor of Acayuca, in Nueva 
Espaha. It contains 103 families of Indians, 
and is six leagues e. of its head settlement. 

XALTOCAN, a settlement of the jurisdic- 
tion and alcaldia mayor of Valles, in Nueva Es- 
paha ; situate in a glen at the foot of a moun- 
tain belonging to the jurisdiction of Mextitlan. 
It is of a benign temperature, annexed to the 
curacy of Huejutla, and contains 90 families, 
who cultivate seeds and some sugar-canes, from 
which they make loaf-sugar. Here are also 
many fine fowls, and other birds : 43 leagues 
from its capital. 

Xaltocan, San Andres de, another settle- 
ment of the jurisdiction and alcaldia mayor of 
Zumpango; situate in the middle of a lake, 
which, in the wet season, must be passed in ca- 
noes, the water then completely surrounding the 
settlement. It contains 277 families of Indians, 
and five of Mustees: it was formerly the head 
settlement of the parish, but which was trans- 
lated to Xaltengo, as well from the great mois- 
ture as from the fetid vapour, which, in the dry 
season, used to arise from the lake ; but to this 
the natives were so familiarized that it did not 
induce them to quit the town. All the neigh- 
bouring parts of this settlement are nothing but 
swamps ; so that the inhabitants are obliged to 
hire lands of other settlements wherein to sow 
their seeds : two leagues s. of its capital. 

Xaltocan, another, of the alcaldia mayor of 
Coautitlan, in the same kingdom. It contains 
282 families of Indians, and is two leagues e. n. e. 
of its capital. 

Xaltocan, another head settlement of the 
district of the alcaldia mayor of Tepic, of a hot 
temperature. It contains 60 families of Indians, 
and is 12 leagues w. of its capital. 

Xaltocan, another, of the head settlement 
and alcaldia mayor of Compostela, in the king- 


X A M XAQ 403 


dom of Nueva Galicia: four leagues n. of its 
capital. 

XAMAROS, a barbarous nation of Indians, 
but little known, who inhabit the mountains to 
the w. of the settlement of the Chiquitos in Peru. 
Its territory extends as far as the llanuras, on 
the shores of the river Apure or S. Miguel. 

XAMILTEPEC, a settlement of the head set- 
tlement of the district of Tetelzinco and alcaldia 
mayor of Coautla, in Nueva Espaxia, annexed to 
the curacy of the settlement of Ocuituco. It con- 
tains five families of Spaniards, six of Mustees , 
and 120 of Indians, including those of the two 
wards annexed to it, and which belong to the 
jurisdiction of the Marquisate del Valle. 

Half a league off is a small mountain, on which 
is a temple of beautiful architecture, in which is 
venerated a miraculous image of the Virgin, of 
which the following miraculous discovery is re- 
lated by D. Joseph de Villasenor, in his Teatro 
Americano ; namely, that some 130 years ago, 
an Indian woman, of an unblemished life, pass- 
ing over the mountain saw a tree which was pe- 
culiarly large and shady, and perceiving the 
trunk of it to be open, she looked in, and there 
discovered in the cavity the said image; that, 
upon this, she immediately partook herself to the 
curate, who hastened to the spot, and found true 
what the Indian woman had related to him. The 
image is a quarter of a yard and four fingers 
long, and the face and hands are most beautiful, 
and it has also the peculiarity of having upon its 
forehead a mark made with some sharp instru- 
ment. In order to raise money, whereby to 
build a temple wherein to deposit the image, 
the curate intrusted it to a certain inhabitant of 
the settlement, named Geronimo, who was to 
demand alms, for the above purpose, at the Port 
of Vera Cruz. It so happened that the fleet ar- 
rived just at that time ; and amongst the con- 
course of people was an European merchant, 
who, taking a great fancy to the image, offered 
for it 30 dollars. The price over tempted the 
person to whom it was intrusted, and he parted 
with it, thinking to make another resembling it, 
and to dress it in the same clothes, which he 
stripped off with that intention. But the de- 
ceit was discovered ; for, by a miraculous in- 
terposition, the original image was found depo- 
sited in the temple long before the arrival of 
the fraudulent man with the counterfeit ; and 
he, being stricken and confused at the circum- 
stance, immediately confessed the whole of his 
dishonesty. The above account rests upon 


upon the juridical acts had and preserved in the 
settlement. 

After the year 1712, in the great earthquake, 
which was experienced throughout the king- 
dom, in the month of August, the principal 
chapel of the temple opened, and the wall being 
in the act of falling, the image held out the 
rosary which it had in its right hand, and 
moved it towards the wall as though in the act 
to support it. Besides the above miraculous 
circumstances, others are daily taking place in 
this settlement ; and it is not amongst the least 
of these, that although frequent attempts have 
been made to smooth over the scar on the fore- 
head of the image, the varnish immediately falls 
off : seven leagues n. e. of its head settlement. 

Xamiltpec, another settlement, the capital 
of the alcaldia mayor of the coast of Xicayan. 
It is of a hot temperature, abounding in cochi- 
neal, cotton, wax, and cacao , in which its com- 
merce consists. It contains 40 families of Spa- 
niards, 50 of Mulattoes, and 703 of Indians. 

XAMUNDI, an ancient and small province 
of the government of Popayan, in the n. n. zo. 
part. It is a country rich in mines, of excellent 
gold, and was discovered by the captain and 
conqueror, Sebastian de Belalcazar, in 1536 : it 
is now incorporated in the province of Choco. 

Xamundi, a river of the province and go- 
vernment of Antioquia, in the Nuevo Iieyno de 
Granada. It rises in the valley ofLile, and run- 
ning from s. w. to n. e. enters the Cauca, just 
before the city of Cali. 

XANAGUECHE, S. Juan de, a settlement 
of the head settlement of the district and alcal- 
dia mayor of Nexapa, in Nueva Espana. It con- 
tains eight families of Indians, and is four leagues 
from its capital. 

XANTETELCO, a settlement of the head 
settlement of the district of Xonacatepec and 
alcaldia mayor of Cuernavaca, in Nueva Espana. 
It contains a good convent of the religious of 
San Agustin. 

XAPALLANGA, an ancient and small pro- 
vince of Peru, now comprehended in that of 
Xauxa. It was conquered by the Inca Huaina- 
Capac, XII. Emperor : its inhabitants are of the 
Guancos nation, and it is very fertile and popu- 
lous. 

XAPUQURIO, a settlement of the head set- 
tlement of the district of Puruandiro and al- 
caldia mayor of Valladolid ; 1| league from the 
settlement of Numaran, to which it is annexed. 

XAQUES, a small island of the Brasilian 
3 f 2 


404 


X A R 


X A S 


sea, opposite the mouth of the river La Plata; 
thus called from the name of its discoverer 
Christoval Xaques, in lat. 35° 28' s. 

XAQUESES, a barbarous nation of Caribe 
Indians, inhabiting the woods of the river Para- 
guay ; bounded n. by the nations of the Xarayes, 
Xacocies, and Chaneses. They live by fishing, 
and by the chase. 

XAQUIAPA, a valley of the alcaldia mayor 
and jurisdiction of Valles, in Nueva Espaiia; 
situate in the middle of the serranias of Xilitla, 
and near the settlement of this name ; where 
also, at the foot of a shady fig-grove, is a crystal- 
line fountain, called de Aguiar, by an archbishop, 
who was of Mexico, Don Francisco de Aguian y 
Seixas. Here it is that the phenomenon takes 
place ; that if a gun is fired off, an instrument 
played upon, or even a stone thrown, the waters 
alter their course ; that is to say, flow more 
rapid, and inundate the place, owing to the effect 
produced upon the air. 

XARAYES, a large and extensive llanura , 
nearly 300 miles long from n. to s. on both sides 
of the Paraguay, almost in the centre of S. 
America; which is, during the greater part of 
the year, inundated; though the latest accounts 
say, the inundation begins in January, and lasts 
three months. A great lake is there formed 
from the rivers flowing down from the moun- 
tains, and from the waters of the river Paraguay, 
which traverses the said llanura. At certain 
times of the year, however, the waters subside, 
and discover the greater part of the plain, and 
the river betakes itself to its own bed, although 
many lakes are still left of the size of from six 
to seven leagues in circumference. The land, 
upon the subsiding of the waters, is found co- 
vered with reeds and other plants, resembling 
arrows ; and from thence, no doubt, the llanura 
w as given the name of Xarayes by the Spa- 
niards, the first discoverers. In the general in- 
undation, the navigation is made by canoes and 
barks, and then the Portuguese of Cuyaba tra- 
verse it, passing directly along the river of this 
name to the Paraguay, the which they cannot do 
when the waters sink, but have to go a round 
about way of 200 leagues, in order to pass down 
the river of Los Porrudos to the Paraguay. In 
the middle of the lake are some islands, covered 
with some lofty trees, of various kinds, amongst 
which are found the cassia and the trees dis- 
tilling gum-arabic. When the waters are at 
their height they overtop these trees by 12 
yards: the number of crocodiles here are im- 


mense, also of water-swine, which they there 
call capivaras ; and of fish, particularly the 
palometas , which the Father Gumilia calls bo- 
ritos, and which are carnivorous. In the vici- 
nity of this lake are many tigers, leopards, 
stags, monkies of various kinds, vipers, and other 
insects, the multitude of ants and mosquitoes 
being incredible. 

The nearest settlements are Cuyaba, 60 leagues 
distant, belonging to the Portuguese, where 
there is a commandant general, owing to the 
rich gold and diamond mines which are worked 
there. Another settlement is Matagroso, more 
to the s. called also Villa-bella, and situate be- 
tween the rivers Serere to the n. and Bapore to 
the s. ; the which rivers unite to form the 
Itenes. 

The nation of the barbarous Guanas Indians 
dwell on the s. side of this lake of Los Xarayes, 
as do the nation of the Bayas ; the former on 
the e. the latter on the w. side of the river Para- 
guay. The nation of the Bororos occupy the 
territory to the e. of the lake, and that of the 
Barbadoes the territory to the n. of the same. 
The nation of the Payaguas command the lake, 
the river Paraguay, and the other rivers which 
enter this. The mountains of San Fernando, 
which run from s. ton. for more than 40 leagues, 
and border on the s. to. of the lake ; and those 
de Los Caballeros, which the Portuguese call 
Dos Cavaleyros, are to the s., between the lake 
to the n. and the river of Los Porrudos to the s. 
The climate is very hot and moist, and conse- 
quently unhealthy. 

XARCIA, San Juan de, a settlement of the 
head settlement of the district and alcaldia mayor 
of Nexapa, in Nueva Espaiia. It contains 18 
families of Indians, who carry on a great trade, 
the settlement being in the highway between the 
provinces of Chiapa, Tehuantepec, and others, 
of the kingdom of Guatemala : four leages e. 
by n. of its head settlement. 

XARIPO,a small settlement of the head set- 
tlement of the district of Xacona and alcaldia 
mayor of Zamora, in Nueva Espaiia. It con- 
tains 15 families of Indians, and is four leagues 
s. of its head settlement. 

XAROCA, an ancient province of the king- 
dom of Quito: s. s. e. of the province of Jaen. 
It is full of woods, rivers, lakes, and swamps, 
and is consequently but little known : its climate 
is extremely hot. 

XASI, a settlement of the jurisdiction and 
government of Maracaibo, in the Nuevo Reyno 


X A U 


X A U 


405 


de Granada. It is of a benign temperature, 
very healthy, fertile and pleasant, produces in 
abundance maize, papas, and other seeds, and 
contains 20 housekeepers and 40 Indians. 

XAVARA, Bay of, on the n. coast of the 
island of Cuba, between the Bay of Baxanas, 
and the Point del Padre. 

XAVIER, S. Strait of, a narrow pass of 
the river Paraguay, in the territory and govern- 
ment of the Chiquitos Indians. 

[Xavier, S. a settlement of Indians, of the 
province and government of Buenos-Ayres ; 
situate on the w. bank of the Parana, about 76 
miles n. e. of Santa Fe ; in lat. 30° 32 / 15". long. 
60° T 15".] 

[Xavier, S. another settlement of Indians, of 
the province and government of Buenos-Ayres ; 
situate on a small river on the n. bank of Uruguay, 
a little to the n. e. of Martires : in lat. 27° 51' 
8" s. long. 55° 14 / 4" w.J 

XAUXA, called also Jauja, a province and 
corregimiento of Peru, bounded n. and n. e. bv 
the province of Tarma ; e. by the mountain of 
the Indians ; s. e. by the province ofHuanta ; s. 
by that of Angaraes ; s. w. by that of Yauyos, 
and w. by that of Guarochiri : in length 12 
leagues from n. to s. and in width 15 from e. tozy. 

This province is a ravine or valley of delightful 
temperature, although on the heights of either 
side of it a considerable degree of cold is expe- 
rienced. In these heights are various estates of cat- 
tle, of the wool of which they make in the work- 
shops clothes of the country. This province pro- 
duces papas and other fruits, peculiar to the scr - 
rania ; and, amongst the rest, a great quantity of 
wheat and barley ; with which they fatten the herds 
of swine, which abound here. N or are there want- 
ing all sorts of vegetables, nor even some por- 
tion of sugar. Also, in the settlements which 
lie at the entrance of the mountain, are found 
cocoa trees, plantains, pine- apples, and other 
fruits. This province is watered by many 
streams ; and through it passes an abundant 
river, which rises in the province of Tarma, out 
of the lake Chinchaycocha, and runs from n. w. 
to s. e. ; and, taking its course to that of Huanta, 
enters that of Apurimac : but from being of 
little depth, it is of little advantage. At a 
league s distance from the bridge thrown over 
the said river, and which is called de Xauxa, 
or the stone bridge of Jajua, another bridge was 
built of only one arch, in the time of the Vice- 
roy, the Marquis de Canete. 

In the reign of the Incas of Peru, Xauxa was 


one of the most populous districts, and proofs of 
this are evident through the numerous remains of 
towns and large castles, which are to be seen 
here. It is not without silver-mines, but few 
of these are worked. It has a college of the 
apostolical missionaries of the order of San 
Francisco, with the title of Santa Rosa de Oco- 
pa, whose business is to convert the infidel In- 
dians of the mountains ; but those who were 
already converted made an insurrection in 1742, 
committing great hostilities in the province of 
Tarma, and other parts. 

[The district of Xauxa contains 14 doctrinal 
curacies ; and one town, with 16 settlements an- 
nexed ; the whole inhabited by 52,286 souls ; 
viz. 32 clergy, 84 Monks, 1,713 Spaniards, 28,477 
Indians, 21,922 Mustees , and 58 slaves. The 
annual value of its productions is 137,642 dol- 
lars. The military force, which was created in 
1768, consists of a battalion of nine companies 
each, with a total force of 93 inrolled. (Guia del 
Peru, 1797).] 

The capital is the settlement of the same 
name. It has manufactories of woollen stuffs, 
and some silver mines ; is of a benign tempera- 
ture, and near to it on the s. side passes a river 
of tbe same name. The other settlements are 
the following : 


Ricran, 

Comas, 

Mojon, 

Andamarca, 

Matahuasi, 

Pariahuanca, 

Cincos, 

Aeobamba, 

San Antonio de 

Muquiyauyo, 

Huancani, 

Huancayo, 

Concepcion, 

Pucara, 

Sicaya, 

Huayocachi, 

Cochangara, 

Caxas, 

H uaripampa, 

Chongos, 

Apata, 

Carhuacallanga, 

Huamal, 

Colca, 

Chupaca, 

Uchubamba, 

San Gregorio, 

Ortocuna, 

Quinchuay, 

Hualhuas, 

Mitoto. 


Xauxa, a large and abundant river of the above 
province, also called Jauja, ivhich rises in the 
province of Tarma, out of the lake Chinchaico- 
cha, which the Indians call Angoyacu ; runs s. e . 
watering the province, together ivith the great 
l/anura of its name, passes to the province of 
Huanta, dividing the same from Angaraes, and 
in that makes its way into the woods of the 
infidel Indians ; collecting the waters of many 
other rivers to enter the Ucayale. It has a 


406 


X E R 


X I C 


beautiful stone-bridge, which was built by order 
of the Viceroy of Peru, the Marquis de Canete, 
to facilitate the pass into the province of An- 
garaes. This bridge is one of the best in Peru, 
and is called the bridge of Iscuchaca, [and is 
about 66 miles s. of Tarrua.] 

XAXO, a settlement of the province and go- 
vernment of Maracaibo, in the Nuevo Reyno de 
Granada ; situate in a llanura, between the cities 
of Merida and Truxillo. 

XEQUETEPEQUE, a settlement of the pro- 
vince and corregimiento of Saha in Peru ; situate 
a quarter of a league from the river of its name. 
It is in the direct road from Valles to Lima. 

XEREZ, an alcaldia mayor and jurisdiction 
of the kingdom of Nueva Galicia; bounded 
n. n. w. bv Nueva Vizcaya, and w. by the pro- 
vince of Nayarith. It is very fertile in seeds 
ancl fruits, and particularly in cattle, this being 
its principal branch of commerce, and it having- 
many folds and grazing lands ; the principal of 
which are those of El Tesoro and of Los Or- 
ganos. It consists of only the following settle- 
ments : 

Monte Esco- Susticatan, Villaguitierrez 
bedo, Valparaiso, del Aguila. 

Xerez, the capital is the town of the same 
name ; small, but one that had carried on a great 
commerce when first settled by the Spaniards, 
although its population is now almost entirely 
of people of colour : [47 leagues n. of Guada- 
laxara ; in lat. 22° 40 / n.~\ 

Xerez, a city of this name, with the addition 
of La Frontera ; the capital of the province of 
Choluteca, on the confines of Guatemala and 
Nicaragua, and SO leagues from the city of 
Santiago. 

Xerez, another, of the province and govern- 
ment of Venezuela, in the Nuevo Reyno de 
Granada, of the district and jurisdiction of Ca- 
racas; situate s. of Nueva Valencia ; from 
whence it is 15 leagues, 20 from Nueva Segovia, 
and 60 from the city of Coro, to the n. of the 
mountains of San Pedro. It has fallen into 
much decay, so as to be now reduced to a mi- 
serable village. 

Xerez, another, of the province and govern- 
ment of Paraguay ; situate in a spacious llanura 
on the shore of the river Mondego or Mbetotey, 
[on the s. side, about 45 miles before this river 
enters the Paraguay.] It was destroyed by the 
infidel Indians in the last (16th) century, and its 
ruins may be yet seen, being the only ones re- 
maining : in lat. 19° 30' 3 " s. 


XEVEROS, a barbarous nation of Indians, 
who dwell in the woods bordering upon the 
river Maranon. They were reduced to a re- 
ligious and civilized life, and into settlements, 
by Father Lucas de la Cueva, a missionary of 
the Jesuits in the province of Quito, in 1638. 
The settlement of this reduccion was most nu- 
merous in 1767. [It is situate on the s. part of 
the river of its name, 36 miles to. s. w. of the 
settlement of La Laguna, belonging to the mis- 
sions which were held by the Jesuits in the pro- 
vince of Mainas : in lat. 5° 30'. s.] 

XEXUI, a river of the province and govern- 
ment of Paraguay ; which runs from w. to e. 
and enters the Paraguay above the city of La 
Asuncion. 

XEXUI-GUAZU, a river of the same pro- 
vince and government as the former ; which runs 
to the same rhumb, and has the same course. 

XEXUI-MINI, a small river of the same 
province and government as the former. It runs 
s. s. w. and enters the Xexuy. 

XIBAROS, a barbarous nation of Indians of 
the kingdom of Quito, who live in the woods to 
the s. of the province of Macas, and e. s. e. of 
that of Cuenca. These barbarians made an 
insurrection since their civilization and conver- 
sion to the Catholic religion, and destroyed the 
city of Logrofio ; retiring into the woods with 
the Spanish women, whom they took with them 
from that ill-fated settlement. Historians dis- 
agree in the epoch of this rebellion. The ex- 
jesuit Coleti asserts, that it was in the middle of 
the 16th century ; but it appears that in the year 
1632, the Father Francisco Fuentes, procurator 
general of Quito in this court, informed the 
King, that, in the year preceding, two missiona- 
ries of the Jesuits had entered to preach to the 
Xibaros Indians. From all that has been writ- 
ten on this subject, it may be inferred that the 
Xibaros are most numerous, and that they still 
preserve some vestiges of the Catholic religion, 
which their ancestors regularly professed. These 
Indians are robust, warlike and intrepid, and in 
their territory are many gold mines. 

Xibaros, a settlement of this name in the 
province and government of Guayaquil and 
kingdom of Quito. 

Xibaros, another, in the province and govern- 
ment of Mainas, of the same kingdom. See 
Concepcion. 

XICALAN, a settlement of the head settle- 
ment of the district of Uruapan and alcaldia mayor 
of Valladolid, in the province and bishopric of 


X I c 


X I L 


407 


Mechoacan. It contains 19 families of Indians, 
and is a league s. of its head settlement. 

XACALANGO, a river of the province and 
alculdia mayor of Tabasco. It runs n. and enters 
the sea in the Gulf of Mexico, to the e. of that of 
Tabasco 

XICALTEPEC, a settlement of the head 
settlement of the district of Pinotepa del Rey, 
and alcaldia mayor of Xicayan in Nueva Espana. 
It contains 38 families of Indians, who occupy 
themselves in the cultivation of cochineal and 
cotton : eight leagues e. of its head settlement. 

ZICAMARCxl, a settlement of the province 
and corregimiento of Huarochiri, in Peru; an- 
nexed to the curacy of Santa Olaya. 

XICAPOTLA, a settlement of the alcaldia 
mayor of Tula, in Nueva Espana; annexed to 
thecuracy ofits capital, being’ distant from this one 
league to thee. It contains 197 families of Indians. 

XICARILLA, a settlement of the missions 
which are held by the religious of S. Francis, in 
the kingdom of N uevo Mexico. 

XICAYAN, a jurisdiction and alcaldia mayor 
of Nueva Espana, in the province and bishopric 
of Oaxaca; situate on the coast of the S. Sea. 
It is very fertile in cochineal, cotton, wax, cacao , 
and salt, in which it carries on a great and lucra- 
tive commerce ; and being, in consequence, a 
jurisdiction of the first class in that kingdom. 
The capital is the settlement of Xamiltepec, and 
the others are. 


Huazolotitlan, 

Huazcaltepec, 

Miloacan, 

T utepec, 

Tetepelzin, 

Pinotepa, 

S. J uan Xacoa, 

S. Pedro Siniyu, 
Sta. Maria N utio, 
S. Christoval, 
Santa Maria, 

S. Lorenzo, 

S. Agustin, 
Pinotepa del Rey, 
Xicaltepec, 
Poputla, 

Tlacama, 

Atoyaque, 

San J uan, 
Santiago, 
Xicayan, 
Petatlapa, 

San Joseph, 
Ixcapa, 


Tulixtlaocan, 

Amuzgos, 

Cacahuatepec, 

Icapaca, 

Zultepec, 

Zacatepec, 

S. Juan de Grotes, 
Santiago Coahuitlan, 
T ututepec, 
Jocotepec, 

Acatepec, 

Santa Cruz, 

Tlaltep ec, 

Tepestlahuaca, 

Olintepec, 

Juquila, 

Xolotepec, 

San Luis, 

Ixcantepec, 

Amiltepec, 

Lazao, 

Palanizuela, 

Ixtapa, 

Xuchatengo. 


Xicayan, another settlement in this jurisdic- 
tion, of the head settlement of the district of 
Atoyaque. It was formerly the capital ; but this 
was afterwards removed to Xamiltepec. It con- 
tains 54 families of Indians, who occupy them- 
selves in the cultivation and commerce of cochi- 
neal, tobacco, seeds, and cotton : 7 leagues w. b y 
n. of its capital. 

XICO, a small island, situate in the middle of 
the lake of Chaleo in Nueva Espana. 

XICOTLAN, a head settlement of the dis- 
trict of the alcaldia mayor of Chiautla in Nueva 
Espana. It contains 230 families of Indians, and 
30 of Spaniards, Mustees, and Mulattoes, who 
maintain themselves by trading in salt, which is 
found in its district, and which they carry to La 
Puebla de los Angeles. 

XICULA, San Juan de, a head settlement of 
the district of the alcaldia mayor of Nexapa. It 
contains 136 families of Indians, whose commerce 
consists in cotton, cochineal, fruit and seeds. It 
has a convent of religious of San Domingo, and 
is five leagues n. ofits capital. 

XIHUITLIPA, a settlement of the head set- 
tlement of the district of Xocotla, and alcaldia 
mayor of Tlapa in Nueva Espana. It contains 
42 families of Indians, who carry on a trade 
in cochineal, maize, and French beans. Two 
leagues n. of its head settlement. 

XILITLA, a settlement of the head settle- 
ment of the district of Tamazunchale, and alcal- 
dia mayor of Valles in Nueva Espana; situate 
on the most lofty part of an elevated sierra. In 
it live united many Mexican, Pames, Othomies, 
and Mecos Indians, nearly all of them Gentiles, 
acknowledging, at least, no other sacrament than 
baptism and matrimony. Thirty-two leagues 
from its principal head settlement, and being di- 
vided from the same by some inaccessible roads, 
full of ravines and rough serranias. 

XILOTEPEC, a district of the jurisdiction 
and alcaldia mayor of N ueva Espana, composed 
of four head settlements of the district, and of 
many other small settlements or wards, which 
are : — 

Chiapantongo, Chiapa de Mota, 

Zanayaquilpa, Alfaxayuca. 

S. Miguel Cambay, 

Ni dote pec, the capital, is the settlement of 
its name, of a mild temperature, abounding in 
maize, seeds, fruits, and large and small cattle, 
in which the natives trade. These amounted to 
3,750 families of Othomies Indians, and 60 of 
Spaniards, Mustees, and Mulattoes. Twenty 
leagues n. of Mexico, one quarter n.e. 


408 


X I M 


Xilotepec, another settlement, in the head 
settlement of the district of Tlacololnla, and 
alcaldia mayor of Xalapa ; situate in a hollow 
formed by various mountains, which surround 
it. It is of a very stony territory, abounding 
with chalk, on which account it is the only part 
where there are lime-kilns, and with that article 
it supplies the whole of the province and its de- 
pendencies. It contains 15 families of Spaniards, 
and 162 of Indians, and is two leagues s. w. of its 
head settlement. 

Xilotepec, another, of the alcaldia mayor of 
Tlapa, in the same kingdom. It contains 14 fa- 
milies of Indians. 

Xilotepec, another, with the dedicatory title 
of Santiago, in the alcaldia mayor of Nexapa ; si- 
tuate in a plain which is surrounded by lofty 
mountains. In it they reckon 120 families of In- 
dians, including those of the wards of its district, 
and here they procure cochineal finer than any in 
the province. 

XILOTLAN, a head settlement of the district 
of the alcaldia mayor of Colima. It contains 80 
families of Indians employed in agriculture, and 
who gather abundant crops of maize and French 
beans. In its vicinity are some farms for breed- 
ing large cattle, in which there are employed 10 
families of Spaniards and Mulattoes. Forty 
leagues e. of its capital. 

XILOTZINCO, Santa Ana de, a head set- 
tlement of the district of the alcaldia mayor of 
Matepec, in the same kingdom as the former. It 
contains 290 families of Indians. 

XILO VASCO, a settlement of the province 
and alcaldia mayor of San Salvador in the king- 
dom of Guatemala. 

XIMBE, a settlement -of the province and cor- 
regimiento of Andahuailas in Peru ; annexed to 
the curacy of the settlement of Moro in the pro- 
vince of Santa. 

XIMBURA, a settlement of the province and 
corrcgimiento of Loxa in the kingdom of Quito; 
annexed to the curacy of the settlement of Caria- 
manga ; situate in a retired and craggy moun- 
tain. Hither the coadjutor to the curate repairs 
once a year to perform the ecclesiastical functions 
and the duties of the parish. The natives of the 
settlement appear by their beard, colour, car- 
riage, and language, to he a degenerated race of 
Spaniards, although they are more uncouth and 
barbarous than any Indians. They are thought, 
indeed, and with some truth, to be descended 
from Spanish families, w hich might have sepa- 
rated from those 90 families, which, in 1539, were 
sent from Quito, by Gonzalo Pizarro, under 


X I Q 

Captain Salinas, for the foundation of some new 
settlements in the province ef Pacamores, which 
is bounded by the province of Zarza. These In- 
dians excite, by their appearance, at once laugh- 
ter and compassion, and it cannot but be won- 
dered at that they can reconcile themselves to 
live in the wretched state to which they are 
addicted. Sometimes they are accustomed to 
trade with the other settlements in the produc- 
tions of their own territory ; these being most 
delicate salted meats, and cheeses of a superior 
quality to any known in the kingdom. Their 
ignorance is such, that it is impossible to learn 
any thing from them ; and they have no tradition 
of their origin. 

XIMENEZ, a settlement of the province and 
government of Tucuman, belonging to the juris- 
diction of the city of Santiago del Estero ; situate 
nearly w. of the same. 

XINGU, an abundant river of the province 
and captainship of Para in the kingdom of Brazil. 
It rises in the mountains of the serrania, runs 
continually n. through the territory of the Topa- 
yos Indians, in which extended course of many 
leagues it collects the waters of other rivers, and 
especially of the Guiriri, by the w. part, and giv- 
ing five large falls, enters, w ith an amazing body, 
into the river Maranon, or Amazonas, [about 70 
miles above the island of Joanes, in lat. 1° 34' 5 .] 

Xingu, a settlement of the Portuguese in this 
province and captainship , on the shore and at the 
mouth of the former river, from w hence it takes 
its name. 

XIPACOYA, a settlement and head settle- 
ment of the district of the alcaldia mayor of 
Tepozcolula in Nueva Espana. It contains 55 
families of Indians, wdio occupy themselves in the 
cultivation and trade of cochineal. 

XIPAN, a settlement of the province and cor- 
regimiento of Guamalies in Peru ; annexed to the 
curacy of the settlement of Chavin de Pariarca. 

XIPICAPA, a settlement of the province and 
government of Guayaquil in the kingdom of 
Quito, and of the district of Puerto Viego, from 
w hich it lies to the s., upon the shore of the river 
of its name, and the which forms the Bay of 
Machala. [The settlement is two short leagues 
from the S. Sea, in lat. 1° 23 / 5.] 

X1QUILPA, a settlement of the head settle- 
ment of the district of Tuzcacuezco, and alcaldia 
mayor of Amola, or Amula, in Nueva Espana. 
It contains 46 families, employed in cultivating 
seeds and breeding cattle. Eleven leagues n. of 
its capital. 

XIQUILPAN, a jurisdiction and alcaldia 


X o c 


X o c 


409 


mm/or of Nueva Espana, in the province and 
bishopric of Mechoacan. It produces much large 
cattle, and loaf-sugar, which is manufactured in 
the mills of its district, the same being the 
branches of its commerce. It also carries on a 
trade with the town of Colima in bartering salt 
and other articles. The alcaldia mayor of Tin- 
guindin is accustomed to be united to this, al- 
though far distant, not however, but that a sepa- 
rate alcalde has frequently been appointed by 
way of safety. Its jurisdiction consists of the 
following settlements. — 

Charapa, Patamba, 

?an Angel, Ocumucho, 

Tarequato, San Joseph. 

Xiquilpan, the capital, is of the same name. 
In it live 158 families of Indians, and 186 of Spa- 
niards, Mustees, and Mulattoes, and it has a con- 
vent of the religious of San Francisco. Eight 
leagues e. of its capital. 

XIQUIPILCO, S. Juan de, a head settle- 
ment of the district of the alcaldia mayor of Me- 
tepec in Nueva Espana. It contains 186 fami- 
lies of Indians. 

XITALUA, a settlement of the province and 
alcaldia mayor of Zedales in the kingdom of Gua- 
temala. 

XITIPOS, Santiago de, a settlement of the 
missions which were held by the Jesuits of the 
province and government of Mainas of the king- 
dom of Quito; founded by the Father Lorenzo 
Lucero in 1670, on the shore of a lake which is 
formed from the waters of the Maranon. 

XITOLTEPEC, a settlement of the province 
and alcaldia mayor of Zoques in the kingdom of 
Guatemala. 

XIVIA, a settlement of the province and cor- 
regimiento of Huamalies in Peru; annexed to 
the curacy of the settlement of Jesus. 

XIUTOPANTLA, a settlement of the head 
settlement of the district of Atengo, and alcaldia 
mayor of Chilapa in N ueva Espana. T wo leagues 
w. of its head settlement. 

XOCHIHUEHUETLAN, a settlement of the 
alcaldia mayor of Tlapa in Nueva Espana. It 
is of an extremely hot temperature, contains 112 
families of Indians; and in its district is a mine- 
ral of exquisite copper, this being the only article 
and branch of trade. 

XOCHIMALCO, a settlement of the alcaldia 
mayor of Xalapa, in the same kingdom as the 
former. It is very fertile and pleasant. Its po- 
pulation is composed of 343 families ot Indians, 
seven of Spaniards, 44 of Mustees and Mulattoes ; 
but it produces nothing but maize, of which they 

VOL. v. 


make biscuit for the food of the muleteers. In 
its vicinity is a rancheria, or small farm, called 
Cenquantla, annexed to its curacy, and in which 
reside many families dedicated to the cultivation 
of tobacco and seeds. It has also two sugar ma- 
nufactories, but which are now converted into 
places for storing cattle. Besides these there are 
the farms of Estanzuela and Tazampa. Two 
leagues s. w. of the settlement of Choatepec. 

XOCHIMILCO, a jurisdiction and alcaldia 
mayor of Nueva Espana ; bounded e. by that of 
Chaleo, w. by that of Cuyoacan, and n. by the 
lake of Mexico. It is very fertile and pleasant, 
and of great trade, through its vicinity to the 
capital of the kingdom, whither they convey by 
the lake in canoes necessary fruits and other ar- 
ticles ; also transmitting by land the same to the 
neighbouring jurisdictions. Its population con- 
sists of the settlements which are head settle- 
ments of the district, (and of different wards 
or small settlements), Amilpa and San Pedro 
Acotopam. 

Xochimilco, the capital, is the settlement of 
the same name, founded by the Chichimecos In- 
dians, before the Mexican empire, on the shore 
of the lake. It was extremely opulent in those 
times, as appears from its numerous population : 
since, including the inhabitants of its wards, the 
same amounted to 2,500 families of Mexican 
Indians, and lias now many families of Spaniards, 
Mustees , and Mulattoes. What has greatly 
tended to the preservation of the splendour and 
population of this capital for so many years is, 
that almost all the inhabitants have some pecu- 
liar employment. Some of them, and indeed the 
greater part, are carpenters ; making doors, win- 
dows, beds, benches, chairs, tables, and other 
pieces of furniture of great beauty, the which 
they carry in canoes by the lake to one of the 
markets of Mexico, where they make a great 

f trofit of them. Others are blacksmiths, and make 
ocks, staples, nails, &amp;c. and others apply them- 
selves to the manufacture of wooden-lattices and 
nets for the windows of houses : also those 
who inhabit the lake, in some islands which they 
call Chinampas, are engaged in cultivating 
flowers and in making common mats, called 
petates, from an herb found in the lake resem- 
bling a rush, and called in the Mexican language 
tule, and which they hang at the doors of the 
temples and houses, in testimony of their joy, and 
before their pulque-houses and taverns. Here 
are also some estates and ranchos , in which are 
cultivated wheat, maize, and other seeds, and a 
very good convent of Franciscans. [Ten miles 
3 G 


410 


X O L 


X O N 


5. 5 . e. of Mexico, in lat. 19° 1 6' n. long. 99° 2 y 

30" a&gt;.] 

XOCHINACATLAN, a small settlement or 
ward of the alcaldia mayor of Guauchinango in 
Nueva Espaiia: annexed to the curacy of the 
settlement of Tlaola. 

XOCHITEPEC, a settlement of the head set- 
tlement of the district of Huitepec, and alcaldia 
mayor of Cuernavaca in the same kingdom as the 
former. It contains 35 families of Indians, and 
16 of Spaniards and Mustees , with a good con- 
vent of Franciscans. Its territory, and that of 
the wards annexed to it, are dry and barren ; for, 
although it be surrounded by various rivers, 
their waters cannot be made use of as being very 
muddy. Three leagues s. of its head settlement. 

XOCHITLAN, S. Augustin de, a settle- 
ment of the head settlement of the district of 
Xacapistla, and of the same alcaldia mayor as 
the former. 

XOCA, a small river of the province and go- 
vernment of Merida, in the Nuevo Reyno de 
Granada. It rises in the celebrated valley of 
Cucata, runs s.e. and enters the Apure. 

XOCOTA, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Truxillo in Peru. 

XtDCOTEAPA, S. Pedro de. a settlement of 
the head settlement of the district and alcaldia 
mayor of Acayuca in Nueva Espana. It is of an 
hot temperature, situate on the skirt of the sierra 
of San Martin, contains 350 families of Indians, 
produces plenty of maize, French beans, fruits, 
and thread of pita, which is the principal branch 
of its commerce ; and is eight leagues 5. of its 
capital. 

XOCOTENANGO, a settlement of the pro- 
vince and kingdom of Guatemala. 

XOCOTEPEC, a settlement of the alcadia 
mayor of Guauchinango, in Nueva Espana. It 
contains 212 families of Totonacos Indians; in- 
cluding those dwelling in the six wards of its 
district and is three leagues s. of its capital. 

XOLAPA, a settlement of the head settlement 
of the district of Olintla, and alcaldia mayor of 
Zacatlan, in the same kingdom; three leagues 
and a half from its head settlement. 

XOLALPAN, a settlement of the alcaldia 
mayor of Teotalco, in the same kingdom. It 
contains 270 families of Indians. 

X ola T. pan, another settlement, with the de- 
dicatory title of Santa Maria, in the same king- 
dom, and of the alcaldia mayor of Ecatepec, 
annexed to the curacy of its capital; from whence 
it is one league to n. n. e. It contains 85 fami- 
lies of Indians. 


XOLOTEPEC, a settlement of the head set- 
tlement of the district of Juquiia, and alcadia 
mayor of Xicayan in the same kingdom. It con- 
tain- 18 Indian families, and is 28 leagues e. by 
n. of its capital. 

XOLOTLA, a small settlement or ward of 
the alcadia mayor of Guauchinango in the same 
kingdom ; annexed to the curacy of the settle- 
ment of Naupan. 

XOLOTLAN, a head settlement of the dis- 
trict of the alcadia mayor of Motines, in the same 
kingdom as the former. It contains 24 families 
of Indians. 

XOMULCO, a settlement of the head settle- 
ment of the district and alcadia mayor of Xala in 
the same kingdom. It is of a miid temperature, 
and contains 20 families of Indians. 

XONACAPA, S. Miguel de, a settlement 
of the head settlement of the district, and alcadia 
mayor of Ixmiquilpan in the same kingdom ; 
nine leagues n. e. of its capital. 

XONACATEPEC, a head settlement of the 
district of the alcaldia mayo &gt;■ of Cuernavaca in 
the same kingdom ; its jurisdiction is composed 
of 14 settlements, so close to each other that they 
are all registered as one population. In these 
dwell 813 families of Mexican Indians, and 87 of 
Spaniards, Mustees, and Mulattoes, who exercise 
themselves in the cultivation of some seeds and 
fruits, as well European as those peculiar to the 
country ; its situation is upon a plain, equally 
barren and scarce of water. It has a convent of 
Augustins, and is 14 leagues e. of its capital. 

XONACATLAN, Santiago de, a head set- 
tlement of the district of the alcaldia mayor of 
San Juan de los Llanos in the same kingdom. 
It contains 540 families of Indians, including 
those of the wards of its district, and is nine 
leagues n. w. of its capital. 

Xonacatlan, San Francisco de, a head set- 
tlement of the district of the alcaldia mayor of 
Metepeque in the same kingdom. It contains 
313 families of Indians. 

Another, of the head settlement of the district 
of Amaqueca, and alcaldia mayor of Zayula in 
the same kingdom. It contains 15 families of 
Indians, who occupy themselves in cultivating 
seeds and fruits and cutting wood ; it is situate 
in the serrania, and is two leagues from its head 
settlement. 

Another, of the alcaldia mayor of Tlapa in 
the same kingdom. It contains 15 families of 
Indians. 

XONGOPAUI, a settlement of the missions, 
which are held by the religions of San Francisco, 


XUL 


41 1 


X u c 


in the province of Moqui, and of the kingdom of 
Nuevo Mexico. 

XONOTAL, a head settlement of the district 
of the alcaldia mayor of Tetela Xonotla in the 
same kingdom. Its jurisdiction comprehends 
five settlements, in the which dwell 476 families 
of Totonaques Indians. It is of a good, fertile, 
and pleasant temperature, and is irrigated by a 
river, which, after running through a narrow glen 
for some distance, unites itself with another, and 
thus passes through many provinces until it 
empties itself into the sea. Its commerce con- 
sists of woods, cut on the mountains, and of 
making charcoal ; 18 leagues n. e. of its capital. 

[XORILLO, a llanura of the intendancy of 
Valladolid, of which a further account may be 
seen under that article.] 

[Xorillo, a large volcano of the intendancy 
of Valladolid in Nuevo Mexico, which sprung 
up by an earthquake, from a chasm to 1640 feet 
above the level of the plains. See Valladolid, 
Intendancy of.] 

XOSAA, a head settlement of the district of 
the alcald'ia mayor of Villalta in the same king- 
dom. It contains 63 families of Indians, and is 
16 leagues from its capital. 

XOXOCOTLAN, Santa Cruz de, a settle- 
ment of the head settlement of the district of 
Cuilapa, and alcald'ia mayor of Quatro Villas in 
the same kingdom. It is of a mild and dry tem- 
perature, contains 194 families of Indians and 
some of Spaniards, given to the cultivation of 
seeds, fruits, and cochineal, and to making coal and 
cutting wood. It abounds in melons and water 
melons much esteemed, and is half a leag ue s. of 
its head settlement. 

XOXUTLA, San Miguel de, a head settle- 
ment of the district of the alcald'ia mayor and 
jurisdiction of Cuernavaca in the same kingdom. 
It contains 316 families of Indians, including 
those of 10 other settlements of its district. In 
its church is venerated an image of Christ cruci- 
fied, which was found by the Indians at the root 
of a thorn, which was plucked up ; eight leagues 
s. of its capital. 

XUALTEGUI, Bay of, on the n. coast of 
the strait of Magellan, on the side of Port An- 
gosto, or Narrow, and opposite the point of San 
Ildefonso. 

XUCUBAY, a river of the province and 
government of Mainas, in the kingdom of Quito. 
It rises in a lake which is in the country or ter- 
ritory of the Mainas Indians ; runs nearly from 
s. to n. and enters the Maranon. 


XUCHALTENGO, a settlement of the head 
settlement of the district of Juquila, and alcald'ia 
mayor of Xicayan in N ueva Espana. It con- 
tains 60 families of Indians, 20 of Mustees and 
Mulattoes, who occupy themselves in the culti- 
vation and trade of cochineal, tobacco, and cot- 
ton, and is 35 leagues n. of its capital. 

XUCHIAPAS, a settlement of the head settle- 
ment of the district of the alcald'ia mayor of Te- 
nango in the same kingdom. It contains 96 
families of Indians. 

XUCHICALCO, a small settlement or ward 
of the head settlement of the district, and alcaldia 
mayor of Tetela de Volcan in the same kingdom; 
a quarter of a league from its capital. 

XUCHIMILCO, Santa tomas de, a settle- 
ment of the head settlement of the town of the 
marquisate, and alcald'ia mayor of Quatro Villas, 
in the same kingdom. It contains 59 families, 
who occupy themselves in cultivating cochineal, 
wheat, maize, pulse, and fruit, in cutting wood 
and making charcoal, in all of which they trade ; 
half a league e., quarter s. c. of its capital. 

XUCHITEPEC, a settlement of the alcald’ia 
mayor of Guajuapa in the same kingdom. It 
contains 50 families of Indians. 

Another settlement, in the same alcaldia mayor 
as the former. It contains 85 families of Indians. 

Another, with the dedicatory title of Santa 
Maria, in the alcaldia mayor of Huamelula; in 
the centre of a valley, fertilized by various 
streams, and which run through the streets of 
the settlement : by these waters the cultivated 
farms of the district are irrigated. It is 14 
leagues from the sea, contains 50 families of In- 
dians, who trade in cochineal, cotton, seeds, and 
fruits, and is five leagues from the settlement of 
Pochutla. 

XUCHITLAN, S. Bartolome de, a settle- 
ment of the head settlement of the district of 
Ixtac, and alcaldia mayor of S. Juan de los Llanos 
in the same kingdom. Inhabited by 190 fami- 
lies of Indians. Amongst the many estates in 
its jurisdiction is found one which was formerly 
the Real of silver mines, called Santiago de 
Temextla, and which is now reduced to a copper 
foundery, this metal being sometimes found 
mixed with the silver ; 10 leagues n. w. of its 
head settlement. 

XULUAPA, a settlement of the head settle- 
ment of the district of Almololoyan, and alcaldia 
mayor of Colima in the same kingdom ; founded 
on the top of an elevated mountain. It is of a 
hot temperature ; contains 48 families of Indians, 

3 g 2 


412 


XUN 


X U X 


occupied in manufacturing mats, cutting wood, 
and making charcoal for the consumption of the 
capital ; six leagues w. of its head settlement. 

XUNGAPEO, a settlement of the head set- 
tlement of the district of Tuxpan and alcaldta 
mayor of Maravatio in the province and bishop- 
ric of Mechoacan. It is of an hot temperature, 
abounding in sugar canes of various kinds, of 
which the inhabitants manufacture much sugar 
and honey ; these consist of 37 families of Spa- 
niards and Mustees , and 223 of Indians. Four 
leagues s. of its head settlement. 

XURULLO, Jorullo, or Juruyo, a vol- 
cano of the province of Mechoacan, and inten- 
dency of Valladolid, in Nueva Espana ; formed 
on St. Michael’s day in the year 1759, in the 
middle of a beautiful, fertile, and pleasant valley, 
which extends three leagues from e. to w. and 
more than eight from n. to s. The Indians gave 
it this name, which, in their idiom, signifies pa- 
radise. 

In this valley once stood a very rich estate, 
belonging to Don Joseph Pimentel, in which 
they manufactured a great quantity of sugar of 
the best quality of any in the kingdom, and not 
far off were two settlements, called La Presenta- 
cion and Aguacana ; but which, on the eruption 
of the volcano, were not only entirely destroyed, 
but exhibit the most deplorable prospect, being- 
nothing but heaps of ashes, with half burnt trunks 
of trees, and the whole ground being full of great 
chasms ; and, moreover, a complete mountain 
being in the place where before all was level 
ground. 

By the skirt of this mountain passes a stream 
which, before, fertilized the valley, and which 
they now call del Salto, since its waters are so 
hot that men or horses passing through it, are in 
danger of being scalded, it being necessary to 
cross this river in going to the copper mines, 
which are worked here on account of govern- 
ment. Six months before this catastrophe took 
place, dreadful subterranean noises were conti- 
nually heard, also earthquakes, which so alarmed 
the people that they had all immediately left the 
territory, but for the persuasions of Father Igna- 
cius Molina, a Jesuit, who was solicited to use 
his influence here, through the aforesaid lord of 
the estate. As, upon the first perception of the 
earthquakes here, the eruption of the volcano of 
Colima ceased, it is thought, notwithstanding 
that the latter place is at the distance of more 
than 70 leagues from hence, that the matter, en- 
tombed in the earth, found a communication 


through the whole distance till it burst out in this 
valley. 

[Xurullo, or, as it is found in the English 
maps, Jorullo, is 30 miles s. from the city of 
Pasquaro, and 55 s. w. by s. from the city of 
Valladolid, in lat. 19° 2' n. and long. 101° 30' an] 

XUXIUCAPA, a settlement of the province 
and alcaldta mayor of Zedales in the kingdom of 
Guatemala. 

XUXUPANGO, a settlement of the head 
settlement of the district of Amatlan and alcaldta 
mayor of Zacatlan in Nueva Espana. Three 
leagues from its head settlement. 

XUXL T I, or Jujuy, S. Salvador de, a city 
of the province and government of Tucuman in 
Peru, founded, in 1580, at the mouth of a ravine 
of more than 30 leagues long. But the Omo- 
huacas Indians, who had some years previously 
embraced the Catholic religion, rebelled, and, by- 
repeated attacks, twice destroyed it ; although it 
was as many times rebuilt by its governors to 
serve as an outwork, and lastly, by Don Francisco 
Arganaraz y Murguia, by order of the governor 
D. Juan Ramirez de Velasco, in the spot where 
it was first founded, which is in an extensive and 
delightful llanura. It is of a hot temperature, 
has a parish with five chapels in the vicinities of 
the city, and in the city itself is another chapel 
with the dedicatory title of S. Roque, the which 
of itself served as a parish until 1766, when the 
city was built ; it has a convent of the religious 
of San Francisco, another of la Merced, and a 
house of residence for the Jesuits. Whenever 
European merchandise was permitted to enter 
Peru, from Buenos Ayres, it was taken in carts as 
far as this city, and from hence on the backs of 
mules, and this porterage was a source of great 
emolument to the inhabitants; but, as this trans- 
fer of goods has much decreased, it follows also 
that the population and wealth of the city has 
declined, the sole trade of the inhabitants being 
that of some seeds, cows, horses, mules, and of a 
small portion of wood. The following curacies 
belong to its district : 

Humahuaca, Cochinoca, Santa Catalina. 

The first has seven chapels ; the second an 
hermitage of Santa Barbara, which is a chapel of 
ease, also two other hermitages in the settlement 
of Casivindo, which are those of la Rinconada, 
and the Rio San Juan; [61 miles n n. e. from 
the city of Salta, and 275 n. from Santiago del 
Estero, in lat. 23° 19' x.J 

Xuxui, a river of this province and govern- 
ment, which rises to the s. w, and near the settle- 


Y A B 


ment of Casivindo, runs e. and turning its course 
to s. e. incorporates itself with the Siancas to 
enter the Berinejo, or Vermejo. It is also called 
de S. Salvador or Rio Grande and Rio Dulce. 
On its shores are many estates of cattle, which 


Y A C 41 :3 

are frequently attacked and destroyed by the 
Abipones and Guaicurus Indians. 

XUZISTLAHUACA, a settlement of the al- 
caldia mayor of Guajuapa in Nueva Espana. It 
contains 108 families of Indians. 


Y. 


YABAA, a head settlement of the district of 
the alcaldia mayor of Villalta in Nueva Espana. 
It is of a hot temperature, contains 90 families 
of Indians, and is two leagues s. of its capital. 

[YABAQUE, or Inaque, two of the Lucayas, 
or Bahama Islands, called great and little Inaque, 
situate about 77 miles s. e. of Crooked Islands, in 
about lat. 21° 10' n. and long. 73° 20 / w.~\ 

YABARI, Yavari, Yahuari, [called also 
Javary], a large and abundant river of the 
kingdom of Peru, which rises in the mountains of 
the Conomamas to the e. of the river Paro, or 
Ucayalie, runs many leagues nearly to the n. 
through the territory of the Plateros Indians, in 
the province of the Amazonas, and then turns its 
course to the n. e. through the province of the 
Paguanas Indians, [and enters the Maranon, or 
Amazonas, opposite and close to the town of Ta- 
batinga.] The Portuguese have this river as a 
divisional line between their dominions and those 
of the crown of Spain ; and near its mouth they 
have built a fort, with the name of San Pedro de 
Yahuari. [In lat. 4° 7' s.] 

YABA.ZA, a river of the province and govern- 
ment of Darien and kingdom of Tierra Firme ; 
which rises in the mountains in the interior of the 
province, runs from e. to w. and enters the grand 
river Chucunaqui. 

YABEO, a settlement of the head settlement 
of the district of Yahuyve and alcaldia mayor of 
Villalta in Nueva Espana. It contains 147 
families of Indians, and is 21 leagues e. of its 
capital. 

YABEVIRI, a river of the province and 
government of Chaco in Peru, which rises in the 
mountains near the round mountain Yoivide, 
runs from n. w. to s. e. and enters the Paraguay. 
It is also called Rio Confuso and de los Fogones. 

Yabeviri, another river, in the province and 
government of Paraguay, which runs s. 


YABI, a settlement of the province and corre- 
gimiento of Chicas and Tarija in Peru, belonging 
to the district of the second. 

YABOGE, a river of the province and govern- 
ment of Louisiana in N. America, which runs s. 
and then turning w. enters the sea in the bay of 
San Luis. 

YACA, a river of the province and govern- 
ment of Paraguay, which runs e. and enters the 
Parana. 

Yaca, another river, in the province and 
government of Paraguay, which runs e. and enters 
the Parana. 

Yaca, another, a small river in the province 
and government of Popayan and Nuevo Reyno 
de Granada, which enters the Putumayo, just 
after its rising. 

[YACA-GQAZA, a parish of the province 
and government of Paraguay ; in lat. 25° 58 / 2" 
s. and long. 56° 32' 19" w .] 

YACAN, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Tarma in Peru, annexed to the 
curacy ofHuariaco. 

YACANTO, mountains of, in the province and 
corregimiento of Cuyo, of the kingdom of Chile ; 
they are e. of the city of Loyala, and run s. s. e. 
on the shore of the river Quinto, following the 
course of the same. 

YACARE, a river of the province and govern- 
ment of Buenos Ayres, which runs s. ana enters 
the Uruguay. This river, which is in the pro- 
vince and country of las Amazonas, in the terri- 
tory and part possessed by the Portuguese, runs 
from n. to s. and enters the river Negro. 

YACARE GUZAU, a river of the province and 
government of Buenos Ayres, which runs w. and 
enters the Parana, between the rivers Tuquara 
and Guasaiquirara. 

YACARE-MINI, a river of the same province 
and government as the former. It runs also zo. 


414 


Y A C 


Y A G 


parallel to the former river, and enters likewise 
into the Parana, between the rivers Tuquaras 
and Cavayu. 

YACARETIS, or Yacaretes, a barbarous 
nation of Indians who inhabit the woods to the n. 
of the river Maraiion. It is but little known, 
and its territory is said to be the famed land of 
Dorado, which has given rise to so many fables 
and inventions. 

YACAYOBI, a river of the province and 
government of Paraguay, which rises in the 
sierras of Tape, runs s. s. w. and enters the Pica- 
zura. 

YACA1IIQUARAS, a barbarous nation of In- 
dians, who inhabit the mountains n. of the Mara- 
non, near the Putumayo : on the e. side nothing 
is known of them save their name. 

YACHILA, S Martin de, a settlement of the 
head settlement of the district of Cuilapa and 
alcaldia mayor of Quatro Villas in Nueva Espana. 
It contains 78 families of Indians, and eight of 
free Mulattoes, all of whom are employed in cul- 
tivating and trading in cochineal, seeds, fruits, 
coal and wood, which they cut on the mountains. 
Eleven leagues s. of its head settlement. 

YACO, a settlement of the province and eorre- 
gimiento of Sicasica in Peru. 

YACOCHI, a settlement of the head settle- 
ment of the district and alcaldia mayor of Villalta 
in Nueva Espana. It contains 35 families of 
Indians, and is nine leagues e. of its capital. 

YACOPI, a settlement of the jurisdiction of 
Muzo, and corregimiento of Tunja in the Nuevo 
Reyno de Granada. It is of a hot temperature, 
very small and poor, its inhabitants maintaining 
themselves in cultivating cotton, maize, yucas and 
plantains. 

Yacopi, another settlement, in the jurisdiction 
of the city of La Palma, in the same kingdom : 
annexed to the curacy of the settlement of Gua- 
chipai. It is also small, of a hot temperature, 
and very poor and reduced, yielding the same 
fruits as the former. 

YACSANGA, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Chancay in Peru ; annexed to 
the curacy of the settlement of Paccho. 

YACUAPIRI, a river of the province and 
county of Las Amazonas, in the part possessed 
by the Portuguese. It runs n. n. w. and enters 
the Madera. 

YACUI, a small river of the province and 
government of Buenos Ayres, which runs w. and 
enters the Uruguay between the Braquaenda 
and the San Ignacio. 

Yacui, another, also small, of the province 


and government of Paraguay, which runs s. s. e. 
and enters the Ucay. 

YACUMA. See Santa Ana. 

YACUMARE, a settlement of the jurisdiction 
of Pamplona, in the N uevo Reyno de Granada ; 
situate at a small distance s. of the city of La 
Palma. 

YACUMBE, a settlement of the province and 
government of Maracaibo, in the same kingdom 
as the former ; situate near to the s. s. e. of the 
city of Tucuyo. 

YAEE, a head settlement of the district of 
the alcaldia mayor of Villalta in Nueva Espana. 
It is of a hot temperature, contains 143 families 
of Lapotecos Indians, and is nine leagues w. of its 
capital. 

[YADKIN, a considerable river ofN. Carolina, 
which rises in the Alleghany Mountains, running 
e. about 55 miles, then turning to the s. s. e. 
passes the Narrows, a few miles above Rocky 
River ; thence directing its course through Mont- 
gomery and Anson Counties, enters S. Carolina. 
It is about 400 yards broad where it passes 
Salisbury, but it is reduced between two hills, 
about 25 miles to the s. of that town, to the 
width of 80 or 100 feet. For two miles it is 
narrow and rapid, but the most narrow and 
rapid part is not above half a mile in length. In 
this narrow part shad are caught in the spring 
of the year, by hoop nets, in the eddies, as fast as 
the strongest men are able to throw them out. 
Perhaps there is not in the United States a more 
eligible situation for a large manufacturing town. 
Boats with 40 or 50 hogsheads pass easily from 
these Rapids to Georgetown. The late war, by 
which N. Carolina was greatly convulsed, put a 
stop to several iron-works. At present there are 
four or five furnaces in the state that are in blast, 
and a proportionable number of forges. There 
is one in Guildford County, one in Surry, and one 
in Wilkes, all on the Yadkin. From the mouth 
of Rocky River to the ocean, the stream assumes 
the name of Great Pedee.] 

YAGABILA, a head settlement of the district 
of the alcaldia mayor of Villalta, in Nueva 
Espana. It is of a cold temperature, contains 76 
families of Indians, who in their district gather 
much cochineal, and is 12 leagues w. of its capi- 
tal. 

YAGAYO, a head settlement of the district of 
the same alcaldia mayor and kingdom as the 
former, also of a cold temperature. It contains 
108 families of Indians, and is 10 leagues w. of its 
capital. 

YAGO, S. a settlement of the province and 


Y A G 


Y A G 


4if&gt; 


government of Mainas, in the kingdom of Quito ; 
situate on the shore of the Maranon, near the 
capital of S. Francisco de Borja, and to the w. of 
the same. 

[Yago, S. a handsome and considerable town 
ofS. America, capital of Chile. See Santiago.] 

[YaGOj S. DE LOS CABELLEROS, Ol’ St. 
James’s, an ancient town on the n. side of St. 
Domingo. See Santiago.] 

[Yago, S. de la Vega, or Spanish Town, 
the capital of the island of Jamaica ; situate in 
Middlesex County. See Santiago.] 

[Yago, S. de Cuba, a town on the 5. coast of 
the island of Cuba. See Santiago.] 

[Yago, S. the same as Santiago, which see.] 

YAGUACHE, a district of the province and 
government of Guayaquil in the kingdom of 
Quito ; one of the seven which compose this pro- 
vince. It is an extensive llanura of 12 leagues in 
length, composed of lands which in the winter 
time are covered with water, from the excessive 
swelling of the rivers, though in the summer 
time they are seen covered with flowers and 
fruits. It is bounded by the provinces of Rio- 
bamba and Alausi, by the river of this name ; it 
produces salt, rice, fish, and some cattle, and 
with these it carries on a trade, as aEo with trees 
of quachapeli , yellow and red oak, and wood of 
maria , for masts of ships, the oil of which con- 
sists of a gum distilling from it, and so much 
celebrated for its medicinal qualities. In this 
district the wild canes grow to the height of 50 
feet, being six inches thick ; and of these are 
made the flooring and roofs of houses ; and there 
are also some canes of a different nature, being- 
one geometrical foot from knot to knot, and in 
which is found deposited, at the full of the moon, 
some very fresh, pleasant and salutary water, 
affording to the weary traveller a refreshing- 
drink, never known to injure. The palms or 
coco-nut trees are very common, but peculiar for 
their height and for the abundance of their fruit, 
since each tree throws out a branch monthly, con- 
taining from 12 to 16 coco nuts, of the size of a 
common melon, with the bark of which they 
caulk vessels ; making drinking cups for domestic 
uses of the shells, and of the water which is 
within them, a delightful and wholesome drink, 
also of the kernel, which is whiter than an almond, 
a much esteemed conserve. In the mountains 
which they call Belubulu, are abundance of hogs, 
zaliinos , and wild boars, and other animals of the 
chase, which afford their flesh as food, whilst 
their skins are employed for different purposes. 

This district, the jurisdiction of which begins 


from the foot of the mountains which divide, to 
the s. the government of Guayaquil from the 
province of Cuenca, and to the e. the same from 
that of Chimbo, comprehends part of the antient 
province of los Guancavelicas, a nation distin- 
guished ariiongst all others, as wanting the two 
middle upper teeth, which they have been in the 
habit of extricating from time immemorial, and 
which circumstance is signified by their name ; 
moreover, it is this nation which in the most 
pointed manner refute the general imputation 
given to Indians by certain philosophers; namely, 
that because they inhabited a hot climate, they 
must necessarily be weak and innervated. These 
Indians, although they have been but little under 
the yoke of the Incas, and still less benefited by 
their instruction, have, of themselves, maintained 
a regular government ; nor have their rustic and 
unsophisticated habits prevented them from har- 
bouring sentiments the most generous, from per- 
forming actions the most noble ; nor have they, 
because brought up under the torrid zone, been 
wanting in feats of valour. They are divided 
into many numerous tribes, with their different 
caciques ; and formed a republican government, 
maintaining a continual warfare with those pro- 
vinces the most renowned in arms ; such being 
the provinces of los Canares and Purhuayes. 
They received the Spaniards by a peaceable con- 
vention of their caciques , and with a dignified 
generosity ; and not only did they permit them to 
found the city of Guayaquil, but even lent them 
their assistance in the undertaking. Again, when 
the Spaniards had taken away from them their 
gold, they bore patiently with the wrong ; but, 
when their women were taken from them, their 
resentment could no longer be confined, but they 
butchered with knives whomsoever they could 
catch, and destroyed the city which was latety 
founded ; and, resolving no longer to be on amica- 
ble terms with their new guests, they maintained 
the war with such constancy as to destroy all the 
people that were sent from Lima and Quito. At 
length, finding themselves triumphant, they made 
the most liberal treaties of peace, and it was 
ultimately agreed, amongst various other articles, 
that the Spaniards should take their wives from 
their own nation, and leave their (the Indian) 
women unmolested ; and, these articles being 
ratified, they have ever since remained tranquil 
and obedient. But the plague which visited this 
nation in 1589, almost entirely destroyed it ; and 
nothing of it was in fact left, save some few indi- 
viduals who were scattered through the woods 
and the mountains. The principal or head settle- 


416 


Y A G 


Y A 1 1 


ment is of the same name, and the rest of the 
population is reduced to two other settlements, 
which are Alonche and Guafa. 

The principal settlement, with the dedicatory 
title of San Jacinto, was formerly very numerous, 
but abandoned by the greater part of its inhabi- 
tants, from the river, on the shore of which it 
stood, having naturally changed its course to a 
league’s distance ; and this having caused a change 
not only of the pastures but of the custom-houses, 
which are there called Bodegas, and which were 
there established. In its church is venerated the 
beautiful painting or likeness of S. Jacinthus 
Dominican, which has kept for 158 years, and 
looks as though it were not more than a day old. 
This, as being the representation of the patron 
saint, is held in particular devotion ; and, in 
times of danger and affliction, many are the 
vows, pilgrimages, and nine days prayers which 
are offered up to it by a vast concourse of people 
from all parts ; though most particularly on the 
festival of the saint, which is the 15th of August. 
This settlement produces very much cotton ; 
[and is 13 miles n. e. from the capital Guayaquil, 
but by the course of the river it is about 30 
miles.] 

YAGUAJES, S. Christoval de, a settle- 
ment of the missions of the Sucumbios Indians, 
which was under the charge of the J esuits, in the 
province and government of Quixos and Macas, 
of the kingdom of Quito. 

YAGUALICA, a head settlement of the dis- 
trict of the alcaldia mayor of Cuquio in Nueva 
Espana. 

YAGUARA, a river of the province and 
government of Popayan in the Nuevo Reyno de 
Granada. It rises at the foot of the paramo of 
Guanacas, runs from w.to e. in a serpentine course, 
and enters the grand river Magdalena above the 
city of la Plata. 

YAGUARAIBA, a small river of the province 
and captainship of San Vincente, in the kingdom 
of Brasil. It runs n. n. w. and enters the Parana- 
pane. 

YAGUARAPARO, a settlement of the pro- 
vince and government of Curuana in the kingdom 
of Nueva Andalucia, in the serrania. It is one 
of the missions held there by the Aragonese 
Capuchin fathers. 

YAGUARATU, a river of the same province 
and captainship as the former. It runs to the 
same rhumb, and has the same course. 

YAGUARCOCHA, a large and very deep 
lake of the province and corregimiento of Ibarra, 
in the kingdom of Quito. Its length is a league 


and a half from n. e. to s. e. and its name, signi- 
fying lake of blood, arises from the circumstance 
of Huaynacap having caused to flow into it, the 
blood of30,000 Indians of the rebellious Cahares, 
guillotined at his command, and whom he had 
conquered in a battle when he went to subject 
them. From this lake rises a small river, which 
enters the Taquando, and its shores are full of 
rushes and reeds of encas. One league from the 
town of Ibarra : in lat. 23° n. 

Yaguarcocha, a settlement in the same pro- 
vince and kingdom : on the shore of the former 
lake. 

YAGUARI, a river of the province and go- 
vernment of Paraguay, which runs s. s. w. and 
enters the Picazuru. 

YAGUARICARA,a small river of the province 
and captainship of Para in Brasil, called also de 
Gentiles. It rises in the territory of the Antipi- 
yus Indians, runs n. n. w . and enters the Topayos 
opposite the settlement of San Ignacio. 

YAGUARON, a settlement of the province 
and government of Paraguay ; situate near the 
river of this name. There is a fort to defend the 
entrance of the said river. 

[Yaguaron, another settlement of Indians, 
of the province and government of Paraguay ; 
situate in a plain on the road from Asuncion to 
Villa Rica, and about 25 miles s. e. from the 
former ; in lat. 25° 33' 20" s. and long. 57° 18' 
14 " ©.] 

YAGUARSUNGU, or Yaguarsongo. See 
Pacamores. 

YAGUAS, a barbarous nation of Indians, in- 
habiting the woods to the n. of the river Maranon. 
Some of them have been reduced to a civilized 
life by the Jesuits in the settlement of San Ignacio 
de Pevas. 

YAGUERA, a settlement of the government 
and province of Neiva in the Nuevo Reyno de 
Granada ; annexed to the curacy of its capital. 
It is of an hot temperature, abounding in gold 
mines, vegetable productions and cattle. 

YAGUI, a small river of the province and 
government of Paraguay, which runs e. and en- 
ters the Parana between the Guanapay and the 
Quirapuy. 

YAHU, San Elias de, a settlement of the 
province and country of las Amazonas, in the 
territory possessed by the Portuguese ; on the 
shore of the river Negro. 

YAHUALICA, a district and alcaldia mayor of 
the kingdom of Nueva Espana. It it is the 
boundary dividing the archbishoprick of Mexico 
from that of Mechoacan, in the provinces of 


Y A L 


YAM 


417 


Guasteca. It is of a mild temperature, abound- 
ing in wheat, maize, French-beans, and other 
seeds, which are the branches of its commerce, 
not to mention cotton, which is the principal in 
which the inhabitants are concerned, and which, 
through the stuffs they manufacture, yield great 
profit. Its population consists of four principal 
or head settlements, on which are dependent as 
many wards, and in these are many estates and 
cultivated farms, where a number of hands are 
employed in the cultivation of the seeds above 
enumerated. In the same also are many heads 
of cattle, large and small, in which an equal trade 
is carried oq, 

The capital is the settlement of the same name, 
of a mild temperature. It contains 80 families 
of Indians, and 60 of Spaniards, Mustees , and 
Mulattoes ; to the n. e. of Mexico. The other 
settlements are : 

Ifuatzalingo, Guautla, Geapa. 

YAHUIBE, Santa Maria de, a head settle- 
ment of the alcaldia mayor of Villalta, in the same 
kingdom as the former. It is of a cold tempera- 
ture, contains 220 families of Indians, and is 15 
leagues e. of its capital. 

YAHUYO, a head settlement of the same 
alcaldia mayor as the former. It is of a hot tem- 
perature, contains 147 families of Indians, and is 
14 leagues between w. and n. of its capital. 

YALAH, Punta de, a point on the s. coast of 
the island Jamaica, between Point Beacon and 
Villa Franca. 

YALAH UI, a head settlement of the district 
of the same alcaldia mayor as the former. It is 
of a cold temperature, contains 44 families of 
Indians, and is three leagues n. of its capital. 

YALALA, a head settlement of the district of 
the same alcaldia mayor as the former. It is of a 
hot temperature, contains 435 families of Indians 
including those of the wards of its district, and is 
six leagues s. of its capital. 

YALARO, a river of the province and country 
of las Amazonas. It is a grand arm of the 
Madera, which returns to enter the same river in 
one of the many large flood pools belonging 
to it. 

YALATLACO, Ascencion de, a head settle- 
ment of the district of the alcaldia mayor of 
Metepec, in Nueva Espana. It contains 277 
families of Indians. 

[YALE College. See New Haven.] 

YALIGUE L ake, on the coast of the province 
and corregimiento of Colchagua, and kingdom of 
Chile. In it is found much salt. 

VOL. v. 


[YAMACRAW, the ancient Indian name of 
the spot where Savannah, in Georgia, is erected. 
Also the name of a tribe of the Creek Indians.] 

YAMARI,a river of the province and country 
of las Amazonas; which rises in the territory of 
the Oreguatus Indians, runs to n. and, inclining 
to n. w., enters the Madera. 

YAMBAJALCA, a settlement of the province 
and corregimiento of Chachapoyas in Peru ; an- 
nexed to the curacy of the settlement of Olieros. 

YAMBE, a settlement of the province and go- 
vernment of Esmeraldas, in the kingdom of Quito. 

YAMBRASBAMBA, a settlement of the pro- 
vince and corregimiento of Chachapoyas in Peru. 

YAMENA, or Yamane, a settlement of the 
province and government of San Juan de los 
Llanos in the N uevo Reyno de Granada. It is 
very poor, and was a reduccion of the missions 
held there by the Jesuits. It is at present under 
the charge of the religious of San Francisco, and 
is annexed to the curacy of its capital, [S. Juan 
de los Llanos, and from which it is only about six 
miles to the nd\ 

YAMEOS, San Juan Francisco Regis de 
los, a settlement of the province and govern- 
ment of Mainas in the kingdom of Quito. It is 
a reduccion of the missions which were held there 
by the Jesuits, and is the capital of various other 
settlements of Indians of this nation, from whom 
it took its name. It has on its w. side the river 
Tigre, and on the e. the nation of the Omaguas ; 
it stands on the shore of the Maranon, in lat. 
4° 26' IF' s. 

YAMOR, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Caxatambo in Peru ; annexed to 
the curacy of the settlement of Caxacay. 

YAMORIBA, a settlement of the missions 
which were held by the Jesuits in the province of 
Topia and kingdom of Nueva Vizcaya; situate 
in the middle of the sierra of Topia, and on the 
shore of the river Piastla. 

YAMPARAES, a province and corregimiento 
of Peru ; bounded n. by the province of Misque, 
n. e. and e. by that of Tornina, s. e. by that ofPo- 
mabamba, s. and s. e. by that of Porco, the river 
Pilcomayo running between, and w. and n. w. by 
that of Chayanta, or Charcas. Its temperature is, 
for the most part, cold, and consequently its pro- 
ductions are papas , barley, some wheat, maize, 
and pulse, which serve for the supply and con- 
sumption of the city of la Plata and town of 
Potosi. In the heights are bred some cattle, and 
its mines of gold and silver are but very few ; 
although it has an extremely abundant mine of 
3 h 


418 


YAM 


Y A N 


salt. It is watered by two considerable rivers, 
which are Pilcomayo and Cachimayo ; and these, 
united with others which flow down from various 
provinces, enter the lands of Chaco, inhabited by 
infidel Indians The former of these rivers comes 
from the province of Porco, has over it a stone 
bridge of one arch, over which you pass to that 
province, to la Plata, and to Potosi ; it then 
divides this province from that of Mizque by the 
n. after having- collected the waters of the river 
Cochabamba, and of another called Rio Grande, 
the which, after surrounding the e. part of the 
province of Santa Cruz, incorporate themselves 
with the Marmore, and run to enter the Maranon. 
In these rivers they catch some fish, such as olive 
fish, dorados , bagres ; and in some of the neigh- 
bouring vallies, which are of a warm tempera- 
ture, and naturally fertile, are cultivated all 
kinds of garden herbs and fruit-trees ; in one of 
these also, they grow vines, although in small 
number ; and, in others, sugar canes. Moreover, 
towards these parts are woods, from which they 
procure timber for building and other uses ; and, 
amongst the l’est, are no few cedars. 

In this province there are also wild beasts, trou- 
blesome and poisonous insects, and a multitude of 
birds, and, among others, one which is called 
carpintero (carpenter) which, in order to secure 
its young ones, forms its nest by making a hole 
with its beak in the trunk of a tree ; again, cer- 
tain bees depositing their honey in the like cavi- 
ties, afford a ready repast to the former birds. 
Here are also other birds which are called hor~ 
news (oven birds), since they form, with ex- 
treme pains, some small dwellings of clay in the 
form of an oven, on the loftiest trees ; but of 
such hardness, that though they should fall to the 
ground they are not to be broken. 

The fertility of these vallies, and the advan- 
tages of their fruits, are outweighed by the in- 
conveniences they experience from sicknes, occa- 
sioned by the damps, especially in the district of 
the curacies of Cupavilque, Mojotoro and Gua- 
nipaya, where, through the quality of the territory, 
air and w ater, the greater part of the natives are 
deformed, humpbacked, hard of hearing, squin- 
ters, and have ugly tumors on the throat, which 
they call cotos ; there are, also, some, in the 
same parts, equally deformed in mind. The 
number of all should amount to 7000 ; and they 
live, for the most part, dispersed in the estates. 
Its capital is the settlement of the same name, 
'30 miles n. zi\ of Chusiqusaca, or La Plata.] 
ts corregidior had a repartimiento of 16,570 dol- 
lars, and it payed an alcavala of 132 yearly. 


YANA, a river of the province and govern- 
ment of Mainas in the kingdom of Quito. It 
rises e. of the settlement of Chamianos, runs 
and, forming a semicircle, pursues its course e. 
with different windings, to a vast distance ; and 
ultimately turns to n. n. e. and enters the Mara- 
non, changing its name to that of Samiria. 

YANABAYA, a settlement ofthe province and 
corregimiento of Larecaxa in Peru ; annexed to 
the curacy of the settlement of Ayata. 

YANABINI, a river of the province and coun- 
try of las Amazonas, in the Portuguese posses- 
sions. It runs from e. to w. and enters the Parime 
between the Yatapi and Demeveni. 

YANAC, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Castro Virreyna in Peru ; an- 
nexed to the curacy of the settlement of Arma. 

YANACA, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Aimaraez in Peru. 

YANACACHE, a settlement of the province 
and corregimiento ofSicasica in Peru. 

YANACOA, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Canes and Canches in the same 
kingdom. 

YANACUNAS, or Yanaconas, a nation of 
Indians, who, when conquered, pay an annual 
tribute to the king of 10 dollars each. These 
Indians, in the kingdom of Chile, are destined to 
the service of the Spaniards, who, however, are 
obliged to requite their services with w ages of 50 
dollars each yearly. They begin to pay tribute 
at the age of 16, and are indemnified from it 
w hen arrived at the age of 50 years. From this 
word Yanacuna, w hich in the Quechuan language 
signifies servant, has arisen the custom of calling 
by the same title all Indians who are acting in 
that capacity, making general the term which be- 
longed to this nation specifically. 

YANAHUARA, an antient province of Peru 
to the w. of Cuzco ; bounded by the province of 
Aimaraez. It was conquered and united to the 
empire by Capac Yupauqui. There is also a 
settlement of this name, in the province and 
corregimiento of Arequipa. 

YANAPAMPA, a settlement of the province 
and corregimiento of Quispicanchi in Peru : an- 
nexed to the curacy of the settlement of San- 
garara. 

YANAQUIJUYA, a settlement of the pro- 
vince and corregimiento of Condesuyos de Are- 
quipa in Peru ; annexed to the curacy of the set- 
tlement of Andaray. 

YANAS, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Conchucos in Peru ; annexed to 
the curacy of Uco. 


Y AN 


Y A N 


419 


YANASSA, a river of the province and go- 
vernment of Quixos and Macas in the kingdom 
of Quito, and of the district of the second. It 
rises in the sierra, which divides this district from 
the province of Mainas ; runs nearly from n. to 
s. through the country of the Xibaros, and enters 
the Morona by the no. part; in lat. 3° 17' s. 

YANAURA, an island of the N. Sea ; situate 
at the principal mouth of the river Maranon, be- 
tween the coast of Guayana and the great island 
of Joanes or Marajo. Mr. Beilin, engineer to 
the King of France, in his description of Guayana, 
calls it Yanaucu. 

YANA-YACU, a small river of the province 
and government of Mainas in the kingdom of 
Quito, which runs to n. n. w. and enters the Yana, 
near its source. 

YANA-URCU, a very lofty mountain of the 
province and corregimiento of Otavalo in the 
kingdom of Quito, in the n. part. Its top is 
covered with snow the whole year round, and 
from it rise many streams and fountains, and, in 
the n. w. part, the river of Santiago, which, at its 
source, is called Cayapas ; in lat. 28° n. 

YANCAO, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Chancay, in Peru ; annexed to 
the curacy of the settlement of Iguari. 

YANERI, a head settlement of the district 
of the alcaldia mayor of Villalta, in Nueva Es- 
paua. It is of a cold temperature, contains 98 
Indian families, and is 13 leagues no. of its ca- 
pital. 

YANGA, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Canta, in Peru ; annexed to the 
curacy of the settlement of Arahuay. 

YANGUA, a small river of the province and 
government of Paraguay, which runs w. and en- 
ters the Parana, near the settlement of Corpus 
Christi. 

YANGUITLAN, a head settlement of the 
district of the alcaldia mayor of Tepozcolula, in 
Nueva Espafia. It was formerly a separate juris- 
diction and alcaldia mayor ; contains a convent 
of the religious of St. Domingo, to whom the 
cure belongs, the said convent being entirely of 
wrought stone, and built upon arches, and well 
worthy of the admiration of the most skilled in 
similar subjects. In short it is the best edifice 
in all that kingdom : it was begun by Don Fran- 
cisco de las t asas, kinsman to the noted Herman 
Cortes, whilst governor of this settlement, and 
was finished by his son Don Gonzalo, the build- 
ing of it having taken a period of 25 years ; 
and during this time there being employed in it 
600 Indians, who were exchanged for a fresh set 


every week. The master, or architect, was one 
of those who had been employed in the building 
of San Lorenzo el Real, and was sent hither by 
Philip II. T he settlement is situate in a beau- 
tiful valley, surrounded by mountains. It enjoys 
a pure air, a fine atmosphere, a benign tempe- 
rature, and delicious waters. It was, m the time 
of the Indian gentilism, a large town, and con- 
tained 10,000 inhabitants ; but these are now re- 
duced, including those of the wards of its dis- 
trict, to 900 families of Mistecos Indians, Mus- 
tees , and Mulattoes ; all of whom are employed 
in the cultivation and trade of cochineal and 
woven cotton stuffs : 52 leagues e. of Mexico. 

YANI, a settlement of the province and cor- 
regimiento of Cochabamba, in Peru. 

[YANKTON S ANNAH, Indians of N. Ame- 
rica. They are the best disposed Siouz who 
rove on the banks of the Missouri, but they will 
not suffer any trader to ascend the river, if they 
can possibly avoid it : they have, heretofore, in- 
variably arrested the progress of all they have 
met with, and generally compelled them to trade 
at the prices, nearly, which they themselves 
think proper to fix on their merchandise : they 
seldom commit any further acts of violence on 
the whites. They sometimes visit the river De- 
moin, where a partial trade has been carried on 
with them, for a few years past, by a Mr. Craw- 
ford. Their trade, if well regulated, might be ren- 
dered extremely valuable. Their country is a 
very fertile one ; it consists of a mixture of 
woodlands and prairies. The land bordering on 
the Missouri is principally plains with but little 
timber.] 

[Yanktons of the north, Indians of N. 
America, who are in a small degree traders, but 
for the most part independent of the trade of 
the Missouri. They have rather furnished them- 
selves with the means, not only of distressing and 
plundering the traders of the Missouri, but also 
of plundering and massacreing the defenceless 
savages of the Missouri, from the mouth of the 
river Plata to the Minetares, and no. to the rocky 
mountains. The country these people inhabit is 
almost one entire plain, without timber : it is 
extremely level ; the soil fertile, and generally 
well watered.] 

YANQUE, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Chumbivilcas, in Peru ; an* 
nexed to the curacy of the settlement of Col- 
quemarca. 

YANQUI, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Collahuas, in Peru. It was the 
capital before the discovery of the mine of Cail- 
3 h 2 


420 


YAQ Y A R 


loma, when the former was removed to this lat- 
ter place. It is now very poor, and redueed. 

YANTA, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Canta, in Peru ; annexed to the 
curacy of the settlement of Pomacocha. 

YANTALO, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Chachapoyas, in Peru ; annexed 
to the curacy of the settlement of Sorita. 

YAPA, a settlement of the same province and 
kingdom as the former; annexed to the curacy 
of the settlement of Yambrasbamba. 

YAPE, a river of the province and govern- 
ment of Darien, in the kingdom of Tierra Firme. 
It rises in the mountains of the interior, runs 
from e. to w. and enters the Grande Tuira. 

YAPEL, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Santiago, in the kingdom of 
Chile, celebrated for its rich gold mine, from 
which great wealth has been extracted. 

"YAPERAES. SeeApERUES.] 

YAPEYA, a settlement of Indians of the 
province and government of Buenos Ayres, 
situate on the to. bank of the Uruguay, in iat. 
29° 31 7 47 // s. and long. 56° 38 x 2S" w.] 

YAPEYU, a large settlement of the province 
and government of Paraguay, called also de los 
Santos Reyes. It is a reduction made by the 
missions of the Jesuits, and is situate on the w. 
shore of the river Uruguay, and on the n. side 
of the settlement of Aguapey. The Infidel In- 
dians, united with Mamelucos of San Pablo, 
pillaged and destroyed it in 1701, but the Neo- 
fites, assisted by 200 Spaniards, pursued the 
aggressors, overtook them, and gave them bat- 
tle, and succeeded in putting them all to the 
sword, returning with the spoils to rebuild the 
settlement : [in lat. 29° 28 / 6" s.] 

YAPITINGO, a river of the province and 
captainship of Ilheos, in Brasil. It rises near 
the coast, runs e. and enters the sea in the Bay. 

Yapitingo, a settlement of the same pro- 
vince and kingdom as the former river; and on 
the shore and at the mouth of the same. 
YAPIZLAGA. See Manso. 

YAPO, a river of the province and captain- 
ship of San Vincente, in Brasil ; which runs n. 
and enters the Parana-pane. 

YAPOCO. See Oyacopo. 

YAPUI, a very rapid river, w hich flows down 
from the mountains of the Chiquitos Indians, in 
Peru, and enters by the w. side into the Para- 
guay. 

YAQUANQUER, a settlement of the pro- 
vince and government of Pastos, in the king- 
dom of Quito ; of the jurisdiction of the corre- 


gimiento of the district of las Cinco le guas de la 
Capital. 

YAQUARI, a small river of the province of ' 
Guaira, in the government of Paraguay. It 
runs w. and enters the Parana. 

YAQUE, a large and abundant river of St. 
Domingo, which rises in the mountains of Ci- 
boo ; runs n . ; and, on passing opposite the city 
of Santiago, turns its course to w. then collect- 
ing the waters of all those which flow to the sea, 
disembogues itself in a very abundant stream on 
the n. coast, forming a great mouth on the side 
of the Point of Monte Christi. \ 

[Yaque, Port St. at the mouth of the above 
river, vulgarly called Old Port, a small anchor- 
ing place on the n. side of the island of St. Do- 
mingo; situate between Padrepin on the w. and 
Macoris Point on the e.] 

YAQUEACU, a river of the province and 
captainship of Pernambuco, in Brasil ; which 
rises near the coast, runs s. s. e. and enters the 
sea between the San Miguel and the Iquen. 

YAQUEIIIRI, a river of the province and 
country of las Amazonas, in the Portuguese pos- 
sessions. It runs from n. to s. and enters the 
Parima or river Branco. 

YAQUESON, Port, on the n. coast of the 
island of St. Domingo, within the Bay of Bar- 
baeoas. 

YAQUIA, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Conchucos, in Peru ; annexed 
to the curacy of the capital Huary del Rey. 

YAQUIN, or Acquin, a settlement and pa- 
rish of the French in their possessions in the 
island of St. Domingo, at the to. point, near the 
s. coast, and the isle of its name. 

YAQUINI, a small river of the province and 
government of Paraguay ; which runs zo. and 
enters the Parana, between the Teidi and the 
Piracabi. 

YAQUITUA, a settlement of the province 
and alcaldia mayor of Chiapa, in the kingdom of 
Guatemala ; belonging to the district and divi- 
sion of Coinitlan. 

YARACES. See Orejones. 

YARAPAZI, a small river of the province 
and country of las Amazonas, in the Portuguese 
possessions. It rises in the territory of the 
Aicuares Indians, between the river Maranon 
and the Caqueta, runs follow ing the same course 
as the former, and enters the same just before 
one of the arms, into which the second river 
above mentioned is divided. 

YARAQUI, a river of the province and go- 
vernment of Venezuela, in the Nuevo Reyno de 


YAR 


Y A S 


421 


Granada. It rises in the sierra to the e. of Bara- 
quisimieto, follows its course to this rhumb , and 
enters the sea in the bay of Burburata, between 
port Cabello and the point of Chiribiche. [The 
Yaraqui rises 40 leagues s. to the Aeroa, and 
does not become navigable until within two 
leagues of S. Felipe, where the produce of the 
valley of S. Felipe is shipped, together with that 
of the plain of Baraquisimieto, and from thence 
conveyed to Porto Cabello, as the nearest 
port.] 

YARAUCA, an arm of the river Maranon, 
which enters by the s. side, and forms the island 
of Guaricura. 

YARDSLEY’S FERR Y, on Delaware river, is 
three miles n. w. of Trenton, in New Jersey, and 
five below M‘Crankey’s Ferry. 

YARE, a settlement of the province and go- 
vernment of Venezuela, in the Nuevo Reyno de 
Granada ; situate on the shore of the river T uy, 
near the settlement of Ocumare. 

YARI, a river of the province and country of 
las Amazonas, in the territory of the Portuguese. 
It runs s. e. and enters the Maranon opposite the 
settlement of Curupa, in lat. 49' s. 

Yari, a settlement of the Portuguese, in the 
same province as the former. 

YARMARCA, a settlement of the province 
and eorregimienlo of Chachapoyas in Peru, where 
there is a mine of rock salt, of excellent qua- 
lity, and from whence much of this article is 
extracted. 

YARMOUTH, a city of the county of Barn- 
stable, in the colony of Plymouth, of the United 
States ; situate in the s. part of the peninsula, 
formed by the bay of Cape Cod ; five miles s. of 
Barnstable. 

Yarmouth, another city, in the county of 
York, of the colony of Hampshire, on the coast 
of Casco Bay, and at the mouth of Royal River. 
It is small, and stands midway between Bruns- 
wick and Falmouth. 

[Yarmouth, a township in the County of 
Middlesex, Upper Canada, lying to the w. of 
Malahide, and fronts lake Erie.] 

Yarmouth, a fort, built by the English in 
the province of Connecticut one of those of New 
England, of the United States; situate on the 
coast having the capital, Boston, on the n. 

YAROCALLA, a settlement of the province 
and eorregimienlo of Caxatambo in Peru ; an- 
nexed to the curacy of the settlement of Cocha- 
marca. 

YAROS, a barbarous nation of Indians, of 
the province and government of Paraguay, de- 


scendants of the Charuas. They inhabit the 
territory between the river Tibiguari to the n ., 
the Uruguay to the w., and the Negro to the s. 
They have no fixed abode, but go wandering 
about, and tarrying only in places where they 
may find good hunting and fishing, as by these 
means they subsist. 

YARUBA, a small river of the province and 
country of las Amazonas, which runs e. and en- 
ters the Madera. 

YARUNCAI, a river of the province and 
eorregimienlo of Cuenca, in the kingdom of Quito. 
It passes a quarter of a league from that city. 

YARUPA, San Miguel, de, a settlement of 
the province and country of las Amazonas, a re- 
. duccion of the missions which were held by the 
Jesuits. It is situate on the shore of the Ma- 
ranon, close to a lake called la Rebalsa. 

YARUQUI, a settlement of the kingdom of 
Quito, in the district of the eorregimienlo of las 
Cinco Leguas de la Capital. It has a rich estate 
in its vicinity, called Oyambura, and a large 
llanura, celebrated for the two pyramids which 
were fixed there by the academicians of the 
sciences of Paris, in record of the astronomical 
observations they made, of their measurement 
of the degrees of the equator, and of their plans 
for determining the true figure of the earth ; thus 
perpetuating their useful labours. But the au- 
dience gave orders for the removal of these py- 
ramids, and the sensation of disgust thereby 
occasioned was universally great. The settlement 
is of a mild and benign climate, and fertile and 
abundant in vegetable productions. It has to 
the e. the cordillera of mountains of Guamani,and 
of Pambamarca, and on the w. the cordillera of 
Pichinche. It was formed from the neighbour- 
hood of the settlement of Cacha, which was swal- 
lowed up in 1640 : in lat. 10° 7 / s. 

YARUQUIES, a settlement of the province 
and corregimiento of Riobamba, in the kingdom 
of Quito. 

YAR USE, a small river of the province and 
government of Jaen de Bracamoros, in the king- 
dom of Quito. It rises in the cordillera of the 
province of Loxa, runs from n. to s. and enters 
the Santiago, on that side on which are the ruins 
of the city of Zamora la Vieja. 

YASALUN, a settlement of the province and 
alcaldia mayor of Zedales, in the kingdom of 
Guatemala. 

YASOVA, a river of the province and go- 
vernment of Louisiana. It has its origin 60 
leagues above the Mississippi, and into this it 
afterwards enters in a very large stream. On 


422 


Y A T 


Y A V 


its shores dwell the nations of the Yasoves, 
Tounicas, and Kourovas Indians. 

Yasova, a settlement in the same province 
and government as the former river, and situate 
on its shore. This settlement was destroyed by 
the F rench ; its natives having been in alliance 
with the English. 

YASQUAL, a settlement of the province and 
government of Pastos, in the Nuevo Reyno de 
Granada. 

YATA Primero, a river of the province and 
government of Moxos, in the kingdom of Quito. 
It rises from the lake of Rogagualo, runs to the 
n. in a serpentine course for many leagues ; then 
turns e. and enters the Madera, in the territory 
and country of the Cauibabas Indians. 

Yata, another river, with the addition of 
Segundo, in the same province and government. 
It has the same origin as the former river, runs 
parallel to it, and enters also the Madera, to- 
wards the side where that river is entered by the 
Beni. 

YATACHES, a settlement of Indians, of the 
province and government of Texas, in N. Ame- 
rica, on the shore of the river Colorado. 

YATAO, a settlement of the head settlement 
of the district and alcaldia mayor of Villalta, in 
Nueva Espana. It is of a cold temperature, 
contains 105 families of Indians, and is nine 
leagues from its capital. 

YATAPIRI, a river of the province and 
country of las Amazonas, in the part possessed 
by the Portuguese. It runs w. and enters the 
Parirne, between the rivers Jocota and Jana- 
bini. 

YATASCO, a settlement of the province and 
government of Tucuman in Peru; situate on 
the shore of the river of its name. 

Yatasco, the above river, rises in the dis- 
trict of the jurisdiction of Salta. It runs e. and 
enters the Pasage between the rivers Canas and 
Metan. 

YATERA, a port of the island of Cuba, near 
the extremity of the s. coast, between two other 
ports, called Escondido and la Sabana del Mar. 

YATI, a settlement of the province and govern- 
ment of Cartagena, in the Nuevo Reyno de Gra- 
nada ; situate on the shore of the river Cauca, on 
a long strip of land which this river forms in the 
district of Mompox, near the spot where it enters 
the Grande de la Magdalena. 

YATONI, a head settlement of the district of 
the alcaldia mayor of Villalta in Nueva Espana. 
It contains 57 families of Indians, and is five 
leagues and a half from its capital. 


[YATTASSEES, Indians of N. America, who 
live on Bayau Pierre, (or Stony Creek) which 
falls into the Red River, w. division, about 50 
miles above Natchitoches. Their village is in a 
large prairie about half way between the Caddo- 
pues and Natchitoches, surrounded by a settle- 
ment of French families. The Spanish govern- 
ment at present exercise jurisdiction over this 
settlement, where they keep a guard of a non- 
commissioned officer and eight soldiers, but the 
Yattasees are unwilling to bend to their authority, 
and in spite of them persist in trading with the 
Americans. 

This settlement, till some few years ago, used 
to belong to the district of Natchitoches, and the 
rights to their lands were given by the govern- 
ment of Louisiana, before it was ceded to Spain. 
The Yattassees at one time say they belong to the 
French, and at another, to the Americans. 

Of the ancient Yattassees there are but eight 
men remaining, and 25 women, besides children ; 
but a number of men of other nations have inter- 
married with them and live together. Their 
original language differs from any other ; but 
now all speak Caddo. They live on rich land, 
raise plenty of corn, beans, pumpkins, tobacco, 
&amp;c. ; have horses, cattle, hogs and poultry.] 

YAU, a settlement of the missions held by the 
Portuguese Carmelite Fathers, in the country of 
las Amazonas ; situate on the point of land formed 
by the river Negro, and at the junction of this 
with the river of las Amazonas. 

YAUARAYA, a small river of the province 
and captainship of Seara in Brasil, which runs n. 
between the rivers Jacunda and Pacajas, and 
enters that of las Amazonas in the arm formed 
by the island of Marajo. 

YAYARI, an island of the river of las Amazo- 
nas, opposite the settlement of Tuhere. 

YAUCA, a settlement of the province and 
correghniento of Camana in Peru annexed to 
the curacy of the settlement of Acari. 

YA VEIRI, a river of the province and govern- 
ment of Chaco in Peru. 

YAVI, San Francisco de, a settlement of 
the province and government of Tucuman in 
Peru ; situate on the shore of a small river to 
the w. of the town of Tarija. It is of the juris- 
diction of the city of Xuxuy ; annexed to the 
curacy of Santa Catalina, has a large chapel of 
ease, which was built by the Marquis del Valle 
del Tojo, and is kept in a magnificent manner by 
his successors. 

YAVICHE, a head settlement of the district of 
tli e alcaldia mayor of Villalta in Nueva Espana. 


Y A U 


It is of a hot temperature, contains 50 families of 
Indians, and is eight leagues w. of its capital. 

YAVINCAN, a settlement of the province 
and corregimiento of Caxamaca in Peru ; annexed 
to the curacy of the settlement of Pipincos in the 
province of Jaen. 

YAVIZA, a settlement of the province and 
government of Darien in the kingdom of Tierra 
Firme ; situate on the shore of the river Tuira, 
near the Gulf of San Miguel. At a small distance 
is a fort, lately built for its defence. 

YAULI, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Huarochiri in Peru. It is large, 
a head settlement of the district, over seven other 
settlements dependent upon it, and is celebrated 
as well for the rich silver mines in its neighbour- 
hood, which are called Nuevo Potosi, as for its 
baths of mineral waters. 

YAURI, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Canes and Canches in Peru. It 
has in its district two mines of copper, and some 
of gold ; but neither the one nor the other are 
worked. It has also two chapels or sanctuaries, 
the one of the Virgin of Huancani, the other of 
la Candelaria, and both of these are annexed to 
its curacy. 

YAURISQUE, a settlement of the province 
and corregimiento of Chilques and Masques in 
Peru. 

YAUTEPEC, a head settlement of the dis- 
trict and alcaldia mayor of Cuernavaca in Nueva 
Espana. It has in its jurisdiction four settle- 
ments, which contain 150 families of Spaniards, 
Mustees , and Mulattoes, and 223 of Indians ; all 
of which live very comfortably, as the settle- 
ment is situate in a valley, which is pleasant, 
well watered, and planted plentifully with sugar 
canes, of which they make loaf-sugar. Here they 
also cultivate various fruits and seeds, such as 
maize, melons. French-beans, and garbanzos. It 
has a beautiful convent of the religious of St. 
Domingo, and an hospital of the title of la Cari- 
dad de San Hipolito ; five leagues e. of its capital. 

ATautepec, another settlement, with the dedi- 
catory title of San Bartolome, which is a head 
settlement of the district and alcaldia mayor of 
Nexapa, in the same kingdom as the former. It 
is of a hot temperature, situate in a plain, and 
inhabited by 45 families of Indians, who exercise 
themselves in the cultivation of the sugar-cane, 
for the purpose of making loaf-sugar. In its dis- 
trict are various gardens, which, through the 
salutary influence of a river which passes oppo- 
site the settlement, produces many fruits of the 


Y AU 


423 


na, and w. by that of Canete. 
leagues from n 


country. This district comprehends eight settle- 
ments. 

YAUYAUGANI, a settlement of Indians of 
the province and colony of Virginia in N. Ame- 
rica ; situate on the shore of the river of its 
name. 

Yauyaugani, this river runs n. w. and enters 
the Ohio. 

YAUYOS, a province and corregimiento of the 
kingdom of Peru ; bounded n and n. w. by the 
province of Guaroehiri, e. by those of Xauxa and 
Angaraes, s. w. and s. by that of Castro Virrey- 

Its length is 34 
to s. and its width 38 from e. to 
w. It is one of the provinces of the most unequal 
and craggy territory in the whole kingdom, and 
is extremely cold, with the exception of one or 
other ravine ; its mountains being of the cordil- 
lera real, and always covered with snow, so that a 
way must be opened to effect a pass through 
them ; some have the precaution of erecting 
stones in the said passes by way of a guide, 
Avhilst others will make steps with a pick-axe, 
and, amongst these flights, that by which you 
descend to the settlement of Pampas, is the most 
curious. For the above reasons this province 
was, in antient times, but thinly peopled, and no 
monuments Avhatever are to be found in it. In 
its mountains breed many vicunas and huanacos , 
and in the ravines are found deer and mountain- 
cats, and some cattle; and of the skins of these 
the Indians make woven stuffs, which they barter 
on the coast, taking- in exchange grain for their 
subsistence, the crops here being extremely small. 
It is only in those parts that are less cold, that 
various mines have been discovered ; but very 
few of them have been Avorked, the advantages 
not covering the expense of the labour. It has 
many streams, which, united, flow down to the 
coast and form the rivers which water the pro- 
vince of Canete. Its corregiclor had a repartimi- 
ento of 125,000 dollars, and it payed 1000 for 
alcaxala annually. The capital is of the same 
name, and the other settlements are ; 

Tauripampa, Cachuy, 

Allauca, Quisque, 

Tupi, Porocha, 

Cusi, Pampas, 

Pocoto, Putinsa. 

Cappilluca, 

[The district of Yauyas contains seven doc- 
trinal curacies, and 25 settlements inhabited 
by 9574 souls ; 12 clergy, 13 Spaniards, S005 In- 
dians, 93 Mustees, and 1457 free Mulattoes. 


424 


Y E B YER 


The value of its productions is 20,200 dollars. 
(Guia del Peru, 1797.)] 

YAXONI, a settlement of the head settlement 
of the district of Chixila and alcaldia mayor of 
Yillalta in Nueva Espana. It is of a hot tempe- 
rature, contains 42 families of Indians, and is nine 
leag ues n. of its capital. 

YAZEC, a small river of the province and 
country of las Amazonas, in the Portuguese 
possessions. It runsw. between the rivers Yerbal 
and Yutay, and enters the Maranon or Amazonas. 

YAZECHE, Alto, a head settlement of the 
district of the alcaldia mayor of Yillalta in Nueva 
Espana. It is of a cold temperature, contains 88 
families of Indians, and is six leagues s. of its 
capital. 

Yazeche, another settlement in the same 
alcaldia mayor and kingdom, also a head settle- 
ment of the district, but having the surname of 
Baxo, to distinguish it from the former. It is 
also of a cold temperature, contains 130 families 
of Indians, and is five leagues from its capital, bj 
the same rhumb as the former. 

YAZONA, a head settlement of the district 
of the alcaldia mayor of Yillalta in Nueva Espana. 
It is of a hot temperature, contains 190 families 
of Indians, who occupy themselves in cultivating 
cochineal, and is three leagues n. of its capital. 

[YAZOO, or Yasoo, River, in Georgia \V. 
Territory, consists of three large branches, which 
united, pursue a s. w. course a few miles, and the 
confluent stream enters the e. bank of the Missis- 
sippi, by a mouth upwards of 100 yards wide ; 
according to Mr. Gauld, in lat. 32° 37' n. and by 
Mr. Purcel, in 32° 38'. See Georgia Western 
Territory.] 

[Yazoo Cliffs, or Aux Cotes, lie 7| miles 
from the river Yazoo, and 39| miles from Lousa 
Chitto, or Big Black River.] 

YAZU, a settlement of the province and corre - 
gimiento of Canta in Peru ; annexed to the curacy 
of the settlement of Arahuay. 

[YBICUY, a parish of the province and govern- 
ment of Paraguay ; situate on the river Mbouya- 
pey, about 55 miles s. e. from Asuncion, in lat. 
26° O' 54" 5 . and long. 57° 1' 7" ©.] 

[YBITIMIRI, a parish of the province and 
government of Paraguay, in lat. 25° 45' 43" 5. and 
long. 56° 53' 2" ay.] 

YCA, a province of Peru. See Ica. 
YCAQUE, or Icaco, the n. point of the Bay 
of Mancenilla, in the island of St. Domingo.] 
YEBINETO, a small river of the province 
and government of Mainas in the kingdom of 


Quito. It runs e. and turning n. n. c. enters the 
Urquicia. 

YECHIBIDE, Cerro de, a mountain of the 
province and government of Chaco in Peru, w. of 
the settlement of San Ignacio de Zamucos. 

YECORA, a settlement of the missions which 
were held by the J esuits in the province of Cina- 
loa, of N. America. 

Yec ora, another settlement of the missions of 
the Jesuits, in the province of Ostimuri. 

YECUATLA, a settlement of the head settle- 
ment of the district of Naulingo, and alcaldia 
mayor of Xalapa in Nueva Espana, at the boun- 
dary of the jurisdiction of the district of this 
head settlement. 

YECUDAHUE, a small river of the province 
and corregimiento of Maule, in the kingdom of 
Chile. It runs n. and enters the Tabolebo. 

YEGUADA,. River of the, in the island of 
St. Domingo ; it is -small, and runs to the w. head 
and n. coast of the great Bay of Samana, where it 
enters the sea between the rivers Jaina and 
Guanabo. 

YELAMBO, a settlement of the province and 
government of Antioquia, in the Nuevo Reyno 
de Granada, on the shore of the Grande de la 
Magdalena. 

[YELLOW Mountain. See Tennessee.] 

YELOXI, a head settlement of the district of 
the alcaldia mayor of Villalta, in Nueva Espana. 
It is of a cold temperature, contains 82 families 
of Indians, and is nine leagues s. of its capital. 

YELTECOMATL, San Nicolas de, a set- 
tlement of the head settlement of the district of 
Huipuxtla, and alcaldia mayor of Tepetango in 
Nueva Espana. It contains 35 families of In- 
dians. 

YEMa, a small river of the province and 
country of las Amazonas, which rises in the terri- 
tory of the Chunamas Indians, runs from n. to 
s. s. e. and enters the Maranon opposite the set- 
tlement of San Pablo de los Omaguas. 

YEPOMERA, a settlement of the missions 
which were held by the J esuits in the province of 
Tacaumara, and kingdom of Nueva Yizcaya; 
31 leagues w. by $. of the town and real of mines 
of Chiguagua. 

YERABUENA, a port of the coast of the pro- 
vince and corregimiento of Coquimbo in the king- 
dom of Chile. 

Yerabuena, a point, or long strip of land; 
being one of those which form the above port. 

Y'erabuena, a port of the coast of the S. Sea, 
in the province and corregimiento of Arica, and 




Y O C 

kingdom of Peru, on the boundary of the pro- 
vince of Arequipa ; in lat. 17° 35 / . 

YERBAL, a small river of the province and 
government of Buenos Ayres, which runs s. and 
enters the Rio Negro. 

YETES, a barbarous nation of Indians of the 
river Maranon, descended from those of the 
Omaguas. They dwell in the woods and moun- 
tains n. of the Napo, in the territory of the 
Encabellados ; are very few, and live dispersed 
without any fixed abode. 

YETLA, San Mateo de, a settlement of the 
head settlement of the district of Chinantla, and 
alcaldia mayor of Cozamaloapan, in Nueva Es- 
pana; situate in a large and beautiful valley, 
through which meanders a stream equally crys- 
talline and abundant, and which is surrounded 
by a belt of various mountains, covered with 
cedars, pines, and ocotales, from which they 
gather teas, used as torches. Its temperature is 
mild, with an inclination to hot. It contains 20 
families of Chiantecos Indians, who maintain 
themselves by a great trade in seeds, cotton, ex- 
quisite woods, and various fruits ; 13 leagues 5. 
of the settlement of Utzila, and 63 s. of its 
capital. 

Yetla, another, a small settlement in the 
alcaldia mayor of Guauchinango, of the same 
kingdom ; annexed to the curacy of the settle- 
ment of Haola. 

YETZELALA, a head settlement of the dis- 
trict of the alcaldia mayor of Guachinango, of 
the same kingdom ; annexed to the curacy of the 
settlement of Haola. 

Yetzelala, a head settlement of the district 
of the alcaldia mayor of Villalta in Nueva Es- 
pana. It is of a hot temperature, contains 50 
families of Indians, and is five leagues n. of its 
capital. 

YETZICUBI, a settlement of the head settle- 
ment of the district of the same alcaldia mayor 
and kingdom as the former. It is of a cold tem- 
perature, contains 89 families of Indians, and is 
two leagues n. of its capital. 

[YLO, a town and port of Peru. See Ilo.J 

YOA, a lake of the province and Country of 
las Amazonas, formed by a waste-water of the 
Madera : it stands on the bank of this river, and 
between the rivers to the n. of the Paracevini. 

Y013EGO, a settlement of the head settle- 
ment of the district of Chixtla, and alcaldia 
mayor of Villalta, in Nueva Espana. It con- 
tains ten families of Indians, and is 11| leagues 
from its capital. 

YOCALLA, a settlement of the province and 

VOL. V. 


YOJ 425 

corregimiento of Porco in Peru. At its entrance 
over the river Cachimayo, is abridge of stone, one 
of the best in the whole kingdom : 10 leagues 
from Potosi. 

YOCARBAYA, a settlement of the province 
and corregimiento of Larecaja in Peru ; annexed 
to the curacy of the settlement of Italaque. 

YOCON, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Cuenca, in the kingdom of Qui- 
to ; annexed to the curacy of the settlement of 
Canar. 

YOCOPO, a river of the province and govern- 
ment of Cayena, in Nueva Andalueia. It rises 
in the mountains, and enters the sea at the side 
of Cape Orange. 

YOHI, a river of the province and govern- 
ment of Guayana, or Nueva Andalueia. It is 
formed by an union of the Tocome and Hicliique, 
representing the figure of a Y, from which it 
takes its name. It enters the Orinico opposite 
the settlement of Alta Gracia. 

[YOIIOGANY, a river of N. America, the 
principal branch of Monogohela River, called 
also Yodghiogeny, and Toxhiogeni, pursues 
a n w. course, and passes through the Laurel 
Mountain, about 30 miles from its mouth ; is, so 
far, from 300 to 250 yards wide, and the naviga- 
tion much obstructed in dry weather by rapids 
and shoals. In its passage through the moun- 
tain it makes very great falls, admitting no navi- 
gation for 10 miles, to the Turkey-foot. Thence 
to the Great Crossing, about 20 miles, it is again 
navigable except in dry seasons, and at this place 
is 200 yards wide. The sources of this river are 
divided from those of the Patowmack, by the 
Alleghany Mountain. From the falls^ where it 
intersects the Laurel Mountain, to Fort Cumber- 
land, the head of the navigation to the Patow- 
mack, is 40 miles of very mountainous road. 
The country on this river is uneven, but in the 
vallies the soil is extremely rich. Near to Pitts- 
burg the country is well peopled, and there, as 
well as in Redstone, all the comforts of life are 
in the greatest abundance. This whole country 
abounds with coal, which lies almost on the sur- 
face of the ground.] 

YOIBIDE, a very lofty mountain of the pro- 
vince and government of the Chiquitos Indians 
in Peru. On its s. is a lake, producing much 
salt. It was near this mountain that the brother 
of Albert Romero, of the Jesuits, suffered mar- 
tyrdom. 

YOJOBI, a head settlement of the district of 
the alcaldia mayor of Villalta in Nueva Espana. 
It is of a hot temperature, contains 55 families of 
3 i 


Y O R 


426 YON 

Indians, and is three leagues and a quarter w. 
of its capital. 

YOLO, a settlement of the jurisdiction and 
alcaldia mayor of Octupam in Nueva Espana. 

YOLOTEPEC, Santa Maria be, a head 
settlement of the district of the alcaldia mayor of 
Tepozcolula, in the province and bishopric of 
Oaxaca in Nueva Espana. It contain 254 fami- 
lies of Indians, including those who dwell in the 
wards of its district ; and in these wards are 
many farms, yielding abundant crops of wheat 
and maize. It is of a hot temperature, and 19 
leagues s. of its capital. 

YOLOXINISQUILA, San Pedro de, a 
settlement of the alcaldia mayor of Teocuilco 
in Nueva Espana. It contains 224 families of 
Indians, including those of the wards of its dis- 
trict, produces cochineal in abundance, this being 
its only fruit ; though the ground itself is very 
favourable to all kind of fruits. The inhabi- 
tants, however, have their minds so fixed on this 
lucrative production, that they even neglect the 
cultivation of the necessaries of life. 

YOEHUE, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento ofQuillota in the kingdom of Chile, 
on the coast, near the river Imperial. 

[YONGE, a township, in the county of Leeds, 
Upper Canada ; it is the tenth township in ascend- 
ing the river St. Lawrence.] 

[YONGE STREET, is the direct communi- 
cation from York to Lake Simcoe, UpperCanada, 
opened during the administration of his excel- 
lency Major-general Lieutenant-governor Simcoe, 
who having visited Lake Huron by Lake Aux 
Claies, (formerly also called Ouentaronk, or Sini- 
on, and now named Lake Simcoe) and discovered 
the harbour of Fenetengushere (now Gloucester) 
to be fit for shipping, resolved on improving the 
communication from Lake Ontario to Lake Hu- 
ron, by this short rout, thereby avoiding the cir- 
cuitous passage of Lake Erie. 

This street has been opened in a direct line, 
and the road made by the troops of his excel- 
lency’s corps. It is SO miles from York to Hol- 
land’s River, at the fine fort called Gvvillimbury, 
where the road ends ; from thence you descend 
into Lake Simcoe, and having passed it, there are 
two passages into Lake Huron ; the one by the 
river Severn, which conveys the waters of Lake 
Simcoe into Gloucester Bay ; the other by a small 
portage, a continuation of Yonge-street, to a 
small lake which also runs into Gloucester Bay ; 
this communication affords many advantages ; 
merchandize from Montreal to Michilimackinac 
may be sent this way at ten or fifteen pounds less 


expence per ton, than by the route of the Grand 
or Ottawa River ; and the merchandize from 
New York, to be sent up the North and Mohawk 
Rivers, from the n. w. trade, finding its way into 
Lake Ontario at Oswego (Fort Ontario) the ad- 
vantages will certainly be felt of transporting- 
goods from Oswego to York, and from thence 
across Yonge-street, and down the waters of 
Lake Simcoe into Lake Huron, in preference to 
sending it by Lake Erie.] 

[YONKERS, a township of New York, in W. 
Chester County ; bounded e. by Bronx River, 
and w. by the county of York, and Hudson’s 
River. It contained, in 1790, 1125 inhabitants, 
of whom 139 were electors, and 170 slaves.] 

[Yonkers, a post-town of New York, 114 
miles from Philadelphia.] 

YOTAHUACAN, a settlement of the head 
settlement of the district of the alcaldia mayor of 
Cuquio in Nueva Espana, on the shore of the 
river Verde, and four leagues s. of its capital. 

YOTALA, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Yamparaes in Peru, of the arch- 
bishopric of Charcas. 

[YORK, New, one of the United States. See 
New York.] 

[York, a maritime and populous county of 
the district of Maine ; bounded e. and n. e. by 
Cumberland, s. by the ocean, w. by New Hamp- 
shire, from which it is separated by Salmon Fall 
River, and n. by Canada. It is well watered by 
Saco, Mousom, and other streams, and is divided 
into 27 townships, and contains 28,821 inhabi- 
tants. Chief town, York.] 

[York, a post-town of the district of Maine, 
in York County, nine miles n. e. of Portsmouth, 
in New Hampshire, 13 s. of Wells, 37 s. by w. of 
Portland, and 53 from Boston, lat. 43° 8' n. It is a 
port of entry and capital of the county. The 
river of its name empties into York Harbour at 
the town. It is navigable for vessels of 250 tons. 
About a mile from the sea is a wooden bridge 
across the river, 270 feet in length, which was 
erected in 1761. Before the war, 25 or 30 ves- 
sels were employed in the W. India trade, and 
coasting business, but their vessels were taken 
6r destroyed, and little marine business is now 
done, except that a small fishery is supported. 
This township was settled in 1630, and called 
Agamenticus, from the hill of that name, which is 
a noted land-mark for mariners. In 1640, Sir 
Ferdinand Gorges incorporated a great part of it 
by the name of Georgiana. In the year 1692, the 
Indians took the town by surprise, and burnt 
most of the houses, and 150 persons were killed 


YORK. 


427 


or captivated. It contained, according to the 
census of 1790, 2900 persons. Fish of various 
kinds frequent the rivers and shores of the sea 
contiguous. In a calm season, in the summer, 
one may stand on the rocks of the shore, and 
catch them in the sea, with a line, or even with an 
angling rod, and a fathom or two of line.] 

[York, a county of Pennsylvania, bounded e. 
and n. e. by Susquehannali River, which separates 
it from Lancaster and Dauphine Counties, and s. 
by the State of Maryland. It contained, in 1790, 
29 townships, and 37,747 inhabitants.] 

[York, a post-town and capital of the above 
county ; situate on the e. side of Codorus Creek, 
which empties into the Susquehannah. It con- 
tains about 500 houses, several of which are of 
brick. The town is regularly laid out ; the pub- 
lic buildings are a court-house, a stone gaol, a 
record-office, handsomely built, an academy, a 
German Lutheran, a German Calvinist, a Pres- 
byterian, Roman Catholic, and Moravian church, 
and a Quaker meeting-house. It is 22 miles w. 
s. w. of Lancaster, 40 n. w. by n. of Hartford, in 
Maryland, 73 w. of Philadelphia.] 

[York, a county of S. Carolina, in Pinckney 
district ; bounded e. by Catawba River, n. by 
the State of N. Carolina ; s. by Chester County, 
and w. by Broad River, which divides it from 
Spartanburg, and is one of the most agreeable 
and healthy counties in the State, and well 
watered by Catawba and Broad Rivers, and their 
tributaxies. It contained, in 1790, 6604 inhabi- 
tants, of whom 5652 were whites, and 923 slaves. 
Here are extensive iron-works. This county 
sends three l-epresentatives and one senator to the 
State legislature.] 

[York, a county of Virginia, bounded n. by 
York River, which divides it from Gloucester 
County, s. by Wanvick, e. by Elizabeth City 
County, and w. by that of James City. It con- 
tained, in 1790, 5233 inhabitants, of whom 2760 
were slaves.] 

[York, or Yorktown, a port of entry and 
post-town of Viiginia, and capital of York Coun- 
ty. It is agreeably situate on the s. side of York 
River, where the river is suddenly Contracted to 
a narrow compass, opposite to Gloucestei', and a 
mile distant, where there is a fort fronting that 
on the York side, about 11 miles w. by s. of Toes 
Point, at the mouth of the river. The banks of 
the river are very high, and vessels of the greatest 
burden may ride close under them with the 
greatest safety. It contained, in 1790, about 60 
or 70 houses, a gaol, an Episcopal church, and a 


tobacco warehouse. In the same year it con- 
tained 661 inhabitants, of whom 372 were slaves. 
Its exports, in the year 1794, amounted to 71,578 
dollars. It will ever be famous in the American 
annals for the capture of Lord Cornwallis and his 
army, by the combined force of the United States 
and France, which took place on the 19th of 
Octobei', 1781. It is 12 miles e. of Williams- 
burgh, 15 n. w. of Hampton, 57 e. s. e. of Rich- 
mond. Lat. 37° 16' n. Long. 76° 35 / w.] 

[York, a county, of Upper Canada, it consists 
of two ridings, the e. and w. The e. riding is 
bounded on the e. by the ®. line of the county of 
Durham ; on the s. by Lake Ontario, until it 
meets the e. boundary of Toronto township, which, 
with the Missassaga tract, gives its w. limits, and 
on the n. by Holland’s River, Lake Simcoe, and 
Talbot River, until it meets the n. w. boundary 
of the county of Durham. The w. riding of the 
county of Yoik is bounded on the e. by the town- 
ships of King, Vaughan, and Yoik; on the s. by 
the Lake Ontario, Burlington Bay, and Dundas- 
street ; on the w. by the London district ; and on 
the n. by the county of Simcoe. It sends, in 
conjunction with the county of Durham, and the 
first riding of the county of Lincoln, one repre- 
sentative to the provincial pai’liament.] 

[York, the capital of the above county of its 
name, is in about 43° 35 / ot n. lat. and is the pre- 
sent seat of government of Upper Canada. It is 
most beautifully situate within an excellent har- 
bour of the same name, made by a long penin- 
sula, which confines a bason of water, sufficiently 
large to contain a consideiable fleet : on the ex- 
tremity of the peninsxda, which is called Gibi'al- 
tar Point, are commodious stores and block- 
houses, which command the entrance to the hai- 
bour : on the main land, opposite to the point, is 
the garrison, situated in a fork made by the hai’- 
bour and a small rivulet ; the barracks being 
built on a knoll, ai'e well situated for health, and 
command a delightful prospect of the lake to the 
w. and of the harbour to the e. The government 
house is about two miles from the e. end of the 
town, at the entrance of the harbour, and the 
town is increasing rapidly ; the river Don emp- 
ties itself into the harbour a little above the 
town, running through a marsh, which when 
drained will afford most beautiful and fruitful 
meadows. This has already been commenced in 
a small degree, which will no doubt encourage 
farther attempts. The long beach or peninsula, 
which affords a most delightful ride, is considered 
so healthy by the Indians, that they flock to it 
3 i 2 


428 


YORK. 


[whenever indisposed ; and the bridge over the 
Don being finished, is generally resorted to, not 
only for pleasure, but as the most convenient road 
to the height of Scarborough. The ground, 
which has been prepared for the government- 
house, is situated between the town and the river 
Don. Vessels of all sizes may be conveniently 
built here, and a kind of terrace or second bank, 
in front of the town, affords an excellent situa- 
tion for a rope walk. The remains of the old 
French fort Torento stands a little to the w. of the 
present garrison, and the river Humber discharges 
itself into Lake Ontario, about two miles and a 
half w. of that : on this river and the Don are 
excellent mills, and all the waters abound in fish. 
In winter the harbour is frozen, and affords ex- 
cellent ice for the amusement of northern counties, 
driving in trianeaus. The climate of York is 
temperate, and well sheltered from the n. winds 


by the high lands in the rear. The Yonge-street 
leads from hence to Lake Simcoe, and the Dun- 
das-street crosses the rear of the town. 

This town was captured by the enemy in the 
present war, April 27, 1813, the Americans being 
commanded by Major-general Dearborn, and 
Commodore Chauncey. See account of the cam- 
paign, article, United States. 

Soon after his excellency John Graves Simcoe, 
Esq. the first Lieutenant-governor, had taken 
upon him the administration of the government 
of the province of Upper Canada, he divided it 
by proclamation into districts, counties, and town- 
ships, which have been new modelled, and several 
others added by his excellency Francis Gore, 
Esq. the present Lieutenant-governor ; the whole 
being now constituted agreeably to the following 
table. 


Division of the Province of Upper Canada. 


Districts. 


County. 


Townships. 


Districts 


County. 


Townships. 


Eastern 


r 


Glengary - 


Stormont - - 


Dundas - - - 


Prescott - 


Russell 

l 


( Lancaster 
' Charlottenburgh 
] Kenyon 
CSt. Regis Indians 


C Cornwall 
J Osnabruck 
i Finch 
^Roxburgh 


f Williamsburgh 
3 Matilda 
i Mountain 
C Winchester 


Johnstown 


1 

( 

( 

1 


Hawksbury 

Caledonia 

Longueiul 

Alfred 

Piantagenet 

Clarence 

Cumberland 

Gloucester 

Osgoode 

Russell 

Cambridge 


"Edwardsburgh 
Augusta 
Wolford 
Oxford, on the 
Grenville - - ■{ Rideau 

Marlborough 
Montague 
Gower, North and 
South 




Leeds - - 


l^Carleton - 


''Elizabeth Town 
Yonge 
Lansdown 
Leeds 

Crosby, North and 
" South 
Bastard 
Burgess 
Elmsley 
^Kitley 

Nepean] 


YORK. 


4 ; 29 


[Districts. 


Counties. 


Townships. 


Frontenac - -&lt; 


Midland - ^ 


Lenox and Ad- 
dington - - 


Hastings - 


Howe Island 

Pittsburgh 

Wolfe Island 

Kingston 

Loughborough 

Portland 

Hinchinbroke 

Bedford 

-Ernest Town 
Adolphus Town 
| F redericksburgh 
Richmond 
I Camden, E. 
Amherst Island 
'Sheffield 

.Sydney 
Thurlow 
Mohawks 
H ungerford 
Huntingdon 
•Rawdon 


( A meliasburgh 

^Prince Edward \ Wallowell 

) Sophiasburgh 

(_ Marys burgh 


Northumber- 
land - - 


Newcastle { 


Murray 
Cramahe 
Haldimand 
^ Hamilton 
Alnwick 
Percy 
^Seymour 


Durham 


( Hope 

' T’larL 


)e 
Clarke 
(. Darlington 


f Whitby 
Pickering 


Districts. 


Counties. 


Townships. 


Home - - 

( continued.) 


/ King 

i Whitchurch 
E. Riding of J Uxbridge 

the County \ Gwillimbury, E. 
of York - - i Ditto, W. 

f Ditto, N. 

^ Scott 


W. Riding of 
the County 
of York - - 


Home - - ■{ 


E. Riding of 
the County 
of York - - 


l 


Scarborough 
York and Penin- 
sula 

Etobicoke 
Markham 
L Vaughan 


Norfolk 


London - 


Toronto 

Trafalgar 

Nelson 

Flamborough, E. 
Ditto, W. 

Beverly 

SixNation Lands, 
n. of Dundas 
Street 

Reserved lands 
Crown lands and 
Church lands 


r Rainham 
Walpole 
Woodhouse 
Charlotteville 
W alsingham 
Houghton 
' Middleton 
Windham 
Townsend 
T urkey Point and 
Promontory of 
Lono- Point 


f Burford,and Gore 
of Burford 
Norwich 
Oxford - - K Dereham 

Oxford onThames 
Blandford 
^ Blenheim 

London 
Westminster 
Southwold 
Dorchester 
Yarmouth 

Middlesex - ^ Dunwich 

Aldborough 
Delaware 
Malahide 
^ Bay ham] 


430 


YORK. 


[Districts. 


Counties. 


Lincoln 


Niagara - { 


Townships. 


l^Haldimand 


Barton 

Ancaster 

Gian ford 

Saltfleet 

Binbrook 

Grimsby 

Caistor 

Clinton 

Louth 

^ Grantham 
N iagara 
Stamford 
Thorold 
Pelham 
Gainsborough 
Wainfleet 
Crowland 
Willoughby 
Bertie 

Humberstone 


r SixNation’sland, 
V s. of Dundas 
( Street 


Districts. 


Counties. 


Townships. 


Kent 


Western - ^ 


Essex 


Dover 
Chatham 
Camden, W. 
Oxford 
Howard 
Harwich 
Raleigh 


Romney 

Tilbury, E. &amp; W. 
Shawanees 
Mersea 
Gosfield 
Colchester 
Malden 

-( Sandwich and 
T own 

Amherstburgh 
(Garrison) 
Maidstone 
Rochester 

The counties send 25 representatives to the 
provincial parliament, who, with a legislative 
council, are called together once every year. The 
representatives are elected for four years, to serve 
in the Assembly, unless the parliament be sooner 
dissolved by the person administering the go- 
vernment.] 


A TABLE 


431 


YORK. 

[A TABLE, shewing the direct Distances between the principal Places, &amp; c. in Upper Canada ; 
and their Bearings, nearly, by the Magnet, from York, on Lake Ontario. 


183 


Burlington Bay.' 
Carleton Island. 
Chatham. 

Detroit. 


139 


30 


109 


Genesee River. 

Grand River, where it intersects Dundas-street. 

Head of Lake Ontario. 

Hungry Bay 
Kingston. 

Lake Simcoe 
Lake St. Clair. 


68 


162 


149 


120 


144 


178 39 


109 


Oswego 

Oxford on the Thames. 210 283 86 
Presqu’Isle de Quinte. 165 76 120 85 
^ Sodus 


202 ] 381 
125 ! 296 


239 


154 


99 60 


260 121 


190 


130 


133 


38 

140 

121 

218 

61 

120 

260 

224 

183 

202 

26 

129 

140 

130 

165 

195 

57 

90 


52 


London. 

Long Point, on Lake Erie 
Matchedash, or Gloucester, on Lake Huron. 

Mohawk Village, Grand River, 

Mouth of the Grand River, or Ouse. 

Mouth of the Thames, or La Tranche. 

Niagara 

Oswegatchie, or Johnstown. 


117 


70 


270 


180 


153 


159 



83 


73 


111 


310 


233 


28 


191 


75 


117 


218 


121 


144 


178 


381 


296 


99 


260 


276 


194 


121 


115 


35 


80 


89 


193 


67 


204 


160 


96 


90 


146 


151 


321 


252 


210 


180 


201 


180 


321 


144 


60 


63 


225 


62 


28 


163 


321 


256 


208 


198 


204 


179 


321 


145 


70 


41 


229 


178 


175 


62 

148 


78 


54 


110 


27 


39 


148 


36 


232 


160 


51 


113 


141 


208 


204 


80 


119 


49 


48 


118 


44 


119 


65 


263 


190 


22 


144 


170 


82 


92 


120 


244 


173 


129 

170 


133 


101 


244 


74 


150 


52 

159 


60 


27 i 


150 


179 


355 


354 


221 


102 


151 


239 

153 


178 


34 


210 


412 


330 


130 


292 


309 


47 


230 


104 


13) 

308 


308 

180 


14 


59 


103 


204 


107 


315 


362 


95 


212 


183 


20 


11 

161 

329 


261 


217 


192 

210 


131 187 



125 


170 


109 


22 


178 


175 


62 


140 


70 


54 


110 


19 


30 


140 


36 


232 


160 


43 


The distance in miles between twm places is found in the squares, at the intersection of the lines drawn both ways from those 
places ; and the bearings of each place from York is found at the bottom of each column of squares respectively, as for 
example : — 

From Oswegatchie to Detroit is 412 miles, tire former bearing east by north ; T f north, the latter south-west and west f west, from 
York. 

From London to York is 107 miles, on a course west-south-west.] 


432 


YORK. 


[Sketch of the Length and Circumference of the 
following Lakes in Upper Canada, by Estima- 
tion. 


Lakes. 

Greatest 
length lit 
miles. 

Circumfe- 
rence follow- 
ingthe shore. 

Erie ------- 

200 

610 

George ------ 

25 

58 

Huron ------ 

250 

1100 

Michigan ----- 

260 

945 

Ontario ------ 

160 

450 

St. Clair - 

30 

100 

Superior ----- 

410 

1525 


Table of Latitudes and Longitudes, from the in 
formation hitherto received. 


Places. 

N- Latitude. 

W. Longitude. 


Deg. 

Min. 

Sec. 

Deg. 

Min. 

Sec. 

Detroit - - - - 

42 

14 

0 

82 

33 


Ditto, River’s Mouth 

41 

52 





Erie Fort - - - - 

42 

53 

17 




Grand Remou - - 

44 

50 





Kingston - - - - 

44 

8 

0 

75 

41 


Landguard - - - 

42 

7 

15 




Long Point carrying 







place - - - - 

41 

39 

21 




Michilimackinac 

45 

48 

34 




Michigan Lake S. end 

41 

8 





Manitou Islands - - 

44 

46 





Niagara - - - - 

43 

15 

47 

78 

25 


Oswego - - - 

43 

20 

0 

75 

43 


Ontario, Lake, head 







of, 

43 

47 

3 




St. Regis - - - - 

45 






York ----- 

43 

35 






Sketch of the Islands in the following Lakes of 
Upper Canada. 

Lakes. Islands. 


Lake Erie - 


Bass Islands 
Isle Bois Blanc 
Isle Celerou 
Cunningham’s Island 
East Sister 


Lakes. 


Lake Erie 


Islands. 


Grosse Island 
Middle Island 
Middle Sister 
St. George’s Island 
Ship Island 
Turtle Island 
West Sister 


^La Cloche 
Duck Islands 
Flat Islands 
Grosse Isle 

Lake Huron - i Lie Traverse 

Manitou Islands 
Michilimackinac 
Prince William’s Island 
L St. Joseph’s Island 


Lake Ontario 


Lake St. Clair 


Amherst Island 
Isle la Barque 
Carleton Island 
Isle de Petit Cataraqui 
Cedar Island 
Isle Cauchois 
Isle au Cochan 
Isle du Chene 
Duck Islands 
Duck Islands 
Isle la Force, or la Forte 
Isle au Foret 
Gage Island 
Grand Isle 
Gull Island 
Howe Island 
Nicholas Island 
Orphan Island 
Isle de Quinte 
Isle Tonti 
Petite Isle Tonti 
Isle aux Tourtes 
Wolfe Island 
^Wapoose Island 

/■Island Chenal Ecarte 
I Harsen’s Island 
Hay Island 
J Peach Island 
(.Thompson’s Island 


Lake Superior 


Isle Grange 
Isle de Minatte 
Michipicoten 
Isle Montreal 
Patie Island 
Isles aux Rabies 
WJiite Fish Island.] 


Y O R 


YT A 


433 


[York, a division ofterritory forming the town- 
ship of the above county of its name, lying to the 
w. of Scarborough, having the river Humber for 
its to. limit : its front is principally occupied by 
a long sandy beach, which forms the harbour. 
The rest of the township in front is open to Lake 
Ontario.] 

[York, a river of Virginia, which takes its rise 
near the Blue Ridge, and empties into the Chesa- 
peak, a little to the s. of Mobjack Bay. At York 
Town it affords the best harbour in the State, 
which will admit vessels of the largest size. The 
river there narrows to the width of a mile, and is 
contained within very high banks, close under 
which the vessels may ride. It has four fathoms 
water at high tide, for 20 miles above York, to 
the mouth of Poropotank, where the river is a 
mile and a half w ide, and the channel only 75 
fathoms, passing under a very high bank. At the 
confluence of Pamunky and Mattapony it has but 
three fathoms depth, which continues up Pamunky 
to Cumberland, where the width is 100 yards, and 
up Mattapony «to within two miles of Frazer’s 
Ferry, where it becomes 28£ fathoms deep, and 
holds that about five miles.] 

[York, a river of York County, district of 
Maine, which runs up seven or eight miles, and 
affords a tolerable harbour for vessels under 200 
tons. The rocks, however, render it somewhat 
difficult and hazardous for strangers.] 

[York Bay is nine miles long and four broad, 
and spreads to the s. before the city of New 
York. It is formed bv the confluence of East and 
and Hudson’s Rivers, and embosoms several small 
islands, of which Governor’s Island is the princi- 
pal. It communicates with the ocean through the 
Narrows, between Staten and Long Islands, 
which are scarcely two miles wide. The passage 
up to New York, from Sandy Hook, the point of 
land that extends furthest into the sea, is safe, and 
not above 20 miles in length. The common na- 
vigation is betw een the e. and w. banks, in about 
22 feet water. The light-house at Sandy Hook is 
in lat. 40° 28 / n. and long. 74° 2' zo.] 

[York Fort, on the s. w. shore of Hudson’s 
Bay, at the mouth of Port Nelson River, is 1(50 
miles w. of Severn House. Lat. 57° 1' 51" n. 
Long. 92° 46' 40" a).] 

[York Harbour lies w ithin the elbow formed 
by S. Head, in the Bay of Islands, Newfoundland 
Island ] 

[York Island, one of the Gallipago Islands, 
on the coast of Peru.] 

[York Isle, or Islands, lie in lat. 50° 37 / 5 . 

VOL. v. 


about 50 leagues from the coast of Patagonia, in 
S. America, and are inhabited. Trinity lies due 
e. of them, near the main land.] 

[York Ledge, on the coast of the district of 
Maine. From York Harbour to York Ledge, the 
course is s. e. two leagues.] 

[York Minster, on the 5. coast of the island 
of Tierra del Fuego, is 38 miles e. s. e. from Gil- 
bert Island. Lat. 55° 26 / s. Long. 70° w.\ 
[York Road, or Bay, in the Straits of Magel- 
lan, in S. America, is 10 miles from Cape Cross 
Tide. Lat. 53° 39' s. Long. 73° 52'.] 

[York Town, a township of New York, W. 
Chester County, bounded w. by the town of 
Portland, and n. by Dutchess County. In 1796, 
according to the State census, there were 210 of 
the inhabitants electors.] 

YOUANA, a settlement of Indians of the pro- 
vince and government of Louisiana ; on the shore 
of the river Soulahue. It is the last town of the 
Indians of the Chactaws nation. 

YOUNG, a settlement of the island of Barba- 
does, in the parish and district of St. Thomas, 
near the w. coast. 

[YOUNG FREDERICK’S Island, on the n. 
w. coast ofN. America, divides Port Ingraham. 
See Port Ingraham.] 

[YPANE, or Ipane, a settlement of Indians of 
the province and government of Paraguay; situ- 
ate on the e. bank of the Paraguay, about eight 
miles 5 . e. from Asuncion ; in lat. 25° 27' 44" 
5 . and long. 57° 33' 15" e.] 

[YQUAMANDIZ U, a parish of the province 
and government of Paraguay ; in lat. 24° 6' 12" 
s. and long. 56° 58' 29" w .] 

[YSIDBO, S. or Isidro, a parish of the pro- 
vince and government of Buenos Ayres ; situate on 
the shore of La Plata, about 15 miles n. of Buenos 
Ayres. Lat. 34° 28' s. Long. 58° S3' 10" w.) 

[YTA, or Ita, a settlement of Indians of the 
province and government of Paraguay ; situate 
a little from the e. bank of the Paraguay, about 
20 miles s. e. from Asuncion. Lat. 25° 30' 30" 
s. and long. 57° 25' 2" wJ\ 

[YTANGUA, a parish of the province and 
government of Paraguay ; in lat. 25° 24' 44" s. 
and long. 57° 24' 6" w.~\ 

[YTAPE, or It a pe, a settlement of Indians 
of the province and government of Paraguay ; 
situate on the road from Asuncion to Villa Rica, 
and about eight miles w. from the latter ; in iat. 
25° 52 ' s. and long. 56° 29' 49" zd.] 

[YTAPUA, or It apua, a settlement of In- 
dians of the province and government of Paraguay; 

3 K 


434 


YU C 


Y U C 


situate on the n. bank of the Parana, about five 
miles /?. w. from Candelario ; in lat. 27° 20' 16" 
s. and long. 55° 52 ' 59" ay.] 

[YTA4 Y, or It ati, a settlement of Indians of 
the province and government of Buenos Ayres ; 
situate on the Parana, about 20 miles n. e. of 
Corrientes. Lat. 27° 17' s. Long. 58° IP 38" ay.] 

YU ANES, a barbarous nation of Indians of the 
province and government of Tucuman in Peru. 
They dwell to the n. of the city of Cordoba, and 
are bounded by this rhumb by the nation of the 
Frentones, e. by the river Paraguay, w. by the 
Salado, and 5. by the nation of the Abipones. 
Any information concerning these Indians is very 
scarce. 

YUBAL, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Cuenca in the kingdom of Quito; 
situate at the source of the river Abenico. 

YUCA, a large settlement of the pi'ovince and 
corregimiento of Velez, in the Nuevo Reyno de 
Granada. It enjoys one of the best and most 
healthy climates possible, produces abundance of 
wheat of the best quality, also of maize, tartuffles 
and pulse. It has a convent of the religious of 
St. Domingo, and its inhabitants amount to 700 
housekeepers and 60 Indians ; one league from 
the town of Luba ; 10 n. e. of the city of Velez, 20 
n. ofthe capital, Santa Fe, and seven from Tunja. 

Yuca, a small river of the island of St. Do- 
mingo : it rises very near the s. coast, runs s. and 
enters the sea between the capital and the point 
of Cancedo. 

YUCAL, a settlement of the province and 
government of Cartagena in the Nuevo Reyno de 
Granada ; on the shore of the Rio Grande de la 
Magdalena. 

YUCAR, a settlement of the province and 
government of Santa Marta in the Nuevo Reyno 
de Granada, near the coast. 

YUCATHAN, or Yucatan, a province and 
government of the kingdom of Guatemala in N. 
America. It is a peninsula, surrounded on three 
sides by the sea, on the e. by the Gulf of Guana- 
jos, or of Honduras, and it is in this part 130 
leagues, as far as the island of Cozumel ; on the/?, 
it is washed by the sea from the aforesaid gulf to 
the Bay of Mexico, running along a parallel of 
from 22° 20' to 21° 40 / , the coast being 70 leagues 
long. It is bounded s. by the province and 
alealdia mayor of Vera Paz, and s. w. by that of 
Tabasco. Its length is 120 leagues from s. w. to 
n. e., and its breadth is 98 from e. to w. at the 
widest part, from the unknown point to that 
which is opposite the island of Cozumel. 


This country was discovered by Francisco Fer- 
nandez de Cordova in 1517, and was conquered 
by Captain Francisco de Montejo, in 1527. It is 
of a very hot and moist temperature, and the 
territory is for the most part stony, but fertile. 
It has no other river throughout the whole of it 
than that of Lagartos, which is, however, very 
abundant. It is argued that it has many subter- 
raneous waters, and this is pretty well proved, 
through certain deep chasms of stone, which they 
call zenotes, and in which water has been seen 
to run. 

The land is plain, covered with shady trees, 
and abounding in honey, wax, and cotton, and of 
the latter they make spun and woven stuffs, 
which they dye of various colours, and which are 
highly esteemed in all Nueva Espana. It also 
produces some cochineal, and from the above 
productions, as well as from some Campeche- 
wood, and some rigging, which they manufacture, 
do they maintain a commerce. In its forests are 
excellent sorts of woods, of which some ships 
have been built ; and one sort of these woods, 
called habin , is so hard that it is impossible to 
drive a nail into without first boring a hole. 
Here are many wild beasts, such as tigers and 
leopards ; also snakes and venomous insects, 
and a species of spider, which the Indians call 
ham, since, whenever a person is bitten by it, the 
excruciating pain he suffers causes him to cry out 
this word, and this he continues doing till he 
dies, no remedy ever having been found against 
its fatal influence. Both sheep and neat cattle 
are scarce in this province, through want of 
water and pastures ; but here are abundance of 
swine, as well as of all kinds of fruit of a warm 
climate. On the sea coasts is found much amber, 
and an inhabitant, by name Fernando Landeros, 
picked up a piece which weighed seven arrobas. 

[According to the Guia de Forasteros (Foreign- 
er’s Guide) published in Spain in 1802, the num- 
ber of regular troops in this province, amounted 
to 1,079. 

In Yucatan the native Indians were circum- 
cised, and yet gross idolaters, but curious work- 
men in carving and adorning their images. They 
had in their houses images made like bears, 
which they worshipped as their household gods, 
with singing and incense. They caused boys to 
answer the people’s petitions from hokow images, 
as if God had spoken to them. When they 
wanted rain, or were in any danger, they had 
their processions and pilgrimages to these idols. 
In Nigaragua they worshipped the sun and divers 


YUCATHAN. 


435 


idols. All tlieir priests, except confessors, mar- 
ried. The ordering of the sacrifices, and their 
numbers, depended merely on the priests, who 
used to go about the captives three times, sing- 
ing mournfully, and then with their flint knives 
suddenly open their breasts. They divide the 
body thus ; the prelate hath his heart, the king 
his hands and feet, the person who made him 
captive his buttocks, and the people the rest. 
The heads are set on trees, under which they 
sacrifice men and children. They have their 
idolatrous processions, in which, for the honour 
of their idol, they wound themselves, and for the 
desire of future happiness, they offer themselves 
cheerfully for sacrifices. Whilst the priest anoints 
the cheeks and the mouth of the idol with blood, 
the others sing, and the people pray. 

The priest performs the ceremony of marriage 
by joining the little fingers of the bridegroom 
and bride near a fire ; but the lords are first per- 
mitted, for honour’s sake, to indulge in the privi- 
leges of the bridegroom. The adulterer is beaten 
and the adultress is divorced. He that forceth 
a virgin is a slave, except he pay her dowry. 
But if a slave forceth his master’s daughter, they 
are both buried alive. See Benzo, P. Martyr , 
and Gomara . ] 

The capital is the city of Merida. 

Bishops who have presided in the province of 
Yucatan. 

1. Don Fr. Juan de San Francisco, first bishop 
of Yucatan ; of whom we know little more than 
that he is ranked amongst the bishops of this 
church. 

2. Don jFr. Juan de la Puerta : he died in 
1552, before being consecrated. 

3. Don Fr. Francisco de Toral, of the order 
of San Francisco, native of Ubeda, where he took 
the habit. He passed over to Nueva Espana, 
through a zeal to convert the Indians, converted 
and baptized many, making himself perfect master 
of the Mexican and Polacan language. He was 
nominated Custodio for the General Chapter, 
which was celebrated at Salamanca in 1553 ; re- 
turned to Mexico the following year, with 34 
other religious of his order, was then elected 
provincial, and, after fulfilling the duties of this, 
was presented to the bishopric of Yucatan, of 
which, after having refused, he was induced to 
take possession in 1562. He assisted at the first 
and second Mexican councils, in 1555 and 1565, 
thrice visited his bishopric, and, through weighty 
business, returned to Mexico, w here he died in 
1571. 


4. Don Fr. Diego de Landa, native of Cifuentes 
in Alcarria, also a religious of the order of San 
Francisco : he was one of the first of those who 
passed over to Yucatan, and, learning the idiom 
of the Indians, reduced it to grammar : he la- 
boured with incredible zeal in their instruction, 
destroyed many idols, and persecuted sorcerers, 
who, incensed against him, sought to put him to 
death : he then began to preach with a cross in 
his hand, when the infidels became immoveable, 
their weapons lying useless in their hands : he 
was next elected provincial, and went to Spain 
on urgent business ; was nominated guardian of 
the convent of San Antonio de Cabrera, and 
thence presented to the bishopric of Yucatan. 
In 1572, he visited the whole of his diocese, and 
suffered great persecution in defending the eccle- 
siastical immunities. It is related of him, that in 
the case of a great famine, he maintained with 
the maize of the convent an immense number of 
Indians, without the store suffering any diminu- 
tion : he died full of virtues, and under the im- 
putation of sanctity, in 1579. 

5. Don Fr. Gregorio Montalvo, of the order of 
St. Domingo ; was professed at Salamanca in 
1550, was prior of the convent of Plasencia, 
elected bishop of Nicaragua, and promoted to 
this in 1580. He celebrated a synod, thrice 
visited the bishopric, and assisted at the third 
Mexican council in 1585, giving proofs of his 
great erudition : he was promoted in 1587 to the 
bishopric of Cuzco in Peru. 

6. Don Fr. Juan Izquierdo, of the order of 
San Francisco, native of the town of Huelva in 
the county ofNiebla : he took the habit in Lima, 
w here he was professed ; and thence passed to 
the province of Guatemala : was several times 
guardian, and elected bishop of Yucatan in 1587 : 
thrice visited the bishopric, finished the building 
of the beautiful cathedral in 1598, and governed 
with great justice and prudence until 1602, when 
he died. 

7. Don Diego Vazquez Mercado, who, being- 
dean of the church of Mechoacan, was presented 
to this mitre in 1603 : he took possession the 
following year, was a most vigiiant pastor, twice 
visited his diocese, and was promoted to the 
bishop of Manilla in 1608. 

8. Don Fr. Gonzalo de Salazar, native of 
Mexico ; being master in his religion, he came to 
Spain upon business of his province, and was 
elected to the bishopric of this church in 1608, 
of which he took possession the following year : 
he visited six times the whole of his bishopric, 
learnt the Yucatecan idiom, taught the Indians in 

3 k 2 


436 


YUCATHAN. 


t 


person their religion, extirpated idolatry, destroy- 
ing more than 20,000 idols, for which he obtained 
the thanks of Pope Paul V. : bestowed great 
pains that the youth should be instructed in gram- 
mar, theology, and theYucatecan tongue; assisted 
frequently at the divine offices, performing the 
several duties for 52 years successively, without 
ever being ill ; and, although 76 years of age, he 
kept the days of obligation ; was very charitable, 
and, in a great famine, sustained, by his own in- 
come, more than 4000 poor people : he was ex- 
tremely devoted to the Holy Virgin, adorned his 
church with precious ornaments and vases, and, 
full of years and good works, he died in 1636. 

9. Don Juan Alonso de Ocon, native ofRedal 
in la Rioja ; collegiate in the college of San 
Ildefonso of Alcala, where he graduated as doc- 
tor in theology, and was professor of arts, curate 
of the parish of Elechosa in the archbishopric of 
Toledo, and afterwards of the parish of Santa 
Cruz de Madrid, which he left for the bishopric 
of this church in 1638, taking possession of it the 
following year : he visited all his dictrict, con- 
firming more than 68,000 souls, was rigorous in 
the examination of the ecclesiastics, and was pro- 
moted to the bishopric of Cuzco in 1642. 

10. Don Andres Fernandez de Ipenza, native 
of the town of Arnedo in la Rioja, trilingual col- 
legiate of Alcala : he there studied canons, and 
graduated as doctor in the university of Avila ; 
passed to Mexico as familiar to the archbishop of 
Don Francisco Manso, by whom he was named 
provisor of the Indians, and, when the same arch- 
bishop returned to Cartagena, he remained gover- 
nor of the archbishopric, and, afterwards having 
arrived at Madrid, he was made inquisitor of 
Toledo, and afterwards bishop of Yucatan, in 
1643 ; but he died that year before he left 
Toledo. 

11. Don Marcos de Torres y Rueda, native of 
the town of Almazan : he studied at Osma, and 
graduated as doctor in theology : he was elected 
bishop of Yucatan in 1646 ; was consecrated in 
la Puebla de los Angeles, by the Senor Palafox, 
and took possession the following year; and, 
through the discords existing between the afore- 
said venerable Palafox and the Viceroy, the 
Count of Salvatierra, he was nominated viceroy 
and president of the audience of Mexico, and died 
in 1649. 

12. Don Fr. Domingo de Villa Escusa Rami- 
rez de Arellano, of the order of San Geronimo ; 
collegiate in the college of S. Lorenzo el Real, 
where he read moral theology ten years : was 
visitor-general of the order, and afterwards gene- 


ral of the same ; elected bishop of Chiapa, which 
church lie governed ten years, passing from this 
to A ucatan in 1651 : he was received with the 
greatest joy through the fame of his virtue and 
charity, was truly humble and poor in spirit, 
though w ithout losing his authority : he died, 
causing universal regret, in 1652. 

13. Don Lorenzo de Orta, elected bishop of 
this church, but who died immediately after. 

14. Don Fr. Luis de Cifuentes y Sotomayor, 
native of Sevilla : he took the habit of St. Domi- 
nique in Mexico ; w as elected bishop of Yucatan 
in 1657, of which office he took possession in 
1659 : he visited his diocese several times, was 
most zealous of divine worship, and gave to his 
church valuable ornaments of gold and silver, 
endowed the chapel of Santo Christo of Ichmul, 
but caused the same to be transferred from that 
settlement, on account of its having been burnt, 
together with the church, and nothing having 
been saved but the image of our Saviour : he 
died in 1676. 

15. Don Juan de Escalante Turcios y Men- 
doza, who obtained various prebendaries in this 
church of Yucatan, where also he was commissary 
of crusade, provisor and vicar-general of the 
bishopric, and, being dean, was elected arch- 
bishop of St. Domingo in 1671, and in 1676 pro- 
moted to Yucatan : he visited all the bishopric, 
and, after the visitation of Tabasco, died in the 
settlement of Uman in 1681. 

16. Don Juan Cano Sandoval, native of the 
city of Mexico, doctor in sacred canons, canoni- 
cal doctor of the church of Mechoacan, and after- 
wards provisor of Indians, and provisor and 
vicar-general of the bishopric of Mexico, elected 
bishop of Yucatan in 1682, of which office he 
took possession the following year : he was ex- 
tremely charitable and religious, and died in 
1695. 

17. Don Fr. Antonio de Arriaga y Agiiero, of 
the order of San Augustin, w ho w as rector of the 
college of Doha Maria of Arragon in Madrid ; 
presented through his literature and exemplary 
life to this church, in 1696 : he went to be conse- 
crated at la Puebla de los Angeles, and, before 
he arrived at his church, died in the town of 
Carrion, in 1698. 

18. Don Fr. de los Reyes Rios de la Madrid, 
native of Sevilla, and monk of the order of St. 
Benedict : he obtained in his religion the em- 
ploys of master, preacher-general, doctor in theo- 
logy, and poser in the university of Oviedo : he 
was preacher to King Charles II. and was elected 
bishop of Honduras, having been promoted before 


Y U C A T H A N. 437 


he embarked for the bishopric of Yucatan, in 1700 : 
he twice visited his diocese, and in bis time was 
finished the conquest of the province of Peten : 
he was a most spirited defender of the ecclesias- 
tical jurisdiction, and died in 1714. 

19. Don Juan Gomez de Parada : he was born 
at Compostela, of the bishopric of Guadalaxara 
and kingdom of Nueva Galicia, was collegiate in 
the old college of San Ildefonso, and afterward 
in that of Santa Maria de Todos los Santos of 
Mexico : he took the degree of doctor in the 
university of Salamanca, where also he read phi- 
losophy three years ; was prebend of the metro- 
politan of Mexico, and was presented to the bishop- 
ric of Yucatan in 1715, of which he took pos- 
session the following year ; he celebrated a dio- 
cesan synod, in which belaboured with indefatig- 
able zeal, both for the reform of the ecclesiastical 
and secular estates, and for the relief of the In- 
dians, proving himself to them a perfect father ; 
amongst these he made new regulations, by order 
of the king, and was much interested in the pro- 
motion of the ecclesiastics, maintained the nuns in 
the famine of 1726, and was promoted to the 
bishopric of Guatemala in 1728. 

20. Don Juan Ignacio de Castorena y Ursua, 
native of Zacatecas in the kingdom of Nueva 
Galicia, collegiate in the college of San Ildefonso 
of Mexico, provisor of Indians in that bishopric, 
and commissary-general of crusade in Nueva 
Espana : he had various prebendaries in the 
church of Mexico, and was presented to this bi- 
shopric in 1729 : manifested, during the whole 
time of his government, his fatherly zeal, and 
died in 1733. 

21. Don Francisco Pablo Matos Coronado, na- 
tive of the city of Canarias: he studied philosophy 
and grammar in the convent of St. Domingo, went 
through a «*&gt;urse of canons in the university of 
Sevilla, from whence he passed to Salamanca, re- 
ceived various prebendaries in the cathedral of 
Canarias, and was promoted to the archdeaconry, 
and from thence to the bishopric of Yucatan in 
1734 ; took possession in 173G, and visited the 
whole of his bishopric : was noted for his litera- 
ture, governed with great prudence and zeal, and 
was promoted to the bishopric of Mechoacan in 
1741. 

22. Don Fr. Mateo de Zamora y Pinagos, na- 
tive of the Nuevo Reyno de Granada : he there 
took the habit of San Francisco, was theological 
doctor in the university of Santa Fe, procurator 
general in the courts of Madrid and Rome, ea/ifi- 
cador of the holy office, and elected bishop of 
Yucatan in 1741, of which he took possession in 


1743: visited the whole of the diocese, and died 
in the town of Valladolid in 1744. 

23. Don Fr. Francisco de San Buenaventura 
Texacla Diez de Velasco, of the order of San 
Francisco, native of Sevilla, auxiliar to the bi- 
shop of Cuba, with the title ofTricali, presented 
to this bishopric of Yucatan in 1746: he twice 
visited the diocese, without missing any settlement, 
erected the Tridentine college, repaired many 
parish churches, and in the convent of San Pablo 
de la Brena of his province of Andalucia, built at 
his own cost a house of recluses for bad women : 
he was promoted to the church of Guadalaxara 
in Nueva Galicia in 1752. 

24. Don Juan Joseph de Eguiara y Eguren, 
native of Mexico : he studied in that university, 
where he took the degree of doctor in theology, 
was professor of philosophy, consultor of the holy 
office of the inquisition, and author of various 
works, and amongst others of the first volume of 
the Mexican bible ; was elected bishop of Yuca- 
tan in 1751, but renounced this dignity to the 
general regret of those who were acquainted with 
bis virtue and learning. 

25. Don Fr. Ignacio Padilla y Estrada, native 
of Mexico : he took the habit of St. Augustin, 
was doctor in his university, and in his religion 
professor of philosophy and theology, visitor of 
the convents of Guadalaxara and Havana, arith- 
metician and procurator-general of the province 
of Jesus in the courts of Madrid and Rome, 
elected archbishop of St, Domingo, where he 
governed till 1752, and from whence he was 
promoted to this church: he was a most zealous 
defender of the dignity, was extremely beneficent, 
and succoured by his liberality the convent of 
nuns of La Concepcion, and died in 1760. 

26. Don Fr. Antonio Alcalde, of the order of 
St. Domingo, native of the town of Zigales in 
the bishopric of Valladolid : he was lecturer of 
arts, master of the students, and lecturer of theo- 
logy, 26 years : he was nominated prior of the 
convent of Zamora, and afterwards of Val verde, 
where he remained nine years, and afterwards 
of Segovia, although he did not fill this office, as 
having been presented by the King to the bi- 
shopric of Yucatan in 1761 : he was consecrated 
at Cartagena of the Indies, and took possession 
in 1763, and promoted to Guadalaxara in 1773. 

27. Don Diego Peredo. 

28. Don Fr. Juan Manuel de Vargas y Rivera, 
of the order of N uestra Sefiora de La Merced, 
native of Lima, comendador of the convent of Pa- 
nama in the kingdom of Tierra Firme: he went 
to Spain, where he was honoured with the degree 


438 


Y U I 


Y U N 


of father of the province, and presented to the 
bishopric of Chiapa, from whence he was pro- 
moted to this of Yucatan in 1764, although he 
died before he took possession. 

29. Don Antonio Caballero y Gongora, pro- 
moted to the bishopric of Santa Fe in the Nuevo 
Reyno de Granada in 1777. 

30. Don Fr. Luis de Pina y Mazo, of the oi’der 
of San Benito. 

YUCAY, Santiago de, a settlement of the 
province of Urubamba in Peru. It has a con- 
vent of religious recoletans of San Francisco, is 
situate in a pleasant, fertile, and spacious valley, 
of a benign temperature, and abounding in all 
kinds of vegetable productions. In this settle- 
ment died the Prince Sayri Tupac Inca, after a 
three years retirement : he had acquired the title 
of Bautismo Don Diego Inca, and was the last 
monarch of Peru, having renounced his empire 
and his rights to the king of Spain : he was son of 
Manco Inca, and nephew of the Emperor Huas- 
car Inca. 

[YUCUATL, the Indian name of Nootka 
Island ; which see.] 

YUCUL, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Chancay in Peru ; annexed to 
the curacy of the settlement of Canchas. 

YUCUNDUCHE, Santiago de, a settle- 
ment of the alcaldia mayor of Nochiztlan in 
Nueva Espana. It contains 75 families of In- 
dians, applied to the cultivation and commerce of 
cotton and cochineal. Two leagues n. of its 
capital. 

YUECHI, a head settlement of the district of 
the alcaldia mayor ofVillalta in Nueva Espana. 
It contains 61 families of Indians, and is four 
leagues s. of its capital. 

YUHUARI, a river of the province and coun- 
try of Las Amazonas, which runs nearly due«. in 
the territory of the Omaguas Indians, and enters 
the river of Las Amazonas. 

YUY, a river of the province and country and 
government of Buenos Ayres, which runs from 
s. e. to n. w. and enters the Uruguay, opposite 
the settlement of the missions called Santa Maria. 
On its shores the Indians martyred the Fathers 
Roque Gonzalez de Santa Cruz, Alonzo Rodri- 
guez, and Juan del Castillo, of the order of the 
Jesuits, in 1628. 

YUINEIMA, a river of the province and go- 
vernment of Paraguay, which runs e. collecting 
the waters of many other rivers, and enters by 
the to. side into the Grande del Parana. 

YUIPA, a small river of the same province 
and government as the former. It runs to n. n.w. 


and enters the Uruguay, between those of Aguas 
and Baju. 

[YUISPIN, or Jesus Nazareno, a settle- 
ment of Indians of the province and government 
of Buenos Ayres ; situate about 60 miles to the 
s. w. of San Lucia, on a branch of the Parana, in 
lat. 29° 43' 30" s. long. 60° 20' 30" an] 

YULUC, a settlement of the province and cor- 
regimiento of Loxa in the kingdom of Quito. 

YUMA, an island of the N. Sea, one of the 
Lucayas, called also Exuma. It was discovered 
by Christopher Columbus. It lies n. of the island 
of Cuba, and s. of that of San Salvador ; is 22 
leagues long and seven wide, and inhabited by 
Caribee Indians. 

YUMBA, Bay of, on the s. coast of the island 
of St. Domingo, between the island of Saona and 
the point of Espada. 

YUMBEL, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Itala in the kingdom of Chile. 
It is the frontier of the Araucanos Indians, and 
on that account has a fort to defend the limits. 
This fort was besieged by those barbarians in 
1743, but they were obliged to desist from their 
attempt with great loss. 

YUMBO, a settlement of the province and go- 
vernment of Popayan, in the Nuevo Reyno de 
Granada. 

YUME, a river of the province and country of 
Las Amazonas. It runs e. and enters the Ma- 
rahon. 

YUMETO, an island of the N. Sea, one of the 
Lucayas, discovered by Christopher Columbus, and 
situate under the tropic, to the n. of the island of 
Cuba. It is 15 leagues long, and inhabited by 
Caribee Indians. 

YUNA, a large river of St. Domingo, which 
rises in the mountains of the centre of the island, 
runs to n. n. e. and near the town of Cotuy 
turns its course to 5. s. e. and enters the sea in 
the Bay of Samana, forming several islands at its 
mouth. 

YUNDUZA, Santa Cruz de, a head settle- 
ment of the district of the alcaldia mayor of Te- 
pozcolula in Nueva Espana. It contains 116 
families of Indians, who live by the cultivation 
of wheat, maize, and French-beans. It is of a 
cold temperature, and is 11 leagues e. by s. of its 
capital. 

YUNGA, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Conchucos in Peru; annexed to 
the curacy of the settlement of San Marcos. 

YUNGAI, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Huailas, in the same kingdom as 
the former. It is large and populous, contains 


Y U R 


Y U R 


4.39 


two parishes, and in its vicinity, in a ravine, are 
to be seen the ruins of another settlement, called 
Ancas, which contained about 1,500 inhabitants, 
all of whom perished by a sudden inundation, 
from the irruption of a great mountain of snow, 
occasioned by an earthquake which took place 
here on January 6, 1725. 

YUNGAS, a race of people who live retired 
to the n. e. of the province and government of 
Guayaquil, in the lands which are bounded by 
the 5 . w. by the province of Latacunga in the 
kingdom ol Quito, and toward Angamarca. They 
are Mustees , Mulattoes, and other casts. They 
sow and cultivate tobacco, cotton, and cacao; are 
scattered, and independent of all government and 
subjection, and also amongst them are some In- 
dians of the ancient nation of the Yungas, from 
whom they have taken their name. They are 
half Christians, but have neither instruction or 
parish. They are also called the Coiorados. 

YUNGUI, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Chancay in Peru; annexed to 
the curacy ot the settlement oflguari. 

YUNGUYO, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Omasuyos in the same kingdom 
as the former; situate in the peninsula of Copa- 
cavana of the great lake Titicaca. 

YUNGUI, a settlement of the province and 
government of Chucuito in the same kingdom as 
the former; situate e. of the town of Moquehua. 

YUNTA, a settlement of the province and 
government of Tucumau in Peru ; situate in the 
barren tract of the salines to the n. of the settle- 
ment of Ambargasta. 

YUPAN, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Conchucos in Peru ; annexed to 
the curacy of the settlement of Llapo. 

YUPANA, a small river of the province and 
government of Cumana; which rises in the sierra 
of Imataca, runs s. and enters the Cuyuni by the 
n. side. 

YUPURA. — See Caqueta. 

YUQUI, a river of the province and govern- 
ment of Paraguay. It is small, and enters the 
river of this name, nearly opposite the Yabebiri, 
which comes from Chaco. 

YUQUIPA, Santa ana de, a settlement of 
the province and government of Quixos and 
Macas, in the kingdom of Quito. 

YURA, a settlement of the province and cor- 
regimiento of Collahuas in Peru ; annexed to 
the curacy of the settlement of Llota. It has, 
at a league’s distance, a mountain of lime-stone, 
which article they prepare in ovens, and carry for 
sale to various parts, especially to Arequipa, which 
is seven leagues off. 


YURACARES, a river of the province and 
government of Santa Cruz de la Sierra, in Peru. 
It rises in the cordillera, from various streams 
which unite, runs n. and enters the Marmore, in 
the country of the Indians, from whence it takes 
its name. 

YURANI, a river of the province and go- 
vernment of Guay ana ; which rises from a lake 
in the mountains of the e coast, runs from n. to 
s. and enters the river Cuyuni just before this 
joins the sea. 

YURAYACO, a settlement of the province 
and corregimiento of Chancay in Peru ; annexed 
to the curacy of the settlement of Canchas. 

YURI, a small river of the province and go- 
vernment of Guayana or Nueva Andalucia. It 
rises in the sierra of Maiguatida ; runs e. and 
enters the Arebato. 

YURIMA, a river of the province and corre- 
gimiento of Pomabamba in Peru. It runs n. and 
turning its course to e. forming an S. enters into 
the large river Beni. 

YURIMAGUAS, a barbarous nation of In- 
dians, inhabiting the woods s. of the Maranon, 
in the missions of Mainas, which were held by 
the Jesuits. There is a settlement of these In- 
dians reduced to the Catholic faith by those mis- 
sionaries, and named Nuestra Senora de las 
Nieves de los Yurimaguas. This settlement is 
on the shore of the river Guallaga. 

YURIMOS, a barbarous nation of Indians, 
but little known, inhabiting the w oods n. of the 
river Iza or Putumayu. 

YURIRAPUND ARO, a head settlement of 
the district of the alcaldia mayor of Zelaya, in 
the province and bishopric of Mechoacan. It 
contains 485 families of Indians, and a convent 
of the religious of San Agustin, one of the most 
magnificent buildings in the whole kingdom : 15 
leagues s. w. of its capital, and is generally 
called Yurira for brevity. 

YURMASICA, a settlement of the province 
and corregimiento of Chachapoyas in Peru. 

YURNA, a territory and country of great 
extent, occupied formerly by the nation of the 
Aguas Indians, on the s. shore of the river Ma- 
ranon. At present nothing is known but its 
name. 

YURU, Besni, or Muria. A river of the 
province and country of las Amazonas, according 
to Mr. Beilin. It runs nearly from w. to e. and 
enters the Rio Negro. 

YURUA, a large river of the kingdom of 
Peru; the origin of ivhich is little known, as the 
river runs through the countries of infidel In- 
dians, until it enters the Maranon. The geo- 


440 


Y U R 


Y Z A 


grapher, Don Juan de la Cruz, quoting Mr. 
Bowel asserts, that it is the Yurba that is the same 
as the Amarumava, and not the Yurua, as accord- 
ing to the father Manuel Rodriguez in his history 
of the Maranon, where he makes its source in the 
mountains of the Andes of Cuchoa, and says, that 
after running many leagues to n. it turns e. and 
afterwards returns to its first course; and, in the 
territory and country of the Curianis Indians, 
enters the Maranon. 

Yurua, a small island of the coast of Brasil, 
opposite that of Marajo, between those of Ma- 
chiana and Alitatis. 

YURUANI, a small river of the province and 
colony of Surinam, belonging to the Dutch. It 
is one of those which enter the Caroni by the n. 
side. 

Yuruani, another, also small, of the same 
province. It runs e. and enters the Caura above 
the rapid stream of the Chapara. 

YURUARIO, a river of the province and 
government of Guayana or Nueva Andalucia. 
It rises from a lake which is in the mountains to 
the e. : it runs from n. to s. and enters the Cur- 
guni, just before this joins the sea. 

Yuruario, a settlement of the same pro- 
vince; a reduction of Indians by the Capuchin 
Fathers, situate on the shore of the former 
river. 

YURUBASI, a river of the province and coun- 
try of las Amazonas ; which rises n. of the lake 
Cumapi, and from a waste-water of the arm of 
the same lake. It runs e. and enters the river 
Negro, opposite one of the arms of the river 
Parima. 

YURUBECHI, or Maria, a river of the 
same province and country as the former, in the 
district possessed by the Portuguese. It rises in 
the territory of the Orelludos Indians, runs e. 
inclining to s. e. for many leagues, and enters, 
very abundantly, into the Negro, opposite the 
mouth of the Cababury. Mr. de la Condamine 
calls it Yurubesa, and says, that it enters the 
aforesaid in lat. 42' s. 

YURUHA, a fertile and beautiful valley of 
the province and corregimienlo of Maule, in the 
kingdom of Chile. 

YURUPA, a large and very abundant river 
of the Nuevo Reyno de Granada. It is in its 
origin an arm of the Caqueta, which, increasing 
itself as it goes along, becomes so large from 
collecting- the waters of other rivers, as, upon 
entering the Maranon, to have been frequently 
mistaken for the Orinoco. 

YURUSNIES, a barbarous nation of Indians, 


who dwell n. of the river Maranon : always united 
with the nations of the Iquitos, the Zapatoas, 
and the Abixiras, to make war against the Che- 
velos. It is ferocious though not numerous. 

YUTAI, or Aetau, or Yata, [known also in 
the English maps by the name of Jutay,] a large 
and most abundant river of the kingdom of 
Peru, [which rises from the large lake of Rogua- 
guado, which is about 180 miles e. n. e. of Cuzco, 
runs ra., and enters the Maranon, or Amazonas, 
near the settlements of Traquetamha, by the s. 
part, in lat. 2° 40 / s.] It is much renowned for 
its riches, and for the multitude of nations 
which inhabit its shores ; such as the Tipunas, 
Guanatus, Ozuanas, Moruas, Nonas, Conomo- 
mas, Marianas, and Omaguas, which are those 
who dwell nearest to Peru. These nations wear 
attached to their ears and nostrils large pieces of 
gold. This was, according to the Father Acuna, 
the province, to the discovery of which Pedro de 
Ursua went out by order of the viceroy, the 
Marquis of Canete, but which he did not find 
from having made his entrance by a branch of 
this river, which runs some leagues below' : so that 
when he entered the Maranon, these nations of 
Indians lay higher up, and it was impossible for 
him to go back to find them, owing to the im- 
petus of the currents, according to the geo- 
grapher, Don Juan de la Cruz." Mr. De Lisle 
names this river Otapari. 

Yutai, a settlement of the province and go- 
vernment of Cuenca, in the kingdom of Quito; 
situate on the shore of the river Abenico. 

YUTI, a settlement of the province and go- 
vernment of Paraguay, situate on the shore of 
the Tebiquariguaza : [on the road from Villa 
Rica to Candelaria ; and about 50 miles from 
the former ; in lat. 26° 35' 56" s. ; long. 56° 16' 
48" ».] 

YUYAPARI. See Orinoco. 

YWAPOY, a river of the province and go- 
vernment of Guayana, in the part belonging to 
the Dutch. &amp; 

YWASEE, a settlement of Indians of the 
province and colony of N. Carolina, situate on 
the -bore of the river Euphasee. 

YZA, a territory or extensive country of the 
nation of Indians, called the Moscas or Muiscas, 
in the Nuevo Reyno de Granada, in the e. part 
of Bogota, and s. e. of Tundama. It was dis- 
covered and entered pacifically by Juan de St. 
Martin, in 1537 : it has a settlement of its name. 

Yza, a river. See Putumayo. 

YZAUANDE. SeelsQUANDE. 


ZAC 


ZAC 


44 l 


z. 


ZABALETAS, a settlement of the province and 
government of Antioquia, in the Nuevo Reyno 
de Granada ; situate near the coast of the S. Sea, 
on the shore of the river of Buenaventura. 

ZACAN, Santa Ana de, a head settlement 
of the district of the alcaldia mayor of Cordoba, 
in Nueva Espana. It contains 333 families of 
Indians, five of Spaniards, and four of Mustees: 
four leagues n. n. w. of its capital. 

ZACANHUALIN, a settlement of the head 
settlement of the district of Atengo, and alcaldia 
mayor of Chilapa, in Nueva Espana : six leagues 
w. of its head settlement. 

ZACAPALA, a settlement of the head settle- 
ment and alcaldia mayor of Antlan, in Nueva 
Espana. It contains 20 families of Indians, and 
is three leagues s. w. of its head settlement. 

ZACAPO, Santa Ana de, a settlement of 
the head settlement of the district of Tirindaro 
and alcaldia mayor of Valladolid, in the province 
and bishopric of Mechoacan, situate in a spa- 
cious plain of a mild temperature. In its vici- 
nity, towards the n. is a spring of water, which 
forms a small river, and runs e. and enters a 
lake. It has in it a convent of the religious of 
San Francisco. Its population is composed of 
80 families of Indians, applied to the cultivation 
of the land, including those who inhabit five 
ranchos in its district : 12 leagues n. of its 
capital. 

ZACAPUASTLA, a head settlement of the 
district of the alcaldia mayor of San Juan de los 
Llanos in Nueva Espana. It contains 500 fa- 
milies of Indians, and 40 of Spaniards, Mulat- 
toes, and Mustees , including those of the wards 
of its district, who are occupied in agriculture : 
seven leagues n w. of its capital. 

ZACAPUATO, a small settlement of the 
head settlement of the district of Cuzamala, and 
alcaldia mayor of Azuchitlan in Nueva Espana : 
on the shore of the river, which they call de los 
Bejucos, the waters of which diminish in the 
summer-time, though in the winter they swell 
to such a size as to be extremely difficult and 
dangerous to pass. The settlement is situate 
half a league from the high road ; is of a hot 
and dry temperature, and consequently barren 
in vegetable productions. In its vicinity is a 

voe. v. 


large estate, in which the inhabitants are em- 
ployed as labourers, and at the distance of four 
leagues is a mineral of silver, called Alva de 
Liste; which, although it has fallen into some 
decay, from the little metal that it yields, is still 
worked. Near to the settlement is a sugar- 
engine, and some ranchos , in which are bred 
some large cattle, this being the chief branch of 
commerce. In the aforesaid places, and in the 
settlement, dwell 14 families of Spaniards, (i of 
Mustees , 20 of Mulattoes, and 34 of Indians. 

ZACAPULA, a settlement of the kingdom of 
Guatemala. 

ZACATA, a settlement and asiento of silver 
mines of the province and government of Chu- 
quito in Peru, annexed to the curacy of Juli, 
In its district are tw o chapels at two salines, by 
which the whole- of the province is supplied. 

ZACATECAS, a province and alcaldia mayor 
of the kingdom of Nueva Galicia and bishopric 
of Guadalaxara ; bounded e. by the province of 
Panuco; w. by that of Chiametlan ; n. by the 
kingdom of Nueva Vizcaya ; s. by the province 
of Guadalaxara; s. w. by that of Xalisco ; n. zo. 
by that of Culiacan. It is situate in the tropic 
of Cancer, and is in length upwards of 100 
leagues from e. to w. and 55 in width at the 
broadest part, narrowing very much at other 
parts ; [but, according to the most recent infor- 
mation, it is 210 miles long from n. to s. and 
177 wide from e. to &lt;©.] The temperature is 
generally dry and cold ; on which account, the 
frosts and snows are in the winter very preva- 
lent. The territory is rugged and mountainous, 
but very rich, and abounding in minerals of sil- 
ver, these affording its principal commerce, and 
being the branch by which it has been much en- 
riched. This province is indeed one of the most 
opulent of N. America. In the n. part, which 
is somewhat less craggy and more temperate, 
there are found in abundance wheat and other 
vegetable productions ; and in the woods are birds 
and animals of the chase. It is also one of the 
best peopled provinces of this kingdom. 

[This last assertion of Alcedo is peculiarly at 
variance with later writers, for (says Humboldt) 
the province of Zacatecas is singularly ill peo- 
pled, and consists of a mountainous and arid 
3 L 


442 


ZAC 


ZAC 


tract, exposed to a continual inclemency of cli- 
mate. It is bounded (by his description) on the 
n. by the intendancy of Durango ; on the e, by 
the intendancy of San Luis Potosi ; on the s. by 
the province of Guanaxuato ; and on the w. by 
that of Guadalaxara. Its greatest length is 85 
leagues, and its greatest breadth from Sombrerete 
to the Real de Ramos, 51 leagues. 

The intendancy of Zacatecas is nearly of the 
same extent with Switzerland, which it resembles 
in many geological points of view. The relative 
population is hardly equal to that of Sweden. 

The table-land, which forms the centre of the 
intendancy of Zacatecas, and which rises to more 
than 2,000 metres, or 6,561 feet, in height, is 
formed of Sienites, a rock on which repose, ac- 
cording to the excellent observations of M. Va- 
lencia, (who wrote a very interesting description 
of the mines of Zacatecas ) strata of primitive 
schistus and schistous chlorites ( chlorith-schiefer.) 
The schistus forms the base of the mountains of 
grauwacke and trappish porphyry. North of the 
town of Zacatecas are nine small lakes abound- 
ing in muriate, and especially carbonate of soda. 
This carbonate, which, from the old Mexican word 
tequixquilit , goes by the name of tequesquite, is 
of great use in the dissolving of the muriates, and 
of the sulphurets of silver. M. Garces, an advocate 
of Zacatecas, has recently fixed the attention of 
his countrymen on the tequesquite, which is also 
to be found at Zacualco, between Valladolid and 
Guadalaxara, in the valley of San Francisco, near 
San Luis Potosi, at Acusquilco, near the mines of 
Bolanos, at Chorro near Durango, and in five 
lakes around the town of Chihuahua. The cen- 
tral table-land of Asia is not more rich in soda 
than Mexico. 

The population of the intendancy of Zacatecas 
amounted in 1803, to 153,300 souls : the extent 
of surface in square leagues is 2,355, giving 65 
inhabitants to the same leagues. 

The most remarkable places of this intendancy 
are, 

Zacatecas, Fresnillo, Sombrerete. 

Besides these three places, the intendancy of 
Zacatecas contains also interesting metalliferous 
seams near the Sierra de Pinos, Chalchiguitec, 
San Miguel del Mezquitas, and Mazapil. It was 
this province also, which in the mine of the 
Veta Negra de Sombrerete, exhibited an example 
of the greatest wealth of any seam yet disco- 
vered in the tw o hemispheres.] 

The capital is the city of the same name : 
founded in a spot, convenient from its proxi- 


mity, to the rich silver mines which were disco- 
vered by Juan de Tolosa, and who was one of 
the first settlers of this town. It stands in a 
narrow pass, formed by the serrania of the 
mines ; and on this account, although the towm 
be large, since its population exceeds 5,000 fa- 
milies of Spaniards, Alustees, and Mulattoes, it 
has only one street, the houses occupying the 
heights on both sides, so that although the su- 
perior edifices are lofty, the huts exceed in 
height the highest towers. [Averaging five per- 
sons in each family, the population has consi- 
derably increased of late years, since Humboldt 
states it at present at 33,000 souls.] It has a 
great number of nobility, who enjoy themselves 
in consequence of the riches of the mines, which 
are worked by a great number of hands. The 
houses are beautiful, and in their erection much 
care has been taken to supply the defects of the 
sloping ground ; and the quality of these build- 
ings differ much in proportion to the wealth of 
the occupiers. It has, besides the parish church, 
convents of the religious of San Domingo, San 
Francisco, San Agustin, la Merced, a college 
which belonged to the Jesuits, and an hospital of 
San Juan de Dios. It is of a cold temperature, 
and at one league’s distance to the e. ; it has^ a 
sumptuous temple and sanctuary of Nuestra 
Senora de Guadalupe, and a college of Francis- 
can missionaries, from which went forth, the first 
of this order, who undertook the conversion of 
the Indians in the province of los Asinais, or of 
Texas, with the assistance of the venerable 
Father Fr. Antonio Margil de Jesus, and his 
companion Fr. Isidro Felix de Espinosa. [This 
city is 250 miles n. n. w. of Mexico, 140 n. e. of 
Guadalaxara, and 140 s. e. of Durango. In lat. 
23° V n. and long. 101° 35 / s&gt;.] 

Zacatecas, a settlement and real of mines of 
the above province and alcaldia mayor, situate 
three leagues from the capital. 

[ZACATULA, a small sea-port of the S. Sea, 
on the frontiers of the intendancy of Valladolid, 
between the ports of Siguantanejo and Colima.] 
ZACATZAN de las Madzanas. A juris- 
diction and alcaldia mayor of N ueva Espana. It 
is of a cold temperature, but very fertile, and 
abounding in fruit, cotton, beans, vetches, and 
maize, of which it gathers three crops a year. It 
fattens a considerable portion of swine cattle, 
and in these carries on a great trade, as well as 
in horses and small cattle, of all of which it has 
breeds. It is one of the best peopled jurisdic- 
tions, and contains the follow ing settlements : 


ZAC 


ZAC 


443 


Santiago, 

S. Juan Aquistla, 
S. Baltazar, 

Sta. Catalina Mar- 
tin, 

San Christoval, 

T epexcoquatro, 

S. Miguel Tanaco, 
San Juan Ahua- 
catlan, 

San Francisco, 

San Marcos, 

Sta. Maria Ixtepec, 
S. Francisco Cax- 
huacan, 

San Juan, 

San Miguel, 

San Mateo, 

Santa Barbara, 

San Andres, 

San Antonio, 

San Simon, 

Santa Maria, 

Santo Tomas, 

San Miguel, 

S. J oseph Amatlan, 
S. Felipe, 

The capital is the 


La Magdalena, 

Santa Maria, 

Olintla, 

San Salvador Huehuet- 
lan, 

Santa Catarina, 

San Geronimo, 
Xuxupango, 

Santiago Cuyay, 

Santa Maria Zapotit- 
lan, 

San Francisco Tapay- 
ula, 

San Pedro Comocautla, 
Nacatlan, 

S. Sebastian Tuctla, 
Santiago Hitcilan, 
Santa Maria Zomco- 
lotla, 

San Andres Teutalpan, 
San Antonio, 

Xolapa, 

Chilaque, 

S. Pedro Tlaolan, 

San Andres Chincontla, 
Sta. Maria Patla. 


settlement of the same 
name, situate in a rough sierra ; though plea- 
sant and fertile in fruit trees, and surrounded by 
five rivers, the waters of which in the winter 
render the access to the town difficult. It con- 
tains 300 families of Spaniards, Mustees, and 
Mulattoes, and 780 of Mexican Indians ;7produces 
the same fruits as those mentioned in the juris- 
diction. It has a convent of San Francisco ; 
and, at five leagues distant, some abundant cop- 
per mines, which are worked and belong to the 
house of the Duke of Alva 
of Mexico. 


35 leagues e. n. e. 


ZACATEPEC, a settlement of the head set- 
tlement of the district and alcaldia mayor of Tez- 
coco or Tezcuco, in the same kingdom as the for- 
mer. It contains 156 families of Indians, and 
46 of Spaniards, Mustees and Mulattoes ; is one 
short league e. of its capital. 

Zacatepec, another settlement in the head 
settlement of the district of Amuzgos and alcaldia 
mayor of Xicayan in the same kingdom. It con- 
tains 97 families of Indians, who employ them- 
selves in the cultivation and commerce of cochi- 
neal, cotton, tobacco, and vaynilla ; 20 leagues w. 
by n. of its head settlement. 

Z ACATULA, a jurisdiction and alcaldia mayor 
of the province and bishopric of Mechoacan. It 


is very thinly peopled, and scanty in productions ; 
and, although it has many times had an alcalde 
mayor , it has been generally added to the town 
of Leon, and this, notwithstanding the great 
inconvenience to the administration of justice, 
owing to its great distance from that place. Its 
population consists of only three settlements, 
which are, 

S. Agustin Coyuca, Maxaltepec, Tecpan. 

The capital is the settlement of its name, of a 
hot temperature ; inhabited by 30 families of In- 
dians, its district being filled with mills and ran- 
chos, , in which dwell 100 families of Spaniards, 
Mustees, and Mulattoes ; and its territory being- 
fertilized by the large river of its name, which 
runs with a precipitate course to enter the S. Sea : 
130 leagues w. by n. of Mexico. 

ZACAZONAPA, Santa Maria de, a settle- 
ment of the head settlement of the district of S. 
Francisco del Valle, and alcaldia mayor of Zul- 
tepec, in the same kingdom as the former ; an- 
nexed to the curacy of the settlement of San Mar- 
ten. It contains 37 families of Indians, who em- 
ploy themselves in cultivating fruit and seeds, 
which yield in abundance through the benefit of 
the irrigation of a river which fertilizes this terri- 
tory : three leagues s. of the settlement of Santo 
Tomas. 

[ZACHEO, or Desechio, a small island, 
eight or nine leagues to the n. e. by n. of Mona, 
between the island of St. Domingo and that of 
Puerto Rico. It is nothing more than a green 
mountain 800 or 1000 yards long.] 

ZACOALPAN, a settlement of the head set- 
tlement of the district of Tetelzinco and alcaldia 
mayor of Tetelzinco and alcaldia mayor of Co- 
autla in the same kingdom. Near it passes the 
river Amazina, which waters its territory, and 
makes it fertile and delightful, through an abun- 
dance of flowers, fruits, and vegetables. It con- 
tains 30 families of Spaniards, 12 of Mustees , 60 
of Mulattoes, and 120 of Indians ; five leagues e. 
from its head settlement. 

ZACOTIPA, a settlement of the head settle- 
ment of the district of San Luis, of the coast and 
alcaldia mayor of Tlapa in Nueva Espaha. It 
contains 78 families of Indians, who occupy them- 
selves in cultivating cotton, of which they make 
very fine woven stuffs, and by which they main- 
tain a regular trade ; two leagues and a half s. of 
its capital. 

ZACUALPA, San Vicente de, a settlement 
of the head settlement of the district of Huetepec 
and alcaldia mayor of Cuernavaca in N ueva Es- 
paha. It contains 46 families of Indians. 

3l2 


144 


Z A M 


Z A M 


Zacualpa, another settlement, in the head 
settlement of the district of Almololoyan and 
alcaldia mayor of Colima in the same kingdom. 

It is of a cold temperature, and situate on the 
skirt of the volcano of Colima. 

Zacualpa, another, of the province and alcal- 
dia mayor of Capabanastla in the kingdom of 
Guatemala. 

ZACUALUCA, a settlement of the head settle- 
ment of the district and alcaldia mayor of Theoti- 
huacan in Nueva Espana ; one league w. of its 
capital. 

ZACACHE, Santa Ana de, a settlement of 
the head settlement of the district of Cuilapa and 
alcaldia mayor of Quatro Villas in the same king- 
dom as the former. It is the largest settlement 
of the whole jurisdiction, contains 400 families of 
Indians, who employ themselves in the cultiva- 
tion and trade of cochineal, seeds, fruit, and col- 
lecting coals and wood ; four leagues s. s. e. of its 
head settlement. 

ZAGUIN, Cano de, a large arm of the river 
Orinoco, by which this communicates with the 
Aracoa. 

ZAILA, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Parinacochas in Peru. 

ZALANGO, a small island of the S. Sea ; 
situate near the coast of the province and govern- 
ment of Guayaquil, in the kingdom of Quito, of 
the district and division of la Puna. 

ZAMBA, a settlement of the province and 
government of Cartagena in the Nuevo Reyno de 
Granada ; situate in the bay formed by the point 
of its name, and in the vicinity of which a fort 
has been built. 

Zamba, the aforesaid point of the same coast, is 
between the city of Cartagena and the mouth of 
the river Grande de la Magdalena. 

Zaaiba, a bay on the coast of the above pro- 
vince and government. It is very large, conve- 
nient, and sheltered from the winds ; for which 
reason it is much frequented by vessels, which 
ordinarily enter it to take in water. 

Zamba, an island, called Galera de Zamba, 
through its long and narrow figure, and forming 
one of the sides of the former bay. 
ZAMBALLAS. See Samballos. 
ZAMBIZA, a settlement of the province and 
kingdom of Quito, in the district of the corregi- 
miento of Las cinco leguas de la Capital. 

ZAMBORONDON, a settlement of the pro- 
vince and government of Guayaquil in the king- 
dom of Quito; situate on a lofty spot near the 
shore of the river Babahoyo. It has this name 
through a zamibo , called Rondon, who was the 


first who established himself here. It is of a 
mild and healthy temperature, has a parish priest, 
and is in lat. 48' s. 

ZAMBRANO, a settlement of the province 
and government of Cartagena in the Nuevo 
Reyno de Granada ; situate op the shore of the 
river Grande de la Magdalena. 

ZAMORA, a jurisdiction and alcaldia mayor of 
the province and bishopric of Mechoacan in N ue va 
Espana, called formerly de Xocona. It is of a 
very rich territory, fertile in wheat, cotton, maize, 
barley, and fruit of many sorts, and abounding in 
neat cattle and horses ; all the which render it 
one of the best and most esteemed jurisdictions 
in the whole kingdom. It formerly yielded also 
much flax, cloves, and saffron, but the cultivation 
of these productions has been of late abandoned 
through the concomitant expenses, as well as be- 
cause the inhabitants are ignorant of the mode of 
working those metals. Its population consists of 
the following settlements, 

Zanguyo, Comuato, 

La Palma, Xacona, 

Coxumatlan, San Pedro, 2, 

San Pedro, Tanganziquaro, 

Puxaqueran, Santiago, 

Guarachita, Xaripo, 

Ixtlan, Ario. 

The capital is the town of its name ; situate in 
the middle of a valley, which serves as a skirt to 
the sierra of also the same title. This valley is 
nearly four leagues long, and somewhat more 
than three wide, and is surrounded by many 
mountains and thick groves of trees, amongst 
which are several kinds of wood esteemed alike 
in this and in the other jurisdictions. It is of a 
mild and dry temperature, and the town is beau- 
tifully disposed as to its houses, streets, and public 
buildings. It extends a quarter of a league from 
n. to 5. and somewhat less from e. to w. It has 
many gardens and orchards, which are irrigated 
by a fine river, called the Rio Grande, which has 
also several other smaller rivers, which may be 
called its branches ; this river runs s. and abounds 
in fine fish, and the greater part of the town 
stands upon its banks, and on these are also many 
fields of wheat. 

The town was founded in 1540 by order of 
the king, for a garrison, and as a frontier to the 
Chichimeca nation. Its population is composed 
of 300 families of Spaniards, ]\lustees, and Mulat- 
toes ; it has, besides the parish church, two con- 
vents of religious, the one of San Francisco, the 
other of San Juan de Dios, and in the latter are 
two large infirmaries. About 40 years ago there 


Z A M 


Z A N 


&gt;vas added to this town a ward inhabited by 30 
families of Indians of the Teca nation, and which 
is very fertile and pleasant, and abounding- in 
fine water, maize, French-beans, and medicinal 
herbs. In the vicinity of the town they count 32 
estates, with their gardens and orchards ; these ren- 
der the country very delightful to behold ; and in 
them assist no less than 158 families of Spaniards, 
80 of Mustees, and 33 of Mulattoes. [Zamora is 
155 miles ay. n.zo . of Mexico, in lat. 20° 2 / n. and 
long. 101° 4 6' ©.] 

Zamora, another city, in the province and 
government of Jaen de Bracamoros, or Yaguar- 
songo, in the kingdom of Quito. It was founded 
by Alonso de Mercadillo, and not Pedro, as is 
asserted by the ex-jesuit Coleti, in 1549, between 
the two rivers of Yamquambi to the e. and that 
of Zamora to the s. ; but, in 1663, its inhabitants 
changed its situation farther to the w. and on the 
shore of the river Zamora. It is of a hot tem- 
perature, subject to rain, and barren in vegetable 
productions, but abounding in gold mines, which 
were formerly worked and produced great wealth; 
from whence it became to be a large, rich and 
handsome town ; but to day, since the labour of 
its mines has been abandoned, it has fallen to 
such decay as to be nothing but a miserable 
village, not deserving the name of city. It has 
besides the church, a very poor convent of the 
religious of St. Domingo, and it is still inhabited 
by some illustrious, though poor and much re- 
duced families ; [234 miles s. of Quito, and 85 
n. n. w. of the city of Jaen, in lat. 4° 2' s. and 
long. 78° 50 / w .] 

Zamora, another city, with the addition of 
Nueva, in the province and government of Mara- 
caibo and Nuevo Reyno de Granada. See Ma- 
racaibo. 

Zamora, a large river which takes its name 
from the city which it washes, in the province of 
Jaen in the kingdom of Quito. It collects in its 
course the waters of the rivers Pucii, Bombasi- 
caro, Zabanilla, Numbixa, Yamquambi, Yaruse, 
Chicoasa, and others by the n. part ; and those 
of Surinisa, Tabuahua, Urumanga, Irambisa, 
Paraasa, Iranasa, Yugutua, Yerisa, and others 
by the s. part. It enters the woods of the Xiva- 
ros Indians, and running to the e. for upwards of 
57 leagues, disembogues itself in a very large 
stream by the w. part into the Mayo or Santiago, 
[and with this name enters the Maranon, or 
Amazonas, near St. Borja.] 

ZAMPALLON. See Sampallon. 

ZAMUCOS, San Ignacio de, a settlement 


445 

of the province and government of Chaco in 
Peru ; situate on the shore of the river Paraguay. 

ZAMUDIOS, a river of the province and 
government of Chaco in the Nuevo Reyno de 
Granada. It rises in the grand cordillera , runs 
w. and enters the S. Sea, to the e. of the Point of 
Salinas. 

ZANA. See Sana. 

ZANAYAQU1LPA, a head settlement of the 
district of the alcaldui mayor of Xilotepec in 
Nueva Espana; annexed to the curacy of its 
capital, from whence it lies four leagues to e. 
It contains 83 Indian families. 

ZANCA, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Quispicanchi in Peru ; annexed 
to the curacy of the settlement of Papres. 

ZANCOS, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Yilcas Huaman in the same king- 
dom as the former. 

ZANCUDOS, San Joseph de eos, a settle- 
ment of the missions which were held by the 
Jesuits in the province of San Juan de los Llanos 
of the Nuevo Reyno de Granada; situate on the 
shore of the river Apure. 

ZAND, [or, rather, Sand] Point, an extremity 
of the island of Tobago, which looks to thes. oppo- 
site the point ofArecifes, of the island of Trinidad. 

ZANGUAL, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Truxillo in Peru ; on the shore 
of the river Yiru. 

ZANGLIYO, a head settlement of the district 
of the alcaldia mayor of Zamora in Nueva Es- 
pana. It is of a hot and moist temperature, 
bounded n. by the jurisdiction of Zapotlan of 
Nueva Galicia, from whence it lies 18 leagues 
to the n. by the jurisdiction of la Barca of the 
same province, which is 14 leagues distant; and 
by the n. and s. by the jurisdiction of Xiquilpan, 
at two leagues distance. It sutlers much from 
scarcity of water, providing itself with the rain 
which falls periodically. It contains 14 families 
of Spaniards, 15 of Indians, 10 of Mustees , and 
live of Mulattoes, who trade in some seeds and 
pita. It has a convent of religious of San Agus- 
tin, and is 12 leagues zo. of its capital. 

ZANJON, Primero, a river of the province 
and government of Mainas in the kingdom of 
Quito. It rises e. of the settlement of San Pe- 
dro, runs to n. n. e. and enters the Machapo. 

Zanjon, another river in the same province 
and kingdom as the former, with the surname of 
Segundo, for distinction. It is the same which 
changes its name to Machdco, See tin's article, 

Zanjon, another, of the district of Guadaiab- 


446 


ZAP ZAP 


quen,in the kingdom of Chile. It runs nearly n. 
and enters the Valdivia. 

ZANOJE, a settlement of the province and 
government of Venezuela in the Nuevo Reyno 
de Granada ; situate on the shore of the river 
Guarico, opposite the mouth of the Orituco. 

ZAORIPA, a settlement of the missions which 
were held by the Jesuits in the province and 
government of Sonora. 

ZAPALLOS, a river of the province and cor- 
regimiento of Pastos in the Nuevo Reyno de 
Granada. It rises e. of the city of Caguan, runs 
e. and enters the grand river Caqueta, between 
those of Caguan and la Fragua. 

ZAPALUTLA, a settlement of the province 
and alcaldia mayor of Chiapa and kingdom of 
Guatemala in the district of Comitlan. 

ZAPANGAS, a settlement of the province and 
government of Costarica in the same kingdom as 
the former ; situate near the coast of the S. Sea, 
and of Cape Blanco. 

ZAPANQUI, a settlement of the.province and 
corregimiento ofSicasica in Peru. 

ZAPARAS, a barbarous nation of Indians, 
descended from the Encabellados in the province 
of Sucumbios, and in the vicinities of the river 
Curaray. 

Zaparas, another nation of Indians in the 
province and government of Venezuela, of the 
Nuevo Reyno de Granada; bounded n. by the 
Guajiros. 

Zaparas, a settlement of the province and 
government of Maracaibo in the same kingdom ; 
situate on the e. coast, and at the point formed by 
the great lake of Maracaibo. 

ZAPAS, San Salvador de, a settlement of 
the missions which were held by the Jesuits in 
the province and government of Mainas of the 
kingdom of Quito. 

ZAPATERO, a small island, situate in the 
great lake of Nicaragua. 

ZAPATOSA, a lake of the province and go- 
vernment of Santa Marta, in the Nuevo Reyno de 
Granada, formed from various rivers which rise 
from the sierra Nevada (snowy) and empties 
itself by four arms, which afterwards unite, and 
with the name of Cesare, enters the Grande de la 
Magdalena. 

Zapatosa, a settlement of the same province 
and kingdom. 

ZAPAZOS, a barbarous nation oflndianswho 
dwell in the n. n. e. of the province and corregi- 
miento of Guamico in Peru ; bounded by the 
nation of the Pantaguas, and is but little known. 


ZAPE, a settlement of the province and go- 
vernment of Antioquia in the Nuevo Reyno de 
Granada ; situate on the shore of the river San 
Agustin. 

ZAPILOSA, San Jacinto de, a settlement 
of the head settlement of the district ofYahuive, 
and alcaldia mayor of Villalta. It contains 72 
families of Indians, and is six leagues n. of its 
capital. 

[ZAPITIVA, a small scattered settlement of 
Brasil, four leagues from Santa Cruz, formerly 
the property of the Jesuits, and now the royal 
farm of the Prince Regent of Portugal. It is 40 
English miles from Rio Janeiro. The road from 
Zapitiva to Rio Janeiro is composed of primitive 
granite : in some parts are large stones, ap- 
proximating to basalt ; and other parts consist 
of a fine clay. The dwellings on this route are 
very few, but there is one well known to travel- 
lers as the half-way house between the village and 
the capital, called Panelera, or the Bake-house. J 

ZAPO, Valley of, in the province and cor- 
regimiento of Muzo, of the Nuevo Reyno de 
Granada, thus called by the first Spaniards who 
entered at the conquest through a very large 
zapo, or valley, which they found here. 

ZAPOCOTLAN, a settlement of the head 
settlement of the district and alcaldia mayor of 
Zochicoatlan, in the same kingdom of Nueva 
Espana as the former. It is very small, its popu- 
lation being reduced to 14 Indian families. Three 
leagues w. of its capital. 

ZAPOPAN, a jurisdiction and alcaldia mayor 
of Nueva Espana in the kingdom of Nueva Ga- 
licia and bishopric of Guadalaxara. It is much 
reduced, consisting only of four settlements, 
which are, — 

San Estevan, Ocotlan, 

Cedazos, Thesistlan. 

The capital is of the same, and has a nume- 
rous population of Spaniards and Mustees, be- 
sides the people who frequently meet here to 
visit the sanctuary of a miraculous image of Our 
Lady, which is venerated in its district. It pro- 
duces abundant crops of maize, wheat, and other 
seeds, with which it does much traffic. Two and 
a half leagues n.w. of Guadalaxara. 

ZAPOSTLAHUACA, a settlement of the head 
settlement of the district of Santa Marta, and al- 
caldia mayor of Tlapa in the same kingdom. It 
contains 2 3 families of Indians applied to the cul- 
tivation of maize and some fruits, the only ones 
it produces. Somewhat more than three leagues 
e. s. e. of its capital. 


ZAP 


ZAPOTAS, a barbarous nation of Indians in- 
habiting- the woods to the s. of the Marahon : 
bounded by the nations of the Abixiras, Iquitos, 
and Yurusnies; and at continual war with the 
Chevalos. 

ZAPOTE, or Zapote Yacu, a river which 
flows down from the mountains to the s. of the 
settlement of Chamicuros, in the s. lands of the 
Maranon. It enters into the Casavatay, in lat. 
5° IPs. 

Zapote, a settlement of the province and cor- 
regimiento of Caxamarquilla in Peru. It has a 
good port in the river Maranon, by which a com- 
munication and commerce are made with the pro- 
vince of Huamachuco. 

Zapote, another settlement, with the dedica- 
tory title of Santa Maria, a head settlement of 
the district of the alcaldia mayor of Zacatlan in 
N ueva Espaha ; to the district of w hich belong 
other six settlements, in which dwell 987 families 
of Indians. 

Zapote, another, in the head settlement of the 
district of Atistlae, and alcaldia mayor of Tlapa 
in the same kingdom. It is of a cold and moist 
temperature, and inhabited by 38 families of In- 
dians who sow maize, their poverty not admit- 
ting anything else. 

ZAPOTECAS, San Iedefonso de eos, a 
city of the province and bishopric of Oaxaca in 
Nueva Espana; founded by the treasurer Alonso 
de Estrada between some very lofty mountains, 
which in many parts seem to out-top the clouds. 
Here it frequently rains, and at times the sun is 
invisible ; nor is there in its precincts a llanura 
of any extent. Notwithstanding the roughness 
and inequality of the territory, its conquest was 
undertaken, and the Zapotecas and Mixes Indians 
were defeated. It is between these two people 
that the city stands, and many are the privileges 
which have been granted it by the Emperor 
Charles V.; and amongst the rest, that all the 
Spaniards who established themselves here should 
enjoy a revenue from the royal funds, and bear 
the title of corregidors ; also it was granted to 
the Indians that they should be free from all kinds 
of tribute. The edifices are of bad quality, the 
soil not permitting better, and they are built of 
clay for want of mortar. It has still a good con- 
vent of St. Domingo, though in 1580 it w as burnt 
and entirely destroyed. 

ZAPOTILTIC, a settlement of the head set- 
tlement of the district, and alcaldia mayor of Sa- 
potlan in Nueva Espana; situate between this 
and the head settlement of Tuspan. It is very 


ZAP 417 

populous, and has a convent of Franciscans. A 
iittle less than three leagues from its capital. 

ZAPOTITLAN, a settlement of the head set- 
tlement of the district ofTuscacuezco, and alcaldia 
mayor of Amola in Nueva Espafia; near two vol- 
canoes which are in the jurisdiction of Colima, 
the one covered with snow, and the other a vol- 
cano. It has a convent of Franciscans, and 80 
families of Indians who cultivate their gardens 
and orchards and cut wood in the sierras of the 
volcanoes. It is 12 leagues e. of its head settle- 
ment, and this distance is filled up with five deep 
ravines, which render impossible the journey in 
the winter-time, since they are then inundated. 

Zapotitean, a province and alcaldia mayor 
of the kingdom of Guatemala; divided, from its 
great extent, into four parts or lieutenancies of 
the alcalde, mayor; the same being Azitlan, Te- 
panatitlan, Quezaltenango, and Totonicapa. 

ZAPOTLAN, a settlement of the head settle- 
ment of the district of Tlacolula, and alcaldia 
mayor of Huamalula in Nueva Espana; in the 
plain of a ravine surrounded by mountains which 
make it very dismal. It is very abundant in 
waters, which gush out of the earth in various 
springs ; and these serve for the irrigation of the 
orchards and crops of seeds It contains 62 fa- 
milies of Indians who cultivate cochineal, with 
wdiich they trade to such an extent, as to exceed 
in their quantity in this article all that is pro- 
cured in the other jurisdictions. Three leagues 
n. of its head settlement. 

Zapote an, another settlement, in the juris- 
diction and alcaldia mayor of Pachuca, of the same 
kingdom : annexed to the curacy of the settle- 
ment of Tezayuca. It contains only 14 families 
of Indians. 

Zapotean, another, of the head settlement of 
the district and alcaldia mayor of Tepic in the 
same kingdom. It contains 106 families of In- 
dians, who have no other traffic than that arising 
from the cultivation of seeds and cotton. Three 
leagues e. by s. of its capital. 

Zapotean, another, which is the head settle- 
ment of the district of the alcaldia mayor of Sen- 
tipac in the same kingdom. It is of a hot tem- 
perature, contains 83 families of Indians, some of 
Spaniards and Mustccs , and a convent of Fran- 
ciscans. Tw enty leagues n.w. of its capital. 

Zapotlan, a shoal of rocks of the N. Sea, 
near the coast of the province and alcaldia mayor 
of Tabasco in Nueva Espana, on the side of the 
point of San Martin. 

ZAPUESA, a settlement of the province and 


44a 


Z A R 


Z A R 


government of Santa Marta, in the Nuevo Reyno 
de Granada; situate on the shore of the lake Za- 
patosa, on the w. side. 

ZAQUALCO, a settlement of the head settle- 
ment of the district of Amaqueca and alcaldia 
mayor of Zayula in Nueva Espana ; situate in a 
plain formed by various mountains. It has a lake 
of salt-water of four leagues long, and its popu- 
lation is of 200 families of Spaniards, Mustees , 
and Mulattoes, and 300 of Indians, who in their 
territory gather much maize, and breed large 
cattle, though its principal commerce is in lea- 
ther, of which they make shoes for sale in the 
other jurisdictions. It has a convent of Francis- 
cans, and is 10 leagues w. by n. of its capital. 

ZAQUALPA, a jurisdiction and alcaldia mayor 
of Nueva Espana, to which is united the district 
of Escateopan. Its jurisdiction consists of 15 
other settlements, head settlements of districts, 


and which are, — 
Marinaltenango, 

San Juan Quetza- 

Coatepec, 

Acapetlahuaya, 

Santa Maria Teolo- 

ls, 

Ixtapa, 

San Francisco Zica- 

lopan, 

puzalco, 

San Surion Totolte- 

S. Simon Otzuma, 

pec, 

Santa Maria Esca- 

Santiago, 

S. Juan Alahuixtlan, 

teopan, 

S. Francisco Coate- 

Santa Maria Tona- 

pec. 

tico, 



The capital, of the same name, is of a benign 
and mild temperature, inclining to hot. It con- 
tains 240 families of Indians with those inhabit- 
ing its wards, 50 of Spaniards, and as many of 
Mustees and Mulattoes, all dedicated to the la- 
bour of the silver mines which are on the river 
Zaqualpa, and in the sowing of wheat, maize, 
and other seeds. In its district are found vari- 
ous mills and engines, in which they make sugar, 
honey, and in which they trade with the other 
jurisdictions. Thirty leagues s. e. one-half s. of 
Mexico. 

Zaqualpa, another settlement, which is the 
head settlement of the district of the alcaldia 
mayor of Tlapa in the same kingdom. It con- 
tains 109 families of Indians, and is three leagues 
n. of its capital. 

ZAR AGOCILLA, a settlement of the pro- 
vince and government of Cartagena in the Nuevo 
Reyno de Granada, of the district of the town of 
Tolu : situate on the coast within the same bay 
of Tolu, to the w. of the town of this name. 

ZARAGOZA, a city of the province and go- 


vernment of Antioquia in the Nuevo Reyno de 
Granada ; founded between the rivers Cauca and 
the Grande de la Magdalena, and on the shore 
of the Nechi, (the waters of which are very de- 
licious, and mixed with sands of gold), in 1581, 
by the Governor Gaspar de Rodas, in the valley 
of Virue. It is of a hot and sickly temperature, 
and very abundant in gold minerals ; these riches 
having attracted to it a great population, so that 
it had become a very considerable and wealthy 
place, but that the influence of its climate has 
reduced it to 200 housekeepers. It produces 
many fruits and fish ; but it is very scantily sup- 
plied with flesh-meat, and wants trade. In its 
district are the celebrated lavaderos , or washing- 
places of gold, called Tumburon Oca, Santa 
Marta, La Raya, San Francisco, Machuca, S. 

J uan, Bara, A valeta, Guinea, Porcio, and T enche. 

Zaragoza, a settlement, called Rincon de 
Zaragoza, in the head settlement of the district 
of Puruandiro, and alcaldia mayor of Valladolid 
in Nueva Espana. It is small, and annexed to 
the curacy of the settlement of Numaran. 

ZARATA, a settlement and capital of the 
province and corrcgimiento ofLarecaxa in Peru; 
situate near the river Beni.. 

Zarata, or Zorate, a small settlement of 
the province and government of Santa Marta in 
the Nuevo Reyno de Granada ; situate on the e. 
shore of the river Grande de la Magdalena, to 
the s. of the town of Teneriffe, and to the w.n.w. 
of the lake of its name. It was formerly large, 
populous, and of great commerce, but now in a 
state of great decay ; of a very warm climate, and 
in lat. 9° 46 / n. 

ZARBE, a river of the province of Los Mar- 
quetones in the Nuevo Reyno de Granada. It 
rises near the city of Muzo to the w., follows its 
course to this rhumb for many leagues, and, unit- 
ing itself with the Carare, enters the Grande de 
la Magdalena, at a small distance from where this 
is entered by the Opon. 

ZARIPA, a river of the province and govern- 
ment of Maracaibo in the Nuevo Reyno de Gra- 
nada. It rises in the sierra Nevada (snowy), 
and enters the Apure, four leagues to the w. of 
the Ticoporo. 

ZARUMA, or Saruma, a town of the pro- 
vince and corregimiento of Loxa in the kingdom 
of Quito ; founded by Captain Alonso de Merca- 
dillo in 1549, with the title of city, which was 
afterwards changed to that of town ; upon the 
river Amarillo. It is of a very hot climate ; 
since, according to the observations of Don Car- 


Z A Y 


Z A Y 


4-10 


los La Condamine, of the Academy of the Sciences 
of Paris, it is only 1,680 yards above the level of 
the sea, which is one half less than is the terri- 
tory of Quito. It has a very good parish church, 
and a convent of the religious observers of San 
Francisco. It was formerly very populous, and 
had many noble families, although, at the pre- 
sent day, it is much reduced ; there being now, 
however, no less than 6,000 souls in it. The 
abundance of its gold minerals has rendered this 
city celebrated, and, although these metals are 
not of the linest alloy, and although the inhabi- 
tants do not understand how + o extract the par- 
ticles of silver and lead, with which they are 
mixed ; yet it is to be observed, that these mines 
are some of the few which have been worked, 
without intermission, from their first discovery to 
the present day ; and yet they are in a state of 
decay, and the city is much dilapidated, since the 
houses which were built upon the mines, many of 
which were so excavated as to give way, have 
fallen in the ruins. Here are many founderies 
and silver-smiths forges, in which they make 
trinkets ; since the gold, unworked, finds no 
market abroad. The natives ai’e discoloured, 
from the malignant vapours from the metals, par- 
ticularly from the quicksilver, which is found in 
every part. The corregidor of Loxa enjoys also 
the title of alcalde mayor of the mines of Zaruma. 
[This town is 30 miles n. w. of Loxa, in lat. 3° 
37' s. and long. 79° 33' w.] 

ZARZA. See Loxa. 

ZASSA, a settlement of the island of Cueva, 
on the n. coast. 

ZAVALITA, a settlement of the province and 
government of Antioquia, in the Nuevo Reyno 
de Granada. 

ZAURA, a small river of the province and 
colony of Surinam, in the part of Guayana pos- 
sessed by the Dutch. It is one of those which 
enter the Cuyuni near its source. 

ZAYULA, or Sayula, a jurisdiction and 
alcadia mayor of Nueva Espana and kingdom of 
Nueva Galicia, in the province and bishopric of 
Mechoacan. It is one of those of the greatest 
extent, being 130 leagues in circumference : it 
abounds in cattle, fruit, and seeds, has many 
workshops, in which are made of their wool a 
certain portion of coarse blankets, this being its 
principal trade. Anciently great numbers of 
cattle used to die from drinking the well-waters, 
which are very thick and unhealthy; but, in 
1742, the precaution was taken of conducting 
the water to the cattle by subterranean aque- 

VOL. V. 


ducts from a stream of sweet and good water, 
rising at the foot of a lofty mountain, two 
leagues from the capital, towards the w. The 
population of this district is numerous, and 
consists of the following settlements : 
Uxmaxaque, Atotonilco, 

Apango, Atemaxaque, 

Atlaco, Xonacatlan, 

Chiquilixpan, Santa Cruz l. 

Amaqueca, Teocuitlan, 

Tepet, Cuyacapan, 

Talalpa, Cacula, 

Xalpa, San Martin, 

Ixhuatlan, Santa Cruz 2. 

San Luis, Teotepec, 

Atoyaque, Axixique, 

Zechalatla, San Juan Cozatla, 

Zaqualco, San Christoval, 

San Marcos, Chapala, 

Santa Ana, San Antonio, 

Tizapan, Tizapan. 

The capital is the settlement of the same 
name, situate in a llam/ra, sheltered by moun- 
tains on the s. and on the w. and on the n. hav- 
ing a lake of six leagues long and two wide, but 
of very little depth ; and, consequently, useless ; 
since, besides that it yields no fish, its waters 
are brackish, and it is only on the shores that 
they find some small fry. The temperature is 
rather hot than mild, but refreshed by the rains 
in the months of April and May. Its population 
is composed of 500 families, of Spaniards, Mus- 
tees, and Mulattoes, and 30 of Indians : the com- 
merce of whom, with regard to the first, is in 
the cultivation of chile and other seeds, whilst 
the Indians dedicate themselves to the making of 
mixed wine, which they extract from the roots of 
magueyes or pitales trees, making also from the 
same pita many bags, which serve for the traffic 
of salt, carried on by many of the Spaniards 
with the other jurisdictions. It has a magnificent 
convent of the religious of San Francisco, in the 
grand altar of which is venerated a cross, which 
100 years after the reduceion of those provinces 5 
was fixed in the ground at the end of the princi- 
pal street ; and on the 3d of May, on which the 
church celebrates the festival of its invention, it 
began to tremble with such violence, for some days 
at intervals, that the extremities ofthe arms touched 
the ground ; whilst neither the latter nor the 
houses were observed to be at all agitated : many of 
the people from the neighbouring parts assembled 
to view this prodigy, to which they have as- 
cribed their testimony. [Zayula is 245 miles w . 
3 M 


450 


Z E L 


Z E M 


with a slight inclination to the s. of Mexico, in 
long. 103° 28' n. lat. 19° 2' w.~\ 

Zaydla, another settlement, in the head set- 
tlement of the district of Huipuxla and alcaldia 
mayor of Tepetango, in Nueva Espana. It con- 
tains 53 families of Indians. 

Zayula, another, of the province and alcaldia 
mayor of los Zoques, in the kingdom of Gua- 
temala. 

ZAYULTEPEC, S. Andres de, a settlement 
of the head settlement of the district and alcaldia 
mayor of Acayuca, in Nueva Espana. It is of a 
hot and moist temperature, produces maize, 
French-beans, fruit, and thread of pita , which 
forms its principal commerce, contains 140 fa- 
milies of Indians, and is two leagues from its 
capital. 

ZEDALES, a province and alcaldia mayor of 
the kingdom of Guatemala. It is of small ex- 
tent, one of the most inferior provinces. 

ZEDROS, River de los, in the province 
and government of Choco, and of the district of 
Raposo, in the Nuevo Reyno de Granada. It 
rises in the celebrated valley of Patia, in the 
province of Popayan, and empties itself into 
the S. Sea, in the Bay of Guacasma. 

ZEIBO, a settlement of the island and go- 
vernment of St. Domingo, situate on the shore of 
the river of la Romana, in the centre of the c. 
head. 

Zeibo, an isle or rock of the N. Sea, near the 
coast of the province and government of Yu- 
catan, opposite the settlement of Lerma. 

ZEISEN, an island of the N. Sea, near the 
coast of the province and government of Carta- 
gena, in the Nuevo Reyno de Granada. It is 
in the Bay of Tolu, and is that which lies the far- 
thest out of the islands forming that bay. 

ZELANDA, Nueva, a town and fort of the 
Dutch, in the province and colony of Surinam; 
situate on the shore of the river Poumaron, in 
the point or cape of Nassau or Orange. 

ZELAYA, a jurisdiction and alcaldia mayor 
of the province and bishopric of Mechoacan, in 
Nueva Espana. It is extremely fertile, and 
abounding in fruits ; covered with very many 
cultivated estates, in which are produced wheat, 
maize, barley, and other seeds ; but that from 
which they derive the greatest profit is from 
chile, pasilla or pepper, it being incredible the 
excessive quantity which they sow and gather of 
this. It has also many grounds of olives of dif- 
ferent species, of which they make a portion of 
oil of excellent quality ; they have also long and 


short vines, yielding no small quantity of wine. 
Its population consists of eight settlements, head 
settlements of the district, upon which are de- 
pendent other small settlements ; and which 
are, 

Yurirapundaro, San Juan Bautista, 

S. Miguel Emen- Apaceo, 

guaro, S. Francisco Chama- 

Urireo, cuero, 

S. Juan de la Vega, Acambaro. 

S. Miguel Gerequaro, 

The capital is the settlement of the same 
name, one of the best and most pleasant towns 
in the bishopric. It is in a llanura , its streets are 
straight, well proportioned, and regular. The 
parish church is the convent of S. Francisco, a 
sumptuous building, of fine architecture, erected 
by the Commissary General Fr. Fernando Alonso 
Gonzales, with a house of studies, and a beau- 
tiful tower, which is the loftiest of any that have 
been made in America ; also four other con- 
vents, which are of S. Agustin, de Carmelitas 
Descalzos, of S. Juan de Dios, with an hospital; 
and a college which belonged to the Jesuits. The 
population consists of 2,000 families, including 
those dwelling in the wards and estates of its 
district, and 2,600 of Othomies Indians. The 
territory surrounding it is very salitrous, so that 
the dust in the summer time is very troublesome, 
although even this circumstance contributes to 
render the soil more luxuriant. [Zelaya is 110 
miles n. w. from Mexico, in long. 100° 30' w. 
lat. 20° 38' *.] 

[ZELITO, or Ziltio, one of the forts for the 
protection of the harbour of Cartagena, on the 
n. coast of S. America.] 

ZEMIFARA, a settlement of the province 
and government of Antioquia, in the Nuevo 
Reyno de Granada ; situate between the rivers 
Magdalena and Cauca, and nearer to the latter. 

ZEMPOALA, a jurisdiction and alcaldia mayor 
of Nueva Espana. It is much reduced, consist- 
ing of only five settlements, which are 
Tezahuapa, Flaquilpa, 

Zaqualpa, Epazeyuca. 

Santo Tomas Talistac, 

The capital is of the same name, and is as 
thinly jnhabited as thejurisdiction, containing only 
from i4 to 15 families of Spaniards, Mulattoes 
and Mustecs , 45 of Indians, and a good convent 
of the religious of S. Francisco. Its principal 
commerce is in pulque , as the whole of the coun- 
try is covered with magueyes , of the best qua- 
lity, for making this drink. It produces also 


Z E P 


Z I A 


451 


some wheat, maize, and barley, which are culti- 
vated by those few natives : 17 leagues n. e. of 
Mexico. 

Zempoala, another settlement, of the head set- 
tlement of the district of Tlalixcoya and alcaldia 
mayor of Mizantla, containing 15 families of 
Indians. 

Zempoala, another, a small settlement of the 
alcaldia mayor of Guachinango, in the same 
kingdom as the former ; annexed to the curacy of 
the settlement of Chiconcuautla. 

ZENEGUANCA, Bay of, the n. coast of 
the government and province of Santa Marta 
and Nuevo Reyno de Granada, between the 
Cape of la Abuia and that of San Juan de 
Guia. 

ZENIT ARA, a river of the province and go- 
vernment of Antioquia, in the same kingdom as 
the former bay. It rises near the sierras of 
Guamoco, and enters the Grande de la Mag- 
dalena. 

ZENIZO, a small island of the N. Sea, near 
the coast of the province and government of 
Cartagena, in the Nuevo Reyno de Granada. It 
is at the entrance of the river Grande de la Mag- 
dalena, and in the part opposite the island 
Verde. 

ZENTLA, San Geronimo de, a settlement 
of the alcaldia mayor of Cordova. It is of a hot 
temperature, contains 105 families of Indians, 
and is 15 leagues e. of its capital. 

ZENTLALPAN, a head settlement ofthe dis- 
trict of the alcaldia mayor of Chaleo, in Nueva 
Espana, one league e. of the settlement of Ame- 
cameca, and containing 273 families of Indians. 

ZENTORA, a small river of the province 
and government of Mainas, in the kingdom of 
Quito ; which runs e. and enters the Napo be- 
low the settlement of San Estanislao. 

ZEPAYUTLA, a settlement of the head set- 
tlement of the district of Zitepec and alcaldia 
mayor of Tenango del Valle, in Nueva Espana. 
It was once of the jurisdiction and alcaldia mayor 
of Tacuba, and was added to this from the great 
distance of the former. It contains 40 Indian 
families. 

ZEPEDA, a settlement of the province and 
government of Santa Marta, in the Nuevo 
Reyno de Granada; founded on the shore of the 
river Cesare, in the valley of Upar : n. n. e. of 
the city of los Reyes. 

ZEP1TA, a settlement of the government 
and jurisdiction of Pamplona in the Nuevo 
Reyno de Granada. It is of a very hot tempe- 


rature, produces much sugar-cane, plantains, 
yucas, and large and small cattle. Its natives, 
who amount to about 300, suffer an epidemic of 
the shingles, which they call carates, and which 
is very common here : 25 leagues from Pam- 
plona, eight from the city of San Gil, and the 
same from that of Giron. 

Zepita, another settlement, in the province 
and government of Chacuito and kingdom of 
Peru ; situate on the shore of the Great Lake, 
and where rises the river del Desaguadero. 

ZERETE, a settlement of the province and 
government of Cartagena in the Nuevo Reyno de 
Granada, and ofthe district of the town of Tolu, 
founded in 1776, by the Governor Don Franciso 
Pimienta. 

ZERMEFANA, a settlement of the Nuevo 
Reyno de Granada, very populous in the time of 
the Indians ; and capital of the province of this 
name. It is now a miserable place, of a hot and 
moist temperature, inhabited by a very few un- 
happy Indians. 

ZEROCAHUI, a settlement of the missions 
which were held by the Jesuits in the province 
and government of Cinaloa in N. America. 

ZEREZUELA, a settlement of the province 
and corregimiento of Bogota in the Nuevo Reyno 
de Granada; situate in a plain. It is of a very 
cold temperature, but pleasant, delightful, and 
abounding in all the fruits of a cold climate. Its 
waters are much celebrated, it contains 70 house- 
keepers, as many Indians, and is three leagues 
s. e. of Santa Fe, in the high road which leads 
down to Honda and to Mariquita. 

ZESACO, a small island of the S. Sea, close 
to the coast of the province and government of 
Veragua, in the kingdom of Tierra Firme, on the 
side of Point Blanca. 

ZETEGANTI, a river of the province and 
government of Darien, in the same kingdom as 
the former island. It rises in the s. part, and 
runs n. until it disembogues itself in the sea in 
the Gulf of San Miguel. 

ZEUNAS, a barbarous nation of Indians 
dwelling in the woods to the n. of the Maraiion. 
It is very warlike, and at continual enmity with 
the Aguas, and uses the most active poison in 
their arms. 

ZI A, a settlement of the missions held by the 
religious of San Francisco, in the kingdom of 
Nuevo Mexico. 

Zi a, a river in the same kingdom. 

ZIACALCO, a settlement of the head settle- 
ment of the district of Huatenango, and alcaldia 
3 m 2 


452 


Z I M 


Z l M 


mayor of Colotlan in N ueva Espana ; two leagues 
t. of its head settlement. 

ZIAS, or Ziyus, a barbarous nation of In- 
dians of Peru, descended from the Parianas. 
They live in the woods to the e. of the river 
Putumayu. They are tall and well made, and, 
though treacherous, warlike. 

ZIBIRIJOA, a settlement of the province and 
alcaldia mayor of Cinaloa in Nueva Espana, on 
the shore of the river Fuerte, between the settle- 
ments ofTeguego and Charay. 

ZICALPA, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Riobamba in the kingdom of 
Quito, celebrated for the sanctuary of Nuestra 
Sehora of its title, and which is venerated here, 
■with a beautiful temple and corresponding orna- 
ments. Here also is celebrated an annual solemn 
festival, and on all occasions of public necessity 
the said image is carried in procession to the 
capita], from whence this settlement lies only two 
miles off by a broad and beautiful road, which 
is meandering, in order with the greater facility 
to reach the settlement which is situate on a 
mountain. 

ZICAPUZALCO, San Francisco de, a set- 
tlement of the head settlement of Escateopan and 
alcaldia mayor of Zaqualpa in Nueva Espana, 
containing 140 families of Indians. 

ZICASTLA, a settlement of th c alealdia, mayor 
ofMixtetlan in the same kingdom as the former, 
annexed to the curacy of the settlement of Tlan- 
chinol, and containing 95 Indian families. 

ZICUICHI, a settlement of the head settle- 
ment of the district and alcaldia mayor of Tin- 
guindin in the same kingdom, containing 84 fami- 
lies of Indians, all of whom are painters and 
sculptors, though indifferent ; four leagues e. of 
its capital. 

ZICUILTEPEC, a settlement of the head 
settlement of the district of Xocutla and alcaldia 
mayor of Chilapo, in the same kingdom ; eight 
leagues s. of its head settlement. 

ZILACAYOAPAN, a head settlement of the 
district of the alcaldia mayor of Tonala in the same 
kingdom. 

ZILACOLOTITLAN, a settlement of the 
head settlement of the district of Xalapa and 
alcaldia mayor of Tlapa in the same kingdom. 
It contains 40 families of Indians, agricultural- 
ists, and is three leagues from its head settlement. 

ZIMACOTA, a settlement of the jurisdiction 
and district of the city of San Gil and corregi- 
miento of Tunja in the Nuevo Reyno de Gra- 
nada. It is of a hot temperature, very abundant 
in rice, which fetches generally three reals the 


arroba , in cotton, of which they make very good 
counterpanes, coverings for tents, &amp;c. and by 
which they carry on a good trade ; as also in 
much sugar which they make, together with con- 
serves, and in excellent woods. It produces 
also a great quantity of maize, yucas, and fruits. 
It was formerly an Indian town, and is now 
transformed into a population of whites ; is the 
last town of the Nuevo Reyno, by the w. part, 
a long chain of mountains extending themselves 
from it as far as the river Grande de la Magda- 
lena. It contains 1,000 inhabitants, and is eight 
leagues s. w. of the town of San Gil, the river 
Mochuelo and Suarez, which are passed in taravi- 
tas , running between. 

ZIMAPAN, a settlement of the capital and 
real of mines of the alcaldia mayor of this name, 
the jurisdiction of which has no other settlement, 
although some wards, in which are found 820 
families of Indians, and 200 of Spaniards, Mus- 
tees, and Mulattoes. Its temperature is extremely 
cold, it being situate in the sierra Madre de 
Mextitlan. Its trade is reduced to that of the 
mines of silver, which has an alloy of lead, and 
which, in consequence, is used only in founding, 
the lead not permitting the quicksilver to be 
used as it is in other parts. The richest and 
most celebrated vein of this mine is that which 
they call lomo de toro (bull’s loins) and from 
whence the metal, ever since its discovery, has 
been extracted of a red colour. [Zimapan is 58 
miles n. n. e. of Mexico, in lat. 20° 45' n. and 
long. 98° 40' a 1 .] 

ZIMARRONES, a barbarous nation of In- 
dians, descended from the Mainas, and dwelling- 
in the woods in the vicinities of the river Morona 
on the e. part, and to the w. of the Pataza, and 
extending as far as the Maranon. They are now 
very few r , and go dispersed about. 

ZIMATLAN, a head settlement of the district 
of the alcaldia mayor of Chichicapa and province 
and bishopric of Oaxaca in Nueva Espana. It 
is of a mild and dry temperature, was formerly 
a separate jurisdiction and alcaldia mayor , but 
which was added to this alcaldia , with the settle- 
ments contained in four head settlements of the 
district. It contains a convent of Dominicans, 
and 615 families of Indians, who cultivate and 
trade in cochineal and seeds ; [11 miles s. zo. from 
the city of Oaxaca.] 

ZIMITARA, a river of the province and 
government of Cartagena and district of Gua* 
moco in the Nuevo Revno de Granada, which 
runs n. n. e. and enters the Grande de la Mag- 
dalena. 


Z I N 


Z I P 


453 


ZIMITI, a city of the same province and 
government as the former river ; on the shore of 
a lake formed by the waters of the Magdalena. 

ZIMPALCO, San Juan de, a settlement of 
the head settlement of the district of Atempa and 
alcaldia mayor of Teuzitan in Nueva Espaiia ; 
annexed to the curacy of the former. It contains 
52 families of Indians, and is one league n. of its 
head settlement. 

ZINACAMITLAN, a principal or head set- 
tlement of the district of the alcaldia mayor of 
Motines in the same kingdom as the former. It 
contains 26 families of Indians. 

ZINACANTEPEC, San Miguel de, a head 
settlement of the district of the alcaldia mayor of 
Metepec in the same kingdom. It contains 13 
families of Indians, with those of the wards of 
its district. 

Zinacantepec, another, a small settlement 
in the head settlement of the district of Alrnolo- 
loya and alcaldia mayor of Colima in the same 
kingdom ; annexed to the curacy of Cochimat- 
lan. 

ZINAPEQUAllO, a head settlement of the 
district of the alcaldia mayor of Tlalpujagua in 
Nueva Espaiia. It contains 245 families, in- 
cluding those of the wards of its district, and a 
convent of Franciscans. Near the road which 
leads from this settlement to the city of Vallado- 
lid, which served as a fortress to the Chichi mecas 
Indians, are some medicinal hot baths, celebrated 
for the cure of many infirmities ; 17 leagues 
7i. 7i. w. of its capital. 

ZINGA, a settlement of the province and cor- 
regimiento of Huamalies in Peru. 

ZINGAREO, Santa Maria de, a settlement 
of the head settlement of the district of Irimbo 
and alcaldia mayor of Maravatio, in the pro- 
vince and bishopric of Mechoacan. It contains 
30 families of Indians, and, in the ranchos of its 
district, 15 of Spaniards, 12 of Mustees , and 26 
of Indians ; one league n. n. zo. of its head settle- 
ment. 

[ZINOCIISAA, the original name of a river 
of New York, which runs through Onondago, 
the chief town of the Six Nations.] 

ZINTO, a river of the province and govern- 
ment of Santa Marta, in the Nuevo Iieyno de 
Granada, in the e. part. It runs from s. to n. 
and enters the sea, forming a small bay. Some 
call it also of Don Diego. Its mouth is in lat. 
IV 17' n. 

ZINZELEJO, a settlement of the province 
and government of Cartagena in the same king- 


dom as the former river ; situate n. of the town 
of San Bernardo Abad. 

ZIMI, a large river of the same province 
and kingdom as the former settlement. It rises 
in the valley of Guaca, at the foot of the sierras 
of Abide, runs n. in a serpentine course, through 
the district of Tolu, and enters the sea, forming 
a beautiful bay by different mouths, which make 
many islands. The territory, laved by this river, 
is very fertile, and provides with fruit and herbs 
the city of Cartagena. Its mouth is in lat. 9° 
28' n. 

Zimi, a town of the above province and king- 
dom, on the e. shore of the former river. It was 
a large town in the time of the Indians, and in it 
much gold was found by Pedro de Heredia in 
1534. It is now reduced to a miserable village. 

ZINZI, a settlement of the same province and 
kingdom as the former settlement ; situate n. of 
the town of San Bernardo Abad. 
ZINTZUNTZA. See Cocupao. 

ZIOPATA,a bay of the N. Sea, on the coast of 
the province and government of Cartagena, and 
in the Bay and Gulf of Tolu. 

ZIORiCA, an island of the river Orinoco in 
the Nuevo Reyno de Granada, opposite la 
Guayana. 

ZIPACON, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Bogota in the Nuevo Reyno de 
Granada. It is of a very cold temperature, 
situate in a rough and mountainous country, and 
covered over continually with thick clouds ; near 
the settlement of Facatativa, and at the back of 
that of Bqjaca, and eight leagues s. zo. of Santa Fe. 

ZIPAQUIRA, a head settlement of the district 
of the corregmiiento of its name in the Nuevo 
Reyno de Granada. It is of a cold but benign 
and healthy temperature ; situate in a delightful 
llanura. It produces in abundance wheat, maize, 
barley, papas , and pulse, which are sold in the 
other provinces, and it thus carries on a lucrative 
trade, the market taking place every five days. 
It has some very abundant salines, from whence 
it extracts 20,000 bushels of salt yearly. Its 
population consists of more than 800 house- 
keepers and 80 Indians. It was a doctrinal 
establishment of the religious of San Francisco ; 
[10 miles n. n. e. of Santa Fe, on the Royal Road 
from thence to Tunja.] 

ZIPATALIGUARIS, a barbarous nation of 
Indians of the province and government of Para- 
guay, descended from the nation of the Xarayes : 
bounded s. by the Taicomas, n. by the Gorgoto- 
ques and by the Varais, and w. by the mountains 


z o c 


454 Z 1 T 

of the province and government of Santa Cruz de 
la Sierra. 

ZIPEZIPE, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Cochabamba in Peru. 

Z1PUAZA , or Zipueza, a large and popu- 
lous city, in the time of the Indians, of the pro- 
vince and government of Santa Marta and Nuevo 
Reyno de Granada. It was taken and sacked in 
1530, by the Captain Francisco Cardoso. It is at 
present a miserable village, situate on the 5 . w. 
coast of Lake Zapatosa, and at a small distance 
from the Grand River Magdalena on the e. part, 
fand about 56 miles s. s. e. of the city of Tene- 
riffe.] 

ZIRITA, a city of the province and govern- 
ment of Venezuela in the district of the city of 
Gibraltar ; situate on the shore and at the source 
of the river of its name. 

Zirita. This river, which is very large and 
abundant, rises in the mountains in the same pro- 
vince, runs in a direction nearly from e. to w., 
and, then making a curve to the n. runs to the 
lake of Maracaibo by the part opposite the en- 
trance of the same lake. 

ZISPATA, a settlement of the province and 
government of Cartagena ; situate on the shore 
of one of the arms of the river Cauca, s. of the 
town of San Bernardo Abad. It is on the side of 
a great bay of its name, which the Ex-Jesuit Co- 
leti, wrongly called Sistapa in his dictionary. 

ZITALA, a settlement of the province and 
alcaldia mayor of Capabanastla in the kingdom of 
Guatemala. 

ZITAQUARO, San Juan de, a head settle- 
ment of the district of the alcaldia mayor of Ma- 
ravatio in the province and bishopric of Mechoa- 
can ; situate in some lofty mountains, covered 
with very large firs and other trees of valuable 
timber. It is of a mild temperature, and its district 
abounds in wheat, maize, French-beans, and other 
seeds. It has a convent of Franciscans, more 
than 150 families of Spaniards, Mustees, and Mu- 
lattoes, and 115 of Indians. In its district, in a 
part called Purua, there is a fountain of rare 
qualities, the most peculiar of which are, that all 
the wood thrown into it sinks to the bottom and 
becomes covered with stones of different sizes 
resembling bezoa stones, and which are extremely 
hard. It is also to be observed, that in its plains 
are produced the royal dittany. Five leagues 
s. u\ of its capital. 

[ZITAR, a town of Tierra Firme, S. America, 
near to and s. from the head of the Gulf of 
Darien.] 


ZITEPEC. San Pedro de, a head settlement 
of the district of the alcaldia mayor of Tenango 
in the same kingdom as the former. It was for- 
merly of the jurisdiction of Tacuba, and was 
added to this owing to the great distance it was 
from the former. It containsTO families oflndians. 

ZITLALA, a settlement of the district of the 
alcaldia mayor of Chilapa in the same kingdom as 
the former. It contains 175 families of Mexican 
Indians, and a convent of Augustins, in which is 
venerated a miraculous image of San Nicolas de 
T olentino. This image was being carried from La 
Puebla de los Angeles to the coast of the S. 
Sea, and, upon its arrival at this settlement, the 
chest which contained it was found to be so heavy 
as to resist the exertions of 50 men to raise it. 
The inference was, of course, that there was some- 
thing supernatural in the business, and it being 
argued by the owners that it was meant that the 
image should remain in this settlement as the 
protector of the inhabitants, they, in juridical 
form, made a present of it to them. Upon the 
arrival of the curate, who was to take it away, 
the-chest was moved up with one hand, and the 
circumstance having greatly surprised the con- 
course of people who had assembled round the 
spot, they immediately formed themselves into a 
solemn procession, shewing forth the most devout 
expressions of joy and gratitude, and placing the 
image on the grand altar of the parish-church. 
Repeated prodigies have been wrought through 
its intercession. Three leagues n. of its capital. 

ZITLALTEPEC, a settlement of the a Icaldia 
mayor of Tlapa in the same kingdom as the 
former. It is of a cold temperature, and con- 
tains 17 families of Indians, who maintain them- 
selves by the cultivation and commerce of cochi- 
neal and cotton. Four leagues s. of the settle- 
ment of Atlamaxaczinco. 

Zitlaltepec, another settlement, in the al- 
caldia mayor of Zumpango of the same kingdom. 
It was formerly the capital of the jurisdiction. 
It produces maize and barley, in which the na- 
tives, who amount to 90 families of Indians, 
trade, and is one league w. of its capital. 

[ZOAR, a plantation of Berkshire County, 
Massachusetts, which contained, in 1790, 78 in- 
habitants.] 

Z OCA US, a river of the province and go- 
vernment of Quijos and Macas in the kingdom of 
Quito, and which enters the Putumayo. 

ZOCHICOATLAN, a jurisdiction and alcal- 
dia mayor of Nueva Espana. It produces silk 
and cotton, of which they make cloaks, sheets, 


ZON 


Z O Y 


455 


table-cloths, napkins, stockings, and under stock- 
ings ; carrying on with all these a great com- 


merce, as also 


on 

with 


sugar manufactured in the 


engines in its district, and with various other pro- 
ductions. Its population consists of the follow- 
ing settlements, — 


Atempa, 

Xacalco, 

Pexmatlan, 

Talnalic, 

Pauchutla, 

Tuzancoa, 

Papaxtla, 

Mazahuacan, 

Quautlamayan. 


Acomulco, 

Xalamelco, 

Zapocoatlan, 

Mecapala, 

Ahuacatlan, 

Tecpaco, 

Chaleo, 

Chilcayotla, 

Thocintlan, 

Coyutla, 

The capital is the settlement of the same name ; 
situate in the sierra of Mextitlan, between some 
lofty mountains, so that it is of a very cold tem- 
perature. It has a good convent of Franciscans, 
and its population is composed of six families of 
Spaniards and Mustees, and of 124 of Indians. 
[About 90 miles n. e. of Mexico.] 

ZOCHIMEHUA, S. Pablo de, a small set- 
tlement of the head settlement of the district and 
alcaldia mayor of Cholula in Nueva Espana. It 
contains seven or eight families of Indians, and 
is very close to the settlement of La Puebla. 

ZOCOLOTLA, Santa Maria de, a settle- 
ment of the head settlement of the district of 
Zapotitlan, and alcaldia mayor of Zacatlan in the 
same kingdom as the former. One league from 
its head settlement. 

ZOCONUSCO, Santiago de, a settlement 
of the head settlement of the district and alcaldia 
mayor of Acayuca in Nueva Espana, of a hot and 
moist temperature. It produces maize, French- 
beans, and much thread of pita, in which consists 
its principal trade with the other jurisdictions. 
It contains 295 families of Indians, and is one 
league e. of its capital and head settlement. 

ZOCOTO, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Caxamarca in Peru ; annexed to 
the curacy of the settlement of Huambos. 

ZOMETLA, S. Miguel de, a settlement of 
the head settlement of the district and alcaldia 
mayor of Tezcoco in Nueva Espana ; annexed to 
that of Acolman, from whence it lies a quarter of 
a league to the e. It contains 91 families of In- 
dians. 


[ZONCOLCUCAN, mountains in Guaxaca, 
in JNueva Espana, which give rise to Papalo- 
Apain, or Alvarad River.] 

[ZONESHIO, the chief town of the Seneca 
Indians. Two miles n. of Seneca Lake.] 


ZONGUILUCA, a settlement of the alcaldia 
mayor of Tulanzinco in the same kingdom. It 
contains a convent of Augustins, and 43 families 
of Indians. Four leagues n. of its capital. 

ZONZERON, a settlement of the province 
and captainship of Sergipe in Brazil ; on the shore 
of the Bay of Sergipe in the part opposite the 
capital. 

ZOPIA, a river of the province and govern- 
ment of Antioquia in the Nuevo Reyno de Gra- 
nada. It runs e. and enters the large stream of 
the Cauca, opposite the city of Anserma. 

ZOQUES, a province and alcaldia mayor of 
the kingdom of Guatemala. 

ZOQUITLAN, a settlement of the alcaldia 
mayor of Nexapa in Nueva Espana ; situate in a 
lofty plain surrounded by a river, with the waters 
of which the inhabitants irrigate their crops. Here 
dwell 40 families of Indians, and in its district 
are 20 mills, or sugar-engines, in which reside 
upwards of 20 families of Spaniards and Mustees, 
all of them upon the banks of a river which passes 
through various settlements of this jurisdiction, 
and which equally fertilizes the jurisdiction of 
Tehuantepeque, where its course terminates, inas- 
much as it there enters the S. Sea. Three leagues 
e. of the settlement of Totalpa. 

Zoquitlan, another settlement of the head 
settlement of the district of the alcaldia mayor of 
Theotihuacan in the same kingdom. It contains 
500 families of Indians, and is 10 leagues s. e. of 
the capital. 

ZOQUIZINCO, Sta. Maria de, a head 
settlement of the district and alcaldia mayor of 
Marinalco in the same kingdom, and of a cold 
and moist temperature. The whole of its district 
is full of wells of water, though, notwithstanding 
its settlements suffer much from want of that ar- 
ticle, as being situate on the driest plain in the 
district. This settlement is surrounded by moun- 
tains on the vo. and n. w. and its population 
amounts to 147 families of Indians, who trade in 
various seeds, make pulque , and cut wood, of 
which there is great abundance in the aforesaid 
mountains. Five leagues n. of its capital. 

Z ORATA, a settlement and capital of the 
province and corregimiento of Larecaxa in Peru. 

ZOYACATLAN, a settlement of the head 
settlement of the district of S. Luis de Potosi, 
and alcaldia mayor of Tlapa in Nueva Espana. 
It contains 65 families of Indians, and is three 
leagues from its head settlement. 

ZOYALTEPEC, a head settlement of the dis- 
trict of the alcaldia mayor of Teutila in the same 
kingdom as the former. It is of a warm and dry 


45(5 


Z U A 


temperature, and in the wards of its district dwell 
600 families of Indians, who cultivate much cot- 
ton and vaynilla. Ten leagues s. of its capital. 

Zoyaltepec, another settlement, with the 
dedicatory title of San Bartolome, a head settle- 
ment of the district of the alcaldia mayor of Yan- 
guitlan in the same kingdom. It contains 64 fa- 
milies of Indians, and is five leagues s. e. of its 
capital. 

ZOYATITLAN, a settlement of the province 
and alcaldia mayor of Capabanastla in the king- 
dom of Guatemala. 

ZOYATLAN, a settlement of the head settle- 
ment of the district, and alcaldia mayor of Autlan 
in Nueva Espana. It contains 25 families of In- 
dians who cultivate many seeds and fruits, the 
soil being extremely fertile. It is annexed to the 
curacy of Tenamaztlan, from whence it lies lj 
leagues to the s. with some inclination to the w. 

Zoyatlan, another settlement, of the head 
settlement of the district of San Luis de la Costa, 
and alcaldia mayor ofTlapa in the same kingdom. 
It is of a hot temperature, contains 74 families of 
Indians, and is five leagues from its head settle- 
ment- 

ZOYATLINALAPA, a settlement of the head 
settlement of the district and alcaldia mayor of 
Atrisco in the same kingdom as the former. It 
is of mild temperature, contains 65 families of 
Indians, and is 16 leagues e. s. e. of its capital. 

ZOZOCOLTENANGO, a settlement of the 
alcaldia mayor of Capabanastla in the kingdom of 
Guatemala. 

ZOZOLCO, a head settlement of the district 
of the alcaldia mayor of Papantla in the same 
kingdom. It contains 320 families of Indians, 
and is 14 leagues from its capital. 

ZOZORANGA, a settlement of the province 
and corregimiento of Loxa in the kingdom ot 
Quito. 

ZUA, a small river of the province and go- 
vernment of Cumana, which rises e. of the town 
of San Fernando, runs s., and turning w. enters 
the Chivata. 

Zl’AQUEO, a small river of the province of 
Ostimuri in Nueva Espana, which enters the 
Hiaqui. 

ZUATLAN, a head settlement of the district 
of the alcaldia mayor of Xala in Nueva Espana. 
It is of a cold temperature, annexed to the cu- 
racy of the settlement of Yxtlan. It contains 
25 families of Indians who trade in seeds and 
French-beans, and is three leagues n. by 5. of 
its capital. 

Zuatean, another settlement, in the province 


Z U L 


and alcaldia mayor of Los Zoques, and kingdom 
of Guatemala. 

ZUCHILTEPEC, a settlement of the head 
settlement of the district of Tepalcaltepec and 
alcaldia mayor of Nexapa in the same kingdom. 
It contains 24 families of Indians, and is half a 
league from its head settlement. 

ZUCHIQUILATZAN, a settlement of the 
head settlement of the district of the alcaldia 
mayor of Juxtlahuaca in Nueva Espana. It 
contains 80 families of Indians, including those 
of two other settlements of its district. 

ZUCHITEPEC, S. Miguel de, a settlement 
of the head settlement of the district of Ozto- 
lotepec and alcaldia mayor of Mahuatlan in the 
same kingdom. Its principal commerce is in 
trinkets for making rosaries : 20 leagues from 
the capital. 

ZUCHITLAN, a settlement of the head set- 
tlement of the district and alcaldia mayor of 
Autlan in the same kingdom. It contains 20 
families of Indians, who maintain themselves by 
trading in large cattle, sugar, honey, seeds, and 
oil of coco, of which they procure abundance 
from the great numbers of palms in its district. 
It is annexed to the curacy of Zecolotlan, and 
is distant four leagues to the 5. 

ZUCHITLAPILCO, a settlement of the al- 
caldia mayor of Guajuapa in the same kingdom 
as the former. It contains 55 families of In- 
dians. 


ZULE, a river of the province and govern- 
ment of Pamplona in the Nuevo Reyno de Gra- 
nada. It rises in the mountains of that district, 
and runs from s. to n. forming a curve till it 
enters the lake of Maracaibo, by the part oppo- 
site the mouth of this lake. 

ZULTEPEC, or Sultepec, a jurisdiction and 
alcaldia mayor of Nueva Espana, known by the 
name of la Plata, from the opulence which it 
had obtained in former times from its minerals, 
and from the engines for working the metals 
found here, and which were of the best alloy. 
In its district are 22 cultivated estates, at which 
assist 167 families of Spaniards, Mustees and 
Mulattoes, and who gather abundant crops of 
wheat, barley, maize, and other seeds. It is one 
of the most populous, as may be seen by the fol- 
lowing settlements : 

Capula, Pozoltepec, 

Santiago Tecaltitlan, Zultepec, 

S. Francisco Coajuzco, Santa Cruz, 

Santiago, Santo Tomas, 

San Pedro A 1 mol oy a, Amatepec, 

Acuyapan, San Felipe, 


ZU L 


ZUN 


457 


lo's 


los 


San Andres de las 
Gamas, 

San Simon de Barre- 
teros, 

San Francisco del 
Valie, 

Sta. Maria Ahuacat- 
lan, 

Santa Maria Pipiol- 
tepec, 

San Miguel Ixtapas, 
San Martin, 

Santa Cruz, 

San Lucas, 

San Martin Otzoloa- 
pan, 

San Juan Atezcapa, 
Santo Tomas,' 

Santa Maria Zacoza- 
napa, 

San PedyoTexupilco, 
San Miguel Ixtapa, 
Cuentla, 

Santiago Arizmendi, 
San Simon, 

San Andres, 

San Lucas, 
Acamuchitlan, 
Acutitlan. 

The capital, of the same name, is situate in 
the most craggy part of a mountain ; it is of a 
mild temperature, and contains 400 families of 
Spaniards, Mustees , and Mulattoes, whose for- 
tunes have greatly decayed. They have now 
only one mine, which is worked, called Nuestra 
Sehora del Carmen, though, if they had the 
means, these are not without other mines, which 
would yield great profit : they are now chiefly de- 
dicated to the exercise of muleteers. The whole 
of the territory is full of mines of gold, silver, 
copper, and lead ; and they make here some silk 
stuffs, highly esteemed throughout the kingdom, 
whilst they draw from the neighbouring juris- 
dictions such provisions and vegetable produc- 
tions as they may stand in need of. This settle- 
ment has a very good parish church, and a con- 
vent of Franciscans, [and is 54 miles 5. w. from 
Mexico ; in lat. 18° 58' n. and long. 99° 52' w.~] 

Zultepec, another settlement, in the same 
jurisdiction and alcaldia mayor. It is the head 
settlement of the district, contains 54 families of 
Indians, and is four leagues s. of the capital. 

Zuetepec, another, of the head settlement 
of the district of Amuzgos, and alcaldia mayor of 
Xicayan, in the same kingdom. It contains 49 

VOL. V. 


San Simon, 

San Miguel, 
Santiago, 

Santiago Clayac, 

San J uan, 

San Mateo, 

Coatepec, 

San Francisco, 

San Felipe, 

San Pedro, 

Santa Ana, 

Santa Maria, 

S. Juan Huixtlan, 
Aldas, 

San Miguel Tecol- 
maloya, 
Axuchitlan, 
Tehuilotepec, 

San Pedro H uestahu, 
Matlatepec, 
Temascaltepec, 

San Miguel de 
Ranchos, 

San Francisco, 

San Mateo de 
Ranchos, 

San Martin Tequis- 
quipa, 


families of Indians, who cultivate and trade in 
cotton, tobacco, cochineal, and vaynilla: 13 
leagues w. by n. of its head settlement. 

ZUMALAO, a small settlement of the pro- 
vince and government of Tucuman in Peru, of 
the district and jurisdiction of the city of Salta. 
In it is venerated an image of most holy Christ, 
called de Vilque. 

ZUMAMPA, a settlement of the same pro- 
vince and government as the former; on the 
shore of the river Dulce. 

ZUMATA, a settlement of the government 
and jurisdiction of San Juan Giron, in the Nuevo 
Reyno de Granada; at the foot of a mountain. 

ZUMPAHUACAN, a head settlement of the 
district of the alcaldia mayor of Marinalco in 
NuevaEspana. It contains in its district two 
wards, and, in all, its inhabitants amount to 356 
families of Indians, and eight of Mustees^ who live 
by sowing maize, making bags and mats, which 
they there call petates, and much lime, and with 
these it carries on a trade with the neighbouring- 
jurisdictions. It has a convent of Augustins, 
and is seven leagues e. of its capital, by a road, 
rough and full of deep chasms and ravines. 

ZUMPANGO, a jurisdiction and alcaldia 
mayor of Nueva Espana, with the surname de 
la Laguna, from a very large lake which it has, 
and which, although in the time of drought it 
becomes much diminished, never dries up com- 
pletely. The same lake has a lock by which it 
may be replenished by the waters of the lake of 
Mexico, through the lake Christoval. This ter- 
ritory produces much seed, and in the cultiva- 
tion of these and in the office of muleteers are 
the greatest part of the natives employed ; al- 
though also in the making of pulque. Its popu- 
lation consists of the following settlements : 

Xitlaltepec, S. Marcos Tilon- 

San Andres Xal- zinco, 

tengo, Santiago Tequisqui- 

San Andres Xaltocan, ac. 

The capital is the settlement of its name, on 
the side of the lake. It is very fertile in bar- 
ley, maize, French beans and qmlque ; contains 
554 families of Indians, 12 of Spaniards, and 92 
of Mulattoes and Mustees : [23 miles n. of 

Mexico, in lat. 19° 47 / n. and long. 99° 2' w.~\ 

Zumpango, another settlement, with the ad- 
dition de las Minas, in the alcaldia mayor of 
Tixtlan, in the same kingdom. It contains 264 
families of Indians. 

Zumpango, another, of the province and king- 
dom of Guatemala. 

ZUN A, a settlement of the province and go- 
3 N 


ZUY 


458 Z U N 


vernment of Quijos and Macas, in the kingdom 
of Quito. 

Zuna, a large and abundant river of the same 
kingdom, which rises in a lake in the province of 
Alausi, near that of Colaycocha ; laves the above 
settlement, to which it gives its name, in the 
province of Macas, runs e., and, united with the 
Vulcano, forms the Upano. 

ZUNI, a settlement of the province and go- 
vernment of Antioquia in the Nuevo Reyno de 
Granada, on the shore of the river Grande de la 
Magdalena. 

Zuni, another, of the missions, held by the 
religious of St. Francisco, in the kingdom of 
Nuevo Mexico. 

ZUNIBATIVA, a settlement of the province 
and kingdom of Quito, in the district of las 
Cinco Lequas de la Capital ; situate near the 
road which leads down from Guayaquil. 

ZUNIGA, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Canete in Peru ; annexed to the 
curacy of the settlement of Pacaran. 

ZUNUA, a settlement of the province and 
alcald'ia mayor of Zoques, in the kingdom of 
Guatemala. 

ZUNUBAS, a barbarous and ancient nation 
of Indians, of the Nuevo Reyno de Granada, 
who inhabited the province of Sutatenza, in 


what was then the kingdom of Tunja. This race 
has become entirely extinct. 

ZUNUNACA, a river of the province and 
government of the Chiquitos Indians in Peru, 
which rises between the Capiavari and the Po- 
taquisimo, runs e. and enters or joins the latter. 

ZUPUTUBA, a river of the province and 
country of las Amazonas, in the territory of 
Matogroso. It runs s. ; and, uniting itself with 
others, enters the Paraguay. 

ZUQUIAPA, Santiago de, a settlement of 
the alcaldia mayor of Theocuilco in Nueva 
Espana. It contains 74 families of Indians, and 
is 10 leagues n. with an inclination to w. of its 
capital. 

ZURI, a settlement of the province and cor- 
regimiento of Sicasica in Peru. 

ZURINAS, a barbarous nation of Indians, 
inhabiting the woods to the s. of the river Ma- 
rafion. They are pacific, industrious, and of 
good dispositions, make beautiful woven stuffs of 
cotton, and utensils of choice woods. 

ZURITE, a settlement of the corregimiento of 
Cuzco in Peru ; and being seven leagues from 
this city, in the high road leading to Lima. 

ZUTAGAOS. SeeSuTAGAos. 

[ZUYDT River, a name in Dutch maps 
given to Delawar river.] 
