DAG 

JLJABAIBA, an imaginary ancT fabulous river, 
which some travellers would fain have to be in the 
mountains of Abide. Amongst the many rivers, 
however, which flow down from that cordillera, 
we find no one of this name in the ancient or mo 
dern charts of the best geographers. 

DABOYAN, a settlement of the province and 
government of Cinaloa in Nueva Espana ; situate 
between the rivers Mayo and Fuerte. 

DACADMA, a lake of the province and 
country of the Amazonas, in the territory pos 
sessed by the Portuguese. It is formed by an arm 
or waste-water of the river Maranon, which returns 
to enter that river, leaving this lake; and at a 
small distance from it is another, called Cudaja. 

DACARRON, a large and convenient bay of 
tne Malvine or Falkland isles, on the w. part of 
the principal one. Here the French peopled this 
settlement, and the castle of S. Louis, in 1763 . 

DACINO, a river of the province of Pasto in 
the kingdom of Quito, to the s. It runs from . 
(o s. and enters the Coca on the n. side, in lat. 
36 .v. 

DADO, a small settlement or ward of the head 
settlement of Tlazintla, and ulcaldia mayor of Ix- 
miquilpan, in Nueva Espana. 

DAEMA, a river of the province and govern 
ment of Buenos Ayres. It is small, and runs e. 

[DAGSBOROUGH, a post-town in Sussex 
VOL. ii. 



DAM 

county, Delaware ; situated on the . w. bank of 
Peper s creek, a branch of Indian river, and con 
tains about 40 houses. It is 19 miles from Broad 
hill, or Clowe s, and 127 s. from Philadelphia.] 

DAJABON, a river of the island of St. Do 
mingo, in the part possessed by the French. It 
rises near the n. coast, runs n. n. w. and enters the 
sea in the bay of Manzanillo. 

DALBY, a settlement of the island of Barba- 
does, in the district of the parish of St. Joseph ; 
situate near the t#. coast. 

DALES-GIFT, a city of the province and co 
lony of Virginia^ 

[D ALTON, a fine township in Berkshire 
county, Massachusetts, having Pittsfield on the 
w. ; ami contains 554 inhabitants. The stage 
road from Boston to Albany runs through it- 
Dalton was incorporated in 1784, and lies 135 
miles w. by n. of Boston, and about 35 the same 
course from Northampton.] 

[D ALTON, a township in Grafton county, New 
Hampshire, first called Apthorpe, was incorporated 
in 1784, and has only 14 inhabitants. It lies on 
the e. bank of Connecticut river, at the Fifteen* 
mile falls, opposite Concord, in Essex county^ 
Vermont.] 

DAMAQUIEL, a river of the province an si go 
vernment of Daricn in the kingdom of Tierra 
Firme, It rises in the sierras or mouutauis of 



2 DAN 

Abide, of the province of Antioquia, runs to the n. 
and turning w. enters the sea in the port of Los 
Arboletes, and the mountain of Aguila. 

DAMARISCOTE, a small river of the pro. 
vince of Sagadahock, which rises from a lake, runs 
s. and enters the sea between the bays of Broad 
and of Sagadahock. 

DA MAS, River of the, in the island of St. Do 
mingo, which rises in the sierras of Baruco, and 
running n. n. w. enters the lake of Enriquillo. 

DA MAS, another river, in the district of Toltcn 
Baxo, in the kingdom of Chile. It runs s. and 
enters the Imperial. 

DAMASE1N, a river of the island of S. Do 
mingo, in the territory possessed by the French. 
It rises near the s. coast in the w. head, runs 5. and 
enters the sea in the port Pimiento arid the bay of 
Los Col lad os. 

DAMASIQUINI, a river of the province and 
government of San Juan de los Llanos, of the 
Nuevo Reyno de Granada. It rises in the centre 
of them, between the rivers Guabiare and Inirita, 
and then enters the Orinoco. 

DAME, NOTRE, or NUESTRA SENORA, moun 
tains of Nova Scotia or Acadia, in the peninsula 
of the Gaspesiens or Gaspesios Indians. They run 
e. w. from those of S. Louis to the cape of Rosters. 

DAME, NOTRE, a bay on the e. coast of the 
island of Newfoundland. 

[DAMERISCOTTA GREAT Bay, in Lincoln 
county, Maine, is about four miles in circum 
ference.] 

[DAMERISCOTTA River, a small stream in Lin 
coln county, Maine, which falls into Booth bay. 
A company has been lately incorporated to build a 
bridge over it.] 

DAMIAN, S. a small island of the gulf of Cali 
fornia, or Mar Roxo de Cortes ; situate near the 
other, called S. Cosmc. These both lie very near 
the coast, in the canal formed by the coast and the 
island of Carmen. 

DAMPIERRE, Strait of, an opening or pass of 
S. Guinea, discovered by Captain William Dam- 
pierre, who gave it his name, and imagined at the 
same time he should be able to find here a com 
munication with S. America. It has many islands, 
and the largest of them is situate in the n. part, 
forming, with the coast, a navigable and very con 
venient channel. 

[DAN, a considerable river of N. Carolina, 
which unites with the Staunton, and forms the Ro- 
anoke. In May 1795, a boat 53 feet long, and 
about seven tons burden, passed from Upper Saura 
town to Halifax, about 200 miles above Halifax, 
under the direction of Mr. Jeremiah Wade. She 



DAN 

brought about nine hogsheads from the above place, 
six of which she discharged at St. Taminy, 40 
miles above Halifax, to which place the river has 
been cleared by the donations of individuals. 
From St. Taminy to Halifax she brought about 
5000 weight through the falls, which hitherto had 
been deemed impassable. Mr. AVade thinks, safe 
navigation for boats of a larger burden may be 
made at a small expence. The famous Bursted 
hill stands on the bank of the Dan in Virginia, 
near the borders of N. Carolina. It appears to 
have been an ancient volcano. There are large 
rocks of the lava or melted matter, from 1000 (o 
1500 weight, lying on the summit of the hill. 
The crater is partly filled and covered with large 
trees.] 

DANAS, a small settlement of a nation of In 
dians of this name, in the province and corregi- 
micnto of Alacesi, of the kingdom of Quito. It 
lies to the n. of Sibambe, in lat. 2 9 s. 

DANBURY, a settlement of the province and 
colony of Pennsylvania ; situate near the shore of 
an arm of the river Delaware. 

[DANBURY, a post-town in the county of Fair- 
field, in Connecticut. It was settled in 1687, and 
the compact part of the town contains two churches, 
a court-house, and about 60 dwelling-houses. On 
its small streams arc iron-works, and several mills. 
Mr. Lazarus Beach presented to the museum in 
New York city, a quire of paper made of the 
asbestos, at his paper-mill in Danbury, March 
1792, which the hottest fire would not consume. 
It lies about 70 miles n. e. of New York city, 
and 33 n. w. by w. of New Haven. This town, 
with a large quantity of military stores, was burnt 
by the British on the 26th of April 1777.] 

[DANBY, a township in Rutland county, Ver 
mont, e. of Pawlet, and contains 1206 inhabitants. 
It lies about 32 miles n. of Bennington.] 

DANICALQUi, a small river of the kingdom 
of Chile, which runs s.s.e. and enters that of 
Sera u eo. 

DANIEL, a settlement of the island of Bar- 
badocs, in the district of the parish of St. Joseph ; 
situate near the w. coast. 

DANIEL, a port of the coast of Brazil, in the 
province and captainship of Seara, between the 
river Gororasu and the river Hook. 

[DANIEL, Port, on the n. side of Chaleur bay, 
N. America, is a commodious harbour for vessels 
of a considerable draught of water. It affords a 
cod-fishery, and is about nine leagues from Plato, 
w. n. w. of cape Despair.] 

[DANISH AMERICA. In the W. Indies the 
Danes possess the islands of St.ThomaSj St. Croix, 



BAR 

or Santa Cruz, and St. John s ; which are de 
scribed under their respective names. The Danish 
policy, in respect to their islands, is wise, and de 
serving of imitation. These islands were ill ma 
naged^, and of little consequence to the Danes, 
whilst in the hands of an exclusive company ; but 
since the late king 1 bought up the company s stock, 
and laid the trade open, the islands have been 
greatly improved. By an edict of the Danish king, 
no slaves were to be imported into his islands after 
the year 1802 ; till then their importation was en 
couraged by a law operating as a bounty. Many 
of the inhabitants of Greenland, and Negroes of 
the Danish W. India islands, have embraced 
Christianity under the Moravian missionaries, who 
are unwearied in their humane exertions. See 
SANTA CKUZ, &amp;c.] 

[DANVERS, a township in Essex county, 
Massachusetts, adjoining Saiem on the n. w. ; in 
which it was formerly comprehended, by the name 
of Salem village. It consists of two parishes, 
and contains 2425 inhabitants, and was incorpo 
rated in 1757. The most considerable and com 
pact settlement in it is formed by a continuation 
of the principal street of Salem, which extends 
more than two miles towards the country, having 
many workshops of mechanics, and several for re 
tailing goods. Largo quantities of bricks and 
coarse earthenware are manufactured here. An 
other pleasant and thriving settlement is at the 
head of Beverly river, called New Mills; where 
a few vessels are built and owned. The town of 
Danvers receives an annual compensation of 10/. 
from the proprietors of Essex bridge, for the ob 
struction of the river.] 

[DANVILLE, a thriving post-town in Mercer 
county, and formerly the metropolis of Kentucky, 
pleasantly situated in a large fertile plain, on the 
5. w. side of Dick s river, 35 miles s. s. w. of Lex 
ington. It consists of about 50 houses, and a 
Presbyterian church. From Leesburg to Dan 
ville, the country, for the first 20 miles, is of an 
inferior rate for lands in this country ; but round 
Lexington, and from Leesburg to Lexington and 
Boonsborongh, is the richest land in the country. 
It is 40 miles s. by e. of Frankfort, 83 from Louis 
ville, 201 from Hawkins in Tennessee, and 830 
from Philadelphia. Lat. 37 30 n. Long. 85 
30 o&amp;gt;.] 

[DANVILLE, a very thriving township in Ca 
ledonia county, Vermont. It was a wilderness, 
without so much as a single family, a few years 
ago, and now contains 574 inhabitants. Jt Lies 
eight miles n.w. of Unmet.] 

DARA, S. JOSEPH DE,. a settlement of the Por- 



D A R 



3 



tuguese, in the province and country of Las Ama- 
zonas ; situate on the shore of the large river 
Negro, near the month where this is entered by 
the Jurubasi. It is a reduction of the missions 
which are held by the religious order of the Car 
melites of Portugal. 

DARA, an arm of the river Parimc or Paravil- 
lanas, one of the four, and the first, by which this 
river enters the Negro. 

[DARBY, a small town in Delaware county, 
Pennsylvania, on the e. side of Darby creek. It 
contains about 50 houses, and a Quaker meeting 
house, and lies seven miles s. ID. by w. of Phila 
delphia. There are two townships of this name in 
the county, called Upper and Lower, from their 
relative situation.] 

DARIBAZANA, a settlement of the missions, 
which belong to the religious order of the Carme 
lites of Portugal, in the province and country of 
Las Amazonas; situate on the shore of the river 
Negro. 

DARIEN, a province of the kingdom of Tierra 
Firme, one of the three, and the larger of those 
which compose the government of this kingdom. 
It is bounded n. and s. by the two seas, e. by the 
province of Tierra Firme, and w. by that of Choco. 
It is 68 leagues long e. w. and not 100, according to 
the Ex-jesuit Coleli, and about 50 wide n. s. at 
the broadest part. It is a mountainous and rugged 
country, but not without its Uanuras or plains, where 
it is very fertile, though deserted and uncultivated, 
producing only a small proportion of cacao and to 
bacco ; both of which are of an excellent quality. 
It is watered by an infinite number of rivers, some 
of which enter the S. sea, and others the N. in the 
sands of which are found a certain portion of gold 
washed down from the many mines of this metal 
found here ; the largest of which was the mine of 
Santa Cruz de Cana, from which in former times 
infinite wealth had been extracted. This province 
was the first in Tierra Firme in which the Spa 
niards established themselves, when it was con 
quered by the president Vasco Nunez de Balboa ; 
here also Francisco Pizarro, the conqueror of Peru, 
manifested incredible feats of valour. The climate 
is very moist and unhealthy ; for which reason the 
settlements that it had were abandoned, a small one 
only of Spaniards remaining, with a little fort, which 
was furnished by a detachment that came every 
month from Panama, for the sake of guarding the 
gold mines. Its natives, according to (he calcula 
tion made in 1747 by its governor Don Joaquin 
Valcarcel de Miranda, amounted to 5000 families. 
They are valorous and hardy, but cruel, stupid, 
and faithless, incapable of being reduced to the 
B 2 



D A R I E N. 



dictates of religion, or the laws of civil society. 
At this time, however, they appear to have made 
several attempts, but were as often drawn back to 
their idolatrous ways, and retired into their native 
mountains. They live by fishing and the chase, 
in which latter they are very dexterous, and ex 
tremely skilful in the use of the bow and arrow : 
their bows are made of a very strong but flexible 
kind of wood, called chonta ; and their arrows of 
a species of light cane called viruli, the point being 
of fish-bones, or of the same chonta roasted or burnt. 
Their favourite food is the flesh of monkeys, and 
there are an incredible variety of these animals 
here. They are much addicted to inebriety and 
sensual gratifications ; for the former, they make 
use of a kind of drink called mazato^ which is a 
fermentation of maize and plantains : they go al 
most naked, and wear only a cloth which serves to 
cover them in front, and which they call panequiri. 
They all deck themselves for dress-ornaments with 
gome small golden rings pendant from the nose, the 
gristle of which is bored for this purpose directly 
after their children are born : no less care is ob 
served in cultivating the growth of the hair, and of 
permitting it to flow down unconfined. The wo 
men adorn both their legs and arms with strings of 
coral, beads of glass and of gold. The priests, 
"who are called Leres^ and to whom singular re 
spect is shown, paint their faces of various colours, 
making incisions to insert the bitumen that they 
se, and which never leaves them, but renders them 
for ever after horrible and deformed. It has been 
affirmed by some that these priests have communi 
cation with the Devil, and that they are, upon this 
account, confirmed in their unnatural and beastly 
customs. The advantageous situation of this pro 
vince, communicating as it does with the two seas, 
its fertility, were it cultivated, and its riches, have 
excited a desire amongst the English and the 
.French of establishing themselves in it. The for- 
jner effected this in 1699 in the port of Caledonia, 
from whence they were ejected by the Spaniards. 
These also began to establish themselves here in 
1740., and first made the plantations of tobacco ; 
but they -were put to the sword in 1754 by the In 
dians, who were abetted by the English ; these 
having given them arms, and instructed them in 
the use of the musket, so that they became as 
dexterous in the use of this weapon as in their bows 
and arrows. These Indians are at war with the 
Chocoos, keeping up an enmity which is handed 
down from father to son, and arising from the cir 
cumstance of the Indians of Darien having put to 
death a curate, who was held in high reverence by 
them, about the end of the last century ; and from 



that time, each of them carry a skull of an Indian 
of Darien, who has met his fate at their hands, out 
of which he regularly drinks. These animosities, 
together with the frequent ravages of the small-pox, 
may be considered the causes why their number 
has been much diminished. The enmity, likewise, 
which they manifest towards the Spaniards, is not 
less ; for they rose against them in a body in 1719, 
committing incredible cruelties, until 1740, when 
a peace was entered into with them, by the 
Lieutem-ui-general D. Dionisio Martinez de la 
Vega, president, governor, and captain-general of 
the kingdom ; the articles being, that they should 
forthwith be reduced to settlements, and that they 
should admit amongst them missionaries, who 
might instruct them in the Catholic religion. To 
effect this, the viceroy of Santa Fe, who was then 
Don Sebastian de Eslnba, sent two Jesuits of the 
province of Cartagena with a mission towards the 
n. part, namely, the fathers Salvador Grande and 
Pedro Fabro, and towards the s. the president of 
Panama sent the fathers Matias Alvarez and 
Claud io Escobar, who with the greatest zeal 
formed the settlements of Morineca, Balzas, Tucuti, 
Chucunaque, Cupa, and Yabiza. But when they 
thought to have reaped the fruits of their labour, 
these Indians abandoned the settlements, returning 
to their errors of idolatry, and revisiting their na 
tive mountains. The fathers were indeed pre 
served in a miraculous manner, owing their lives 
to the information imparted to them by an old In 
dian woman. They became after this quite des 
perate as to the object of their wishes, and it was 
then proposed by an individual of some authority, 
that the Indians of Choco should be for a time 
freed from the tribute, so that the Spaniards might 
in the mean time procure their extermination. 
This plan, however, was thought too cruel by the 
government, and consequently rejected. In the 
last year, 1786, their conquest was attempted by 
force of arms by the viceroy, and archbishop of 
Santa Fe, Don Antonio Caballero y Gongora, who 
entrusted an expedition to the charge of the briga 
dier Don Antonio de Arevalo, and he succeeded in 
forming different establishments and settlements ; 
but the badness of the climate, combined with the 
ferocity of the natives, did not permit the object 
of his wishes to be realized. 

DAUIEN, with the dedicatory title of Santa 
Maria, a small settlement, which is the residence of 
the governor. It has a fort for its defence against 
the invasions of the Indians, which is garrisoned by 
a detachment of troops of the fortified place of Pa 
nama, and which is changed monthly. This was 
settlement th.it was made on the continent 



of .America, having been founded, in 1509, by the 
Licentiate Enciso, by the order of Pcdrarias Da- 
viia, when it obtained the name of a city and head 
of a bishopric; this being erected here in 1531, 
arid being afterwards translated to Panama. It has 
since that time been dwindling away by degrees, 
owing to the badness of its climate, and it is now 
actually reduced to nothing but a miserable ham 
let ; and even this has been many times invaded 
by the Indians, who put to the sword its inhabi 
tants, as was particularly the case in the years 
17*24 and 1750. The Emperor Charles V. gave it 
for its arms a golden castle upon a red field ; above 
the castle a sun of the same metal ; and on the 
sides of it a lion rampant and a crocodile. It is 
nine leagues from the 8. sea, and 25 from Panama, 
but by land much farther. 

DARIEN, a large gulf of this province. See 
URABA. 

DARIEN, a settlement of the province and colony 
of Georgia, in N.America ; situate on the coast at 
the mouth of the river Alatamaha. [Darien is in 
Liberty county, Georgia, by the heights of which 
glides the n. channel of Alatamaha river, about 20 
miles above Sapelo island, and 10 below fort Bar- 
rins^on. It lies 47 miles s. s. w. of Savannah. 
Lat. 31 23 n. Long. 81 37 zr.] 

[DA HLJNGTON, the most s. county of Che- 
raw 1 s district, S. Carolina; bounded s. and s. w. 
by Lynch s creek. It is about 35 miles long, and 
21 broad.] 

DARTMOUTFI, a settlement of the province 
and colony of Nova Scotia ; situate on the s. coast 
of the bay of Cheboucto. 

("DARTMOUTH College. See HANOVER.] 

[DARTMOUTH, a town in Grafton county, New 
Hampshire, n. zb. of the foot of the White moun 
tains ; 33 miles n. e. of Haverhill, New Hampshire, 
and 87 w. w. of Portsmouth. It contains lit in 
habitants, and was incorporated in 1772.] 

[DARTMOUTH, a thriving sea-port town in Bris 
tol county, Massachusetts ; situate on the w. side 
of Accushnet river, 50 miles s. of Boston. It was 
incorporated in 1664, und contains 2499 inhabi 
tants. Lat. 41 37 n. Long. 70 52 a&amp;gt;.] 

[DARTMOUTH, a town in Elbert county, Geor 
gia ; situate on the peninsula formed by the con 
fluence of Broad and Savannah rivers, two miles 
from fort James, Dartmouth, which is amile below 
CHARLOTTE Fort, which see. The town and fort 
derive their names from Jamrs Earl of Dartmouth, 
whose influence in the British councils obtained 
from the king a grant and powers to the Indian 
trading company in Georgia to treat with the 
Creeks, for the territory called the Ntw Purchase, 



D A U 5 

ceded rn discharge of debts due to the traders* 
This tract contains about 2,000,000 of acres, lying 
upon the head of the Great Ogechee, between the 
banks of the Savannah and Alatamaha, touching 
on the Oconee, including all the waters of Broad 
and Little rivers. This territory comprehends a 
body of excellent, fertile land, well watered by in 
numerable rivers, creeks, and brooks.] 

DATO, a river of the province and government 
of Merida, which enters the Lebrija. 

DAULE, a district of the province and go 
vernment of Guayaquil in the kingdom of Quito, 
one of the seven which compose the same. It is 
22 leagues in length and 14 in width, which is also 
the length of its river, from whence it takes it* 
name. It is very fertile and abundant, and co 
vered with gardens, in which are many cocoa 
trees, plantains, tamarinds, medlars, pines, ano- 
nas, eapotes, mameyes, chirimoyus, papayas, 
badtas, aguacates, oranges, water-melons, grapes, 
maize, and sugar-cane, from which great quanti 
ties of honey are made ; it also produces much 
cattle, together with cacao, tobacco, cotton, 
cheese, and butter made of cows milk. From 
all the above, as well also from the birds of the 
chase which abound in its swamps and lakes, such 
as ducks, geese, pea-hens, guacharacas, paugies, 
ring-doves, partridges, pheasants, herons, and 
pachaes, it not only amply supplies with luxuries 
this district, but also the other districts, and par 
ticularly the capital. On every Friday there is 
held, on the banks of the river, a regular market 
throughout the year, and the number of people 
that come to traffic on these occasions is incredible. 
It is governed by a lieutenant, who was formerly 
entitled governor of the province, and afterwards 
the viceroy of Sante Fe ; and as relates to its 
ecclessiastical functions, by a school-master and 
curate, who was of the religious order of St. Do 
minic, also by two or three assistants to administer 
the sacraments in the settlements of Daule, Santa 
Lucia, and Balsar, as well as in the country- 
houses and estates ; the inhabitants altogether 
amounting to 4000 whites, without mentioning the 
slaves and people of colour. The capital of this 
district maintains the same name. 

DAULE, a large and navigable river of the same 
province, which runs from . to w. and then turns 
s. It has its origin in the country and mountains 
of the Colorados, (coloured Indians); its shores 
are rendered delightful by the plant-iins which 
abound upon them, as well as by the number of 
estates and gardens belonging to the inhabitants 
of Guayaquil, and in which are found great quan 
tities of cacao, and all kiuds of fruits, of the most 



6 D A U 

excellent quality, the same being carried to that 
capital. Near the settlement called Balsar, and 
upon the w. coast, dwell the Mangaches, who are 
Zambos, (that is to say, descended from a Mulatto 
man and woman), of cape Pasao, and of the pro 
vince of Esmeraldas, who have retired here. This 
river, after running 20 leagues, empties itself into 
the Guayaquil on the w. side, in lat. 2 8 s. 

DAUFUSQUI, an island of the N. sea, in lat. 
32 5 n. long. 81 w. near the coast of Georgia, 
in N. America, one of those called Georgian ; 
situate between the islands of Tybi and Trenches, 
at the mouth of the river Savannah ; between the 
two is formed the strait which bears the same 
name. 

DAUNEY, a large river, called also DAUNY, 
which runs from e. to a?, bathing the ancient pro 
vince of Urriaba, and then entering the Orinoco. 
Its shores are very pleasant, and in its neighbour 
ing woods an incredible number of birds of various 
species. The Urribaes Indians, who inhabit these 
woods, are cannibals of a ferocious disposition, 
and both men and women go entirely naked ; the 
latter look upon lewdness as a very proper kind of 
entertainment, and deliver up their persons to any 
man they fancy, without respect to time or place. 
The mouth of this river is in lat. 3 7 n. 

[DAUPHIN, Fort, a jurisdiction, fort, and 
sea-port town in the n. part of the island of St. 
Domingo. This division contains five parishes ; 
its exports, from Jan. 1, 1789 to Dec. 31 of the 
same year, consisted of sugar, coffee, cotton, in 
digo, spirits, molasses, and tanned hides, in value 
35,252 dollars, 13 cents. The town or fort of 
Dauphin is remarkable for a fountain constructed 
by the orders of M.de Marbois, which cost 10,678 
dollars. Lat. 19 41 n.~] 

[DAUPHIN Fort. See HA BRAGA.] 
[DAUPHIN, a fort in the island of Cape Breton, 
round which the French had their principal settle 
ment, before they built Louisburg.J 

[DAUPHIN County, in Pennsylvania, was for 
merly contained in that of Lancaster, until erected 
into a separate county, March 4, 1785. Its form 
is triangular, its contents 586,400 acres, and is 
surrounded by the counties of Mifflin, Cumberland, 
York, Berks, and Northumberland ; it is divided 
into nine townships, the chief of which is Harris- 
burgh, the number of its inhabitants 18,177. 
Nearly one half of the land is under cultivation, 
but the n. part is very rough and mountainous. 
In several of the mountains is found abundance of 
iron ore of the first quality; a furnace and forge 
have been erected, which carry on briskly the ma 
nufacture of pig, bar iron, &amp;c. The first settlers 



D A V 

here were Irish emigrants, who were afterwards 
joined by a number of Germans. In the town of 
Derry, on the bank of Swatara creek, is a remark 
able cavern ; its entrance is under a high bank, and 
nearly 20 feet wide, and about eight or ten feet in 
height; it descends gradually nearly to a level 
with the creek ; its apartments are numerous, of 
different sizes, and adorned with stalactites cu 
riously diversified in size and colour. Near the 
foot of Blue mountain is a mineral spring, much 
celebrated by the country people for its efficacy in 
removing rheumatic and other disorders.] 

[DAUPHIN. See DELFIN.] 

DAVID, S. JOSEPH DE, a settlement of the 
district of Chiriqui in the province and govern 
ment of Veragua, and kingdom of Tierra Firme. 
It was at first an hermitage j situate 20 leagues 
from the settlement of San Lorenzo, and divided 
from the same by a mountain, which it is necessary 
to pass, and which is called La. Chorea. 

DAVID, another settlement and parish of the 
English, in the s. part of the island of Jamaica. 

DAVID, a point of the coast of Nova Scotia or 
Acadia, in the gulf of St. Lawrence, at the entrance 
or mouth of the bay of Chalcurs. 

[DAVID S Island, ST. a parish in the BER 
MUDA Islands, which see.] 

[DAVID S Town, on the Assanpink river, 
Hunterdon county, New Jersej r , 10 or 12 miles 
from Trenton. Between these towns a boat navi 
gation has lately been opened by means of three 
locks, erected at a considerable expence ; it is 
proposed to render this river boatable 10 or 15 
miles further, in which distance no locks will be 
necessary.] 

[DAVIDSON, a county in Mero district in 
Tennessee, bounded n. by the state of Kentucky, 
e . by Sumner, and s. by the Indian territory. Its 
chief town, Nashville, lies on the great bend of 
Cumberland river.] 

DAVIS, a settlement of the island of Barbadoes, 
in the district of the parish of St. Joseph ; situate 
near the e. coast. 

DAVIS, another settlement of the same island, 
distinct from the former, of the parish and district 
of St. Thomas. 

DAVIS, a strait of the sea, between the n. con 
tinent of America and the w. coast of Greenland, 
which extends to the n. w. of cape Farewel, in lat. 
60 n. to Baffin s bay, in 75. It takes the name 
of John Davis, this person having been the first 
who discovered it in 1585, when he was with two 
vessels attempting to find the n. w. coast, and so 
came to Greenland cape, in lat. 62, where the 
strait begins ; he gave it the name of cape Des*- 



D E A 

pair. Here lie found great quantities of skins of the 
castor and other animals, which he took from (he In 
dians, giving other articles of merchandise in ex 
change ; these Indians followed his vessels in their 
canoesjbringing him,besidesthose above mentioned, 
the skins of white hares, also cod-fish. After this he 
arrived at 64 15 , where he found a great quantity of 
that sand which had been before brought to England 
by Fovbisher ; then pushing forward as far as lat. 
61 40 , he discovered mount Rawleigh. In 1586, 
lie made a second voyage to the same coast, and 
in the following year, in a third voyage, he arrived 
as far as lat. 72 12 , calling the land which lies 
on the e. part, the Coast of London : and which is the 
coast of Greenland. Davis strait extends itself to 
long. 75, where it communicates with Baffin s 
bay, which is to the n. of it, and of the n. con 
tinent, or James island. See BAFFIN S Bay. 

[DAWFUSKEE, an island on the coast of S. 
Carolina, which forms the n. e. sideof the entrance 
of Savannah river, and s. w. side of the entrance 
of Broad river, and admits of an inland communi 
cation between the two rivers. Lat. i&amp;gt;2 T n. 
Long. 80 58 o&amp;gt;.] 

[DAXABON, DAJABON, or DAHABON, which 
the French call Laxabon, is a town and settlement 
of Spaniards, on the line between the French and 
Spanish divisions of the island of St. Domingo; 
it was settled to prevent smuggling, when the Spa 
niards had their share of the island. It is bounded 
c. by the territory of St. Yago, n. by the ex 
tremity of the bed of the Great Yaqui, and the 
bay of Mancenilla, w. by the river and little 
island of Massacre ; it contains about 4000 per 
sons. The town stands 400 fathoms from the e. 
bank of Massacre river, more than SO leagues n. w. 
of St. Domingo, and 28 w. of St. Yago. Lat. 
19 32 n. Long. 74 9 w. from Paris.] 

[DAY S Point, on James river in Virginia. 
There is a plantation here of about 1000 acres, 
which at a distance appears as if covered with 
snow, occasioned by a bed of clam shells, which 
by repeated ploughing have become fine and mix 
ed with earth.] 

[DE-BO IS-BLANC, an island belonging to 
Ihe n. w. territory, a voluntary gift of the Chippe- 
way nation to the United States, at the treaty of 
peace concluded by General Wayne, at Green 
ville, in 1795.1 

[DEAD-CHEST Island, one of the Smaller 
Virgin isles ; situated near the e. end of Peter s 
island, and w. of that of Cooper s.] 

[DEADMAN S Bay, on the e. side of New 
foundland island, lies s. of St. John s harbour, 
and n. w. of cape Spear.] 



DEE 7 

[DEAL, in Monmouth county, New Jersey, 
about seven miles s. of Shrewsbury. This place 
is the resort of great numbers of people from Phila 
delphia, in summer, for health and pleasure.] 

DEANE, a settlement of the island of Barba- 
docs ; situate on the s. coast, near the city of 
Bridge-town. 

DEBADEE, a small settlement of the head 
settlement of Orizaba, and alcaldia mayor of Ix- 
miquilpan, in Nueva Espana. 

DECHANA, a river of the kingdom of Peru. 
It rises in the mountains of the ccrdillera of the 
Andes, and runs into the S. sea, near the island of 
Lobos. 

DECHARGE, GRAND, a river of New France 
or Canada. It rises from the lake of S. Pedro, 
runs e. and enters the lake S. Juan, in the 
country of the Nekoubanistes Indians. 

[DEDHAM, a post-town, and the capital of 
Norfolk county, Massachusetts, called by the ab 
originals Tiot, and by the first settlers, Clapboard 
Trees. The township was incorporated in 1637, 
is seven miles in length, and six in breadth, and 
contains 1659 inhabitants ; its public buildings 
are three Congregational churches, an Episcopal 
church, and a court-house; it is pleasantly 
situated, 11 miles s. w. of Boston, on Charles 
river. A small stream furnishes water most part 
of the year to two grist-mills, two saw-mills, two 
fulling-mills, and a leather-mill, all in the space of 
three quarters of a mile, and joins Neponsit river, 
on the borders of Milton. A wire manufactory is 
erected here for the use of the fish-hook and card 
manufacturers in Boston.] 

[DEEP Spring, in the state of New York, is a 
curiosity, and lies about nine miles s. of Oneida 
lake, at the head of Chittenengo creek, and 10 
miles s. w. of Oneida castle.] 

[DEEP River, in N. Carolina, rises in Wacho 
via, and unites with Flaw river, and forms the n. 
w. branch of Cnpe Fear river.] 

[DEERF1ELD, a township in Cumberland 
county, New Jersey.] 

[DEERFIKI.D River, or the POCOMTIC, rises in 
Stratton, in Bennington county, Vermont; and 
after receiving a number of streams from the 
adjoining towns, enters Massachusetts ; thence 
winding in an e. direction, it receives North 
river, and empties into Connecticut river, be 
tween the townships of Greenfield and Deerfield, 
where it is about 15 rods wide. Excellent tracts 
of meadow ground lie on its banks.] 

[DEEUFIELD, a very pleasant town in Hamp 
shire county, Massachusetts, on the w. bank of 
Connecticut river, from which the compact part 



8 DEL 

of the town is separated by a chain of high lulls. 
It is in the midst of a fertile country, and has a 
small inland trade. The compact part of the town 
Las from 60 to 100 houses, principally on one 
street, and a handsome Congregational church. 
The house in which the Rev. Mr. Williams 
and his family were captivated by the Indians in 
the early settlement of this town, is still standing, 
and the hole in the door, cut by the Indians with 
their hatchets, is still shewn as a curiosity. An 
academy, incorporated in 1797 by the name of 
ct Tire Dcerfield Academy," is established in this 
town. This town was incorporated in 1681, and 
contains 1330 inhabitants; 17 miles n. of North 
ampton, and 109 n. by w. of Boston.] 

[DEERFIELD, a well settled, agricultural town 
in Rockingham county, New Hampshire, and 
was a part of the township of Nottingham ; 19 
miles s. e. of Concord, and 35 //. w. of Portsmouth. 
ft contains 1619 inhabitants, and was incorporated 
in 1766.] 

[DEER Island, an island and township in Pe- 
nobscot bay, in Hancock county, district of Maine, 
containing b82 inhabitants. It was incorporated 
in 1789, and lies 170 miles n. e. of Boston. Lat. 
44 10 n. Long. 68 30 a&amp;gt;.] 

[DEER, an island in Passamaquoddy bay.] 

[D BERING, a township in Hillsborough coun 
ty, New Hampshire, incorporated in 1774. It 
contains 928 inhabitants, and lies 15 miles s. w. 
of Concord, and 54 miles w. of Portsmouth.] 

[DEFIANCE, a fort in the n. w. territory ; 
situated on the point of land formed by the con 
fluence of the rivers of Au Glaize and the Miami 
of the Lake, nearly half-way between fort Wayne 
on the Miami, and lake Erie. Lat. 41 27 n. 
Long. 84 10 w. ] 

DEGUEDO, a small settlement of the head 
settlement of Orizaba, and alcaldia mayor of Ix- 
miquilpan, in Nueva Espana. 

DEHESA, a settlement of the kingdom of 
Chile, in the province or district and corregimicnto 
of Concepcion ; situate on the bank, and at the 
mouth of the river Mapocho. 

[DE-LA-MARCH, a w.. water of Illinois river, 
in tiie n. w. territory. It is 30 yards wide, and 
navigable eight or nine miles.] 

[DELAMATTENOOS, an Indian tribe, in 
alliance with the Delawares.] 

[DE-LA-WAR, a town in King William s 
County, Virginia ; situate on the broad peninsula 
formed by theeonfluence ofthePamunky and Mat- 
lapony. The united stream thence assumes the 
hame of York river* It lies 20 miles , by w,. of 
Williainsburg.] 



DEL 

[DELAWARE Bay arid River. The bay is 
60 miles long, from the cape to the entrance of 
the river, at Bombay hook ; and occupies a space 
of about 630,000 acres ; and is so wide in some 
parts as that a ship in the middle of it cannot be 
seen from the land. It opens into the Atlantic n. 
w. and s. e. between cape Henlopen on the right, 
and cape May on the left. These capes are 18 or 
20 miles apart. 

Delaware river was called ChihohocSi by 
the aboriginals, and in an old Nurenbcrg map- 
is narmd Zuydt river. It rises by two prin 
cipal branches in New York state ; the north era- 
most of which, called the Mohawk s or Cookqug 
branch, rises in lake Ustayantho, lat. 42 25 , 
and takes a s. w. course, and turning s. e. it 
crosses the Pennsylvania line, in lat. 42; about 
seven miles from thence it receives the Popachton 
branch from the n. e. which rises in the Kaats Kill 
mountains. Thence it runs 5. until it strikes the 
n. w. corner of New Jersey, in lat. 41 24 ; and 
then passes off to the sea through Delaware bay, 
having New Jersey e. and Pennsylvania and Dela 
ware w. The bay and river are navigable from 
the sea up to the Great or Lower falls at Trenton, 
155 miles ; and are accommodated with buoys and 
piers for the direction and safety of ships.. A 
74-gun ship may go up to Philadelphia, 120 miles, 
by the ship channel, from the sea. The distance 
across the land, in a s. e. course to New Jersey 
coast, is but 60 miles. Sloops go 35 miles above 
Philadelphia, to Trenton falls ; boats that carry- 
eight or nine tons, 100 miles farther ; and Indian ca 
noes, 150 miles, with the interruption of several small 
falls or portages. For other particulars relating to 
this river, seeHENLOPLN, MAY, BOMBAY Hook, 
REEDY Island, SCHUYLKILL, LEIGH, &amp;c. 

It is in contemplation to connect the waters of 
Chesapeak bay with those of Delaware river, by 
four different canals, viz. Elk river, with Christiana 
creek ; Brond creek, another branch, with Red 
Lion creek ; Bohemia, a third branch of the Elk, 
with Apoqukiemy creek; and Chester river, .with 
Duck creek.] 

[DELAWARE, a small river of E. Florida. See 
CHARLOTTE Haven.] 

[DELAWARE, one of the United States of N. 
America, is situated between lat. 58 29 oO" and 
39 54 n. and between long. 75 and 75 48 w. 
being in length 92 miles, and in breadth 24 miles ; 
contaii.ing 2000 square miles, or 1,200,000 acres. 
It is bounded e. by the river and bay of the same 
name, and the Atlantic ocean ; on the s. by a line 
from Fenewick s island, in lat. 38 29 30" n. 
drawn w, till it intersects what is commonly called 



D E L A W A R E. 



[the tangent line, dividing it from the state of Ma 
ryland ; on the w. by the said tangent line, pass 
ing n. up the peninsula, till it (ouches the w. part 
of the territorial circle ; and thence on the n. by 
the said circle, described with a radius of 12 
miles about the town of Newcastle, which divides 
this state from Pennsylvania. This state derived 
its name from Lord De-La-War, who was in 
strumental in establishing the first settlement of 
Virginia. It is divided into three counties, New 
castle, Kent, and Sussex ; whose chief towns are 
Wilmington, Newcastle, Dover, and Lewis. 
Dover is the seat of government. The number of 
inhabitants, in 1790, was 59,094, of whom 887 
"were slaves ; and by the census of 1810, the po 
pulation amounted to 72,674 souls. 

The e. side of the state is indented with a large 
number of creeks, or small rivers, which generally 
have a short course, soft banks, numerous shoals, 
and are skirted with very extensive marshes, and 
empty into the river and bay of Delaware. In the 
5. and w. parts of this state spring the head waters 
of Pocomoke, Wicomico, Nanticoke, Choptank, 
Chester, Sassafras, and Bohemia rivers, all falling 
into Chesapeak bay ; some of them are navigable 
20 or 30 miles into the country, for vessels of 50 
or 60 tons. 

The state of Delaware, the upper parts of the 
county of Newcastle excepted, is, to speak gene 
rally, low and level. Large quantities of stagnant 
water, at particular seasons of the year, over 
spreading a great proportion of the land, render 
it equally unfit for the purposes of agriculture, and 
injurious to the health of the inhabitants. The 
spine or highest ridge of the peninsula runs 
through the state of Delaware, inclining to the 
c. or Delaware side. It is designated in Sussex, 
Kent, and part of Newcastle county, by a remark 
able chain of swamps, from which the waters de 
scend on each side, passing on the e. to the De 
laware, and on the w. to the Chesapeak. Many 
of the shrubs and plants growing in these swamps 
are similar to those found on the highest mountains. 
Delaware is chiefly an agricultural state. It 
includes a very fertile tract of country ; and 
scarcely any part of the United States is better 
adapted to the different purposes of agriculture, 
or in which a great variety of the most useful 
productions can be so conveniently and plentifully 
reared. The soil along the Delaware river, and 
from eight to 10 miles into the interior country, is 
generally a rich clay, producing large timber, and 
well adapted to the various purposes of agricul 
ture. From thence to the swamps above men- 

VOL. II. 



tioned the soil is light, sandy, and of an inferior 
quality. 

The general aspect of the country is very fa 
vourable for cultivation. Excepting some of the 
upper parts of the county of Newcastle, the surface 
of the state is very little broken or irregular. The 
heights of Christiana are lofty and commanding ; 
some of the hills of Brandy wine are rough and 
stony ; but descending from these, and a few 
others, the lower country is so little diversified as 
almost to form one extended plain. In the coun 
ty of Newcastle the soil consists of a strong 
clay ; in Kent there is a considerable mixture of 
sand ; and in Sussex the quantity of sand altoge 
ther predominates. Wheat is the staple of this 
state. It grows here in such perfection as not only 
to be particularly sought by the manufacturers of 
flour throughout the Union, but also to be distin 
guished and preferred for its superior qualities in 
foreign markets. This wheat possesses an uncom 
mon softness and whiteness, very favourable to the 
manufactures of superfine flour, and in other re 
spects far exceeds the hard and flinty grains raised 
in general on the higher land,. Besides wheat, 
this state generally produces plentiful crops of In 
dian corn, barley, rye, oats, flax, buck-wheat, and 
potatoes. It abounds in natural and artificial 
meadows, containing a large variety of grasses. 
Hemp, cotton, and silk, if properly attended to, 
doubtless would flourish very well. 

The county of Sussex, besides producing- a con 
siderable quantity of grain, particularly of Indian 
corn, possesses excellent grazing lands. This 
county also exports very large quantities of lumber, 
obtained chiefly from an extensive swamp, called 
the Indian River or Cypress Swamp, lying partly 
within this state, and partly in the state of Mary 
land. This morass extends six miles from e. to w. 
and nearly 12 from n. to s. including an area of 
nearly 50,000 acres of land. The whole of this 
swamp is a high and level bason, very wet, though 
undoubtedly the highest land between the sea and 
the bay, whence the Pocomoke descends on one 
side, and Indian river and St. Martin s on the 
other. . This swamp contains a great variety of 
plants, trees, wild beasts, birds, and reptiles. 

Almost the whole of the foreign exports of De 
laware are from Wilmington : the trade from this 
state to Philadelphia is great, being the principal 
source whence that city draws its staple commo 
dity. No less than 265,000 barrels of flour, 
S00,000 bushels of wheat, 170,000 bushels of In 
dian corn, besides barley, oats, flax-seed, paper, 
slit-iron, snufF, salted provisions, &amp;c. &amp;c. to a very] 



10 



DELAWARE. 



[considerable amount, are annually sent from tbe 
waters of the Delaware state ; of which the Chris 
tiana is by far the most productive, and probably 
many times as much so as any other creek or river 
of like magnitude in the Union; 215,000 barrels 
of flour, and other articles, to the amount of 
80,000 dollars more, being exported from this 
creek ; of which, to the value of 550,000 dollars 
are manufactured on its n. bank, within two or 
three miles of the navigation. Among other 
branches of industry exercised in and near Wil 
mington, is a cotton manufactory, (lately how 
ever burnt) ; a bolting cloth manufactory has lately 
been established by an ingenious European ; both 
of which have promised fair to be a lasting ad 
vantage to the country. In the county of New 
castle are several fulling-mills, two snuff-mills, 
one slitting-mill, four paper-mills, and sixty mills 
for grinding grain, all of which are turned by 
water. But though Wilmington and its neigh 
bourhood are probably already the greatest seat of 
manufactures in the United States, yet they are 
capable of being much improved in this respect, 
as the country is hilly, and abounds with running 
water; the Brandywine alone might, with a mo 
derate expence, when compared with the object, 
be brought to the top of the hill upon which Wil 
mington is situated, whereby a fall sufficient for 
40 mills, in addition to those already built, would 
be obtained. The heights near Wilmington afford 
a number of agreeable prospects ; from some of 
which may be seen the town, the adjacent mea 
dows, and four adjoining states. No regular ac 
count of the births and burials has been kept, but 
the place is healthy. The number of children 
under 16 is probably equal to that of any town 
which is not more populous, arid, according to an 
accurate account taken the year 1794, there were 
upwards of 160 persons above 60 years old. The 
legislature of this state, in 1796, passed an act to 
incorporate a bank in this town. 

There is no college in this state. There is an 
academy at Newark, incorporated in 1769. The 
legislature, during their session in January 1796, 
passed an act to create a fund for the establishment 
of schools throughout the state. 

Wheat is the staple commodity of this state. 
This is manufactured into flour, and exported in 
large quantities. The exports from the port of 
Wilmington, where a number of square-rigged 
vessels are owned, for the year 1786, in the article 
of flour, was 20,783 barrels superfine, 457 do. 
common, 956 do. middling, and 346 do. ship stuiF. 
The manufacture of flour is carried to a higher 



degree of perfection in this slate than in any other 
in the Union. Besides the well constructed mills 
on Red-clay and White-clay creeks, and other 
streams indifferent parts of the state, the celebrated 
collection of mills at Brandywine merit a particular 
description. Here are to be seen, at one view, 12 
merchant mills, (besides a saw mill), having double 
the number of pairs of stones found in the others, 
all of superior dimensions and excellent construe, 
tion. These mills are three miles from the mouth 
of the creek on which they stand, half a mile from 
Wilmington, and 27 from Philadelphia, on the 
post road from the e. to the s. states. They are 
called the Brandywine Mills, from the stream on 
which they are erected. This stream rises near 
the Welch mountains in Pennsylvania, and after a 
winding course of 30 or 40 miles through falls, 
which furnish numerous seats (130 of which are 
already occupied) for every species of water 
works, empties into Christiana creek, near Wil 
mington. The quantity of wheat manufactured at 
these mills annually is not accurately ascertained. 
It is estimated, however, by the best informed on 
the subject, that these mills can grind 400,000 
bushels in a year. But although they are capable 
of manufacturing this quantity yearly, yet from 
the difficulty of procuring a permanent supply of 
grain, the instability of the flour market, and other 
circumstances, there are not commonly more than 
from about 290 to 300,000 bushels of wheat and 
corn manufactured here annually. In the fall of 
17h9. and spring of 1790, there were made at the 
Brandy wine mills 50,000 barrels of superfine flour, 
1354 do. of common, 400 do. middling, as 
many of ship stuff, and 2000 do. corn meal. The 
quantity of wheat and corn ground, from which 
this flour, &amp;c. was made, was 308,000 bushels, 
equal to the export of those articles from the port 
of Philadelphia for the same year. 

These mills give employ to about 200 persons, 
viz. about 40 to tend the mills, from 50 to 70 
coopers to make casks for the flour, a sufficient 
number to man 12 sloops of about oO tons each, 
which are employed in the transportation of the 
wheat and flour, the rest in various other occupa 
tions connected with the mills. The navigation 
quite to these mills is such, that a vessel carrying 
1000 bushels of wheat may be laid alongside of any 
of these mills ; and beside some of them the water 
is of sufficient depth to admit vessels of twice the 
above size. The vessels are unloaded with asto 
nishing expedition. There have been instances 
of JOOO bushels being carried to the height of four 
stories in four hours. It is frequently the case] 



DEL 

[that vessels \vith 1000 bushels of wheat come up 
with flood tide, unlade, and go away the succeed 
ing ebb with 300 barrels of flour on board. In 
consequence of the machines introduced by the 
ingenious Mr. Oliver Evans, three quarters of the 
manual labour before found necessary is now suf 
ficient for every purpose. By means of these ma 
chines, when made use of in the full extent pro 
posed by the inventor, the wheat will be received 
on the shallop s deck, thence carried to the upper 
loft of the mill, and a considerable portion of the 
same returned in flour on the lower floor, ready for 
packing, without the assistance of manual labour 
but in a very small degree, in proportion to the 
business done. The transportation of flour from 
the mills to the port of Wilmington does not re 
quire half an hour ; and it is frequently with ease 
that a cargo is taken from the mills and delivered 
at Philadelphia the same day. The situation of 
these mills is very pleasant and healthful. The 
first mill was built here about 50 years since. 
There is now a small town of 40 houses, princi 
pally stone and brick, which, together with the 
mills and the vessels loading and unloading beside 
them, furnish a charming prospect from the 
bridge, from whence they are all in full view. 

Besides the wheat and flour trade, this state ex 
ports lumber and various other articles. The 
amount of exports from the year ending Septem 
ber 30th, 1791, wag 119,878 dollars, 93 cents; 
ditto 1792, 133,972 dollars, 27 cents; ditto 1793, 
93,559 dollars, 45 cents; ditto 1794, 207,985 dol 
lars, 33 cents ; ditto 1795, 158,041 dollars, 21 cents. 

In this state there is a variety of religious deno 
minations. Of the Presbyterian sect there are 24 
churches ; of the Episcopal 14 ; of the Baptist 7 ; 
of the Methodists, a considerable number, espe 
cially in the two lower counties of Kent and Sus 
sex : the number of their churches is not exactly 
ascertained. Besides these there is a Swedish 
church at Wilmington, which is one of the oldest 
churches in the United States. 

There are few minerals in this state except iron ; 
large quantities of bog iron ore, very fit for cast 
ings, are found in Sussex county, among the 
branches of Nanticoke river. Before the revolu 
tion this ore Avas worked to a great amount ; but 
this business has since declined. Wheat and 
lumber arc "the staple commodities of this state. 
The other articles of produce and manufacture, 
are Indian corn, barley, oats, flax-seed, salted pro 
visions, paper, slit-iron, snuff, &amp;c. 

Settlements were made here by the Dutch about 
the year 1623, and by the Swedes about the year 



DEL 



JI 



1627. Their settlements were comprehended in 
the grant to the Duke of York ; and William 
Penn united them to his government by purchase. 
They were afterwards separated, in some measure, 
from Pennsylvania, and denominated the Three 
Lower Counties. They had their own assemblies, 
but the governor of Pennsylvania used to attend, 
as he did in his own proper government. At the 
late revolution, the~Three Counties were erected 
into a sovereign state ; and have established a re 
publican constitution.] 

[DELAWARE County, in Pennsylvania, is s. w. 
of Philadelphia county, on Delaware river. It is 
about 21 miles in length, and 15 in breadth, con 
taining 11 5, 200 acres, and subdivided into ^town 
ships, the chief of which is Chester. The num 
ber of inhabitants is 9483. The lands bordering 
on the Delaware are low, and afford excellent mea 
dow and pasturage ; and are guarded from in 
undations by mounds of earth or dikes, which are 
sometimes broken down in extraordinary freshes 
in the river. If this happens before cutting the 
grass, the crop of hay is lost for that season, and 
the reparation of the breaches is expensive to the 
proprietors. Great numbers of cattle are brought 
here from the w. parts of Virginia and N. Caro 
lina, to be fattened for supplying the Philadelphia 
market.] 

[DELAWARE, a new county in the state of New 
York, on the head waters of Delaware river, taken 
from Otsego county.] 

[DELAWARE, a township in Northampton 
county, Pennsylvania.] 

[DELA WARES, an Indian nation, forraerljr 
numerous and powerful, and who possessed part 
of Pennsylvania, New Jersey, and New York. 
This name was doubtless given them by the Eu 
ropeans ; for they call themselves Lennilenape, 
that is, Indian men ; or Woapanachky, which 
signifies a people living towards the rising sun. 
They now reside about half-way between lake 
Erie and Ohio river. They are an ingenious and 
intelligent people ; and like the Six Nations, are 
celebrated for their courage, peaceable disposition, 
and powerful alliances. Almost all the neighbour 
ing nations are in league with them, especially ihe 
Mahikan, Shauanves, Cherokees, Twichtwees, 
Wawiachtanos, Kilkapus, Moshkos, TucLa h- 
shas, Chippewiiys, Ottawas, Putewoatarnics, and 
Kaskaskias. The Delawares were lately hos 
tile, but made peace with the Uni e:l States, 
1795, and ceded some lands. The United Slates, 
on the other hand, have engaged topiyfhem in 
goods, to the value of 1000 dollars a year for ever, 
c 2 



12 DEL 

Twenty years ago the Delawares could furnish 600 
warriors ; but their number is considerably de 
creased by war since that time.] 

DELE, a small province of the kingdom of 
Brazil, in the middle of the captainship of Seara. 
It is contiguous to the province of Petaguay, and 
are both of them inhabited by savage Indians, 
with some few Portuguese, who have fled hither 
on account of their crimes. It abounds greatly in 
sugar-cane and Brazil-wood. The climate, though 
very hot, is healthy. The Portuguese endea 
voured in vain to subject this province to their 
dominion, after several attempts, in which num 
bers of people were slain, but at length finding all 
efforts vain, they desisted from the enterprise 

DELEC, a settlement of the province and cor- 
regimiento of Cuenca in the kingdom of Quito; 
situate between two rivers, the one to the e. the 
other to the w. both of them uniting together to 
form the Abancay. It is of a fertile and delicious 
territory, healthy climate, and mild and pleasant 
temperature, lying to the ri. n. e. of its capital, in 
lat. 2 48 s. 

DELFIN, or DAUPHIN, a small island in the 
gulf of Mexico, near the coast of W. Florida, 
20 miles to the e. of the entrance or mouth of the 
river Chicasawhay, and in that of the Mobile. It 
is five miles long and very narrow. In one half 
of it there are no trees, and in the other but very 
few. The only fort and settlement that it contains 
is situate in thett). part of it. Between this island 
and another about a league s distance, called Del 
Cuerno, the water is very shallow, and at the ex 
tremity of the last mentioned island is another 
small one, which should rather be looked upon as 
a rock. This is called Redonda, from its round 
figure. The rock Delfin was formerly called Mas 
sacre, and had upon it many store-houses and 
small buildings ; in as much as its port offered a 
greater convenience for the French established 
here to unlade their merchandise than to carry it 
on in small craft as far as the Mobile. In a short 
time it became well peopled ; and a few years 
after the French built a fort, so that it became 
tile principal place of the colony ; maintaining 
this title, not only by virtue of the assistance it 
received from France, but likewise by the success 
ful resistance exhibited against the native savages; 
although these afterward were made to manifest a 
very friendly disposition. Some of these Indians 
established themselves upon the river Mobile, 
where they cultivated a piece of ground, and 
lived in amity with the French, preferring them 
to the Spaniards, with whom they had lived some 



DEL 

time, and notwithstanding that the latter had esta 
blished a misson amongst them for the purpose of 
instructing them in religion. The other Indians, 
bent upon nothing more than enhancing the pros 
perity of the colony, and thinking that it was not 
advantageous to raise corn, set about making some 
plantations of tobacco, which succeeded admirably ; 
and, indeed, they had an idea that this article was 
preferable to any found in Virginia. Some time 
after an English pirate destroyed and burnt their 
storehouses, committing, at the same time, incre 
dible cruelties amongst the inhabitants, in the 
hopes of forcing them to communicate where they 
might have hidden treasure. The loss sustained 
on this occasion, which was by far less serious to 
the king than to individuals, amounted to 80,000 
francs ; and after this it was deeemed expedient to 
fortify the island. The fruits of all the industry 
and labour manifested on this occasion were en 
tirely lost, owing to a hurricane which happened, 
and which filled up the entrance of the port by a 
mountain of sand ; the whole of the island was 
nearly inundated, and the numbers of cattle that 
perished were very great. In 1719, the Spaniards 
endeavoured, for four days following, to take it by 
surprise, but they found themselves obliged to de 
sist from their undertaking. It is in lat. 30 18 n. 
Long. 88 12 w. 

DKI.FIN, a bay on the s. coast of the straits of 
Magellan, close to the point of San Fernando. 

Dt^LFiN, a settlement and parish of the French, 
in the island of St. Domingo ; situate on the n. 
coast, on the shore of a port of its name, being 
between the settlement of Caracol and the bay 
of Manzanillo. [See DAUPHIX.] 

DELGADA, a point of the n. coast of the 
straits of Magellan, one of those which form the 
mouth of the first narrow pass of these straits, call 
ed also Nuestra Senora de la Esperanz;. 

DELGADA, another point of land on the coast 
of Nueva Espaua, and alcaMia mayor of Tam- 
pico. It is 50 leagues from the river of this name, 
in lat. 20 12 . Long. 98 28 . 

[DELIVERANCE Cape is the s. e. point of 
the land of Louisiade. Bougainville was here, 
and named it in 1768.] 

DELORA, a large and rapid river of the king 
dom of Chile, in the province and cqrregimicnto 
of Santiago. It runs from e. to a), and receives 
the waters of the Teno, Pereroa, and Matuquito, 
fertilizing some beautiful plains, and then ia a 
large and copious stream emptying itself into the 
Pacific, in lat. 3&amp;lt;1 45 s. 

[DEL-KEY, a captainship in the s. division 



DEM 

of Brazil, whose chief town is St. Salvador. 
See KEY.] 

[DEL-SPIRITU -SANTO, a river which falls 
into the gulf of Mexico, at the w. w. end of the 
peninsula of Florida.] 

DEMERARA, a large river of the province of 
Guayana and government of Cumana, in the part 
occupied by the Dutch. Its origin is not for cer 
tain known, but it runs n. between the rivers Esse- 
qucbo and Corentin, and enters the sea five leagues 
from the former, having a fort at its mouth. It is 
navigable only by rafts and canoes. Its shores are 
covered with plantations and country houses, and 
the habitations of certain English delinquents and 
refugees, who pay a tribute to the Dutch for the 
possession they enjoy. The productions of these 
estates are sugar, coffee, and cotton, which were 
sent to Europe under the same regulations as were 
the productions of the colony of Essequebo : two 
ships arrive here annually, laden at the charge and 
risk of the company, in which the inhabitants send 
back their productions, paying to the same com 
pany the expences of freight. This medium is re 
sorted to principally by such inhabitants as cannot 
risk a vessel upon their own account : the same 
plan is adopted equally in the other colonies, though 
there are no inconsiderable number of small vessels 
used as private traders. [The river Dernerara is 
about two miles wide at its mouth, opposite the 
fort, on the c. bank of the river, and about 45 miles 
distant from Abary creek. It is scarcely a mile 
wide, 12 miles above the fort; and its course is 
from s. to n. It is navigable upwards of 200 miles 
for vessels which can pass the bar at its mouth, 
which is a mud bank, not having above 24 feet at 
the highest tides. The difference between high and 
low water mark is from 10 to 12 feet. The fort, 
if properly supplied with men and ammunition, is 
able effectually to guard its entrance. Staebroeck, 



DEM 



13 



the seat of government, stands on the e. side of the 
river, 1^ miles above the fort.] 

[DEMERARA, a district in Dutch Guayana, 
which, together with Essequebo, form one govern 
ment, and have the same court of police, but each 
has a separate court of justice. The two districts 
contain about 3000 whites and 40,000 slaves. De- 
merara river, which gives name to the district, 
passes through it, and is usually visited by 40 or 50 
large ships from Holland, who often make two 
voyages in a year, besides upwards of 250 smaller 
vessels, under the Dutch and other flags. The 
plantations are regularly laid out in lots along the 
sea-shore, called facades, about a quarter oi a mile 
wide, and extending |ihs of a mile back into the 
country. Each lot contains about 250 acres each ; 
and when fully cultivated, the proprietor may ob 
tain a similar tract back of the first, and so on in 
progression. Each lot will contain 120,000 cotton 
trees, averaging usually half a pound a tree. Such 
a plantation is reckoned well stocked to have 120 
Negroes. The shores of the rivers and creeks are 
chiefly planted with coffee, to the distance of about 
30 miles from the sea ; thence 30 miles farther up, 
the soil becomes clayey and more fit for sugar- 
canes. Beyond this, the finest kinds of wood for 
building, furniture, &amp;c. are cut. The estates on 
the river have greatly increased and extended them 
selves since 1796, as well as those on the coast ; 
and where there was one sugar-plantation, there 
are five now. Pinckard has, therefore, given an 
erroneous idea about these estates being abandoned. 
The land on the sea-coast is unfit for the produc 
tion of sugar, coffee, and plantains, from the soil 
being too saline. See DUTCH AMEUICA. 

The official value of the imports and exports of 
Dernerara were, in 

1809, imports .550,871, exports .278,998 

1810, .778,404, .346,783. 



And the quantities of the principal articles imported into Great Britain were, 



in 



Coffee. 


Sugar. 


Rum. 


Cotton Wool. 


Brit. Plant. 


For. Plant. 


Biit. Plant. 


For. Plant. 


Cwt. 

1809, 24,528 
1810, 45,480 


Cwt. 

698 * 


Cwf. 
156,131 

150,624 


Cwt. 

7 
2 


Galls. 
353,370 
98,44-2 


Lf&amp;gt;8. 

4,012.257 
7,331, 122 



DEMEVEN1, a river of the province .and 
country of Las Amazonas, in the part possessed by 
the Portuguese. It runs w. and enters the Parime, 
between the rivers Yanavini and Guavao. 

[DEMI-QUlAiV, a river, swamp, and lake on 
the w. side of Illinos river, in the n. w. territory. 
The river runs a s. s. e. course, is navigable 120 



miles, and has the swamp of its name on the ??. 
bank near its mouth ; which last is 50 yards wide, 
32 miles atove Sagamond, and 165 miles above the 
Mississippi. The lake is of a circular form, 200 
yards w. of the river, is six miles across, and 
empties into the Illinois by a small passage four 
feet deep, 171 miles from the Mississippi.] 



U DEN 

DEN, a cape or point of the c. coast of the 
island of Newfoundland, between the bay Blanche 
or White, and the island of St. Barbara. 

[DENNIS, a part of Yarmouth in Barnstable 
county, Massachusetts, which was incorporated 
into a township in 1793.] 

DENNIS, an island of the N. sea; one of the 
many which lie on the n. e. coast of New Breton 
in N. America, thus called after its discoverer, a 
Dutchman of the name of Gerard Dennis. It is 14 
or 15 leagues in circumference, lofty, mountainous, 
and full of woods, abounding in trees of great bulk 
and height, and having upon its coast many cacao 
trees. In the mountainous part it has many plan 
tations, and the soil is of an obscure red colour. 
The figure of this island is very irregular, owing to 
its having many points running into the sea, and 
being full of shoals and sand-banks. The cent re of 
it is in lat. 3 10 s. It is well peopled, and its na 
tives are very dark, bold, and robust. They have 
large and round heads with short and curly hair, 
which they dress in various forms, and paint of dif 
ferent colours : their faces are wide and round, and 
the nose very flat. They are not altogether ugly, 
although they disfigure themselves with paint, and 
various things which they hang through their noses 
and their ears. They are active and very dexter 
ous in the management of their vessels, which are 
ingeniously built. These are large and straight, the 
poop being loftier than any other part, and the 
whole being adorned with figures of birds, fishes, 
human heads, either painted or engraved, which, 
although rudely designed, serve to shew a fanciful 
invention : it is not known what instruments they 
employ, iron not being in use amongst them. 
These vessels or canoes they manage in a very dex 
terous manner by a species of oars. Their prin 
cipal arms are lances, swords, darts, and some bows 
and arrows. The Indians spoken of by William 
Darnpiere, as having come upon him to attack 
him, resemble these. Their language is clear and 
distinct, and the token of friendship is manifested 
by carrying a large stick or bough of a tree upon 
the head. It is in lat. 30 }&amp; n. and long. 36 
10 a;. 

[DENNY S River, district of Maine, 22 miles 
e. of Machias. The country between this river and 
Machiris, in 1794, was a wilderness. The banks of 
the river were at this time thinly settled by a re 
gular and well disposed people.] 

DENONVTLLE, or NIAGARA, a fort of the 
French, in the country of the Iroquces Indians, on 
the shore of the s. coast of the lake Ontario, at 
the mouth or entrance of the river Niagara. 

[DENTON, the chief town of Caroline county, 



DBS 

in Maryland ; situated on the e. side of Choptank 
creek, the e. main branch of Choptank river. It 
is laid out regularly, and has a few houses, and 
lies seven miles s. of Grcensborough, and 37 s.s. e. 
of Chester.] 

[DEPTL ORDj a township inGloucester county, 
New Jersey.] 

DERA, SAN JOSEPH DE, a settlement of the 
Portuguese, in the province and country of Las 
Amazonas ; situate on the shore of the river 
Negro. 

[DERBY, a township in Orleans county, Ver 
mont, on the n. line of the state, on the e. shore of 
lake Mem phrem agog.] 

[DERBY, a town in New Haven county, Con 
necticut, on the point of land formed by the con 
fluence of Naugutuck and Housatonick rivers. 
This town was settled in 1665, under New Haven 
jurisdiction, and is now divided into two parishes, 
and has an academy in its infancy. It has a con 
siderable trade with the W. Indies for so small a 
town, and a number of mills on the falls of Nau&amp;gt; 
gatuck, and streams which fall into it, and iron 
and other works on Eight-mile river, which falls 
into the Stratford. The Stratford or Housatouick 
river is navigable 12 miles to this town.] 

[DERBY, a town in Chester county, Pennsyl 
vania, seven miles from Chester, and five from Phi 
ladelphia. It is situated on Derby creek, which 
empties into Delaware river, near Chester.] 

[DERBY, a township in Dauphin county, Penn 
sylvania ; situated on the e. side of Swatera creek, 
two miles above its confluence with the Susque- 
hannah, and celebrated for its curious cave. See 
DAUPHIN County.] 

[DERBY, a township on Susquehannah river, in 
Pennsylvania. There are two other townships of 
the same name in Pennsylvania ; the one in Mifflin 
county, the other in that of Westmoreland.] 

[DERRYF1ELD, a township in New Hamp 
shire, on the e. bank of Merrimack river, Hillsbo- 
rough county, containing 362 inhabitants, and was 
incorporated in 1751. The soil is but indifferent. 
It is 49 miles w. of Portsmouth.] 

DESAGUADEKO, SAN PEDKO DEL, a settle 
ment of the province and corregiwiento of Pacages 
in Peru ; situate on the shore of the lake Titicaca, 
where also flows the river of its name. 

Dr.sAGUADEiio, another settlement and seat of 
the silver mines of the province and government 
of Chucuito in Peru. 

DF.SAGUADEUO, a river of this province and go 
vernment, over which, owing to its being very 
considerable, a bridge was constructed according 
to the order of the Inca Huaina Capac, to f acili- 



DBS 

tate the passage of his army. The one which 
exists at present is of great note, as it is the 
boundary between this province and that of Paca- 
ges, as also being the spot where the Mitayos In 
dians meet when they are about to work in the 
mines of Potosi, celebrating a festival, which too 
often turns to weeping and sorrow, from the reflec 
tion that they may never meet again ; a presenti 
ment, which, from the labour they undergo, and 
which generally causes their death, is but too faith 
fully verified. 

DiiSAGUADERO, another, which is an arm 
thrown out from the large lake of Los Patos, 
and communicating itself with the lake Mini, in 
the province and captainship of Rey, and king 
dom of Brazil ; on the shore of which the Portu 
guese have built a fort, with the name of San 
Gonzalo. 

DicsAo.UADERO, another large and abundant 
river, which rises from the lake Allaga, in the 
province of Charcas, and towards the s. e. part : 
after an extended course, it forms the lake of Gua- 
nacachos, from which it issues on the e. side, 
and afterwards collecting the tributary streams of 
the Turuyan, Salaclillo, Capoy, and Chunta, with 
others of less note, it enters the sea of Magellan, 
forming the bay of Los Leones or Lions, in lat. 
44 13 s. Some geographers doubt of this course 
of the lake Guanacachos into the sea of Magellan, 
and good proofs of the assertion are wanting. 

DE^AGUADERO, some lakes of the kingdom of 
Chile. They are various, one of them being very 
large, and all formed by the waste-water of various 
rivers. It is from this circumstance that they are 
thus named. 

DnsAGPADERo, another river. See MOYALEI. 

DESOABEZADO, a small river of the pro 
vince and corregimiento of Chilian in the king 
dom of Chile. It runs s. and forms the source of 
the river Tunayan. 

[DcscABEZAuo, a very lofty mountain of Chile, 
at the top of which are found, in a calcined or pe 
trified state, various shells, evidently the produc 
tion of the sea, and which were, without doubt, 
deposited there by the waters of the deluge.] 

DESCOJSOC1DA, PUNTA, a point on tlie coast 
of the province and government of Yucatan, be 
tween the river Arines and the point Piedra. 

DESGUBRIM1ENT0, Rio DEL NUJ.VO, a 
river in the province and country of Las Anm- 
zonas, and territory of Matoijroso. It rises in the 
mountains of the Mures Indians, runs s. and turn 
ing its course to the w. enters in a large body the 
Iten-es-or Guapore, just before it divides itself into 



D E S 15 

arms, which, afterwards uniting, form a large 
island. 

DrscuBuiMiENTO, a settlement and real of the 
silver mines of the alcaldia n at/or of Fresnillo in 
Nueva Espana ; three leagues distant from the 
real of Zacatecas. 

DESEADA, an island of the N. sea, one of the 
Less Antilles, and the first that was discovered by 
the celebrated Christopher Columbus, in hia second 
voyage, in 1493: he gave it this name from the 
desire he felt of seeing land. It is four leagues in 
length and two in width, and is surrounded by 
ridges of rocks and shoals. The part which looks 
to the n. is lower than that which looks to the s. 
It has many mounts or sand-banks, and seen from 
a distance represents the figure of a galley. The 
soil is fertile and well cultivated, and the climate 
healthy. It abounds greatly in higuanas, and in a 
species of birds called fragatas. The Father 
Labat records that there is a deep cavern here, 
containing the bones and arms of the Indians, who, 
he supposes, were buried here. In J76V, it was 
taken by the English, who restored it the follow 
ing year to the French by the peace of Paris, and 
since that time it has been in the possession of the 
latter. It is seven leagues from the island of Ma- 
rigalante, and four from Guadalupe, in lat. 16 
22 n. Long. 61 15 w. 

DESEADO, a large and convenient port of the 
sea of Magellan, on the coast of the Patagones, 
discovered by Hernando Magellanes in 1515. It 
has a very good bottom, but is little sheltered from 
the s. wind. Lat. 47 38 *. 

DESBADO, a cape or point of land on the coast 
of the straits of Magellan. It lies very far 
to the w. and is in lat. 53 35 s, and long. 85 
15 w. 

DE8ECIIO, a small island of the N. sea, near 
the w. coast of the island of Puerto Rico, opposite 
the point of Calvachi and the Espada of St. Do 
mingo. The French call, it Zacheo. It is six 
leagues from the former island, in lat. 18 20 ??. 
Long. 67 31 w. 

[DESERT Islnnd, MOUNT, on the coast of the 
district of Maine, Massachusetts, contains about 200 
families, divided into two different settlements, 
about 15 miles apart, in lat. 44 18 w.] 

[DESKSPOIR, Cape, or DESPAIR, on the n. 
side of Chaleur bay, is about three leagues ??:. 
s. K?. of Bona venture island. There is a large cod 
fishery here.] 

DESESPOIR, an island of the same coast as the 
former bay. 

[DESPAIR, a bay on the s,w. side of New 



16 



D E T 



foundland island, adjoining to FORTUNE Bay on 
the n. e. ; which see.] 

DES1ERTO, MONTE, an island of the N. sea, 
near the coast of the province of Sagadahock, be 
tween the point Nesting and that of Petit Menau. 

DESIERTO, an unpeopled tract of country in 
Pern, in the province and corregimiento of ATA- 
CAMA. See this article. 

DESIERTO, another, in the same kingdom. See 
SIXHURA. 

DESIERTOS, VIEJOS, a lake of New France 
or Canada, to the w. of that of Michigan. 

DESIERTOS, a river of this province, which rises 
from the former lake, runs w, and enters the Mis 
sissippi. 

DESOLLADOS, PUNTA DE LOS, a point on 
the coast of the S. sea, of the province and govern 
ment of Nicaragua, and kingdom of Guatemala, 
between the point San Juan and port Possession. 

DESPARRAMADERO, an arm of the river 
Murichal, which runs through the province and 
government of Cumana, forming many lakes and 
pools, and at last enters the channel of Aracoa. 

DESPENSA, a settlement of the province and 
government of Costarica in the kingdom of Gua 
temala ; situate on the coast of the S. sea, near the 
town of Nicoya. 

DESPOSORIOS. See BUENA VISTA. 

DESTIERRO, a settlement of the province and 
country of Las Amazonas, or part of Guayana 
possessed by the Portuguese ; situate on the shore 
of the river of Las Amazonas, near the moutk of 
the Puru. 

DESTIERRO, another. See NDESTRA SENORA 

DEL SOCORRO. 

DETHAM, a settlement of the English, in the 
province and colony of Massachusetts, one of those 
of New England ; situate on the shore of the river 
Charles, near the coast, to the w. of the city of 
Boston. 

DETOUR, an island of the lake Superior, in 
New France or Canada. It is close to the s. coast, 
between the island of the Two Apostles and the 
river of Ford Plat. 

[DETOUR DBS ANGLOIS, or ENGLISH TURN, is 
a circular direction of the river Mississippi, soyery 
considerable that vessels cannot pass it with the 
same wind that conducted them to it, and must 
cither wait for a favourable wind, or make fast to 
the bank and haul close ; there being sufficient 
depth of water for any vessel that can enter the 
river. The two forts and batteries at this place, 
on both sides the river, are more than sufficient to 
stop the progress of any vessel whatever. Dr. Cox 



D E T 

of New Jersey ascended the Mississippi to this 
place, anno 1698, took possession, and called the 
country Carolina. It lies 18 miles below New 
Orleans, and 87 above the Balize. The banks of 
the river are settled and well cultivated from this 
to New Orleans, and there is a good road for car 
riages all the way.] 

DETREAS, a small river of the province and 
captainship of Para in Brazil. It runs n. between 
the rivers Marajo and the large arm of the Ma- 
ranon, and enters this latter river near its mouth 
or entrance into the sea. 

[D ETROIT, one of the principal towns, and 
best fortified, in the n. w. territory; situated on 
the w. bank of the strait St. Clair, or D Etroit 
river, between lake Erie and lake St. Clair ; 18 
miles n. of the w. end of the former, and nine miles 
below the latter. Fort D Etroit is of an oblong 
figure, built with stockades, and advantageously 
situated, with one entire side commanding the 
river. It is near a mile in circumference, and en 
closes about 300 wooden houses and a Roman ca 
tholic church, built in a regular manner, with 
parallel streets crossing each other at right angles. 
Its situation is delightful, and in the centre of a 
pleasant and fruitful country. For eight miles 
below, and the same distance above fort D Etroit, 
on both sides of the river, the country is divided 
into regular and well cultivated plantations ; and 
from the contiguity of the farmers houses to each 
other, they appear as two long extended villages. 
The inhabitants, who were mostly French, were 
about 2000 in number in 1778, 500 of whom were 
as good marksmen as the Indians themselves, and 
as well accustomed to the woods. They raise large 
stocks of black cattle, and great quantities of corn, 
which they grind by wind-mills, and manufacture 
into excellent flour. The chief trade of D Etroit 
consists in a barter of coarse European goods with 
the natives for furs, deer-skins, tallow, &amp;c. 

By the treaty of Greenville, Aug. 3, 1795, the 
Indians have ceded to the United States the post of 
D Etroit, and all the land to the n. the w. and the 
5. of it, of which the Indian title has been extin 
guished by gifts or grants to the French or English 
governments, and so much more land is to be an 
nexed to D Etroit as shall be comprehended be 
tween Rosine river on the s. ; lake St. Clair on the 
n. ; and a line, the general course whereof shall be 
six miles from the w. end of lake Erie and D Etroit 
river. The fort, &amp;c. was delivered up by the 
British, in July 1796, according to treaty. It lies 
18 miles n. of lake Erie, 724 n. w. by w. from 
Philadelphia. Lat. 42 40 n. Long. 82 3 56 a?.] 



D E Y 

D ETROIT, a river of the province and govern 
ment of Louisiana. It runs s. e. and enters the 
Mississippi 850 miles from the mouth of this 
river. 

[D ETRoiT River, or Strait of ST. CLAIR, flows 
from lake St. Clair into the w. end of lake Erie, 
forming part of the boundary between the United 
States and Upper Canada. In ascending it, its 
entrance is more than three miles wide, but it per 
ceptibly diminishes ; so that opposite the fort, 18 
miles from lake Erie, it does not exceed half a mile 
in width ; from thence to lake St. Clair it widens 
to more than a mile. The channel of the strait is 
gentle, and wide and deep enough for shipping of 
great burden, although it is incommoded by seve 
ral islands, one of which is more than seven miles 
in length. These islands are of a fertile soil, and 
from their situation afford a very agreeable appear 
ance. The length of the river is 28 miles, and 
several streams ifall into it, chiefly from the n. w. 
viz. Bauche, Clora, Curriere, D Etroit, and Huron 
rivers. 1 

DEVIL S MOUTH, a name given by the Eng 
lish to a settlement which has a volcano, in th-e 
province and government of Nicaragua, in the 
kingdom of Guatemala. It lies on the shore of 
the lake Nicaragua, which forms from this spot, 
until it enters the sea, a very astonishing and grand 
spectacle. It is in lat. 13 10 7 . and long. 05 
10 w. 

[DEVIL S NOSE, a promontory on the s. side of 
lake Ontario, 16 miles e. of Fishing bay, and 23 
n. w. of the mouth of Genessee river.] 

[DEVIL S Island, on the e. side of Chesapeak 
bay, is in Somerset county, Maryland, between 
Fishing bay and Nanokin river.] 

DEUX, a small river of the province and 
colony of Virginia. It runs n. and enters the 
Ohio in the county of Hampshire. 
DEYVAERT, a small island of S. America; 
situate to the e. of the lands of Magellan, at a great 
distance from the coast. It was discovered by 
Captain Juan Dewaert, a Dutchman, who called it 
after his name. The territory is low, desert, and 
uncultivated. It is not found in the modern maps, 
but the ancient geographers put it in lat. 56 
21 s. 

[DEWEE, an island in S. Carolina, which 
forms one of the three harbours of Charlestown 
city.] 

DEXERA, a river of the province and govern 
ment of Cartagena. It runs w. n. w. and enters 
the sea, by the side of the river Zinu. 

DEYLO, a valley or spacious and beautiful 

VOL. II. 



D I A 



17 



plain of the kingdom of Peru. It extends s. as 
far as the valleys Tambopalla and Chuli. It is 
very fertile, delightful, and abounding in wheat 
and exquisite wines and fruits. Its climate is ex 
tremely healthy. 

DIABLO, MORHO DEI,, a mountain on the 
long strip of land which runs into the sea, on the 
w. coast of the island of St. Domingo, in the part 
possessed by the French, between the bays of San 
Marcos and of Gran Pierre. 

DIABLO, MORIIO DEL, some islands of the N. 
sea, near the coast of French Guayana, opposite the 
mouth of the river Korore. 

DIABLO, MORRO DEL, a territory of the pro 
vince and government of Buenos Ayres, near the 
coast of the Patagonians. 

DIABLO, MORRO DEL, a small river of the pro 
vince and government of Louisiana, which rises 
there, and runs w. e. between those of Vermilion 
and Osages, and enters the Missouri. 

DIABLOS, MORRO DE LOS, a mountain of the 
coast of Peru, in the province and cotregimiento 
of Arica. 

DIABLOS, MORRO DE LOS, another, in the coast 
of the province and government of Yucatan, to 
the s. of Campeche. 

DIAGUITOS, a settlement of the province and 
corregimienlo of Coquimbo in the kingdom of 
Chile ; situate to the e. of the settlement of San 
Isidro. 

DIAMANTE, a very small island ; situate near 
the coast and w. extremity of the island of Mar 
tinique. 

DIAMANTE, a bay of the above island, larger 
than another, which is likewise thus called. Thej 
are close upon the e. coast of the point of land 
which projects to the w. 

DIAMANTE, a Spanish settlement of the same 
island, which is a curacy of the Frencli Capu 
chin lathers ; situate near the tie. coast, on the 
banks of three rivulets which take their course to 
the sea. 

DIAMANTE, a point of the s. coast of the island 
of St. Domingo, in the part possessed by the 
French, which lies between the island of Jacquin, 
and the cape of Tres Lataniers. 

DIAMANTE, a small isle close to the s. w. coast 
of the island of Martinica. Lat. J426 n. Long. 
61 8 w. 

DIAZ, JUAN, a river of the province and cor- 
regimiento of Arica in Peru. It is small, and en 
ters the sea near to the place where stood the set 
tlement of Arica la Vieja. 

DIAZ, JUAN, another river, in the province and 
D 



18 



D I E 



.government of Panama, of the kingdom of Tierra 
Firme, which enters the sea near the capital. 

[DICKENSON College. See CARLISLE, in 
Pennsylvania.] 

[DICK S River, in Kentucky, is a branch of 
Kentucky river, which it joins in a n. z. direction. 
It is about 50 miles long, and 45 yards wide at 
the mouth, and" has a number of excellent mill- 
seats, and runs through a body of first rate land.] 

[DICKWASSET, or DIGDEGUASH, a river 
in the British province of New Brunswick, which 
empties into Passamaquoddy bay.] 

DIEGO, S. a settlement of the head settlement 
of Temazunchale, and alcaldia mayor of Valles, in 
Nueva Espafia. It is of a nation of the Panics 
Indians, who live as barbarians without any civil 
or political customs. 

DIEGO, S. another settlement, of the head settle 
ment of Iluatuzco, and alcaldia mayor of Cordoba, 
in that kingdom. It contains 75 families of In 
dians, and is 12 leagues to the n. w. of its capital. 

DIRGO, S. another, of the head settlement and 
alcaldia mayor of Acaponeta in the same king 
dom, in which there is a convent of the religious 
order of San Francisco. It is seven leagues to e. 
of its capital. 

DIEGO, S. another, of the province and govern 
ment of Quixos and Macas in the kingdom of 
Quito, one of those of the missions of the Sucum- 
bios, which were held by the regulars of the 
society. 

DiEgo, S. another, of the province and govern 
ment of Venezuela ; situate on the shore of the 
lake Tcicarigua, on the n. part, between the town 
of Nirua and the settlement of Guazara. 

DIEGO, S. another, of the province and govern 
ment of Cumana ; situate on the shore of an arm 
of the river Nevery, near its entrance into the sea, 
and to the s. one quarter to the e. of the city of 
Barcelona. 

Dif GO, S. some shoals or quicksands of the 
coast of Florida, between the garrison of Panzacola 
and the river Mississippi, on which a frigate be 
longing to the king of Spain, and commanded by 
Don Andres de Arriola, was wrecked in 1696. 

DIKGO, S. a river of the province and govern 
ment of Santa Mnrta, which rises in the moun 
tains of the Snowy sierra, and enters the sea be 
tween that city and the point of Chichibacoa. 

DIKGO, S. a cape or point of land of the coast 
of the straits of Ma ire, between the port of Ber- 
choor and that of Mauricio. 

DIE(.O, S. a fort of the province and govern 
ment of Florida, in the strait in which is situate 



D I O 

the city of S. Augustin, to the n. of the city, and 
near the coast. 

DIEGO, S. a river of the same province as the 
above fort, which runs s. arid enters the sea in port 
Cartel. 

D1EMEN. See TIERRA AUSTRAL. 

[DIEP Town, or DEEP Town, a town on the 
n. w. side of the island of St. Christopher s, in the 
W. Indies, lying on a bay of the same name.] 

DIFUNTOS, LACUNA DE LOS, a lake near the 
coast of the province and captainship of Rey in 
Brazil, near the cape Sta. Maria, on the shore of 
which, between it and the coast, the Portuguese 
have a fort, called Santa Teresa. 

DIFUNTOS, some sierras or mountains of this 
province and captainship, which run for many 
leagues to the s. s. e. 

[DIG BY, situated on the s. e. side of Annapolis 
bay, 18 miles s. w. of Annapolis, and 53 n. by e. 
of Yarmouth, is one of the most considerable of 
the new settlements of Nova Scotia.] 

[DIGGES Cape, on the s. side of Hudson 
straits. Lat. 62 4 1 n. Long. 78 50 o&amp;gt;.] 

[D1GHTON, a post-town in Bristol county, 
Massachusetts, seven miles from Taunton, and 20 
from Warren, in Rhode island. There are 236 
houses in the township, and 1793 inhabitants.] 

DIMAN, a settlement of the island of Barba- 
does ; situate on the s. part. 

DIM AS, S. a settlement of the missions which 
were held by the regulars of the society of Jesuits, 
in the province of Tepeguana, and kingdom of 
Nueva Vizcaya. 

DIN, a small river of the province and govern 
ment of Buenos Ayres, which runs n. and enters 
the river La Plata. 

DINGUILL1, a small river of the kingdom of 
Chile, which runs w. and enters the Gallipavo. 

[DINWIDDIE, a county in Virginia, s. of 
Appamattox river, which divides it from Chester 
field. It is about 30 miles long and 20 broad, and 
its chief town is Petersburg!!.] 

DIONISIO, S. a settlement of the province of 
Los Apaches in Nuevo Mexico, founded by the 
religious order of San Francisco, in 1700, on the 
shore of the large river Gila. 

DIONISIO, S. another, in the province and 
alcaldia mayor of Cliiapa, of the kingdom of Guate 
mala. 

DIONISIO, S. another, which is a real of the 
silver mines in the province and bishopric of 
Guadalaxara, and kingdom of Nueva Espana. 

DIONISIO, S. a small river, which runs e. and 
enter? the sea, ou the coast which lies between the 



D I S 

river of La Plata and the straits of Magellan, near 
cape Deseado, in lat. 48 30 . 

DIOMSIO, S. a cape of the s. coast of the 
strait of Magellan, close to the cape of S. Martin, 
and one of those which form Fresh-water creek. 

DIOS, a river of the province and government 
of Cartagena, which joins the sea at the gulf of 
Morrosquillo. 

DIOS, another, of the province and govern 
ment of Texas in Nueva Espafia. 

DIOS, another, of the province and govern 
ment of Buenos Ayres ; it runs e. and enters the 
mouth of the river La Plata on the same coast upon 
which the capital stands. 

DIOSAN, a settlement of the province and cor- 
regimicnto of Chachepoyas in Peru ; annexed to 
the curacy of Olleros. 

DIQUE, a channel of the sea, which serves as 
a trench to the city of Cartagena, and divides 
it from the suburb of Gigimani, a communication 
with which is made by means of a bridge. 

[DISAPPOINTMENT, a bay on the n. w. 
coast of N. America. Lat. 52 15 n. Long. 
129 w.l 

[DISMAL, a swamp in the township of Milton, 
Lincoln county, district of Maine.] 

[DISMAL Swamp, called the Great Dismal, to 
distinguish it from another swamp, called Dismal, 
in Currituck county, is a very large bog extend 
ing from n. to s. near 30 miles, and from e. to w. 
at a medium about 10 miles, partly in Virginia, 
and partly in N. Carolina. No less than five na 
vigable rivers, besides creeks, rise out of it ; where 
of two run into Virginia, viz. the s. branch of 
Elizabeth, and the s. branch of Nansemond river, 
and three into N. Carolina, namely, North river, 
North- West river, and Pcrquimons ; all these hide 
their heads, properly speaking, in the Dismal, 
there being no signs of them above ground. For 
this reason there must be plentiful subterraneous 
stores of water to feed so many rivers, or else the 
soil is so replete with this element, drained from the 
high lands that surround it, that it can abundantly 
afford these supplies ; this is most probable, as the 
ground of the swamp is a mere quagmire, trem 
bling under the feet of those that walk upon it, 
and every impression is instantly filled with water. 
The skirts of the swamp, towards the e. are over 
grown with reeds, 10 or 12 feet high, interspersed 
every where with strong bamboo briars ; among 
these grow here and there a cypress or white cedar, 
which last is commonly mistaken for the juniper. 
Towards the s. end of it is a large tract of reeds, 
which being constantly green, and waving in the 



D I S 



19 



wind, is called the green sea ; in many parts, espe 
cially on the borders, grows an ever-green shrub, 
very plentifully, called the gall bush ; it bears a 
berry which dyes a black colour like the gall of an 
oak, whence it has its name. Near the middle of 
the Dismal, the trees grow much thicker, both 
cypress and cedar ; these being always green, and 
loaded with very large tops, are much exposed to 
the wind, and easily blown down, the boggy ground 
affording but a slender hold to the roots. Neither 
beast, bird, insect, or reptile, approach the heart 
of this horrible desert; perhaps deterred by the 
everlasting shade, occasioned by the thick shrubs 
and bushes which the sun can never penetrate, to 
warm the earth ; nor indeed do any birds care to 
fly over it, any more than they are said to do over 
the lake Avernus, for fear of the noisome exhala 
tions that rise from this vast body of filth and 
nastiness ; these n oxious vapours infect the air 
round about, giving agues and other distempers to 
the neighbouring inhabitants. On the w. border 
of the Dismal is a pine swamp, above a mile hi 
breadth, great part of which is covered with water 
knee deep ; the bottom, however, is firm, and the 
pines grow very tall, and are not easily blown 
down by the wind. With all these disadvantages, 
the Dismal is, in many places, pleasing to the eye, 
though disagreeable to the other senses. 

This dread ful swamp was judged impassable till 
the line dividing Virginia from N. Carolina was 
carried through it, in lat. 36 28 n. in the year 
1728, by order of King George 11. ; although it 
happened then to be a very dry season, the men 
who were employed in pushing the line were not 
altogether free from apprehensions of being starved, 
it being 10 whole days before the work was accom 
plished, though they proceeded with all possible 
diligence and resolution, and besides had no dis 
aster to retard them. 

This swarnp is chiefly owned by two companies ; 
the Virginia company, of which General Wash 
ington is one, owns 100,000 acres ; the N. Caro 
lina company owns 40,000 acres. In the midst of 
the swamp is a lake, about seven miles long, called 
Drummond s pond, whose waters discharge them 
selves to the s. into Pasquotank river, which empties 
into Albemarle sound ; on the n. into Elizabeth and 
Nansemond rivers, which fall into James river. A 
navigable canal has been lately dug to connect the 
navigable waters of the Pasquotank and Elizabeth 
rivers ; the distance about 14 miles. This canal 
will pass about a mile e. of Drummond s pond, 
and will receive water from it. The canal com 
pany are incorporated by the concurring laws of } 
D 2 



20 DOC 

Virginia and N. Carolina. This canal is in 
tended to open an inland navigation from the 
head of Chesapeak bay, including all the rivers in 
Virginia, to Georgetown in S. Carolina ; and 
when the short canal from Elk river to Christiana 
creek is opened, the communication will extend to 
Philadelphia and the other ports connected with 
Delaware river. Such an extensive inland com 
munication must be beneficial in time of peace, 
and in time of war will be essentially serviceable.] 
DIVIDIBAN, an arm of the river Apure, one 
of the three large streams in which this river di 
vides itself to enter by as many mouths into the 
Orinoco. It is that arm which is most to the n. 

D1V1DD1E, a county of the province and 
colony of Virginia. 

[DIXON S Sound, on the n. w. coast of N. 
America, is the passage into the sound between 
the mainland and Washington s or Queen Char 
lotte s islands, from the n. w. This seems to be 
what is called in America BARREL S Sound, which 
see.] 

DO A, a small settlement of the corregimienlo 
of Pasca in the Nuevo Reyno de Granada ; an 
nexed to the curacy of Fusagasuga. 

DOAS, a barbarous nation of Indians, of the 
province of Tocaima, in the same kingdom as the 
former settlement. These barbarians are bounded 
by theSumapaesand Cundayes, and were formerly 
subject to the Sutagaos. 

[DOBB S Ferry, on Hudson river, is 26 miles 
above New York city.] 

[DOBB S County, in Newbern district, N. Caro 
lina, has been divided into two counties, viz. 
Glasgow and Lenoir, since the census of 1790, and 
the name no longer exists. It contained 6893 in 
habitants, of whom 1915 were slaves,] 

DOCE, or DULCE, a river of the province and 
captainship of Espiritu Santo in Brazil, which 
rises near the village of Catasaltas, runs n. n. e. 
and turning afterwards e. enters the sea between 
the point of its name and the island of Reposo. 
In its mid-course it forms a waterfal down a craggy 
rock. 

DOCE, another river, of the province and cap 
tainship of Puerto Seguro in the same kingdom. 
It rises in the mountains near the town of Mariana, 
runs s. and turning e. enters the sea near the ca 
pital. 

DOCE, another, of the province and captainship 
of Itamaraca iu the same kingdom, which rises 
near the coast, runs e. and enters the sea, as do 
the former, between the rivers Tapado and Pao 
Amarillo. 



D O L 

DOCE, a point of land or cape of the province 
and captainship of Espiritu Santo, forming the 
mouth of the river. Lat. 19 35 s. Long. 40* 
lWw&amp;lt; 

[DOG-RIBBED Indians, inhabit round lake 
Edlande, in the n. w. part of N. America ; they 
are often at war with the Arathapescow Indians. 
Both these tribes are among the most savage of 
the human race; they trade with the Hudson bay 
company s settlements. Edlande lake lies n. of 
the Arathapescow sea or lake, and near the arctic 
circle.] 

DOGS Island, in Dutch Hondenesland, and so 
called by William Showten, who discovered it iu 
the S. sea. It is small, low, unfertile, and desert; 
he gave it this name from finding upon it only 
two dogs, and a wild herb resembling in taste gar 
den cresses ; it has no other water than the rain, 
and some brackish marshes discovered in its 
centre; it is said in the high tides to be in 
undated. Some are persuaded that this is the 
same island that was discovered by Jacob le Maire 
in 1616, when he gave it the name of Tiburones. 
It is in lat. 15 13 s. and long. 138 20 w. 

DOGUA, a river of the province and govern 
ment of Choco, in the district of Novita. It rises 
in the province of Popayan, and shaping its 
course like a bow, enters the S. sea, in front of 
the island of Realejo. 

DOLORES, NUEVO PUEBLO DE LOS, a new 
settlement in the alcaldia mayor of San Miguel el 
Grande, of the province and bishopric of Mecho- 
acan in Nueva Espaiia ; founded in 1717 by a 
congregation of this title then residing in the town 
of San Felipe. It contains 200 families of Spa 
niards, Mustees, and Mulattoes. 

DOLORES, another settlement, of the missions 
that were held by the regulars of the society of 
Jesuits in the province of Nayarith, of the king 
dom of Nueva Galicia. Twelve leagues to the 
e. of the settlement of La Mesa. 

DOLORES, another, of the province and go 
vernment of Sierra Gorda, in the bay of Mexico; 
founded by the count of that title, I). Joseph Es- 
candon, colonel of the militia of Queretaro, in 
1750. 

DOLORES, another, with the addition of Del 
Sur, (of the South), of the missions that were held 
by the regulars of the society of Jesuits in Cali 
fornia. 

DOLORES, another, of the same district, called 
Del N. (of the N.) to distinguish it from the 
former. 

DOLORES, another, of the province and go- 



DOM 

vernmcnt of Sonora in Nueva Espaiia ; situate on 
the shore of the river of this name, between the 
settlements of Remedies and Cuciirpe. 

DOMA, a river of the province and govern 
ment of San Juan de los Llanos in the Nuevo 
Reyno de Granada. It rises in the couhtry of the 
Guahivos Indians, between the rivers Meta and 
Vichada ; it runs e . many leagues, and enters the 
Orinoco, above the settlement of Santa Teresa de 
Maipures. 

DOMINGO, ST. or HISPANIOLA, a large 
island of the N. sea, one of the two largest of the 
Antilles, being 170 leagues in length, 30 in -width 
at its middle part, and 360 in circumference. It 
was discovered by Admiral Don Christopher Co 
lumbus in his first voyage, in 1492 ; it had at that 
time, amongst the Indians, the name of Hayti ; 
and a capital having been built, which was called 
St. Domingo, all that part of the island near which 
it was founded was called by the same title, which 
wasafterwards taken by the whole of the island, 
instead of that of Isabella, which had been given 
it in honour of Isabel queen of Spain. It is situate 
in the midst of the islands of Cuba, Jamaica, and 
Puerto Rico, and separated from the latter merely 
by a channel ; it extends from 17 37 to c ^0 lat. 
and from 67 35 to 74 15 long. Some geogra 
phers assert it to be 400 leagues in circumference ; 
the climate is very hot, but the effect is much 
moderated by the winds and frequent heavy falls 
of rain, which render it so damp that most things 
become putrescent in a very short time ; but though 
unsalulary for Europeans, they, when they ac 
custom themselves to it, not only enjoy good health, 
but longevity, many of them reaching the age of 
80 years-, and some even to the advanced period 
of 100. This island, which, after that of Cuba, 
is the largest of any in America, is also the most 
fertile and delightful ; is covered with extensive 
forests of exquisite sorts of wood : of these are the 
Caabas, fmtetes, oaks, hacanas, guayacanes, can- 
delones, capaes, laurels, cedars, oranges, thorns, 
caximas, savines, marias, pines, ceibas, mameyes, 
copei/es, higuilloS) jobos, almacigos, higueros, 
bony-trees, granadillos, cattis, nazarenos, gua- 
conejosy and cuernos de buey, and a great num 
ber of palms and other trees which produce fine 
and delicious fruits, such as ananas, bananas, 
grapes, citrons, lemons, limes, dates, apricots, 
and others in an infinite variety, and superior to 
any of the same sort found in the other islands. 
It also abounds in many kinds of birds, curious 
for their plumage and note ; and the infinite num 
ber of cattle found in the meadows, or, as they are 



D O M 21 

here called, the savanas, is. incredible ; the hides of 
these cattle have ever been one of the princi 
pal articles of the commerce of this island, and 
were exported to Europe alone, in the year 1587, 
to the number of 35,44-1 ; horses, mules, and asses 
are not less numerous. It likewise produces an 
infinite quantity of sugar, indigo, tobacco, cotton, 

ginger, coffee, tea, amber, &amp;c. with various kinds 

of medicinal drugs and dyes. The whole of this 
island is watered and fertilized by many rivers, 
the principal of which are Ozama, Haina, Nigua, 
Villegas, Nissao, Ocoa, and Yane ; in short, 
there can scarcely be found a country so well irri 
gated; these rivers are productive of a great 
quantity of tortoises and other fish. It has many 
mines of gold, silver, copper, crystal, and talc, 
which in former times produced great riches, es 
pecially those of Ciboo among the most excellent, 
and from one of which a large piece of gold, weigh 
ing 3600 ( -astellanoS) was extracted, but lost in the 
fleet that was so unfortunately wrecked. In 1645, 
a mine of quicksilver was also discovered. The 
Spaniards, on establishing themselves here, found 
the Indians so numerous that the bishop of Chiapa, 
fr. Bartolorne de las Casas, related, (if his ac 
count be not exaggerated), that they amounted to 
upwards of 3.000,000, who being assisted in their 
labours by the Negro slaves in working at the 
mines and cultivating the fruits of the earth, help 
ed to enrich, in the early period, not only those 
persons who established themselves here, but many 
other Europeans, to whom the emperor had grant 
ed certain possessions. The population after a 
time decreased, by reason of the influence of the 
small-pox and measles, which laid waste the settle 
ments in 1666, and which period is still remem 
bered here by the appellation of la tragedia de fas _ 
seisis, (the tragedy of the sixes); this decrease of 
population had, of course, an effect upon a com 
merce which was otherwise greatly favoured by 
a multitude of convenient and safe ports found on 
the coasts throughout the island. The French 
being driven by the Spaniards from the island of 
St. Christopher, and being aided by many pirates 
and adventurers of various nations, who- were 
known by the name of Flibustiers, established 
themselves here, and were continually persecuted 
and harassed by the legitimate masters and con 
querors, until the king of France, acknowledging 
them as vassals, nominated a governor, and ob 
tained for them in the peace of Riswick, in J697, 
that the king of Spain, Charles II. should cede to 
them that part of the island in which they had es 
tablished themselves, and which was in fact the 



DOMINGO. 



best and most fertile of the whole. It extended 
400 miles in length, and 140 in width, being 1 for 
the most part mountainous, yet fertile and full of 
beautiful woods and mines of gold, silver, copper, 
andiron: these mines are not worked at the pre 
sent day, the French having rather devoted them 
selves to agriculture, and the high cultivation of 
wheat, maize, and other seeds. This part of the 
island is likewise fertilized by various rivers, some of 
which arc navigable; the principal of its produc 
tions is sugar, 60, 000 load of which, of 500 Ibs. each, 
are made annually ; indigo is produced in a some 
what less proportion, as also cotton, cacao, ginger, 
and coffee, these being in the same ratio as those 
produced in the parts in possession of the Spa 
niards. In 1726, in the French division there 
were 100,000 Negro slaves, and 30,000 white 
colonists ; its greatest commerce at that time was 
in tobacco, with which from 60 to 100 vessels were 
laden annually. The king of France ceded a part 
of this territory to a commercial company, their 
charter having been revoked in 1720, and Ferdi 
nand VI. king of Spain, granted the privilege of 
trading in this island to a company of Catalonians, 
with the title of Nuestra Senora de Monserrat, who 
there made a very lucrative traffic ; but the French 
having been found gradually to encroach upon the 
Spanish territory, it was thought fit to draw a 
line of demarcation to determine the limits of their 
possessions; and this accordingly ran from cape 
Frances to the point Beata, and different detach 
ments of infantry and cavalry were appointed by 
the President Don Joseph Solano to guard against 
any future invasions. We must omit much that might 
be added to this article, as we wish to confine it with 
in the proportionate limits of a dictionary ; and we 
therefore refer our readers to those who have written 
upon the subject, such as the Chronicler An 
tonio de Herrera, Gonzalo Fernandes de Oviedo, 
the Father Pedro Xavier de Charlevoix, the 
French Dominican missionaries, Du Tetre and 
Labat, and lately the Licenciate Don Antonio 
Sanchez Valverdc, who undertakes to show the 
value and importance of the part of the island 
called Hispaniola. The capital of the last men 
tioned division bears the name of St. Domingo, 
and that part in the possession of the French, the 
name of Cape Francois or Frances. 

[INDEX TO ADDITIONAL INFORMATION RE 
SPECTING ST. DOMINGO. 

J. General history. 2. Physical state. 3. An 
cient divisional line. 4. Spanish jurisdictions. 
5. Population of Spanish division. 6. Territo 
rial extent of do. 7, Commerce and productions 



of do. 8. Statistical accounts of the French 
division. 9. Chief towns. 10. Summary ac 
count of the revolution of the blacks. For 
account of natives ^ see CUHA. 

1. General history. St. Domingo, when first 
discovered, formed five kingdoms, each go 
verned by sovereigns called Caciques. The 
names of these kingdoms were Maqua Marien, 
Higuay, Maguana, and Xaraguay. The Spa 
niards had possession of the whole of the island 
for 120 years. At last, about the year 1630, 
a handful of English, French, and other 
Europeans, came and forced them to fight in its 
defence, and after repeated wars for 50 years, they 
were forced to divide the island with the French. 
These latter, being the only survivors of the first 
free-booters or buccaniers, or having insensibly ac 
quired an ascendancy among them, had, so earljr 
as 1640, formed this assembly of individuals, born 
under the domination of almost all the powers of 
Europe, into a French colony, under the direc 
tion of the general government, first established at 
St. Christopher s, and afterwards at Martinico. 
The Spanish part is by far the most extensive and 
the most fertile ; that of the French the best cul 
tivated. The whole island was ceded to the French 
republic in the treaty of 1795, but was evacuated 
by the French troops, and surrendered to the Eng 
lish, under the command of Major-general Hugh 
Lyle Carmichael, by a convention signed 7th 
July 1809. 

2. Physical state. The following particulars 
relating to this famous island are founded on the 
best authority, and many circumstances require a 
separate view of the two artificial divisions of the 
island, viz. the French and Spanish territories 
before they were united under one head. They 
are both alike in possessing the various produc 
tions common to the W. Indies. The European 
cattle are so multiplied here that they run wild in 
the woods ; few of these are in the French part, in 
comparison with the Spanish. 

The two great chains of mountains, which ex 
tend from e. to w. and their numerous spurs, give 
the island an aspect, at a distance, not so favour 
able as it deserves. They are, however, the cause 
of the fertility of the island. They give source to 
innumerable rivers, repel the violence of the winds, 
vary the temperature of the air, and multiply the 
resources of human industry. They abound with, 
excellent timber, and mines of iron, lead, copper, 
silver, gold, some precious stones, and even mer 
cury. With respect to the vegetable class in this 
island, it would be difficult, even in a work de-] 



DOMINGO. 



[voted to the subject, to express or paint all their 
majesty. Here are the mountains of Cibao, Selle, 
and Hotte, reckoned 1000 fathoms above the level 
of the sea. In the plains, in the Spanish part, 
the heat is nearly uniform, but varies in propor 
tion to their distance from the mountains. In the 
plains the thermometer is sometimes at 99. In 
the mountains it rarely rises above 72 or 77. There 
the nights are cool enough to render a blanket not 
unwelcome ; and there are mountains where even 
a fire is a very agreeable companion in some even 
ings. The contrast of violent heats and heavy 
rains renders St. Domingo humid ; hence the tar 
nished appearance of almost all metals, however 
brilliant the polish they may originally have had. 
This is particularly observable on the sea-shore, 
which is more unhealthy than the interior parts of 
the island. The s. part of the island is pretty 
much subject to hurricanes, called here southern 
gales, because they are not attended with such 
dreadful consequences as the hurricanes in the 
Windward islands. 

The roads are nothing but paths passable only 
on foot and on horseback; and eight leagues a day 
is very great work, in which space the traveller 
often docs not meet with a single habitation, and 
must consequently carry with him every necessary 
for nourishment and lodging. Such is the low 
state of commerce in the Spanish part, that Don 
Antonio de Valvcrde, a native Creole, goes so far 
as to assert, in his account of the territory, that 
the commerce in cattle, with the French part, is 
its only support. The whole island is in general 
well watered by rivers and brooks without num 
ber, but certain spaces are deprived of this ad 
vantage. From the formation of the island, their 
courses are but short, and few of them navigable 
to any distance. It is generally impossible to con 
ceive, from the tranquil aspect that these rivers 
usually wear, what they become when they over 
flow their banks. A river (hat but now hardly co 
vered the pebbles on its bed, or wet the foot of the 
traveller, is changed by one tempestuous shower 
into a flood, menacing all that it approaches ; and 
vshould its banks give way, it spreads its watery 
devastation over the plains. Many of these are 
infested with alligators. The only lakes or ponds 
worth notice are those of Henriquelle and Salt 
pond ; the former is a great curiosity. See HEN- 
IUQUELLE. 

The chief of the islands which surround St. 
Domingo, part of which belonged to the Spanish 
part, are Altavele, Saone, Beate, St. Catherine, 
on the 3. side from w. to e. ; Moncand Monique, 
on the*, e. ; Cayrnite and Gonave, on the w. be 



tween the two peninsulas, and La Tortue, on the 
n. side, towards the w. end of the island, and that 
of Avache on the s. side of the s, peninsula. 

3. Ancient divisional line. The ancient divi 
sion line which sejjarated the French from the 
Spanish part of the island extended from the river 
Des Anses a Pitre or Pedernales on the s. side, to 
that of Massacre on the n. side, at the head of the 
bay of Mancenille, which, together with the large 
bay which sets up from the w. between cape St. 
Nicholas and cape Dame M;me, s. w. of the former, 
and 43 leagues apart, moulds this division of the 
island into such a figure as can be best compre 
hended by a view of the map ; suffice it to say, 
that it contains 2,500,000 acres of lind, of an ex 
tremely fertile soil, presenting an agreeable variety 
of hills, valleys, woods, and streams. 

4. Spanish jurisdictions. The cantons or juris 
dictions, beginning at the westernmost point of 
the Spanish frontiers, on the s. coast or narrows, 
are, Baharuco, possessed by the brigands or fugi 
tive Spanish and French Negroes, who inhabit the 
mountain of Baharuco, Neyvc, Azua, Bani or 
Vani, the city of St. Domingo, and territory de 
pendent thereon, St. Laurent des Mines, Sarnana, 
Cotuy, La Vega, St. Yago, Daxabon, St. Ra 
phael, llinche, Banique, and St. John of Ma- 
guana. 

5. Population of Spanish division. The popu 
lation of the Spanish part is composed of whites, 
freed people, and slaves. There are also a few 
Creoles resembling the Indians, having long, 
straight, and black hair, who pretend to be de 
scendants of the ancient natives. They are, how 
ever, thought to be descended from a mixture of 
the aborigines and the Spaniards. There were, 
however, in 1744, several Indians at Banique, 
who proved their descent from the subjects of the 
unfortunate Cacique Henri ; . although historical 
authority atiinns that the whole race was exter 
minated. 

The freed people are few in number, if compared 
with the whites, but considerable in proportion to 
the number of the slaves. The people of colour 
are excluded from almost all employments, civil 
as well as military, as long as the colour of the 
skin betrays its origin ; but the political constitu 
tion of the country admits of no distinction be 
tween the civil rights of a white inhabitant and 
those of a free person. Indeed the major part of 
the Spanish colonists are of a mixed race : this an 
African feature, and sometimes more than one ? 
often betrays ; but its frequency has silenced a pre 
judice that would otherwise be a troublesome re 
membrancer. People of colour are admitted to] 



DOMINGO 



[the priesthood without difficulty ; but the Spa 
niards have not yet brought themselves to make 
Negro priests and bishops like the Portuguese. 
Slaves are treated with extreme mildness, and are 
usually fed as well as their masters. A religious 
principle and an illicit affection tend to their eman 
cipation. A slave can redeem himself at a price 
fixed by law. Thus the fate of the slave is softened 
by the hope of freedom, and the authority of the 
master by the habit of being confounded, in some 
sort, witli those who were the other day in slavery. 
The laws against slaves are much neglected; those 
in their favour are very exactly observed. Few 
of the Creoles can either read or write ; hence the 
want of social intercourse, which is also aug 
mented by the badness of the roads. Over the 
whole of the Spanish part of the island, moun 
tains and plains, were spread, in 1798, 125,000 
inhabitants; of whom 110,000 were free, and 
15,000 slaves ; which does not amount to 40 indi 
viduals to one square league. The Spanish Creoles 
are insensible of all the treasures which surround 
them, and pass their lives without wishing to 
change their lot ; while the French portion fur 
nishes three-fifths of the produce of all the French 
West India colonies put together, or more than 
10 millions sterling. The dress and mode of liv 
ing of the Spanish Creoles indicate pride, lazi 
ness, and poverty. The capital of itself indicates 
decay ; little insignificant towns are to be seen 
here and there, with a few colonial settlements, for 
which the name of manufactories would be too 
great an honour ; also immense possessions, called 
haltes, where beasts and cattle are raised with 
little care, in different degrees of domestication ; 
as the domestic, the gentle, and the shy. Those 
called wild or mountaineers, as also the shy, cost 
the herdsmen, called pioneers and lancers, im 
mense labour and danger in the chase. The hattes 
are the most numerous sort of Spanish settlements, 
and of an extent far disproportioned to their uti 
lity. Some are several square leagues, and do not 
contain above 500 head of cattle, great and small. 
Some are called horse-hattes, others cattle-hattes, 
according to the name of the animals they con 
tain ; others used in breeding pigs are called co- 
rai s. A small piece of wood-land, called venerie, 
frequently serves as a boundary between the hat 
tes, common to those on both sides of it, and also 
shelters the cattle from the heat of the sun. The 
woodland likewise attracts the wild animals, and 
lessens the labours of the huntsman. In these 
hattes, the people lodge miserably, and have but 
poor subsistence. The small provision farms, call 
ed canacos, fall generally to the lot of the poorer 
2 



colonists, or most commonly people of colour, or 
freed people. 

6. Territorial extent of ditto. Many circum- 
stances conspired to render this island a place of 
importance to the Spaniards. It was a key to the 
gulf of Mexico, a convenient place for their ship 
ping to touch at, an excellent rendezvous for their 
squadrons and ilccts, and an important hold for 
naval operations of all sorts ; but from the impo 
litic measures of the government, and the restraints 
on commerce, it proved rather a burden than an 
advantage to the mother country. 

The Spanish part is computed to contain about 
90 leagues in its greatest length from e. to w. 60 
leagues in its greatest breadth ; having a surface of 
about 3200 square leagues. About 400 square 
leagues of this surface are in mountains, which are 
generally more capable of cultivation than those in 
the French part, and have sometimes a soil that 
disputes the preference with that of the valleys. 
There remains therefore a fine fertile surface of 
more than 2700 square leagues, divided into val 
leys and plains of various lengths and breadths. 

7. Commerce and productions of ditto. The 
supply of horned cattle to the French part of the 
island could not be estimated at less than 15,000 
head annually : of which the Spaniards furnished 
four-fifths. These, at 30 dollars a head, and bring*, 
ing them by the Spaniards, could not be less than 
450,000 dollars. This formed three quarters of 
the produce of the colony ; and the impost paid to 
government was 10 per cent. The number of 
200,000 head of cattle is the number in the gene 
ral census taken by order of the president, in 1780 ; 
and if we count the cattle exempted from the tri 
bute, they may amount to 250,000, without com 
prehending horses, mules, and asses, which, with 
an augmentation estimated since 1780, would 
make a stock of 300,000 head, and an annual pro 
duction of 60,000 ; and suppose a fifth part of the 
young ones perish accidentally, there still remains 
48,000. The resources of the colonists are verjr 
confined, and their few establishments all below 
mediocrity. There are but 22 sugar manufactories of 
any consequence ; the rest being not worth naming ; 
and even these 22 have altogether but about 600 
Negroes. Of these six produce syrup, and some 
sugar; but the others, which are called trapiches, 
where animals are employed to turn the mills and 
press the canes, without shelter in the open air, 
make nothing but syrup. The whole of this pro 
duce is generally used in the colony ; small quan 
tities are sometimes sent to Puerto Rico, or to Old 
Spain ; and the goodness of the sugar has proved 
that of the soil, but nothing in favour of the ma-] 



D O M 1 N GO. 



[nufacturer. The coffee raised here is excellent ; 
each tree in a state of bearing will produce, on an 
average, a pound weight, and sometimes of a 
quality equal to that of Mocha, yet chocolate is 
preferred to it. Cotton grows naturally at St. Do 
mingo, of an excellent quality, even without care 
in stony Innd, and in the crevices of the rocks. 
The numerous roots of indigo are only obstacles to 
the feeble cultivation of the fields, where it grows 
spontaneously. All these valuable productions 
have shared the fate of depopulation. Tobacco, 
says Valverde, has here a larger leaf than in any 
oilier part of America; it grows every where, 
and equals sometimes that of Cuba or the Havan- 
nah. Jt is as much esteemed as this latter, in the 
manufactures of Seville, and is even preferable to 
it in segars. Its cultivation lias lately become more 
general. The kernel of the cocoa nut of St. Do 
mingo is more acidulated than that of the cocoa 
nut of Venezuela and Caracas, to which it is not 
inferior; and experience proves, that the choco 
late made of the two cocoas has a more delicate 
flavour than that made of the cocoa of Caracas 
alone. 

8. Statistical accounts of the French division. 
The French part of St. Domingo, containing 
2,500,000 acres, of which 1,500,000 were under 
high cultivation in 1789, was then divided into 10 
jurisdictions, which were subdivided into 52 pa 
rishes. The w. jurisdictions are, Port au Prince, St. 
Mark, Le Petite Goave, and Jeremie ; the n. Cape 
Fran9ois, Fort Dauphin, and Port de Paix; and 
those in the s. Les Cayes, St. Louis, and Jacmel. 
Before the late revolution there were in these pa 
rishes about 42,000 white people, 44,000 free 
people of colour, and 600,000 slaves. Other ac 
counts make them considerably less ; the above, 
however, is from good authority. The number of 
deaths during 1789, according to the bills of mor 
tality, were 7121 ; the number of births the same 
year, 4232. The excess of deaths, 2889, will be 
the less astonishing, when it is considered, that in 
the years 1787 and 1788, there had been im 
ported into the colony nearly 60,000 new Negroes. 
The exports from Jan. 1, 1789, to Dec. 31, of 
the same year, were 47,516.531 Ibs. white sugar ; 
95,573,300 brown sugar; 76,835,2 19 Ibs. coffee ; 
7,004,274 Ibs. cotton; 758,628 Ibs. indigo; and 
other articles, as tanned hides, molasses, spirits, 
&amp;c. to the value of 46,873 livres. The total value 
of duties on the above exportations amounted to 
770,801 dollars, 3 cents. 

9. Chief towns. Port au Prince is the seat of 
the French government in this island in time of 
peace, and a place of considerable trade. Cape 

VOL. II. 



Fran9ois exceeds Port au Prince in the value of its 
productions, the elegance of its buildings, and 
the advantageous situation of its port. It is the 
governor s residence in time of war. The mole, 
though inferior to these in other respects, is the 
first port in the island for safety in time of war, 
being by nature and art strongly fortified. The 
other towns and ports of any note are, Fort Dau 
phin, St. Mark, Leogane, Petit Goave, Jercmie, 
Les Caycs, St. Louis, and Jacmel, which sec 
under their different names. The most ancient 
town in this island, arid in all America, built by 
Europeans, is St. Domingo, of which an ac 
count is given under its proper head. 

10. A summary account of the resolution of the 
bracks. The Negroes in the French division of 
this island have, for several years past, been in a 
state of insurrection. In the progress of these 
disturbances, which have not yet subsided, the 
planters and others have sustained immense losses. 
We shall here give a summary account of this in 
surrection. 

The situation of the French colonies early af~ 
tracted the attention of the constituent assembly ; 
though at this time all was as tranquil as such a 
state of oppression would permit. 

The first interference of the national assembly 
in the affairs of the colonies was by a decree of the 
8th of March 1790, which declared, that alt 
free persons, who were proprietors and resident* 
of two years standing, and who contributed to the 
exigencies of the state, should exercise the right* 
of voting, which constitute the quality of French 
citizens. 

This decree, though in fact it gave no new 
rights to the people of colour, was regarded with 
a jealous eye by the white planters, who evidently 
saw that the generality of the qualification in 
cluded all descriptions of proprietors ; they af 
fected, however, to impose a different construc 
tion upon it. The people of colour appealed to 
common justice and common sense ; it was to no 
purpose; the whites repelled them from their as 
semblies ; some commotions ensued, in which they 
mutually fell a sacrifice to their pride arid re 
sentment. 

These disturbances again excited the vigilance of 
the national assembly : a decree was passed on the 
J2th day of October 1790, by which the assem 
bly declared, as a constitutional article, " That 
they would establish no regulations respecting the 
internal government of the colonies, without the 
precise and formal request of the colonial assem 
blies." 

Peace, however, was not the consequence of] 





DOMINGO. 



[ill is decree. The proprietors, it is true, had ob 
tained a legal right of tyrannizing ; but the un 
fortunate question still recurred, who should be 
permitted to exercise that right ? On this head the 
decree was sijent. New dissensions arose ; each 
of the parties covered, under a factious patriot 
ism, the most atrocious designs. Assassination 
and revolt became frequent. Mauduit, a French 
officer of rank, lost his life by the hands of his 
own countrymen. The unfortunate Oge, a planter 
of colour, who hod exerted himself in France in 
the cause of his brethren, resolved to support by 
force their just pretensions. He landed in the 
Spanish territory of St. Domingo, where he as 
sembled about 6UO Mulattoes. Before he proceeded 
to hostilities, he wrote to the French general, that 
his desire was for peace, provided the laws were 
enforced. His letter was absurdly considered as a 
declaration of war. Being attacked and van 
quished, he took refuge among the Spaniards, 
who delivered him up to his adversaries. These 
disturbances still increasing, the national assembly 
found it necessary, at length, to decide between 
the contending parties. 

On the 15th of May 1791, a decree was made, 
consisting of two articles, by the first of which the 
assembly confirmed that of the 12(h of October, so 
far as respected the slaves in their islands. It is 
true, that the word slave was cautiously omitted 
in this document, and they are only characterised 
by the negative description of u men not free," as 
if right and wrong depeiided on a play of words, 
or a mode of expression. 

This part of the decree met with but little op 
position, though it passed not without severe re 
prehension from a few enlightened members. The 
second article, respecting the people of colour, was 
strongly contested : those who were before known 
by the appellation of patriots divided upon it. It 
was, however, determined in the result, that the 
people of colour, born of free parents, should be 
considered as active citizens, and be eligible to the 
oflices of government in the islands. 

This second article, which decided upon a right 
that the people of colour had been entitled to for 
upwards of a century, instead of restoring peace, 
may be considered as the cause, or rather the pre 
text, of all the subsequent evils that the colony of 
St. Domingo has sustained. They arose not in 
deed from its execution, but from its counterac 
tion by the white colonists. Mad they, after the 
awful warnings they had already experienced, 
obeyed the ordinances of an assembly they pre 
tended to revere ; had they imbibed one drop of 
tbe true spirit oftlwt constitution to which they 



had vowed an inviolable attachment ; had the/ 
even suppressed the dictates of pride in the sug 
gestions of prudence ; the storm that threatened 
them had been averted, and in their obedience to 
the parent state they had displayed an act of pa 
triotism, and preserved themselves from all possi 
bility of danger. , 

But the equalization of the people of colour 
stung the irritable nerves of the white colonists^ 
The descendants of slaves might have lost the re 
sentments of their fathers; but the hatred of a des 
pot is hereditary. The European maxim allows, 
" That they never pardon who have done the 
wrong: but in the colonies this perversity attains 
a more monstrous growth, and the aversion to 
African blood descends from generation to gene 
ration. No sooner had the decree passed than de 
puties from the islands to the national assembly 
withdrew their attendance: the colonial committee, 
always under the influence of the planters, sus 
pended their labours. Its arrival in the island 
struck the whites with consternation : they vowed 
to sacrifice their lives rather than suffer the execu 
tion of the decree. Their rage bordered upon 
phrenzy : they proposed to imprison the French 
merchants then in the island, to tear down the na 
tional flag, and hoist the British standard in its 
place. Whilst the joy of the Mulattoes was 
mingled with apprehensions and with fears, St.. 
Domingo re-echoed with the cries of the whites, 
with their menaces., with their blasphemies against 
the constitution. A motion was made in the streets 
to fire upon the people of colour, who fled from 
the city, and took refuge in the plantations of their 
friends in the woods : they were at length recal 
led by a proclamation ; but it was only to swear 
subordination to the whites, and to be witnesses of 
fresh enormities. Amidst these agitations the 
slaves had remained in their accustomed subordi 
nation. Nor was it till the month of August 1791,- 
that the symptoms of the insurrection appeared 
amongst them. 

A considerable number, both of whites and 
people of colour, had lost their lives in these com 
motions before the slaves had given indications of 
disaffection ; they were not, however, insensible 
of the opportunities of revolt afforded by the dis 
sensions of their masters: they had learnt that no 
alleviation of their miseries was ever to be expected 
from Europe : that in the struggle for colonial do 
minion, their humble interests had been equally 
sacrificed or forgotten by all parties. They felt 
their curb relaxed by the disarming and dispersion 
of their Mulatto masters, who had been accus-- 
tomed to keep them under rigorous discipline.] 



DOMINGO. 



f Hopeless of relief from any quarter, they rose in 
different parts, and spread desolation over the 
island. If the cold cruelties of despotism have no 
bounds, what shall be expected from the parox 
ysms of despair ? 

On the llth of September 1791, a convention 
took place, which produced the agreement called 
the Concordat, by which the white planters stipu 
lated, that they would no longer oppose the law of 
the 15th of May, which gave political rights to the 
people of colour. The colonial assembly even 
promised to meliorate the situation of the people 
of colour, born of parents not free, and to whom 
the decree of the 15th of May did not extend. 
An union was formed between the planters, which, 
if it had sooner taken place, had prevented the in 
surrection. The insurgents were every where dis 
pirited, repulsed, and dispersed; and the colony 
itself preserved from total destruction. By a de 
cree of the national assembly, the 24th of Septem 
ber, the people of colour were virtually excluded 
from all right of colonial legislation, and expressly 
placed in the power of the white colonists. 

If the decree of the 15th of May could instigate 
the white colonists to the frantic acts of violence 
before described, what shall we suppose were the 
feelings of the people of colour on that of the 24th 
of September, which again blasted those hopes they 
Lad justly founded on the constitutional law of the 
parent state, and the solemn ratification of the 
white colonists ? No sooner was it known in the 
islands, than those dissensions, which the revolt of 
the Negroes had for a while appeased, broke out 
with fresh violence. The apprehensions enter 
tained from the slaves had been allayed by the ef 
fects of the concordat : but the whites no sooner 
found themselves relieved from the terrors of im 
mediate destruction, than they availed themselves 
of the decree of the 24th of September ; they 
formally revoked the concordat, and treacherously 
refused to comply with an engagement to which 
they owed their very existence. The people of 
colour were in arms ; they attacked the whites in 
the 5. provinces ; they possessed themselves of 
fort St. Louis, and defeated their opponents in 
several engagements. A powerful body sur 
rounded Port au Prince, the capital of the island, 
and claimed the execution of the concordat. At 
three different times did the whites assent to the 
requisition, and as often broke their engagement. 
Gratified with the predilection for aristocracy, 
which the constituent assembly had in its dotage 
avowed, they affected the appellation of patriots, 
and had the address to transfer the popular odium 
to the people of colour, who were contending for 



their indisputable rights, and to the few white co 
lonists who had virtue enough to espouse thei r 
cause. Under this pretext, the municipality of 
Port au Prince required M. Grimoard, the cap 
tain of the Boreas, a French line of battle ship, 
to bring his guns to bear upon, and to cannonade 
the people of colour assembled near the town : 
heat first refused, but the crew, deluded by the 
cry of patriotism, enforced his compliance. No 
sooner was this measure adopted, than the people 
of colour gave a loose to their indignation; they 
spread over the country, and set fire indiscrimi 
nately to all the plantations : the greatest part of 
the town of Port au Prince soon after shared the 
same fate. Nothing seemed to remain for the white 
inhabitants but to seek their safety in quitting the 
colony. In the n. parts the people of colour adopted 
a more magnanimous, and perhaps a more pru 
dent conduct. "They begun," says Mr. Ver- 
niaud, " by offering their blood to the whites. 
* We shall wait, said they, c till we have saved 
you, before we assert our own claims." They ac 
cordingly opposed themselves to the revolted Ne 
groes with unexampled courage : they endea 
voured to soothe them by attending to their reason 
able requisitions; and if the colony of St. Do 
mingo had ever been preserved to the French na 
tion, it would have been by the exertions of the 
people of colour. 

After this recital of authentic and indisputable 
facts, it will not be difficult to form a clear idea of 
the nature of the insurrection : it is at the present 
moment far from being concluded, and we refer 
such readers as would wish to consider it in a 
more detailed view, to the History of Bryan Ed 
wards and Walton s Hispaniola. 

St. Domingo is situated between lat. 17 55 and 
20 . and between long. 71 and 77 w. from 
Paris. It lies 45 leagues e. n. e. of Jamaica, 22 
*. c. of Cuba, and 29 n. w. by w. of Porto Rico; 
and is, not including the small dependent islands 
that surround it, ICO leagues long from e. to w. 
and from 60 to 70 broad from n. to s.~\ 
Catalogue of the settlements, ports, and rivers of 

this island. 

The capital, Neiba, 

Santiago, Bucna Centura, 

Dajabon, Vany, 

Concepcion de la Vega, Banica, 
Cotuy, Las Caobas, 

8. Lorenzo de las MiriaSj Pedro Corto, 
Hayna, Farfari, 

Ingenios, Ilincha, 

Azua S. Rafael, 

S. Juan, S. Miguel, 

E 2 



28 

Monte de Plata, 

Boya, 

Bayaguana, 

Seibo, 

Iliguey, 

Samana, 

Sabana, 

Monte Christi, 

Puerto de Plata, 

S. Carlos. 

Bays and Ports. 
Bahia de las Aguilas, 
Puerto de la Beata, 
Puerto de Petitru, 



DOMINGO. 



Caicos. 

Rivers. 

Ozama, 

Jaina, 

Nigua, 

Nisao, 

Ocoa, 

De Mulas, 

Tavara, 

Mijo, 

Yaque, 

Artibonito, 

Camu, 

Mao, 



Bahia de Neiba, or De Guayubin, 

Juliana, Daxabon, 

Puerto Viejo de Azua, Yuna, 

Bahia de Ocoa, La Isabela, 

Puerto de la Caldera, S. Lorenzo, 

Puerto de la Catalina, Neiba, 

PuertodeSantoDomingo La Romana, 

Puerto de la Caleta, Macoris, 

Cala de Macoriz, Soco, 

Del Soco, Cucumaya, 

De la Romana, Higuey, 

De Quiabon, Yuna, 

Bahia de Higuey, Indies. 
Bahia dc Samana, or De Capes and Points. 

las Flechas, Del Manglar, 

Puerto de Estero Grande De la Salina Chica, 

Bahia Escocesa, or De De la Roche, 

Cosbec, De Isabelica, 

Bahia del Balsamo, Roxo, 

Puerto de Santiago, Frances Viejo, 

Puerto de Plata, Samana, 

Puerto Caballo, or De Cabron, 

Garcia, De S. Rafael, 

Puerto de Isabella, De Engano, 

Puerto de Estero Hondo, De Espada, 

Rada de Monte Christi, De la Magdalena, 

Bahia del Mansanillo. De Caucedo, 

Islands. Del Palenque, 

Beata, De Salina Grande, 

Santa Catalina, De la Beata, 

Saona, De Nizao, 

Mona, De Mongon, 

Monito, De Peiia, 

Desccho, De Mascuri, 

Baxos de Plata, De Sabanetas, 

Abroxos, De Hicacos, 

Panuelo Quadrado, De Reson, 

Islas Turcas, De Briseval. 
In the part of the French. 

Settlements. Puerto del Principe, 

Cabo Frances, Leogan, 



Cruz d Ramilletes, 

Arcahaye, 

Mirebalais, 

S.- Marcos, 

Artibonito, 

Veretes, 

Goanabas, 

Petit Goave, 

Fondo de Negros, 

Anse a Veau, 

Petit Trou, 

Grand Goave, 

Jeremie, 

Saint Louis, 

Acquin, 

Cavaillon, 

Cayes du Fond, 

Torbeck, 

Coteaux, 

Tiburon, 

Jacmel, 

Cayes de Jacmel, 

Baynet, 

Port Dauphin, 

Port de Paix. 

Petite Anse, 

Quartier Morin, 

Limonade, 

La Grand Riviere, 

Le Trou, 

Le Dondon, 

La Plaine du Nord, 

Le Terrier Rouge, 

Ovanaminthe, 

L Accul, 

Le Limbe, 

Port M argot, 

Le Borgne, 

Plaisance, 

Gros Morne, 

Petit Saint Louis, 

Jean Ilabel, 



Jtivers. 

De Trois Rivieres, 
De la Petite Anse, 
Riviere Grand, 
G uaraguey , 
Guaramu, 
Capotilla, 
Dajabon, 
Guararsy, 
Grande, 
Salado, 
De las Damas, 

Capes and Points. 
De San Nicolas, 
De los Locos, 
De Grand Pierre, 
De S. Marcos, 
Percee, 

De la Geringa, 
De Dona Maria, 
De las Balienas, 
De Irois, 
De Burgados, 
De Cascajo, 
De Abacu, 
De Pasqual, 
De Trois Lataniers, 
De Benet, 
Del Moral, 
De Jacquemel, 
De Marcchau, 
De Belle Roche, 
De Margot, 
De Feste, 
Colorado. 

Islands. 
Tortuga, 
Goanava, 
Navaga, 
Vaca, 
De Agua, 
Caimitos. 



Mole St. Nicolas. 
Presidents, governors, and captains-general who 
have presided in the island of St. Domingo. 

1. The Adelantado Don Bartolotne Columbus, 
brother to the celebrated Admiral Christopher 
Columbus, founder of the city of St. Domingo, 
and which was the first city of the kings of Spa 
nish America, in 1496 ; he governed a short time, 
since the changes made by the alcnldia mayor 
Francisco Roldan obliged the Catholic kings to 
nominate, 

2. Don Francisco Bobadilla, a knight and 
comendador of the order of Calatrava,- nominated 



DOMINGO. 



governor-general of the Indies in 1500; his au 
thority was but of short date, since the vexations 
suffered by the Spaniards and Indians gave them 
sufficient motive for desiring his renunciation ; and 
in his room was elected, 

3. Don Nicolas de Ovando, native of Caceres 
in Estremadura, knight and comendador of Lares 
in the order of Alcantara, a man noted for his 
virtue, justice, and merit ; he came to the govern 
ment in J501, but the many complaints raised 
against him, and which tended to publish the 
fickleness of his character, with the circumstance 
of the Queen Isabel having sworn to chas 
tise him for having put to death the Cacique Ana- 
coana, and she having left her decree in charge to 
Ferdinand, this king divested him of the govern 
ment in 1508, and commanded him to return to 
Spain. 

4. The Admiral Don Diego Colon, son of the 
celebrated Christopher, nominated through the 
importunities that he had made in order that the 
situation might be offered to his father ; he suc 
ceeded to Nicolas de Ovando as governor-general, 
but not in character of viceroy, as his father was, 
in 1508. 

, Rodrigo de Alburquerque, sent with the title 
of distribudor in the different divisions of Indians 
to Hispaniola, through the influence of the rivals 
of the Admiral Don Diego Colon, in J514; but 
the vexations he endured were such as to cause 
him to quit the government in the following year, 
in 1515. 

6. The Licentiate Ibarra, who proceeded with 
the same commission as did the former, but who 
died when he had scarcely arrived at the island the 
same year, in 1515. 

7. The missionaries Luis de Figueroa, prior of 
the monastery of Mejorada de Olrnedo, Bernadino 
de Manzanado, and Alphonso de Santo Domingo, 
prior of the monastery of Ortega, allot the reli 
gious order of St. Jerome ; elected by the Cardinal 
Ximinez de Cisneros, at the death of King Ferdi 
nand, to settle dissensions, and to govern the whole 
of the Indies then discovered, in the year 1516: 
they had ?is an associate the Licentiate Snazo, 
who was separated from them two years afterwards. 
The opportune and well ordered functions of holy 
men, thus encharged with the care of new establish 
ments, did credit to their election ; and their go 
vernment, which lasted till 1518, was deserving 
of the greatest commendations; this they were 
commanded to resign in the same year, and they 
were succeeded by, 

8- The Licentiate Rodrigo de Figueron, with 



the title of administrator ; but, having begun to 
show signs of an insatiable avarice, and clamours 
being raised against him from the extortions prac 
tised against the poor Indians as well as against 
the Spaniards, he was removed from his situation in 
1521, and carried as prisoner to Spain. 

9. The Admiral Don Diego Colon, for the 
second time, until the year 1523. 

10. The Father ray Luis de Figueroa, of the 
religious order of St. Jerome ; elected bishop of 
La Concepcion of La Vega, and president of the 
royal audience in the same year, 1523; but he 
died before he took possession. 

11. Don Sebastian Ramirez de Fuenleal, bishop 
of Santo Domingo, in which title, on account of 
the smallness of the see, was united also that of La 
Concepcion ; he was nominated at the same time 
president of the royal audience and governor of 
the island ; took possession in 1528, and governed 
with extraordinary skill until 1532, when he was 
promoted to the presidency of Mexico ; the Licen 
tiate Gil Gonzalez Davila holding here the reins 
of government in the interim, in quality of visitor 
and governor-general of the island, through the 
promotion of his predecessor, in 1533. 

12. Don Luis Colon, vice-admiral ofthe Indies, 
grandson of the former and much renowned Chris 
topher Columbus, who, pleading his rights at 
court, was declared captain-general of His 
paniola, in J540; this dignity he exercised but 
for a short time, from having ceded it to the 
crown, in exchange for the dukedom of Veragua 
and marquisate of Jamaica. 

J3. The Licentiate Alonso Lopez Cerrato, no 
minated president, with the commission of residen 
tiary to the oidors of that audience in J543 ; he 
governed until 1548, when he was promoted to 
the presidency of the audience of Los Confines. 

14. Don Alonso de Fuenmayor, elected arch 
bishop of Santo Domingo, and nominated at the 
same time president, governor, and captain-generol 
in 1548; which honours he exercised until his 
death, in 1560. 

15. Don Antonio deOsorio, elected in 1560. 

16. Don Domingo de Osorio, admiral of the 
galleys and coast-guarding vessels of the island ; he 
came to the presidency here, having been pro 
moted from the government of Caracas, in 1597. 

17. Don Gabriel de Chaves, colonel of militia, 
in 1646. 

18. Don Bernardino de Mcneses, Count of 
Penalba, in 1652. 

19. Don Juan Francisco de Montemayor, Cor 
doba, and Cuenca, a knight of Aragon, nominated 



30 



DOMINGO. 



president in 1654, and the same who conquered 
the French, taking from them the island of Tor- 
tuga. 

20. Don Andres de Robles, colonel of the in 
fantry militia ; he was promoted to the govern 
ment of Buenos Ayres in 1680. 

21. Don Francisco de Segura, Sandoval, and 
Castilla, a militia colonel of celebrated valour and 
military skill, who gained a complete victory 
against the French in the island, in the year 1691 ; 
he was removed from the government, and em 
barked on board a register ship, through dis 
turbances with the bishop, and died in his voyage. 

22. Don Felipe dc Valera, lieutenant-colonel of 
militia, in 1703. 

23. Don Pedro Niela, in 1714. 

24. Don Alonso de Castro and Mazo, native of 
Toledo, first lieutenant of the regiment of Spanish 
guards ; nominated president, governor, and cap 
tain-general, in 1730. 

25. Don I 3 edro Zorilla de San Martin, Marquis 
of La Gandara, first lieutenant of the regiment of 
Spanish guards ; nominated in 1737. 

26. Don Francisco Rubio and Penaranda, 
comcndador of Hinojosa del Valle, of the order of 
Santiago, brigadier of the royal armies, and cap 
tain of the regiment of Spanish guards ; nominated 
in 1750; he governed until 1759. 

27. Don Manuel de Azlor and Urries, native 
of Aragon, brigadier of the royal armies; nomi 
nated in 1759, governed until 1771. 

28. Don Joseph Solando y Bote, knight of the 
order of Santiago, admiral of the royal armada, 
whose merit, talent, and zeal for the royal service, 
elevated him to the rank of vice-admiral of the 
royal armada ; he was nominated in 1771, being 
at the time governor in Caracas, until 1779. 

29. Don Isidro Peralta, native of Granada; he 
had served as infantry captain in the regiment of 
Galicia, and was first lieutenant of Spanish guards, 
when he was promoted to the presidency of Santo 
Domingo, in 1779, until 1786, when he died. 

30. Don Juan Guillelmi, native of Sevilla ; he 
had served as captain iu the royal body of artil 
lery ; nominated president, governor, and cap 
tain-general of St. Domingo, in 1787. 

In the part of the French. 

1. Monsr. de Fontenay, in 1653; nominated 
first governor by the king of France. 

2. Monsr. Deschamps, L ord of Moussac, in 
1659. 

3. Monsr. Ogeron de la Bovere, in 1665. 

4. Monsr. de Pouancey, nephew of the former, 
Jn 1676. 



5. Monsr. de Cussy, in 1683. 

6. Monsr. de Casse, in 1691. 

7. Monsr. Auger, in 1703. 

8. Monsr. the Count of Choiseal-Baupre, in 
1707. 

9. Monsr. the Count of Blenac, in 1714. 

10. Monsr. the Marquis of Chateaumorand, in 

1710; 

1 1. Monsr. the Marquis of Sorel, in 1719. 

12. Monsr. the Knight of Rochalard, in 1725. 

13. Monsr. the Marquis of Vienna, in 1730. 

14. Monsr. the Marquis of La Fayetc, in J733. 

15. Monsr. the Marquis of Larnage, in 1735. 

16. Monsr. the Knight of Conflans, who was 
afterwards marshal of France, in 1748. 

J7. Monsr. the Count de Bois de la Mothe, in 
1752. 

18. Monsr. the Marquis de Vaudrevil, in 1755. 

19. Monsr. Burt, in 1757. 

20. Monsr. de Bory, in 1761. 

21. Monsr. the Viscount of Belzunce, in 1762. 

22. Monsr. the Count of Estaing, in 1764. 

23. Monsr. the Prince of Rohan, in 1766. 

24. Monsr. the Count of Nolivos, in 1770. 

25. Monsr. the Knight of Valiere, in 1772. 

26. Monsr. the Count of Ennery, brigadier, 
grand cross of the royal and military order of San 
Luis, inspector-general of infantry, director-gene 
ral of the troops, fortifications, artillery, and 
militias of all the French colonies; nominated in 
1775. H 

Archbishops who have presided in the island of 

St. Domingo. 

1. Don Fray Garcia de Pad ilia, of the order of 
San Francisco, confessor of Leonor, wife of Ma 
nuel king of Portugal ; he it was who erected into 
a cathedral the church of St. Domingo, through 
a bull of the Pope Julius II. in 1512, being elected 
first bishop, which dignity he accepted, refusing 
any remuneration; he died before he was conse 
crated. 

2. Don Alexandro Gerardino, native of Rome; 
he passed over to Spain with his brother Don An 
tonio, whom he had accompanied in many em 
bassies ; he was presented to this bishopric by the 
Emperor Charles V. in the year 1520, and Avas the 
first prelate that preached and taught as pastor in 
America ; he died in 1525. 

3. Don Fray Luis de Figueroa, of the order of 
St. Jerome, one of the commissaries sent by the 
Cardinal Ximinez to govern the Indies ; he was 
upon his return to Spain from being prior of the 
monastery of Mejorada, when he was promoted to 
this bishopric, but died before he was consecrated. 



DOMINGO. 



31 



4. Don Sebastian Ramirez de Fuenlral, elected 
by the Emperor Charles V. to the bishopric of 
St. Domingo, and presidency of the royal audi 
ence, through the acknowledged renown of his 
virtue, judgment, mid literature, in .1527; from 
whence he passed over to the presidency of Mexico, 
in 1530; and it is to him that Nueva Espana 
owes all her prosperity and good establishments. 

5. Don Alonso de Fuenmayor, native of Yan- 

uas, collegiate in the college of San Bartolorne of 
alamanca, professor and licenciate in his univer 
sity, and oidor of Navarra ; when he was elected to 
the bishopric of St. Domingo in 1534, he returned 
to Spain, and afterwards to his church, already 
erected into a metropolitan and archbishopric, 
being there first bishop, in J548. 

6. Don Diego de Covarrubias, a celebrated 
president of the council of Castilla, elected arch 
bishop, being then oidor of the chancery of Gra 
nada ; which title he did not fulfil, from having 
been promoted to the bishopric of Ciudad Rodrigo 
before he passed over to the Indies. 

7. Don Juan de Salcedo, native of Granada, 
canon and provisor of its church; presented to the 
archbishopric of St. Domingo in 1560; he died at 
sea in 1562. 

8. Don Fray Juan de Arzola, of the order of 
San Geronimo ; elected to this archbishopric in 
1565 ; he died in the following year, before he was 
consecrated. 

9. Don Fray Andres de Carvajal, native of the 
town of Alcantara in Estrcmadura, a monk of the 
order of St. Francis, collegiate in the college of San 
Pedro and San Pablo de Alcala ; promoted from 
the bishopric of Puerto Rico in 1568 ; he died in 
1579. 

10. Don Alonso Lopez, petty canon of the holy 
church of Cordoba, inquisitor of this city, elected 
archbishop of St. Domingo in 1570 ; promoted to 
the archbishopric of Santa Fe. 

1 ] . Don Fray Nicolas Ramos, native of Villa- 
saba, bishop of Palencia, a monk of the order of 
San Francis, collegiate in the -college of San Pedro 
and San Pablo de Alcala, qualificator of the in 
quisition, provincial of his province, a great theo- 
logist and preacher, and promoted from the bisho 
pric of Puerto Rico to this archbishopric. 

12. Don Fray Agusttn Davila and Padrilla, a 
monk of the order of St. Dominic, native of Mexico, 
master of theology, prior of his convent of the 
Puebla de los Angeles, preacher to King Philip 
111. elected archbishop of St. Domingo in 1599; 
he died in 1604. 

13. Don Fray Christoval Rodriguez, native of 
Salamanca, of the religious order of St. Domins-o, 

* C3 / 



master, and afterwards presented to the priorship of 
the convent of Alcala, visitor of the convents of 
the Indies, and elected archbishop of St. Domingo 
in 1605 ; promoted to the bishopric of Arequipa in 
1611. 

14. Don Fray Diego de Contreras, of the re 
ligious order of St. Augustin, native of Mexico, 
master in his university, professor of writing, di- 
finidor of his province, prior in his convent of this 
capital, provincial, calificador of the holy office, 
and archbishop of St. Domingo in 16 12 ; lie sought 
of the pope permission to go to Rome to settle some 
business, but died at sea in 16 IS. 

J5. Don Fray Pedro Solier, of the religious 
order of St. Augustin, a native of Barajas ; pro 
moted from the bishopric of Puerto Rico to this 
archbishopric in 1619; he died in the following 
year. 

16. J)on Fray Domingo de Valderrama, of the 
order of St. Domingo, native of Quito ; promoted 
from the bishopric of La Paz in 1620. 

17. Don Fray Pedro de Oviedo, of the order of 
San Bernardo, lecturer of arts and theology, pro 
fessor of Alcala, and abbot of the monastery of San 
Clodio, and difinidor of his religion; elected arch 
bishop of St. Domingo in 1620, promoted to the 
bishopric of Quito in 1629. 

18. Don Fray Fernando de Vera, of the order of 
St. Augustin, presented to the archbishopric of 
St. Domingo in 1628, but before consecration pro 
moted to Cuzco. 

19. Don Bernardino dc Almansa, native of* 
Lima, in which university he graduated as doctor 
of canons ; he was curate in various settlements, 
visitor of the archbishopric, treasurer of the church 
of Cartagena, and archdeacon of that of Charcas. 
He came to Spain, where he was made inquisitor 
of Logrono, afterwards of Toledo, and archbishop 
of St. Domingo ; and being consecrated, he was re 
moved to Santa Fe in 1632. 

20. Don Fray Facundo de Torres, of the order 
of San Benito, native of the town of Sahagun, a 
great engineer, well learned in divine and human 
knowledge, lecturer in his convent of San Juan 
de Sainos, thrice abbot of that of Sahagun,. and 
preacher to King Philip IV. who presented him to 
this bishopric in 1632. At the time of his promo 
tion the whole of the city met together, being col 
lected by the sound of a bell, arid entreated him to 
stay amongst them, sending a petition to that ef 
fect, at the same time to the king, so great was the 
reverence and love for his domestic and heroic vir 
tues; but he died in 1640, and before the permis 
sion could be received. 

21. Don Diego de Guevara, native of Mexico? 



DOMINGO. 



doctor of laws and canons, of the university of 
Valladolid, school-master of the church of the 
Puebla dc los Angeles, provisor, visitor, and judge 
of the crusade, chanter of Mexico, provisor and 
visitor of the five provinces of the archbishopric, 
established by his holiness judge for allaying the 
dissensions of the religions of San Francisco and 
San Augustin, commissary-general of crusade, and 
archbishop of St. Domingo in 1&amp;lt;340 ; he died shortly 
after, on his return from being consecrated at 
Mexico. 

22. Don Francisco Bngiieiro, collegiate of the 
college of Sanla Cruz of V r all:idolid, magisterial 
canon of Mondonedo, and afterwards of tbe church 
of Zarnora ; presented to the archbishopric of St. 
Domingo in 1645 ; he died before he wa conse- 

\j 

crated. 

23. Don Juan Diaz de Arce, school-master of 
the holy church of Mexico ; elected archbishop, 
but he refused the ofiice. 

24. Don Francisco Pio, native of Toledo, pro 
fessor of laws in its university, visitor and vicar- 
general of the city of Baeza, canon and provisor of 
Segovia; elected archbishop of St. Domingo in 
1648. 

25. Don Juan de Escalante Turcios and Men- 
doza, commissary of crusade, provisor and vicar- 
general of the bishopric of Yucatan in 1677. 

26. Don Fray Domingo Fernandez Navarrete, 
of the order of St. Domingo. 

27. Don Fray Fernando de Carvajal and Rivera, 
of the order of La Merced ; he emlxirkcd in 1690 
in a Dutch vessel to avoid the persecutions of the 
president, and went to the French colonies on his 
way to Spain, in 1698. 

28. Don Fray Francisco Rincon, of the order of 
the religious minims of San Francisco de Paula, 
native of Valladolid ; elected bishop in 1705, and 
promoted to the church of Caracas in 171 I. 

29. Don Antonio Claudio Alvarez de Quinones, 
provisor and vicar-general of the bishopric of 
Sigiienza, canon of the renowned church of Ber- 
langa ; elected in 1712. 

30. Don Francisco Mendigana, archdeacon of 
the order of St. Dominic ; elected archbishop in 
1712. 

31. Don Fray Juan de Galavis, of the order of 
the canons called the reglares Premostratenses^ 
having been formerly general of the same ; elected 
archbishop of St. Domingo in 1729, promoted to 
be archbishop of Santa Fe in 1737. 

32. Don Domingo Pantaleon Alvarez de Abreu, 
archdeacon of Canarica ; elected in 1737, and pro 
moted to the bishopric of the Puebla de los Angeles 
in 1743. 



33. Don Fray Ignacio de Padilla and Gnar- 
diola, of the order of San Augustin, procurator- 
general of the province of Nueva Espana at the 
courts of Madrid and Rome ; elected archbishop 
of St. Domingo in 1743, promoted to the bishopric 
of Yucatan in 1753. 

34. Don Fray Joseph Moreno Curiel; elected 
in 1754; he died in 1756. 

35. Don Felipe Ruiz de Auzmendi ; elected in. 
1756 ; he died in 1767. 

36. Don Isodoro Rodriguez; elected in the 
above year, 1767. 

DOMINGO, ST. the capital of the former island, 
is of the same name ; lies in the part possessed by 
the Spaniards, and was founded by Don Barto- 
loine Colon (or Columbus) in 1494 ; he having 
given it this name, as it is asserted, in honour of 
his father ; or, as others are of opinion, from his 
having arrived here on a Sunday. A great part 
of this city having been destroyed by a violent 
hurricane which occurred here, it was removed in 
1504 to the spot where it now stands, by the Go 
vernor Nicolas de Ovarido, comendador mayor of 
Alcantara, and founded upon the shore of the river 
Ozama, where there is a good port, though only 
fit for small vessels and frigates. The city is large, 
has many handsome buildings, is of a benign tem 
perature, fertile, and abounding in cattle, and a 
place of great commerce, though nothing like what 
it was formerly, it having at one time been the 
principal colony of America, and the place from 
whence issued nearly all the great conquerors and 
settlers who went over to the continent, as likewise 
the residence of the governors-general. It is the 
head of an archbishopric, founded by Paul III. 
in 1547, and previous to that had been a bishopric, 
established by Julius II. from 1512: it has as suf 
fragans those of Cuba and Puerto Rico. The ca 
thedral church, though small, is a fine piece of ar 
chitecture, and in it are deposited the bones of the 
discoverer of this island, the celebrated Admiral 
Christopher Columbus. It has besides the parish 
church of Santa Barbara, with two other assistant 
parish chapels in the suburbs, of the names of San 
Miguel and San Andres, some convents of the re 
ligious orders of St. Frnncis, St. Domingo, LJI 
Merced, a college which belonged to the regulars 
of the society of Jesuits, a good hospital, and two 
monasteries of nuns, the one of Santa Clara, the 
other of Santa Catalina. It is the residence of the 
president and captain-general of the island, and of 
the tribunal of the royal audience, founded in 1511. 
It had once a mint, for the purpose of coining the 
infinite abundance of metals extracted from its 
mines ; but this was immediately abolished. It is 



DOMINGO. 



so beautiful, and has an air of such grandeur, that 
Gonzalo Fernandez de Oviedo had the boldness to 
say to the Emperor Charles V. that " there was 
not a city even in Spain preferable to it, either for 
the advantage of soil, agreeableness of situation, 
beauty and disposition of the public places and 
streets, and pleasantness of its surrounding coun 
try ;" he further added, that " his Imperial Ma 
jesty often lodged in palaces far inferior in con 
veniences, size, and grandeur, to those met with at 
St. Domingo." This city is situate n. s. on the 
shore of the river Ozama, as has already been ob 
served ; so that on the s. it is terminated by the 
sea, on the e. by the river, and on the w. arid n. 
by beautiful and well cultivated fields. The streets 
are wide and straight, crossing each other at right 
angles, and the houses are well proportioned, and 
some of them of a species of marble-stone found in 
the neighbourhood, and others of a mortar, which 
by the influence of the air and time, becomes as 
hard as any brick. The ground is sufficiently 
raised above the level of the sea, and this affords 
it as it were an impregnable barrier. It is com 
pletely surrounded by a wall, which was begun by 
the archbishop and president Don Alonso de Fueri- 
Mayor ; and at a small distance from it is the 
castle of San Geronimo, which is of a square 
figure, and a very good fortification. Its arms are 
a shield divided horizontally ; in the superior half 
a key ; in the inferior the cross of St. Domingo, 
sustained by two lions rampant ; and above is the 
imperial crown. In 1551, the English, commanded 
by William Gauson, attempted to take it with a 
strong squadron, and with upwards of 2000 men, 
who disembarked here. But appearing off the 
back of the city, they were espied by a battery, 
which had been built thereto guard against a simi 
lar invasion ; and this playing upon the English 
troops with very heavy shot, caused immense 
havoc ; it is asserted also that the craw-fish, with 
which the island is overrun, being alarmed at the 
noise of the firing, made such a clamour that the 
English being persuaded that it was evidently the 
troops of the garrison that were coming out against 
them, immediately betook themselves to flight, and 
readily re-embarked, though with very great loss, 
especially as they were at the same time attacked 
by a body of cavalry. In 1586, however, the 
English succeeded in their attempts of sacking it ; 
and in 1591, the greater part of it was destroyed 
by the shock of a tremendous earthquake. It is 
the native place of many illustrious men, and 
amongst the rest, of the Friar Alonso de Espinosa, 
of the order of St. Domingo, a celebrated writer. 

VOL. II. 



The city lies 42 leagues from the head of the 
island, called Saona. 

[St. Domingo is situated on the w. bank of the 
Ozama, a league below the mouth of Isabella river, 
in which distance it is 24 feet deep, having a bot 
tom of mud or soft sand, and banks 20 feet per 
pendicular height; but n. of the city this height is 
reduced to four feet. The Ozama is navigable for 
9 or 10 leagues, and has several sugar manufacto 
ries, tile kilns, and provision farms on its banks. 
The road before the mouth of the Ozama is very 
indifferent, and lies exposed from w. s. w. to e. It 
is impossible io anchor in it in the time of the s. 
winds ; and the n. winds drive the vessels from 
their moorings out into the sea, which here runs 
extremely high. The port of St. Domingo is mag 
nificent in every respect ; a real natural bason, 
with a great number of careenings for the vessels 
that can get at them. There is a rock at the en 
trance, which will only admit vessels drawing 18 
or 20 feet water ; which it is asserted might be re 
moved without great difficulty. 

The plan of the city is a trapezium of about 540 
fathoms on the e. side, along the Ozama ; near 500 
fathoms on the s. bordering on the sea ; and of 
about 1800 fathoms in circumference. To the w. 
and to the n. of the city, the land is rough and 
rocky for about half a league, but after that it be 
comes good, and the country delightful. Towards 
the scathe site of the city lies very high, which 
forms an insurmountable dike against the fury of 
the waves. It is surrounded with a rampart eight 
feet in diameter, and about 10 feet high. There K 
a great deal of ordnance at St. Domingo, particu 
larly cast ordnance, but the fortifications are not 
strong; and the height of the Ilcignes commands 
it entirely ; and its crown is not more than 250 fa 
thoms from the ditch. The streets are spacious, 
and straight as a line, which gives it a pleasing ap 
pearance. Ten of these streets run from n. to s. 
and 10 others from e. to w. The greatest part of 
the houses, first built, are of a sort of marble found 
in (he vicinity, and in the style of the ancient towns 
of Spain arid Italy : those of a more recent con 
struction are of tapia, a sort of pise. To erect 
these buildings, a case is made of planks, between 
pillars of masonry : this case is filled by degrees 
with a reddish clay, which is rammed down as it i-s 
thrown in, until it forms a solid, or sort of wall be 
tween the pillars. The clay thus pressed together 
acquires an amazing hardness, and the walls are 
sometimes so solid and strong, that the pillars of 
masonry are useless. 

The houses of St. Domingo are tolerably hand- "I 



34 DOM 

[some, in a simple style, and nearly uniform. A 
considerable part of these, built within these 15 
years, are of wood, covered with the leaves or 
taches of palm trees. The roofs are generally plat- 
formed, being shaped -so as to conduct the rain 
water to the cisterns. The climate of the capital is, 
happily, very temperate. The nights of those 
months which answer to the winter in Europe, are 
even found la be cold. 

Among a number of public edifices that merit 
attention in this declining city, we may reckon the 
ruins of the house that Diego, son of Christopher 
Columbus, had begun, entirely of hewed stone. 
The walls are yet remaining, and some of the 
sculpture round the windows. The roof and ceilings 
are fallen in, the lower floor is become a penn for 
cattle, and a Latin inscription over the portal is 
now hidden by the hut a of herdsman. The cathe 
dral, of the same sort of stone as the house of 
Diego Columbus, stands on the s. e. Opposite its 
entrance is a fine spacious oblong square, at the 
s. K&amp;gt;. end of which is the town-house. The cathe 
dral is a noble Gothic pile, begun in 1512 and 
finished in 1540, and was constructed after the 
model of a church at Rome. It merits admiration 
on account of the boldness of its vault, which, not 
withstanding the ravages of earthquakes in its 
neighbourhood, has never, till within these 15 or 
20 years, had a single flaw. The dust of Colum 
bus rested within this pile until 1796, when it was 
removed. 

The population of the city of St. Domingo is 
not very considerable, yet it is extraordinarily aug 
mented since the year 1780. The census lately 
taken amounted to 20,000, of every age and sex : 
but this is far below the exact number. The cen 
sus is, taken by the Spanish priests or vicars, and 
who go from house to house to verify those who 
do not perform their paschal duties. This list 
does not comprehend children under seven years of 
age, nor heads of families absent from their home 
or from the city. But the principal cause of the 
inexactness is, one half of the parochial territory of 
the city is on the outside of the walls. 

This territory comprehends the part called the 
Plains, a great part of the Monte do Plate, and 
again, as well to the e. as to the a&amp;gt;. of the city, a 
very considerable number of country seats and 
provision habitations, where there are a great many 
families of blacks, of people of colour, and white 
cultivators ; so that there are always 5 or 6000 
not included in the census. 

Notwithstanding the declining situation of the 
Spanish territory of the island, it is far mure pros- 



D O M 

pcrous than it was 70 years ago. A census 
of 1737 shows, that the total population at that 
time did not surpass 6000 souls, and the capital 
contained hardly 500. 

The Spanish capital is 70 leagues e. by f. of 
Port an Prince; the road runs half the way along 
the sea-coast, through Bany, Azua, and Ncybe, 
and thence by the lakes Henriquelle and Brackish- 
pond. In this route you have to cross two large 
rivers, Nisai and Neybe, besides 11 smaller streams. 
It is 90 leagues s. e. of cape Francois, going by 
the road through St. Raphael, Azua, &amp;c. and 
about 100 leagues by that of Duhabon, St. Yague , 
and La Vega. Lat, 1828 w. Long. 69 50 w. 
See DOMINGO, ST. the preceding article.^ 

DOMINGO, ST. a town of the province and go 
vernment of Maracaibo ; situate on the shore of the 
river of its name, at the source of this river, to the 
n. of the city of Barinas Vieja. 

DOMINGO, ST. a settlement of the government 
and jurisdiction of Merida, in the Nuevo Reyno 
de Granada. It is of a mild temperature, pro 
duces much maize and truffle; and contains 50 
housekeepers, who make well worked hampers and 
baskets, by which they promote a considerable 
trade, from the emolument of which, combined 
with that arising from their cattle, cows, and 
horses that they breed, they live in comparative 
credit and affluence. 

DOMINGO, ST. another, of the province and go 
vernment of Esmeraldas in the kingdom of Quito. 

DOMINGO, ST. another, of the head settlement 
of the district of Tepoxtlun, and akaldia mayor of 
Cuernavaca, in Nueva Espana. 

DOMINGO, ST. another, of the head settlement of 
Metlatlan, and alcaldia mayor of Papantia, in the 
same kingdom. It contains 1 10 families of Indians, 
and is one league to the s. of its head settlement. 

DOMINGO, ST. another, of the head settlement 
and alcaldia mayor of Nejapa in the same king 
dom ; situate on the skirt of a mountain. It con 
tains 12 families of Indians, who employ them 
selves in the cultivation of scarlet-dye.. It lies two 
leagues from its capital. 

DOMINGO, ST. another, of the head settlement of 
Hiscotepec, and alcaldia mayor of Nejapa, in the 
same kingdom; situate at the foot of an elevated 
mountain. It contains 100 families of Indians, 
who carry on a commerce in scarlet-dye and seeds. 
It is six leagues from its head settlement. 

DOMIXGO, ST. another, which is the head settle 
ment of the alcaldia mayor of Teutitlan in the same 
kingdom. It contains 92 families of Indians, and 
is three leagues between the e. and $. of its capital.. 



DOM 

DOMINGO, ST. another, of the head settlement 
and alcaldia mayor of Tcutitlan in the same king 
dom, with 72 families of Indians. Four leagues 
to the e. of its head settlement. 

DOMINGO, ST. another, of the head settlement of 
Metatlan, and alcaldia mayor of Teutitlan, in the 
same kingdom, with 92 families of Indians. 

DOMINGO, ST. another, of the head settlement 
nnd alcaldia mayor of Villalta, of a very cold 
temperature. It contains 32 families of Indians, 
and is 10 leagues between the e. and s. of its 
capital. 

DOMINGO, ST. another, of the head settlement 
of Tlapacoja, and alcaldia mayor of Quatro Villas, 
in the same kingdom. It contains 102 families of 
Indians, who cultivate some scarlet-dye, seeds, 
fruits, and slips of woods, in which they trade. 
It is somewhat more than three leagues n. w. of its 
head settlement. 

DOMINGO, ST. another, of the kingdom of 
Quito, in the corregimiento of the district Cinco 
Leo-uas de la Capital ; situate on the shore of the 
river Toachi. 

DOMINGO, ST. another, of the province and 
alcaldia mayor of Sonsonate in the kingdom of 
Guatemala. 

DOMINGO, ST. another, of the province and go 
vernment of Costarica in the same kingdom ; si 
tuate on the coast of the S. sea, about 35 miles n. e. 
from cape Blanco. 

DOMINGO, ST. another, with the addition of 
Soriano, in the province and government of Bue 
nos Ayres ; situate on the e. shore of the river 
Uruguay, and at the mouth of the river Negro, 
where it empties itself in an abundant stream into 
the river La Plata. [It is about five miles w. of 
Buenos Ayres. Lat. 33 23 56" s. Long. 58 18 
20" .] 

DOMINGO, ST. another, of the province and 
alcaldia mayor of Zacatepeques in the kingdom of 
Guatemala. 

DOMINGO, ST. another, of the same kingdom, 
which is as it were a ward or suburb of the 
capital- 

DOMINGO, ST. another, of the province and 
corregimiento of Quillota in the kingdom of 
Chile; situate on the shore of the river La 
Ligua. 

DOMINGO, Sr. another, of the province and 
corregimiento of Santiago in the same kingdom ; 
situate on the shore of the river Mapocho. 

DOMINGO, ST. a lake of the province and cor- 
regrmiento of Rancagua in the kingdom of Chile, 
which empties itself into the sea, and abounds in 
fish ; upon its shores is usually found an incrusta- 



D O M 



35 



tion of salt, and it is thus called from its being in 
the vicinity of an estate which belongs to the monks 
of the convent of the order of St. Domingo of the 
cily of Santiago. 

DOMINGO, ST. a river of the province and go 
vernment of Maracaibo, which rises on the side of 
the city of Barinas Vieja, runs nearly due s. and 
enters the Paragua a little before this runs into the 
Apnre. It is also called Guanare ; and according 
to the engineer Bellin, enters the Apnre. 

DOMINGO, ST. a peninsula, or long strip of land, 
formed in the grand lake Titicaca or Chucuito, 
which forms the strait of Capachica. 

DOMINGU1LLO, a settlement of the pro- 
vince and corregimiento of Loxa in the kingdom 
of Quito. 

^ DOMINICA, an island of the N. sea, one of the 
Smaller Antilles, called thus from its having been 
discovered on a Sunday by Christopher Columbus 
on his second voyage. It is the last of the Caribes, 
lying to the leeward, and 15 leagues to the e. of 
those islands. It is 13 leagues in breadth, nearly 
the same in length, and 36 in circumference; al 
though the Father Labat allows it to be no more 
than 30. It is divided, as are the islands of Guada- 
lupe and Martinique, into Cabes-terre and Basse 
terre. It is, generally speaking, mountainous ; so 
much so that the author just mentioned doubts 
whether in the part of Cabes-terre there can be 
found three leagues of plain territory. In the 
roads, however, of the mountains are mostrbeautiful 
trees, and all kinds of European fruits and vege 
tables ; so that it is fertile in every thing produced 
in the Caribes. Hochefort says, that there are in 
its centre inaccessible rocks, inhabited by vipers 
and venomous insects, and snakes of a frightful 
size. In the part of Cabes-terre are many rivers of 
delicious water, abounding with excellent fish, also 
a mountain or mine of sulphur. In the part of 
Basse-terre are only two or three scanty villages, 
the principal of which is called La Gran Sabana, 
situate in the centre, and where are produced 
maize, bananas, some cotton, indigo, cacao, and to 
bacco ; and in greater abundance partridges, 
pigeons, turkeys, and pigs of two sorts, the one 
brought from France, the other from Spain. In the 
waters here are iound some very large and well 
tasted eels ; but these are not eaten by the Caribes 
Indians, who are the inhabitants of this village, 
and who having retired from the other islands in 
flying from the Spaniards, have rendered this well 
peopled. Indeed, in 1700, the Father Labat said 
that the number of Indians here amounted to 2000, 
including women and children. The French, 
who more than any other nation, have frequented 
F 2 



DOMINICA. 



his island, experience a better reception from the 
natives than do any other foreigners ; but they 
have nevertheless not been able to establish them- 
selves here but with considerable difficulty, and 
after a great lapse of time. All around this island 
the anchorage is good, but there is neither port 
nor bay, and the only protection for vessels is 
here and there behind a cape. The French have 
ever been uneasy lest the English should establish 
themselves here, since in war-time they might 
thus lose the communication between Martinique 
and Gundalupe ; and notwithstanding that they, 
the English, have desired it much, and that the 
governor of Barbadoes calls himself also governor 
of Dominica, they have no establishment whatever 
here, and only come here to cut wood and take in 
wafer, and are even then much harassed by the 
Caribes Indians. These, in 1640, formed a treaty 
with the French, and held the former in perfect 
abhorrence, in as much as they pretended to land 
iere with a large fleet under the pretext of friend 
ship, and carried away their people for slaves. 
These Indians had anciently a cacique or ruler of 
the whole island ; and when they came to be on 
good terms with the French, the same ruler was 
Captain Bucon. This chief made many incur 
sions against the English inhabiting the other 
islands. In this island, says the Father Labat, are 
found amongst the sands some small stones, which 
are called eye-stones, from their quality of cleaning 
any dirt from those organs; but they gain this title 
not for any chemical virtue, but through their figure, 
which is of a very small and smooth lens, which, 
being put under the eye-lid, and moved gently 
round, causes whatever is in the eye to drop out. 
[Dominica lies between lat. 15 10 and 15 36 30" n. 
and between long. 61 17 and 61 32 w. ; being 
about 29 miles in length from Crab point s. to the 
n. w. cape of Agusha bay on the n. and nearly 
J6 miles broad from Raymond bay e. to Coulihaut 
on the w. ; and contains 186,436 acres of land, 
and is divided into 10 parishes, viz. St. John, St. 
Andrew, St. Peter, St. Joseph, St. Paul, St. David, 
St. George, St. Patrick, St. Luke, and St. Martin. 
The island contains many high and rugged moun 
tains, interspersed with fertile valleys, and is wa 
tered by upwards of 30 rivers, beside a number of 
rivulets Several of the mountains contain unex- 
tinguished volcanoes, which frequently discharge 
vast quantities of burning sulphur. Here are se 
veral hot springs, esteemed efficacious in removing 
tropical disorders. Some of the waters are said to 
be hot enough to coagulate an egg. Here are vast 
swarms of bees, which produce a great quantity of 
wax and honey ; they hive in the trees, and are 



thought to have been transported from Europe 
the native bee of the W. Indies being a smaller 
species, unprovided with stings, and very different 
in its manners from the European. The forests 
afford an inexhaustible quantity of rose wood, so 
esteemed by cabinet-makers. The fruits and other 
productions arc similar to those in the neighbour 
ing islands ; but the soil Jbeing generally thin, is 
more adapted to the rearing of cotton than sugar. 
Dominica, from its local situation, between Mar- 
tinico and Guadalupe, is the best calculated of all 
the British possessions in that part of the world, for 
securing to her the dominion of the Charaibeansea. 
A few ships of war in Prince Rupert s bay would 
effectually stop all intercourse of the French settle 
ments with each other, as not a vessel can pass but 
is liable to capture, by ships cruising off that bay, 
and to windward of the island. It is a separate 
government and a free port. The legislative autho 
rity is vested in the commander in chief, a council 
of twelve gentlemen, and an assembly of 19 mem 
bers. The governor s salary, exclusive of his fees 
of office, is 1300/. sterling, payable out of the four 
and a half per cent, duties. 

Dominica was discovered Nov. 3, 1493; was 
ceded to the British crown in 1763 ; was taken by 
the French in the late war, and restored to Britain 
at the peace of 1783. Previous to its cession in 
1763, it was deemed a neutral land, but was in 
fact occupied and settled by many French in 
truders, who, to the number of about 800, were 
permitted to remain ; 343 Frenchmen then becom 
ing lessees, and holding 10j541 acres of the British 
crown. These lessees were generally engaged in 
coffee-plantations, which, in 1787, returned 18,149 
cwt. of coffee, and which have been since extended 
to the produce of 40,000 cwt. and may be further 
so in this great island to a considerable amount. 
The country is so rugged and the soil generally 
(but with exceptions) so unfit for sugar, that al 
though 90,346 acres were sold and apportioned, on 
Dominica coming under British sovereignty, it 
had not in 30 years reached to the average produce 
of above 6000 hogsheads of sugar yearly. In the 
report of the privy council on the slave trade, in 
1788, the British property vested here is estimated 
at 100,000 taxed acres of patented estates, and the 
number of Negroes is computed at 22,083, at 50/. 
each Negro. The value of exports, according to 
the current London prices in 1788, amounted to 
302,987/. 15s. sterling, including exports to the 
American states, value 71Q4/. 5s. The cargoes in 
162 vessels consisted of 7 J, 302 cwt. 1 qr. 21 Ibs. of 
sugar; 63,392 gallons of rum; 16,803 gallons of 
molasses ; 1194 cwt. 3 qrs. 21bs. cacao ; 18, 149 cwt.] 



DOM 



DON 



3? 



3 qrs. Gibs, coffee; 11,250 Ibs. indigo; 970,816 Ibs. In 1789, 5450 

cotton; 161 cwt. ginger, besides hides, dyeing 1799, 5200 

woods, &amp;c. 1805, 4600 

By return to house of commons, 1806, the number The official value of the imports and exports were, 

of hogsheads of sugar of 13 cwt. exported, was in in 1809, imports ^3 1 5,581, exports .161,291 

the undermentioned years as follows : 1810, 282,002, 39,686 

And the quantities of the principal articles imported into Great Britain were, in 



Coffee. 


Sugar. 


K m . 




Brit. Plant. 


For. Plant. 


Brit. Plant. 


For. Plant. 



Cwt. 
1809, 32,540 
1 810, 27,185 


Cwt. 
1096 

23 


Cwt. 

41,990 
61,522 


Cwt. 
10,612 
840 


Galls. 
56,356 

39,597 


Lbs. 

75,42o 
59,74t&amp;gt; 



By report of privy council, 1788, and by subsequent returns to house of commons, the population 

of Dominica amounted to 



Years. 


Whites. 


People of 
Colour. 


Slaves. 


1787 
1805 


1236 
1594 


445 

2822 


14,967 

22,083 



Besides which there might be reckoned about 30 
families of Caribes, the remains of the ancient na 
tives. 



By return to house of commons, March 18, 1790, 
the following was the slave trade from Africa to 
this island in the under-mentioned years : 



Arrivals from Africa. 


Negroes Exported. 


Negroes re 
tained for 
Cultivation. 


Years. 


Number of 
Vessels. 


Tonnage. 


Total number of 
Negroes imported. 


To foreign W. In 
dies in for. Bot. 


To foreign W. In 
dies in Brit. Bot. 


To the States 
of America. 


Total 
exported. 


1787 
1788 


25 
24 


3640 
4275 


5709 
6383 


1655 
3404 


233 
1249 


130 
4653 


2018 


3691 
1730 



And the import of slaves into Dominica, by 
report of privy council, 1788, at a medium of 
four years, and by a return to house of com 
mons in 1805, at a medium of two years to 1803, 
was, 



Average of 

Four years to 1787 
Two years to 1803 


Imports. 


Re-exports. 


Retained, 


6203 
550 


4960 
34 


1243 
516 



The only towns of any note in this island are 
Charlotte town, the capital and the seat of govern 
ment, formerly called Itosseau, on the s, w. side of 
the island, and Portsmouth, situate at the head of 
Prince Rupert s bay.] 

[DOMINICA, LA, one of the Marquesa islands, 



called by the natives flecvaroa, extending e. and 
w. six leagues ; is about 16 leagues in circuit, full 
of rugged hills, and of a barren aspect, but is in 
habited. Lat. 9 44 s. The long, of thet^. end 
is 139 5 w. from Greenwich.] 

DOMINICA, LA, a bay on the n. coast of the 
island of Cuba, between that of Merced and that 
of Cabana. 

DOMON, a cape or point of land of the island 
of Newfoundland, and at the extremity of (he 
same, which looks to the n. It is one of those which 
form the entrance of the strait of Belleisle. 

pONANGUISE, a bay of the w. coast of lake 
Erie, in New France or Canada. 

[DON CHRISTOPHER S Cove lies on the ;;. 
side of the island of Jamaica, having St. Ann s bay 
on the w. and Mammee bay on the,s. e. It is re 
markable for having given shelter to the discoverer 



38 



DOR 



of America, during a storm, in 1503, and for being 
the site of the old town of Scvilla de Nucva.] 

DON DON, a settlement and parish of the 
French, in the part they possess in the island of 
St. Domingo ; situate near the n. coast, and to the 
s. of the Petite Ance. [It is three leagues n. w. of 
St. Raphael, in the Spanish part, and J3 leagues e. 
by n. of Les Gonaives.] 

[DONEGAL. There are three townships in 
Pennsylvania of this name ; the one in Lancaster 
county, the other in that of Westmoreland, and 
the third in Washington county.] 

DONE VIS, a small river of the province and 
colony of Sagadahock. It runs s. and enters the sea 
opposite the island of Mount Desert. 

DONGUILL, a river of the kingdom of Chile, 
in the district of Tolten-baxo. It runs n. and en 
ters the Tolten. 

[DOOBOUNT Lake, newly discovered, about 
CO or 70 miles long, and 20 or 30 broad, lies s. e. 
of the head of Chesterfield inlet, in New South 
Wales.] 

DORADO, a spacious province and country, 
called also Coropa, or Nueva Estrernadura. All 
that is said by others concerning it, of its riches 
and mountains of gold, as well as of the grand city 
of Manoa, founded on the shore of the lake Parime, 
are merely fables taken from the imaginary rela 
tions of Juan Martinez, and from whom the Spa 
niards have borrowed them, and from the latter 
strange historians, who have borne testimony to 
them in their histories and geographical charts. 
In this spacious and unknown country dwell many 
barbarous nations of Indians, amongst which some 
place Las Amazonas, but of all of them there is 
but little certain information. Here are large 
rivers which flow down from the mountains, and 
run from n. to w. many of which together form the 
great lake of P.irime, which is not imaginary, as 
Avas formerly thought ; and from this lake run out 
some other rivers on the n. e. and-c. side, and others 
on the s. and s. e. and there enter the Maranon or 
Amazonas, the former running into the Atlantic. 
This fable of the Dorado, or Golden Land 3 has made 
many anxious to find it, and it has been the cause 
of the loss of very many individuals ; first of Gon- 
zalo Pizarro, who, for the sake of discovering it, left 
Peru with a fine army in 1541, and who, after a 
long and tedious peregrination returned only by a 
miracle with a very tew of his companions. Its 
discovery was successively attempted by Pedro 
Ordaz from Quito, Antonio Berrio, sent from the 
Nuevo Reyno de Granada, by Gonzalo Ximenez 
de Quesada, Francisco de Orellana, Felipe tie 
Utre, Pedro de Ursua, all of whom met with the 



DOR 

same disastrous fate as the former ; these being suc 
ceeded with no better fortune by the English under 
Walter Raleigh in 1545, as also by another person, 
called Relmisco, in the following year, 1546 : 
all these repeated misfortunes began at last to 
make people believe that there was really no such 
thing as the Dorado, or Golden Land, in existence ; 
and although the Father Joseph Gumilla, of the 
extinguished company of the Jesuits, corroborates 
its existence in the history he has written of the 
Orinoco, no doubt of its falsity at present remains ; 
since the journeys made into the country by the 
Dutch colonists of Berbice and Surinam, and by 
the Capuchin missionaries of Guayana, by the re 
ligious Franciscans of the missions of Piritu, as 
also made by several officers, who under instruc 
tions for the purpose arrived as far as the lake 
Parime, bear witness to the same assertion; and 
since, moreover, the truth may be easily seen 
by reference to the history of Nueva Andalucia, 
written by the Father Fr. Antonio Caulin, and 
printed in 1779. 

Do u ADO, a river of the province and govern 
ment of Tucuman, in the jurisdiction of Salta. It 
runs n. forming a curve, and enters the river Del 
Valle 

DORCHESTER, a county of the province and 
colony of Maryland in N.America; one of the 
five which compose this province. It is situate to 
the s. of the Talbot. The parish and capital, 
where also is held the assembly, bear the same 
name. This is a small town, having little more 
than a dozen houses. The territory which lies to 
the n. of the river Nantilkoke, from the mouth of 
that of Chickacoan up to its source, and from there 
to the arm of the Anderton, as far as the waste- 
water or arm which it throws out to the n. w. and 
to the mouth of the aforesaid Chickacoan, was de 
clared by an act of the assembly, in 1698, to belong 
to Panquash and Annatouquern, two caciques or 
Indian chiefs, and to their heirs and successors, 
with the condition of paying annually one castor- 
skin by way of tribute. In this country are more 
settlements of Indians than in any other. [It has 
several islands on its coast ; the chief of these, 
from the mouth of Hudson river, are James, 
Taylor s, Barren, Hooper s, and Goldsborough s, 
which last lies between Hungary river and Fishing 
bay. The length of the county from e. to w. is 
about 33 miles, and its breadth from n. to s. 27 
miles. The number of its inhabitants 15,875, of 
whom 5337 are slaves. The lands in the n. parts 
are somewhat elevated, but in the s. parts low and 
marshy, particularly along Fishing bay, and up 
its waters, Traiisquaking, Blackwater, andFearim] 



* DOR 

[creek, and along Hungary river, an arm of the 
Chesapeak. The produce is chiefly wheat, corn, 
and lumber. Its chief town is Cambridge.] 

DORCHESTER, a city of the county of Suffolk 
in New England, which is the largest after Bos 
ton ; situate at the mouth of two small rivers close 
upon the sea-side. It sends four deputies to the 
assembly or congress of the government, and cele 
brates two annual fairs, the one on the fourth Tues 
day in March, the other on the last Wednesday in 
October. 

[DORCHESTER, a small town of Charlestown 
district, S. Carolina, seated on the n. e. bank of 
Ashley river, 18 miles w. n. w. of Charlestown 
city. This place was settled and named as early 
as 1700, by a colony from Dorchester and its vici 
nity in Massachusetts; and a part of its inhabi 
tants, about the year 1750, left it and settled Mid 
way in Georgia.] 

DORCHESTER, a small city of the county of 
Berkley, in the province and colony of N. Carolina, 
founded by the Puritans in 1630 ; situate on the 
confines of Ihe county of Colleton. It contains 
about 350 individuals, and is independent of 
the assembly. In lat. 36 10 n. and long. 79 
20 w. 

[DORCHESTER, a township in Grafton county, 
New Hampshire, incorporated in 1761. In 1790, 
it contained 175 inhabitants. It lies n. e. of Dart 
mouth college about 17 miles.] 

[DORCHI.STER, an ancient and thriving town 
ship in Norfolk county, Massachusetts, settled as 
early as 16.30. A number of towns have been taken 
off from it since its first settlement. It is situate 
two miles 5. by e. . of Boston, and is now about six 
miles long and three and a half broad. The chief 
manufactures here are paper, chocolate, snuff, 
leather, and shoes of various sorts. It has a hand 
some church, 256 houses, and 1722 inhabitants. 
The n. e. point of the peninsula, called Dorchester 
neck, approaches within half a mile of Castle 
island.] 

DOREVAL, a town of New France or Canada; 
situate on the shore of the lake Mistassins, on a 
peninsula or strip of land, which lies to the w. 

[DOliLACH, a township in Otsego county, 
New York. By the state census of 1796, 433 of 
its inhabitants are electors.] 

DORM IDA, Point, at the a?, head, and on the 
s. coast of the island of St. Domingo, between the 
points Diamond and Pasqual. 

DOR MID A, a settlement of the province and go 
vernment of Tuciumin in Peru ; situate on the 
*horeof the river Dulce. 

\ DORSET, a township in Bennington county. 



D O V 39 

Vermont, having Rupert w. Manchester s. and 
Danby w. ; and contains 958 inhabitants ; 27 miles 
n. by e. of Bennington.] 

DOTAC1ONES. See PASAGE. 

[DOTAME, a wandering nation of Indians of 
N. America, inhabiting an open country, and who 
raise a great number of horses and mules. They 
are a friendly, well-disposed people, and might, 
from the position of their country, be easily induced 
to visit an establishment on the Missouri, about the 
mouth of Chyennc river. They have not, as yet, 
visited the Missouri.] 

[DOUGLASS, a township, the southernmost in 
Worcester county, Massachusetts, having the state 
of Rhode island on the s. and that of Connecticut 
on the s. w. and through it passes the middle road 
from Boston to New York. It is a very rocky 
township, and contains 1080 inhabitants. It lies 
16 miles s. of Worcester, and 47 s. w. of Boston. 
It was incorporated anno 1746, and received its 
name in honour of William Douglass, M^D. of 
Boston, a native of Scotland, and a considerable 
benefactor to the town.] 

[DOUGLASS, a township in Montgomery county, 
Pennsylvania.] 

[DOUGLASS, a cape on the n. w. coast of N. 
America, which forms the w. side of the entrance 
into Cook s river, opposite point Bede, which forms 
the e. side. It has a very lofty promontory, whose 
elevated summit appears above the clouds, form 
ing two exceeding high mountains. Lat. 58 56 
n. Long. 206 10 e.] 

DOUTY S Falls, in York county, Maine, a 
place where a post-office is kept; seven miles from 
Berwick, and eight from Sanclford.] 

[DOVER, a township in Norfolk county, Mas 
sachusetts, -incorporated anno 1650. H contains 
485 inhabitants, and lies 15 miles s. of Boston.] 

[DOVER, a considerable township in Strafford 
county, New Hampshire, and the shire town of 
the county ; situate on the s. side of Cochecho 
river, about four miles above its junction with Sal 
mon Fall river, which together form the Pisca- 
taqua ; 10 miles s. by e. of Rochester, six from. 
Berwick, in Maine, and 14 n. w. by n. from Ports- 
month. The Indians named it Winichahanat 
and Cochecho ; by the first settlers, it was called 
Northam. It was incorporated in 1633, and con 
tains 1998 inhabitants. The public buildings are 
a Congregational church, court-house, and goal. 
At Dover is a high neck of land, between the main 
branch of Piscataqua and Back river, about two 
miles long, and half a mile wide, rising gently 
along a fine road, and declining on each side, like 
a ship s deck. It commands an extensive and 



D R A 



D R 1 



variegated prospect of the rivers, bays, adjacent 
shores, and distant mountains. It lias often been 
admired by travellers as an elegant situation for a 
city, and by military gentlemen for a fortress. 
The first settlers pitched here, but the trade has 
long since been removed to Cocheco falls ; and 
this beautiful spot is almost deserted of inhabitants. 
Lat. 43 1 i n. Long. 70 50 a&amp;gt;.] 

[DOVER, a township in Monmouth county, New 
Jersey, between Shrewsbury and New Stafford, 
and extends from the sea to the county line. Al 
though a large township, it contains only 910 in 
habitants, who live mostly upon the sea-shore. 
There is but one church, the property of a generous 
and benevolent individual, who gives liberty to 
ministers of all denominations to preach in it when 
ever they please.] 

[DOVER, the metropolis of Delaware state, in 
Kent county, on ihes. w. side of Jones creek, about 
four miles and a half n. 20. from its mouth, in the 
Delaware; 12 miles from Duck creek, 48 from 
Wilmington, and 76 5. s. w. of Philadelphia. It 
contains about 100 houses, built principally of 
brick. There are four streets, which intersect 
each other at right angles in the centre of the 
town. The area included within these intersec 
tions extends into a spacious parade, on the e. side 
of which is an elegant state-house. The town has 
a lively appearance, and drives on a considerable 
trade with Philadelphia, chiefly in flour. Lat. 39 
JO n. Long. 75 34 .] 

[DOVER, a town in York county, Pennsylvania, 
on Fox run, which falls into Conewago creek, 
near its mouth, in the Susquehannah. It contains 
a German, Lutheran, and Calvinist church, 
united, ano! about 40 houses.] 

[DOWNE, or DOWNS, a township in Cumber- 
and county, New Jersey.] 

[DOWN1NGS, a post-town of Pennsylvania, 
in Chester county, on the e. side of Brandywine 
creek ; 33 miles w. by n. of Philadelphia, and near 
.seven n. w. of Winchester.] 

[DOWNS, a township of New Jersey, in Cum 
berland county.] 

[DOYLSTOWN, a village in Bucks county, 
Pennsylvania, 10 miles s. w. of Howell s ferry, on 
Delaware river, 15 n. w. of Newton, and 33 w. by 
n. of Philadelphia.] 

DOYMAS, a barbarous nation of Indians, of the 
Nuevo Reyno de Granada, descended from the na 
tion of the Pantagoros, and by whom they are 
bounded on the e. They live in the woods bordering 
upon the large river Magdalena, are ferocious and 
very skilful in the use of the bow and arrow. 

[DRACUT, a township in the northernmost 



part of Middlesex county, on the n. bank of Mer- 
rimack river, opposite Patucket falls. It contains 
1217 inhabitants, and lies 30 miles n. by w. of 
Boston, and 28 s. w. of Exeter, in New Hamp 
shire.] 

DRAGO, BOCA DEL, or DRAGON S MOUTH, an 
entrance formed by the point of Paria, on the coast 
ofTierra Firme, and the island of Trinidad, dis 
covered by Admiral Christoval Colon, in his fourth 
voyage, in 1498, when he gave it this name, being 
nearly lost in it through the violence of the cur 
rents. It is 35 leagues from the point of Araya ; its 
entrance is included between long. 61 43 and 61 
55 w. Lat. 10 43 n. 

DRAGUITAS, a barbarous nation of Indians, 
held by some to be the same as the Diaguitas, in 
the province and government of Tucuman in 
Peru : of the one and the other nothing but the 
name exists. 

DRAKE, a port in the w. coast of N. America, 
thus called by the celebrated English navigator 
Francis Drake, when he went to take possession of 
this kingdom in the name of the Queen Isabella of 
England, giving it also the title of New Albion. 
The king of the place clothed him with his own 
hands, putting upon his head a splendid crown of 
feathers, since he, together with his subjects, 
looked upon the English as something more than 
men, and accordingly began to offer them sacri 
fices. In lat. 37 58 30" n. and long. 1 16 45 w. 

DRAKE, FARALLON DE, a desert isle, which lies 
at the mouth or entrance of port Portovelo, thus 
called from the English pirates having invaded it 
under the command of the said Admiral Drake. 
Here it was that this renowned person met his fate, 
having expired before its gates ; at which time it 
was called Nombre de Dios. It was pillaged in 
the year 1597. 

[DRAKE, SIR FRANCIS, or DRAKE S Bay, a bason 
in the middle of the Virgin isles, in the W. Indies, 
three or four leagues broad, and six or seven long, 
the finest that can be imagined ; and in which 
ships may anchor, landlocked, and sheltered from 
all winds.] 

DRAX-HALL, a settlement of the island of 
Barbadoes, in the district and parish of St. George. 

DRAX-HOPE, a settlement of the same island 
as the former, in the same district and parish. 

[DRESDEN, a township in Lincoln county, 
district of Maine ; situated nine miles from Wis- 
casset point, 15 from fort Weston, at Hallo well, 
and 180 n. by e. of Boston. Swan island is in this 
township.] 

[DRINNON S Lick. See JEFFERSON S 
County.] 



DUG 

[DROMORE, a township in Lancaster county, 
Pennsylvania.] 

[DROWNED Lands. See ORANGE County, 
New York.] 

[DRUMMOND or ACCOMAC Court-house, in 
Virginia, is on the post-road from Philadelphia to 
Norfolk, 20 miles from Belhaven, and 194 from 
Philadelphia.] 

[DRYDEN, a military township in the state of 
New York, having Ulysses w. and Virgil on the 
e. ; and on the s. the town of Owego, in Tioga 
county. The centre of the town lies eight miles 
e. of the s. end of Cayuga lake.] 

[DRY TORTUGAS. See TORTUGA.] 

DRY Bay, on the s. coast and w. head of the 
island of St. Domingo, and in the territory of the 
French, by the side of the port of La Salud or 
Safety. 

DRUM, a small island of the coast of S. Caro 
lina, between cape Look-out and the bank Core. 

DRYE, a settlement of the island of Jamaica, 
situate on the n. coast. 

DUACA, a settlement of the province and go 
vernment of Venezuela; situate in the district of 
the city of Barquisimeto, and to the n. one-fourth 
to the n. e. 

[DUANESBURGH, a township in Albany 
county, New York ; containing 1470 inhabitants, 
of whom 260 are electors, and five slaves.] 

DUARTE, FARALLON DP, some islands of the 
N. sea ; situate close to the port of Portovelo, in 
the kingdom of Ticrra Firme : they are three, and 
lie in the form of a triangle. 

DUBARRO, a large river of the new kingdom 
of Granada, in the llanos or plains of the Orinoco, 
which runs s. e. enters this river on the n. shore, 
between those of Bichada and Guabiare, and 
abounds in excellent fish. 

DUBLIN, a small but beautiful city of the 
county of Philadelphia, in the province and co 
lony of Pennsylvania, 10 miles to the n. e. of this 
capital, and nearly the same distance s. e. of 
Bristol. 

[DUBLIN, a township in Cheshire county, New 
Hampshire, on a branch of Ashuelot river, and n. 
of the Great Monadnock, containing 901 inhabi 
tants. It : is 28 miles s. e. of Charlestown, and 82 
o&amp;gt;. of Portsmouth. Incorporated in the year 
1771.1 

DU CHE, a settlement and parish of the English, 
in the island of Guadalupe ; situate on the w. 
coast, and on the shore of the river Cure. 

[DUCK, a river in Tennessee, which rises on 
the n.w. side of the Cumberland mountain. It 
runs a n. w. course, and empties into the Ten- 
VOL. n. 



D U K 



41 



nessee, in lat. 36 39 &amp;gt;;. Long. 78 46 u&amp;gt;. It is 
200 yards wide five miles from its mouth, which 
is 57 miles w. of Nashville ; and is boatable 90 
miles.] 

[DucK CREEK, Cnoss ROADS, or SALISBURY, 
a considerable thriving and post-town in the state 
of Delaware ; situated on Duck creek, which in 
part divides Kent and Newcastle counties. It con 
tains about 90 houses in one street, and carries on 
a considerable trade with Philadelphia, and is one 
of the largest wheat markets in the state.] 

[DUCKTRAP, a village in the district of 
Maine, where a post-office is kept, in Hancock 
county ; containing 278 inhabitants. Twelve 
miles from Belfast, and 32 from Penobscot.] 

DUCLOS, PENINSULA DE, a point of land, 
divided only by a very narrow strip, in the bay of 
the Malvine or Falkland isles. 

[DUDLEY, a township in Worcester county, 
Massachusetts, containing 1114 inhabitants. It is 
18 miles s. of Worcester, and 55 miles s. w. of 
Boston.] 

DU1NO, a large river of the province of Su- 
cumbios in the kingdom of Quito, to the s. It 
runs from w. to e. more than 30 leagues, and emp 
ties itself into the Aguarico, nearly under the equi 
noctial line, in lat. 4 n. [Long. 76 6 w.~] 

DUITAMA, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Tunja in the Nuevo Reyno de 
Granada : situate on a beautiful and pleasant plain, 
between the settlement of Paipa and Santa Rosa. 
It is of a cold temperature, produces much wheat, 
maize, potatoes, &amp;c. also large herds of cattle, 
from the wools of which are wrought various tex 
tures; and abundance of rushes, of which are made 
mats that are carried to all parts. It was in the 
time of the Indians a great and rich city of the 
Mozca nation, and the court of Tundama, one of 
the greatest and most powerful princes in the king 
dom, who was routed in the battle of Bonza by 
Gonzalo Ximenez de Quesado, in 1538; after 
which he became tributary to the crown of Spain. 
It is reduced to a mean village, though in its ter 
ritory is a great quantity of the herb coca. 

[DUKE S County, in Massachusetts, compre 
hends Martha s Vineyard island, Chabaquiddick 
island, Norman s island, and the Elizabeth islands; 
situated on the 5. e. coast of the state. The num 
ber of inhabitants is 3265. They send three re 
presentatives, and in conjunction with Nantucket 
island, one senator to the general court. These 
islands are described separately. Chief town Ed- 
garton.] 

DUKE, a county of the province and colony of 
New York, bounded s. by that of Winchester, e. 



43 D U M 

by the line of Connecticut, w. by the river Hud 
son, and n. by the county of Albany. The s. part 
is mountainous, but the rest is level and well irri 
gated. In it are two tolerable settlements, called 
Poghkeepsing and French-kill. The inhabitants 
who dwell upon the river Delaware are Dutch. It 
has a very flourishing commerce, and although at 
its first establishment some years since, it had only 
12 families, it now numbers, according to some late 
lists or registers, 3500 men capable of bearing 
arms. 

DUKE, a county in New England. Sec SANTA 
MA NT A or ST. MARTHA. 

DULCE, a river of the province and govern 
ment of Tucuman. It rises in the mountains of 
the valley of Calchaqui, from various small rivers 
or streams, which being united, run e. with the 
name of Choromoros, afterwards s. and passing 
through the city of Santiago del Estero, take the 
name of the said city, then that of the Dulce, 
and finally lose themselves in the lake of Los 
Porongos. 

DULCE, another river, in the province and cap 
tainship of Los Ilheos in Brazil. It rises in that 
of Puerto Seguro, and serves as a division between 
the said two provinces, runs e. and enters the sea 
between the rivers Santa Cruz and Puerto Seguro. 

DULCE, another, in the province and govern 
ment of Honduras, on the side of the entrance of 
the gulf of this name. 

DULCE, another, of the province and govern 
ment of Texas in Nueva Espana, which runs s. 
and enters the sea in the bay of Mexico, between 
the rivers Las Flores and Trinidad. 

DULCE, a great gulf of the coast of the province 
and government of Costarica, in the kingdom of 
Guatemala, and S. sea, where its jurisdiction is di 
vided from that of Santiago de Veragua, between 
cape Boruca and the point Mala, and where there 
is a castle for its defence. 

DULCINO, a settlement of the province and 
government of Santa Marta in the kingdom of 
Tierra Firme. 

DUMA, a river of the llanuras of the Orinoco, 
in the new kingdom of Granada, entering the said 
river Orinoco, between those of Cabote and Es- 
clava. 

DUMA, a large settlement in the same province, 
which was a reduction of the Salivas Indians, on 
the shore of the former river. The Caribes Indians 
destroyed and burnt it in 1684. 

[DUMFRIES, a port of entry and post-town 
in Virginia, and chief town of Prince William 
county. It lies on the n. side of Quantico creek, 
four miks above its entrance into the Potowmack, 



DUN 

and 10 miles from Colchester. Its public edifices 
are an Episcopal church, a court-house, and gaol. 
The exports from this port for one year ending the 
SOth of September 1794, amounted in value to 
85,635 dollars, it lies 28 miles n. by e. of Frede- 
ricksburg, and 185*. w. of Philadelphia.] 

DUMMBrl, a fort of the English, in the pro 
vince and colony of New Hampshire, built on the 
shore of the river Connecticut. 

[DUMMER, a township in Grafton county, New 
Hampshire, incorporated 1773. It is to the s. w. 
of lake Unibagog, on the waters of Upper Amo- 
noosuck and of Androscoggin rivers.] 

[DUMMERSTON, a township in Windham 
county, Vermont, n. of Brattleborougb, containing 
1501 inhabitants.] 

DUN, a settlement of the island of Barbadoes, 
in the district arid parish of Santiago, near the w. 
coast. 

DUNA, a small river of the province and cap 
tainship of Los Ilheos in Brazil, rising near the 
coast. It runs c. and enters the sea, between the 
rivers Jucio and Conando-tuba. 

[DUNBARTON, a township in Hillsborough 
county, New Hampshire, incorporated in 1765, 
and containing 917 inhabitants. Nine miles s. of 
Concord, and 53 &amp;lt;#. of Portsmouth.] 

[DUNCANSBOROUGH, a township of Ver 
mont, on the w. side of lake Memphremagog.] 

[DUNDERBERG, in English THUNDER- 
HILL, is situated on the w. side of Hudson river, 
at the s. e. entrance of the high lands, opposite 
Peek s kill ; and is remarkable for its echoes.] 

[DUNKARD S BOTTOM, a tract of fine lands 
on the e. side of Cheat river in Virginia, about 
22 miles from its mouth, and 49 a&amp;gt;. s. w. from ibrt 
Cumberland.] 

[DUNK AIID S Town. See EPHRATA.] 

[DUNLOPE, a fort on the w. bank of Little 
Miama river, about 12 miles above Columbia, in 
the n. w. territory.] 

[DUNQUEN, a river of the province and go 
vernment of Paraguay. It runs n. and enters the 
great river Curituba or Iguaza.] 
DUNSBURY, a settlement of the English, in 
the province of Massachusetts ; situate on the shore 
of Barnstable bay. 

DUNSTABLE, a settlement of the English, in 
the province of Hampshire, one of the four of New 
England ; situate on the shore of the river Penny- 
cook. 

[DUNSTABLE, a township in Hillsborough 
county, New Hampshire, on the w. side of Merri- 
mack river, below the town of Merrimack, and 
separated by the state line from Pepperel and 



D U R 



Dunstable in Middlesex county, Massachusetts. 
It was incorporated in 1746, contains 632 inhabi 
tants, and lies about 40 miles n. w. of Boston.] 

[DUNSTABLE, a township of Massachusetts, in 
the n. part of Middlesex county, and on the s. 
bank of Merrimack river. It contains 380 inhabi 
tants, and lies 37 miles n.w. of Boston.] 

[DUPAGE, a circular lake on the s. e. side of 
Plein river, or rather an enlargement of the channel 
of that river, five miles from its mouth. Plein and 
Theakiki there form the Illinois.] 

, [DUPLIN County, in Wilmington district, 
N. Carolina, is bounded e. by Onslow, and s. w. 
by Sampson. The number of inhabitants is 5662, 
of whom 1383 are slaves. The chief town is Sa- 
recto, on the n. c. branch of Cape Fear.] 

DUQUECO, a river of the island of Laxa in 
the kingdom of Chile, which Don Juan tie la Cruz 
calls Duque. It runs w. and enters the Biobio. 

UUQUESNE, a fort belonging to the French, 
in New France or Canada, on the shore of the 
river Ohio. See PITTSBUUG. 

DURAC, a settlement of the province and go 
vernment of Buenos Ayres ; situate to the w. of 
the capital. 

DURAN, a small river of the province and go 
vernment of Guayaquil in the kingdom of Quito. 
It runs from e. to w. and towards the s. until it 
enters the Guayaquil, in lat. 2 7 30" s. 

DURANGO, orGuADiANA, a city, the capi 
tal of the kingdom of Nueva Vizcaya, or New 
Biscay, in N. America; founded in the valley of 
Guadiana by Captain Alonso Pachcco, agreeably 
to the order of the viceroy of New Spain, Don 
Luis de Velasco, in 1551. The temperature is 
benign and salutary, and it produces in great 
abundance wheat, maize, seeds, and fruits, being 
watered by many rivers, streams, and fountains ; 
accordingly its commerce is considerable, as well 
in the above articles as in hides, the numbers of 
which are much benefited and increased through 
the great richness and abundance of the pastures. 
It is by no means a large town, notwithstanding 
that its inhabitants amount to more than 5000, in 
cluding the militia companies, in which, as well 
as whiles, the Muslees and blacks are enlisted ; 
this militia was formed to suppress the insurrec 
tions of the infidel Indians, and now these them 
selves form no inconsiderable part of the popula 
tion of the kingdom. It has, besides the parish 
church of Sagrario, which is in the cathedral, 
another, which is auxiliary or annexed to it, four 
convents of monks of the following orders, St. 
Francis, St. Augustin, of the regulars of the com 
pany of Jesuits, and where also there was a house 



for studies, and also the hospital of San Juan de 
Dios. There is, besides the aforesaid, another 
church, dedicated to the archangel St. Michael, a 
place of particular devotion ; and without the city, 
at the top of a mountain, another magnificent 
temple of Nuestra Senora de los Remedies ; as 
also to the n. and at a very short distance, another, 
consecrated to Senora de Guadalupe. Here are 
the royal revenue depots, with two officers, the 
accountant, and treasurer ; the one residing in the 
Real del Parral, and at times being changed or 
relieved that he may go to take account of the in 
finite quantity of silver extracted from the many 
and abundant mines found in this district. It is 
the head of a bishopric, erected by Paul V. in 
1620, as appears by the bull of its appointment, 
and not in 1621, according to Gil Gonzalez Da- 
vila and Don Joseph dc Villasenor : it formerly 
belonged to the bishopric of Guadalaxara, and 
was separated therefrom in the aforesaid year ; 280 
leagues of episcopal jurisdiction being allotted 
to it, also nearly the same extent in width, in 
cluding altogether the provinces of Tepeguana, 
Taraumara, Topia, Batopilas, Culiacan, Cina- 
Joa, Ostimuri, Sonora, and Pimeria Alta and 
Baxa. This city has for arms a shield, on which 
is sitting the Evangelist St. Matthew with an angel 
at his back, and above the shield is a royal crown. 
[The height of the town is 2087 metres, or 6845 
feet. There are frequent falls of snow, and the 
thermometer (under the 24 25 ) descends to 8 
or 14 of Fahr. below the freezing point. A 
group of rocks covered with scoria, called La 
Brena, rise in the middle of a very level plain be 
tween the capital, the plantations Del Ojo and 
Del Chorro, and the small town of Nombre de 
Dios ; this group, of a very grotesque form, which 
is 12 leagues in length from n.ios. and six leagues 
in breadth from e. to w. deserves particularly to 
fix the attention of mineralogists. The rocks which 
constitute the Brena are of basaltic amygdaloid, 
and appear to have been raised up by volcanic 
fire. The neighbouring mountains were examined 
by M. Oteyza, particularly that of the Frayle 
near the Hacienda del Ojo; he found on the sum 
mit a crater of nearly 100 metres, or 328 feet, in 
circumference, and more than 30 metres, or 98 
feet, of perpendicular depth. In the environs of 
Durango is also to be found insulated in the plain 
the enormous mass of malleable iron and nickel, 
which is of the identical composition of the aeroli- 
thos which fell, in 1751, at Hraschina, near A gram 
in Hungary; this mass of Durango is affirmed to 
weigh upwards of 1900 myriagrammes, or 41,933 
pounds avoirdupois, which is 400myriaa;rammes,~f 
S g 



DUR ANGO. 



or 8228 pounds avoirdupois more than the aeroli- 
thos discovered at Olumpa in the Tuscuman, by 
M. Rubin de Celis. The population of Durango 
is 12,000; it is 170 leagues from Mexico to the 
n. n. w. and lies in long. 103 38 vs. and lat. 24 
23 *.] 

Bishops who have presided in Durango. 

1. Don Fray Gohzalo de Hermosilla, of the 
order of San Augustin, native of Mexico, pro 
fessor of writing in the university of that capital; 
elected as first bishop in 1620 ; a man renowned 
for his virtue, literature, and labours; he died at 
the visitation of Cinaloa, in 1631. 

2. Don Alonso Franco y Luna, native of Ma 
drid, collegiate-major of San lldefonso de Alcala, 
and curate of the parish of San Andres in his 
country ; elected bishop in the aforesaid year of 
1631; he visited all his bishopric, and was pro 
moted to that of La Paz in 1639. 

3. Don Francisco Diego de Evia y Valdes, of 
the order of San Benito, native of Oviedo, master 
and professor of arts in that university, and pre 
late in different monasteries of his order ; presented 
to the bishopric of Durango in 1639 ; he governed 
13 years, in which time he passed over more than 
JOOO leagues in the visitation of his bishopric, and 
was promoted to that of Oaxaca in 1654. 

4. Don Pedro Barrientos Lomelin, a celebrated 
chanter of the holy church of Mexico, provisor 
and vicar-general of the archbishopric, chancellor 
of that university, and commissary apostolic of the 
holy crusade; he took possession of the bishopric 
in 1656, and died in 1658. 

5. Don Juan de Gorospe and Aguirre, a man of 
great talent and literature ; elected in 1660 ; he 
died in 1671. 

6. Don Juan de Ortega Montaiies, presented 
to this bishopric in 1674 ; and without taking pos 
session, promoted to that of Guatemala in the fol 
lowing year, 1675. 

7. Don Fr. Bartolome de Escanuela, of the 
order of San Francisco ; promoted from the 
bishopric of Puertorico in 1776 ; he visited his 
bishopric, made synodical constitutions, and died 
in 1684. 

8. Don Fray Manuel de Herrera, of the order 
of the minims of San Francisco de Paula, preacher 
to the king; presented to this bishopric in 1686; 
he died in the town of Sombrerete in 1689. . 

9. Don Garcia de Segaspi y Velasco, curate of 
the city of San Luis de Potosi, canon of the holy 
metropolitan church of Mexico, treasurer and arch- 

. deacon to the same, abbot of the congregation of 
San Pedro, chaplain of the college of Las Don- 
cellas, and judge for the sacred congregation of 

1 



Ritos, in the cause of beatification of the venerable 
Gregorio Lopez; elected bishop of Durango in 
1692, and promoted to that of Valladolid in 1700. 

10. Don Manuel de Escalante Colombres y 
Mendoza, morning and evening lecturer of the 
sacred canons, four times rector of the royal uni 
versity of Mexico, media racionero, canonical 
treasurer, superintendant of the royal fabric of its 
church ; re-elected five times abbot, and after 
wards perpetual minister of the congregation of 
San Pedro, founder of its hospital, college, and 
house of entertainment, primiciero or eldest of the 
archicofradia of the most holy Trinity, commis 
sary apostolic, sub-clelegatc-general of the holy 
crusade, judge, provisor, and vicar-general of 
the archbishopric ; he took possession of the 
bishopric in 1701, and was promoted to that of 
Valladolid in the same year. 

11. Don Ignacio Diaz de la Barrera, doctor in 
the sacred canons, abogado of the royal audience 
of Mexico, first professor in its royal university, 
visitor-general of the archbishopric, curate of the 
parish of La Santa Vera Cruz, medio racionero 
and racionero of the church of the Puebla de los 
Angeles, synodical examiner of its bishopric, and 
canon of Mexico ; elected bishop in 1705 ; he 
died in 1709. 

12. Don Pedro Tapis, abbot of Santa Maria 
del Burgo, of the city of Alfaro, vicar of the same 
city and of the district of Agreda, visitor-general 
of the bishopric of Taragona ; presented to this of 
Durango in 1711 ; he died in 1722. 

13. Don Benito Crespo, of the order of San 
tiago, collegiate and rector of the college of the 
king in Salamanca, professor of philosophy and 
theology, visitor for the council of ordenes of the 
convent of Ucles, and of the convents of the 
nuns of Sancti-Spiritus in Salamanca and Santa 
Cruz in Valladolid, dean of the church of Oaxaca ; 
elected in the year 1723; he governed until 1734, 
when he was promoted to the bishopric of La Pue 
bla de los Angeles. 

14. Don Martin de Elizacochea, collegiate of 
La Madre de Dios de Teologos of Alcala, profes 
sor of philosophy in that university, chancellor of 
that of Mexico, canon, school-master, chanter, 
archdeacon, and dean of its holy metropolitan 
church, synodical examiner of the archbishopric, 
comissary-gerieral and sub-delegate of the holy 
crusade, vicar and chaplain-major of the Madres 
Capuchinas ; be took possession of the bishopric 
of Durango in 1736, and governed until 1747, 
when he was promoted to that of Mechoacan. 

15. Don Aselmo Sanchez de Tagle, native of 
the town of Sanlillana, in the mountains of Bur- 



D U R A N G O. 



45 



gos ; he was collegiate-major of San Bartolome 
el Viejo in Salamanca, eldest inquisitor of the holy 
tribunal of the inquisition of Mexico; elected 
bishop in 1747, promoted to the church of Me- 
choacan in 1757. 

16. Don Pedro Tamaron, native of the town 
of Guardia, in the archbishopric of Toledo ; 
he passed over to New Spain as familiar to the 
Senor Don Juan Joseph de Escalona y Calataynd, 
bishop of Charcas ; he graduated doctor in sacred 
canons, was first professor of this faculty, and 
curate of the tabernacle of the holy cathedral 
church, where also he obtained the titles of 
school-master and chanter; he was presented to 
thisbishopric,of\vhich he took possession, in 1758; 
he visited the most remote provinces of his diocese, 
and died in the settlement of Bomoa in 1768. 

17. Don Fray Joseph Vicente Diaz Bravo; 
elected in 1769; he died in 1772. 

18. Don Antonio Macarulla; promoted from 
the archbishopric of Comayagua the aforesaid 
year ; he died in 1782. 

19. Don Estevan Lorenzo de Tristan ; elected 
in 1783. 

[DURANGO, Intendancy of. This inten- 
dancy, better known under the name of New 
Biscay, belongs, as well as Sonora and Nuevo 
Mexico, to the Proxindas Internets Occidentales. 
It occupies a greater extent of ground than the 
three united kingdoms of Great Britain, and yet 
its total population scarcely exceeds that of the 
two towns of Birmingham and Manchester united. 
Its length from s. to n. from the celebrated mines 
of Guarisamey to the mountains of Caraay, situated 
to the n. w. of the Presidio de Yanos, is 232 
leagues ; its breadth is very unequal, and near 
Parral is scarcely 58 leagues. 

The province of Durango, or Nueva Biscaya, 
is bounded on the s. by La Nueva Galicia, that 
is to say, by the two intendancies of Zacatecas 
and Guadalaxara ; on the s. e. by a small part of 
the intendancy of San Luis Potosi, and on the w. 
by the intendancy of Sonora ; but towards the n. 
and especially the e. for more than 200 leagues, 
it is bounded by an uncultivated country, inhabit 
ed by warlike and independent Indians. 

The struggle with these Indians, which has 
lasted for centuries, and the necessity in which the 
colonist, living in some lonely farm, or travelling 
through arid deserts, finds himself of perpe 
tually watching after his own safety, and de 
fending his flock, his home, his wife, and his 
children against the incursions of wandering In 
dians ; and, in short, that state of nature which 
subsists in the midst of the appearance of an an 



cient civilization, have all concurred to give to the 
character of the inhabitants of the n. of New 
Spain, an energy and temperament peculiar to 
themselves. To these causes we must, no doubt, 
add the nature of the climate, which is temperate, 
an eminently salubrious atmosphere, the necessity 
of labour in a soil by no means rich or fertile, and 
the total want of Indians and slaves who might be 
employed by the whites for the sake of giving 
themselves up securely to idleness and sloth. In the 
Provincias Internas the development of physical 
strength is favoured by a life of singular activity, 
which is, for the most part, passed on horseback. 
This way of life is essentially necessary, from the 
care demanded by the numerous flocks of horned 
cattle, which roam about almost wild in the savan 
nas. To this strength of a healthy and robust 
body, we must join great strength of mind, arid a 
happy disposition of the intellectual faculties. 
Those who preside over seminaries of educa 
tion in the city of Mexico, have long observed 
that the young people who have most distinguish 
ed themselves for their rapid progress in the higher 
sciences were, for the most part, natives of the 
most n. provinces of New Spain. 

The intendancy of Durango comprehends the 
n. extremity of the great table-land of Anahuac, 
which declines to the n. e. towards the banks of 
the Rio Grande del Norte. The environs of the 
city of Durango are still, however, according to 
the barometrical measurement of Don Juan Jose 
d Oteyza, more than 2000 metres, or 6561 feet, 
elevated above the level of the ocean : this great 
elevation appears to continue till towards Chihu 
ahua, for it is the central chain of the Sierra 
Madre, which near San Jose del Parral runs in a 
direction n. n. w. towards the Sierra Verde and the 
Sierra de las Grullas. 

The population, in 1803, amounted to 159,700, 
and the extent of surface in square leagues was 
16,873. 

There are reckoned in La Nueva Biscaya one 
city, (Durango), six towns, (Chihuahua, San 
Juan del Rio, Nombre de Dios, Papasquiaro, 
Saltillo, and Mapimi), 199 villages or settlements, 
75 parishes, 152 farms, 37 missions, and 400 
cottages or ranches. 

The most reraareable places are, Durango, 
Chihuahua, San Juan del Rio, Nombre de Dios, 
Pasquiaro, Saltillo, Mapimis, Parras, San Pedro 
de Batopilas, San Jose del Parral, Santa Rosa de 
Cosiguiriachi, Guarisamey, which see.] 

DURANGO, a large river of the province and 
government of Esmeraldas, which runs n. w. and 
enters that of Bogota, in Iat51 n. 



46 OUT 

DURAS, a point of land in the Malvine or 
Falkland isles, near the great bay of Dacarron. 

DURCINO, a settlement of the province and 
government of Santa Marta in the new kingdom of 
Granada. It was great and populous in former 
times, but to-day much reduced. 

DURE, a river of the province and govern 
ment of Louisiana, which runs s. and enters the 
Maligne or Stabloniere, near where this river runs 
into the sea. 

[DURHAM, a township in Cumberland county, 
district of Maine, on the s. w. bank of Andros- 
coggin river, which separates it from Bowdoin on 
the n. e. It was incorporated in 1789, contains 
724 inhabitants, and lies 145 miles n. e. of Boston. 
La.t. 43 55 .J 

[DURHAM, a post-town in Stra fiord county, 
New Hampshire, on Oyster river, near where it 
joins the Piscatagua ; 16 miles w. of Portsmouth. 
It was incorporated in 1639, and contains 1247 in 
habitants. It was formerly a part of Dover, which 
adjoins it on the n. and was called Oyster river. 
On the top of a hill in this town is a rock, com 
puted to weigh 60 or 70 tons, so exactly poised on 
another rock as to be easily moved by one s finger. 
Its situation appears to be natural.] 

[DURHAM, a township in New Haven county, 
Connecticut, settled from Guildford in 1698, and 
incorporated in 1708. It is about 22 miles s. w. 
of Hartford, and 18 miles n. e. of New Haven. It 
was called Caginchague by the Indians ; which 
name a small river, that chiefly rises here, still 
bears.] 

[DURHAM, a township in Bucks county, Penn 
sylvania.] 

[DUROT, a bay on the n. side of the s. penin 
sula of the island of St. Domingo.] 

[DUTCH AMERICA. The only possession 
which the Seven United Provinces, lately called 
the Batavian Republic, held on the continent of 
America, was the province called Dutch Guayana. 
The islands in the W. Indies which belonged to 
the republic were St. Eustatius and Curacoa, the 
small island of Saba near St. Eustatius, and the 
islands Bonaire and Aruba ; which are appendages 
to Curasao, and chiefly improved in raising cattle 
and provisions for that island. 

Dutch Guayana, in South America, is bounded 
n. by the Atlantic ocean; e. by Cayenne; s. by 
an unexplored country, called Amazonia; w. by 
Orinoco, a Spanish settlement. It lies between lat. 
5 and 7 ??. extending along the coast from the 
mouth of Orinoco river to the river Marowyne. 
These settlements were esteemed by Admiral Rod 
ney, who captured them in 1780, as an acquisi- 

2 



D U T 

tion of more value to the British empire than all 
their West India islands. It is divided into three 
distinct governments, viz. Surinam, Berbice, Es- 
sequebo, and Demerara. The two last are two 
districts, forming one government. A number of 
fine rivers pass through this province ; the chief 
of which are Essequebo, Surinam, Demerara, 
Berbice, and Canya. Essequebo is 21 miles wide 
at its mouth, and is more than 300 miles in length. 
The others are navigable, and are described under 
their different names. The chief towns are Para- 
mabiro and Staebroeck. 

In the months of September, October, and No 
vember, the climate is unhealthy, particularly to 
strangers. The common diseases are putrid and 
other fevers, the dry belly-ache, and the dropsy. 
One hundred miles back from the sea you corne to 
quite a different soil, a hilly country, a pure, dry, 
wholesome air, where a fire sometimes would not 
be disagreeable. Along the sea-coast the water is 
brackish and unwholesome; the air damp and 
sultry. The thermometer ranges from 75 to 90 
through the year. A n. e. breeze never fails to 
blow from about nine o clock in the morning 
through the day in the hottest seasons. As the 
days aud nights throughout the year are very 
nearly of equal length, the air can never become 
extremely heated, nor the inhabitants so greatly 
incommoded by the heat, as those who live at a 
greater distance from the equator. The seasons 
were formerly divided regularly into rainy and 
dry ; but of late years so much dependence cannot 
be placed upon them, owing probably to the coun 
try s being more cleared, by which means a free 
passage is opened for the air and vapours. The 
water of the lower parts of the rivers is brackish 
and unfit for use ; and the inhabitants are obliged 
to make use of rain water, which is here uncom 
monly sweet and good. 

About 70 miles from the sea, on the river Su 
rinam, is a village of about 40 or 50 houses, in 
habited by Jews. This village, and the towns 
above mentioned, with the intervening plantations, 
contain all the inhabitants of this colony, which 
amount to 3200 whites and 43,000 slaves. The 
buildings on the plantations are many of them 
costly, convenient, and airy. The country around 
is thinly inhabited with the native Indians, a 
harmless, friendly set of beings. They are, in ge 
neral, short of stature, but remarkably well made, 
of a light copper colour, straight black hair, with 
out beards, high cheek-bones, and broad shoulders. 

In their cars, noses, and hair, the women wear 
ornaments of silver, &amp;c. Both men and women go 
naked. One nation or tribe of them tie the lower] 



DUTCH AMERICA. 



47 



[part of the leg of the female children, when 
young, with a cord bound very tight, for the 
breadth of six inches above the ancle, which cord 
is never afterwards taken off but lo put on a new 
one; by whicli means the flesh, which should 
otherwise grow on that part of the leg, increases 
the calf to a great size, and leaves the bone 
below nearly bare. This, though it must render 
them very weak, is reckoned a great beauty by 
them. The language of the Indians appears to be 
very soft. They are mortal enemies to every kind 
of labour ; but nevertheless manufacture a few 
articles, such as very fine cotton hammocs, 
earthen water-pots, baskets, a red or yellow dye, 
called roue an ) and some other trifles, all of which 
they bring to town, and exchange for such articles 
as they stand in need of. They paint themselves 
red, and some are curiously figured with black. 
Their food consists chiefly of fish and crabs and 
cassava, of which they plant great quantities, and 
this is almost the only produce they attend to. 
They cannot be said to be absolutely wandering 
tribes ; but their huts being merely a few cross 
sticks, covered with branches, so as to defend them 
from the rain and sun, they frequently quit their 
habitations, if they see occasion, and establish 
them elsewhere. They do not shun the whites, 
and have been serviceable against the runaway 
Negroes. 

On each side of the rivers and creeks are situated 
the plantations, containing from 500 to 2000 acres 
each, in number about 550 in the whole colony, 
producing at present annually about 16,000 hhcls. 
of sugar, 1 2,000,000 Ibs. coffee, 700,000 Ibs. co 
coa, 850,0001bs. cotton: all which articles (cot 
ton excepted) have fallen off of late years, at least 
one-third, owing to bad management, both here 
and in Holland, and to other causes. Of the 
proprietors of these plantations not above 80 re 
side here. In the woods are found many kinds of 
good and durable timber, and some woods for or- 
imniental purposes, particularly a kind of maho 
gany, called copic. The soil is perhaps as rich 
and as luxuriant as any in the world ; it -is gene 
rally a rich, fat, clayey earth, lying in some 
places above the level of the rivers at high water, 
(which rises about eight feet), and in most places 
below it. Whenever, from a continual course of 
cultivation for many years, a piece of land be 
comes impoverished, (for manure is not known 
here), it is laid under water for a certain number of 
years, and thereby regains its fertility, and in the 
mean time a new piece of wood-land is cleared. 
This country has never experienced those dreadful 
scourges of the West Indies, hurricanes; and 



droughts, from the lowness of the land, it has 
not to fear; nor has the produce ever been des 
troyed by insects or by the blast. In short, this 
colony, by proper management, might become 
equal to Jamaica or any other. Land is not want 
ing ; it is finely intersected by noble rivers and 
abundant creeks ; the soil is of the best kind, it is 
well situated, and the climate is not very unheal 
thy, and is growing better, and will continue so 
to do, the more the country is cleared of its woods 
and cultivated. 

The rivers abound with fish, some of which 
are good ; at certain seasons of the year there is 
plenty of turtle. The woods abound with plenty 
of deer, hares, and rabbits, a kind of buffalo, 
and two species of wild hogs, one of which (the 
peccary) is remarkable for having something like 
its navel on the back. 

The woods are infested with several species of 
tigers, but with no other ravenous or dangerous 
animals. The rivers are rendered dangerous by 
alligators from four to seven feet long, and a man 
was a short time since crushed between the jaws of 
a fish, but its name is not known. Scorpions and 
tarantulas are found here of a large size and, great 
venom, and other insects without number, some 
of them very dangerous and troublesome ; the 
torporific eel also, the touch of which, by means 
of the bare hand or any conductor, has the effect 
of a strong electrical shock ; serpents also, some 
of which are venomous, and others, as has been 
asserted by many credible persons, are from 25 to 
50 feet long. In the woods are monkeys, the 
sloth, and parrots in all their varieties ; also some 
birds of beautiful plumage, among others the fla 
mingo, but few or no singing birds. 

The river Surinam is guarded by a fort and two 
redoubts at the entrance, and a fort at Paramaribo, 
but none of them of any strength, so that one or 
two frigates would be sufficient to make themselves 
masters of the whole colony ; and never was there 
a people who more ardently wished for a change 
of government than the inhabitants of this colony. 
The interior government consists of a governor and 
a supreme and inferior council; the members of 
the latter are chosen by the governor from a double 
nomination of the principal inhabitants, and those 
of the former in the same manner. By these 
powers, and by a magistrate presiding over all 
criminal affairs, justice is executed, and la\vs are 
enacted, necessary for the interior government of 
the colony ; those of a more general and public 
nature are enacted by the directors, and require no 
approbation here by the court. 

The colony is guarded farther by about 1600 re-] 



48 



D U T 



[gular troops, paid by the directors. These troops, 
together with a corps of about 250 free Negroes, 
paid by the court here, and another small corps of 
chasseurs, and so many slaves as the cou^t thinks 
fit to order from the planters from time to time, 
arc dispersed at posts placed at proper distances 
on a cordon, surrounding the colony on the land 
side, in order, as fur as possible, to defend the dis 
tant plantations, and the colony in general, from 
the attacks of several dangerous bands of runaway 
slaves, which from very small beginnings have, 
from the natural prolificacy of the Negro race, 
and the continual addition of fresh fugitives, ar 
rived at such an height as to have cost the country 
very great sums of money and much loss of men, 
without being able to do these Negroes any eftec- 
tu:il injury. 

This colony was first possessed by the French 
as early as the year 1630 or 40, and was aban 
doned by them on account of its unhealthy cli 
mate. In the year 1650 it was taken up by some 
Englishmen, and in 1662 a charter was granted to 
Charles II. About this time it was considerably 
augmented by the settlement of a number of Jews, 
who had been driven out of Cayenne and the Bra 
zils, whose descendants (with other Jews) compose 
at present one half of the white inhabitants of the 
colony, and are allowed great privileges. In 
1667 it was taken by the Dutch, and the English 
having got possession about the same time of the 
then Dutch colony of New York, each party re 
tained its conquest ; the English planters most of 
them retired to Jamaica, leaving their slaves be 
hind them, whose language is still English, but so 
Corrupted as not to be understood at first by an 
Englishman. At present this colony is in the 
possession of the British.] 

[DUTCH ESS County, in New Nork, is on the 
e. side of Hudson river. It has the state of Con 
necticut on the e. West Chester on the s. and Co 
lumbia county on the n. It is about 48 miles 
long and 23 broad, and contains 15 townships, of 
which Poughkeepsie and Fish-kill are the chief. 
It contains 45,266 inhabitants ; of these 6013 are 
qualified to be electors, and 1856 are slaves. 
Dutchess county sends seven representatives to the 
assembly of the state. In the year 1792, a re- 
oaarkable cavern was discovered in this county, at 
a place called by the Indians Sepascot, at Rhyn- 
bcck. A lad, by chance, passing near its entrance, 
which lies between two huge rocks, on the decli 
vity of a steep hill, on prying into the gloomy re 
cess, saw the top of a ladder, by which he de 
scended about 10 feet, and found himself in a sub 
terraneous apartment, more capacious than he 



DUX 

chose to investigate. lie found, however, that it 
had been the abode of "persons, who probably, du 
ring the war had taken shelter here, as bits of clot Ii 
and pieces of leather were scattered about its floor. 
It since appears to be divided by a narrow passage 
into two apartments ; the first being about 17 feet 
in length, and so low that a child of eight years old 
could but just walk upright in it ; the breadth is 
about eight or ten feet. The second between 12 
and J4 feet in length, but much higher and broader 
than the first. Like many other caverns in the 
United States, it possesses a petrifying quality ; 
and the water, which is constantly percolating 
through the roofs of its apartments, has formed a 
variety of transparent and beautiful stalactites. 
They have the appearance of icicles, and may be 
broken off by the hand, if not more than two 
inches in circumference. But what is most to be 
admired is the skeleton of a large snake turned into 
solid stone by the petrifying quality of the water 
before mentioned. It was with some difficulty 
torn up with an axe from the rock it lay upon, and 
is now in the possession of the gentleman who ex 
plored the cavern. A want of free air was expe 
rienced in the inmost recesses of the cavern, by a 
difficult respiration, though the candles burnt very 
clear. The air also was very warm.] 

[DUTCHMAN S Point, a point of land on the 
Vermont side of lake Champlain, about 16 miles 
s. of the Canada line. The British held a stock 
aded hut here, garrisoned by six soldiers, since 
the peace of 1783. It lias since been delivered up 
to the United States.] 

[DUXBOROUGH, a maritime township in 
Plymouth county, Massachusetts, incorporated in 
1637. Twenty vessels, the greater part from 60 
to 90 tons, are owned here. It is a healthy town, 
and contains 1460 inhabitants ; not a greater num 
ber than it contained 50 years ago. It lies s. by e. 
of Plymouth, three miles across Plymouth bay by 
water, and eight round by land, and 38 s. e. by s. 
of Boston. Within the harbour are Clarke s 
island, consisting of about 100 acres of excellent 
land, and Sauquish island, which was formerly 
joined to the Gurnet by a narrow piece of sand ; 
but the water has insulated it. The Gurnet is an 
eminence at the s. extremity of the beach, on 
which is a light-house built by the state. The In 
dian name of the town was Mattakeeset or Nama- 
keeset. It was settled by Capt. Standish and his 
associates. The captain came to Plymouth with 
the first settlers in 1620.] 

[DUXBURY, a township in Hillsborough coun 
ty, New Hampshire, incorporated in 1763; first 
called Dantzick, joined with Sutton in the enu- 



E A S 



E A S 



meration of 1775. It has only 169 inhabi 
tants.] 

[DUXBURY, a town ship in Chittenden county, 
Vermont, about 20 miles s. e. of Burlington, and 
contains 39 inhabitants.] 



DUYA, a great river of ihel/auos or plains of 
Casanare, in (he new kingdom of Granada, to the 
e. of that of Cravo. Jt Hows dov/n from the 
mountains of Tunja, and running from n. r&amp;. &amp;lt;o 
s. e. enters the Mela. 



E 



li^AR-FIELD, a settlement of the province 
an d colony of Connecticut, one of those of New 
England ; situate on the shore of the river Housa- 



[EARL, a township in Lancaster county, Penn 
sylvania.] 

[EAST, or NORTH HAVEV, or QUINEPAUGE 
River, in Connecticut, rises inSouthington, not far 
from a bend in Farminglon river, and passing 
through \Vallingford and North Haven, empties 
into New Haven harbour. It has been contem 
plated to connect the source of this river with Far- 
raington river.] 

[EAST BETHLEHEM, a township in Washing 
ton county, Pennsylvania.] 

[EAST CHESTER, a township in W. Ches 
ter county, New York, on Long Island sound, 
about eight miles s. w. of Rye, five n. of W. 
Chester, and 17 n. e. of New York. It contains 
740 inhabitants ; of whom 106 are electors, and 75 
slaves.] 

[EAST CHURCH, a settlement of the island of 
Barbadoes, in the district and parish of St. Tho 
mas.] 

[EAST FLORIDA. See FLORIDA.] 

[EAST GREENWICH, a post-town, and the chief 
township in Kent county, Rhode Island ; 16 miles 
5. of Providence, and 22 n. n. w. of Newport, and 
contains 1824 inhabitants. The compact part, 
called Greenwich town, has a number of dwell 
ing-houses, a meeting-house, and handsome court 
house ; and although its commerce is greatly re 
duced, carries on the fisheries to advantage, and 
sends some vessels to the W. Indies. It is situate 
on the n. w. part of Narraganset bay. Both this 
town and Warwick are noted for making good 
cider ; and formerly for raising tobacco for ex 
portation.] 

[EAST HADDAM, a township in Middlesex 
county, Connecticut; situate on the e. side of 
Connecticut river, opposite to Haddam, of which 

VOL. II. 



it was formerly a part. It was settled in 1704, and 
lies 14 miles s. of Middleton, and 21 n. w. of New 
London.] 

EAST-HAM, a city of the county of Bristol, in 
the colony of New Plymouth, and province of 
Massachusetts, one of those of New England. It 
is situate on the neck of land called cape Cod. 
It contains more than 500 Christian Indians, four 
schools, and six justices of peace of the same na 
tion presiding over and governing the same In 
dians. It is in lat. 41 52 . and long. 69 56 w. 

[EAST HAMPTON, a township in Hampshire 
county, Massachusetts, six miles s. of Northamp 
ton, and 105 w. by s. of Boston. It contains 457 
inhabitants, and is divided from the w. bank of 
Connecticut river by the celebrated mountain call 
ed Mount Tom.] 

[EAST HAMPTON, a handsome town in Suffolk 
county, New York, on the s. e. coast of Long 
island, 12 miles e.n.e. of S. Hampton, and 105 
e. of New York city. It has a Presbyterian 
church, an academy, and about 80 dwelling- 
houses in one street. The township contains 1497 
inhabitants, of whom 214 are electors. Gardner s 
island is annexed (o this town.] 

[EAST HARTFORD, in Hartford county, Con 
necticut, lies on the e. bank of Connecticut river, 
opposite to Hartford. The compact part of it 
lies in one broad street, a mile and a half in length. 
Here are a number of hills on the different streams 
which water the town ; also iron and glasi 
works.] 

[EAST HAVEN, a township in New Haven 
county, Connecticut, on the e. side ofNew Haven 
harbour. There is a fort two miles from the 
mouth of the bay, opposite Smith s point, to de 
fend the passage. The Scotch Captain and other 
small islets and rocks lie on the s. shore.] 

[EAST HAVEN, a township in Essex county, 
Vermont, zc. of Maidstone, 11 miles s. f. of the 
t. end of Willoughby s lake ? and 18 . by z. of 
H 



50 E A S 

the upper bar of the Fifteen-mile falls on Con 
necticut river.] . 

[EAST KINGSTON, in Rockingham county, New 
Hampshire, a part of KINGSTON, which see. 
In 1790, it contained 358 inhabitants, and now 
90ft] 

[EAST MAIN is that part of New Britain, or 
Labrador, in N. America, which lies on the e. 
aide of James s bay; as part of New South Wales 
on the w. side of the same bay is called W. 
Main. The Hudson s bay factory, called E. 
Main, is situate on the s. part of E. Main, between 
Rupert and Slade rivers, both of which run w. 
into James s bay.] 

[EAST River, in the state of New York, and 
the waters of N. or Hudson river, form York 
island. The communication between N. river and 
Long Island sound is by E. river, along the e. side 
of New York island.] 

[EAST Town, in Chester county, Pennsyl 
vania.] 

[EAST WHITEI-AND, a township in Chester 
county, Pennsylvania.] 

[EAST WINDSOR, atownshipin Hartford county, 
Connecticut ; separated from Windsor by Connec 
ticut river, and about seven miles n. e. of Hart 
ford. The compact part of the town lies on one 
broad street of about two miles in length. In the 
townsliip are three Congregrational churches. The 
lands are fertile ; and besides those articles com 
mon to the state, produce large quantities of good 
tobacco.] 

[EASTANALLEE, the n. e. head branch of 
Alabama river, in Georgia, on which stands the 
town of Eastanallee.] 

[EASTER, an isle in the Pacific ocean. Lat. 27 
8 s. Long. 109 41 w. It is barren, and has no 
fresh water.] 

[EASTERN Island, on the c. side of Chesapeak 
bay, at the mouth of Chester river.] 

EASTEIIN BRANCH, an arm of the river Po- 
towmak, in the province and colony of Maryland. 

[EASTERN PRECINCT, in Somerset county, 
New Jersey, contains 2068 inhabitants, of whom 
468 are slaves.] 

[EASTERN RIVER, a settlement in Hancock 
county, district of Maine, containing 240 inhabi 
tants.] 

[EA8TERXON, a village in Dauphin county, 
Pennsylvania, on the e. side of Susquehannah 
river, four miles . by w. of Harrisburgh, and 111 
a. w. by w. of Philadelphia.] 

[EASTON, ;&amp;gt; post-town of Pennsylvania, and 
capital of Northampton county ; pleasantly situated 
at the mouth of the Lehigh, and on the o&amp;gt;. side 



ERA 

of Delaware river. It is regularly laid out, and 
contains about 150 dwelling-houses, a church, 
court-house, register s office, and an academy. 
It is 12 miles n. e. of Bethlehem, and 70 n. of 
Philadelphia.] 

[EASTON, tne chief town of Talbot county, Ma 
ryland, formerly called Talbot Court-house, is on 
the e. side of Chesapeak bay, near the forks of 
Tread haven river, 12 miles from its junction with 
Choptank river. It has a handsome court-house 
and market-house ; about 150 dwelling-houses, 
and several stores for the supply of the adjacent 
country. It is five miles s. w. of Williamsburg, 37 
s. of Chester town, and 118 s. w. of Philadel 
phia.] 

[EASTON, a township in Washington county, 
New York. In 1790, it contained 2539 inhabi 
tants, of whom 48 were slaves. By the state cen 
sus of 1796, it appears that 347 of its present in 
habitants are electors.] 

[EASTON, or EASTOWN, a township important 
for its iron manufactures, situated in Bristol county, 
Massachusetts, near the head of Raynham river ; 
six miles n. w. of Raynham, and 12 w. of Bridge- 
water. It contains 1466 inhabitants. The best 
mill-saws in the state are made here. The art of 
making steel was introduced here by Captain Eli- 
phalet Leonard, in 1786. It is made in quanti 
ties ; and is cheaper than imported steel, and 
equal in quality for large work, such as plough 
shares, horse-shoes, &amp;c. which require large 
quantities of hard steel. But for edge tools, in 
general, it is found to be of inferior quality to 
what is imported. The manufacture of linseed 
oil began here in 1792, and from an annual stock 
of 3000 bushels of seed, there has been annually 
produced near 5000 gallons of oil.] 

[EASTON S Beach and Bay, in the state of 
Rhode Island, is separated from Sachueast beach 
and bay by Easton s point. Both lie at the 
e. end of Rhode Island.] 

[EATON, a small town in the n. part of Staf 
ford county, New Hampshire, three miles n. of 
the Great Ossipee lake, and about 56 n. by w. of 
Portsmouth. It was incorporated in 1766, and 
contains 253 inhabitants.] 

[EATONTOWN, improperly called Eden- 
town, a pleasant village in New Jersey, about a 
mile s. of the town of Shrewsbury, in the same 
township. It is a place of some business, and 
thriving.] 

EBATE, an ancient province of the new king** 
dom of Granada, separate from the other provineW 
of the same kingdom, having nobles of its owtV, 1 
who reside in the capital, which gave the name to 



EGA 

the province. It is surrounded with mountains 
and woods, bounded by the nation of the Muzos, 
the ancient province of Tinjaca, and by the great 
lake Fuqucne. it has some beautiful and fertile 
llanuras, where are sown and gathered many fruits; 
and in it is the sanctuary of Nuestra SefSora de 
Chiquinquira. The capital is of the same name. 
This was a great and populous city in the time of 
the Indians ; it was conquered by Nemequene, 
zipa or king of Bogota, and was united by him 
to his crown. Even at present, symptoms of its 
grandeur remain, from the number of its inha 
bitants. 

E.BAUBAS, a village or settlement of the Por 
tuguese, in the kingdom of Brazil ; situate on the 
shore ot the river Tocantincs. 

EBENEZER, a cify of the province and colony 
of Georgia, 36 miles e. from Elberton, on the w. 
shore of the river Savannah, and about 30 miles 
from its mouth. It is a very healthy town, and 
here it is that are established the Saltsburijcses, 
with two ministers, who are a wise and industrious 
set of people, who not only cultivate the grain and 
fruits necessary for their subsistence, but also a 
considerable quantity which they are enabled to 
sell to the inhabitants of Savannah. They have 
many flocks and herds of cattle, which contribute 
in no small degree to their opulence. At 10 miles 
distance, and on the shore of a river which enters 
the Savannah, is the settlement of Old Ebenezer, 
where there are many cows as well as other kinds 
of cattle for the use of the public. Ebenezer is in 
lat. 32 28 n. and long. 81 18 w. 

EBOJ1TO, a volcano in the province and go 
vernment of Choco, to the zo. of the city of An- 
tioquia. 

ECATEPEC, a district and alcaldia mayor of 
Nueva Espana. It is scanty and poor, owing to 
its territory being rendered unfertile, by cause of the 
saltpetre found in the waters of the lake. It pro 
duces only some seeds in a certain few cultivated 
estates found in it. The greater part of its inha 
bitants are muleteers. Its jurisdiction consists of 
nine settlements, which are as follows : 
Tecama, Xaloztoc, 

Santa Clara, Coacalco, 

Xolalpan, Atzacalco, 

Chiconanta, San Pedro. 

Tulpetlac, 

The capital is of the same name, but with the 
dedicatory title of San Christoval 3. situate on the 
shore of a lake, which is also thus called, and 
which title signifies in the Mexican tongue Moun 
tain of Air, from the circumstance of its being 



E C H 51 

situate at the foot of a mountain where there is 
constantly a fresh breeze blowing. It. has a very 
ancient causeway which has of late been renovated, 
and serves as a path, and at the ^amc time as a 
mound, which divides the waters of its lake from 
those of Tezcuco. In the said mound are certain 
gates, communicating the waters, of either lake, 
and in time of drought, wliea the waters of the lake 
Tezcuco become low, they are replenished by those 
of San Christoval. This operation;&amp;gt;js generftlly 
performed in Shrove-tide, and therigreat numbers 
of frogs, chorales or pegercycs,- which they there 
call wistlapique, are caught- and distribute:! 
amongst the corrcgidor or afcafdia mat/or, the 
inhabitants, and the monks &amp;gt;of a convent of the 
order of San Francisco. This convent is very 
beautiful, and in it the viceroys usually take their 
abode the night before they make their entrance 
into Mexico. This settlement contains 00 /amities 
of Indians, and some of Spaniards and Mustees. 
It is six leagues to the n. of Mexico, with an in 
clination to the n.n.e. [It is in lat. 19 34 
30" n. and long. 99 5 w.~] 

ECATEPEQUE, a settlement of the province 
and alcaldia mayor of Chiapa, in the kingdom of 
Guatemala. 

ECAZINGO, S. PEDRO DE, a settlement and 
head settlement of the district of the a/caldta mayor 
of Chalco in Nueva Espana. It contains 203 fa 
milies of Indians, and has a good convent of monks 
of the order of St. Domingo. Six leagues to the e. 
of its capital. 

ECCE-HOMO, a settlement of the jurisdiction 
and government of Pamplona in the Nuevo Key no. 
de Granada ; situate in the valley of Matanza, of 
a mild temperature, and producing all the fruits 
peculiar both to a hot and cold climate. It has 
some gold mines, and contains 400 inhabitants. 
It lies in the road which leads to Ocana, and is 96 
leagues to the n. of Santa Fe, in the boundaries 
where the archbishopric of this place is divided 
from the bishopric of Santa Marta. Twenty-four 
leagues s. w. of Pamplona. j3 

ECCE-HOMO, another settlement of the jurisdic 
tion of Velez in the same kingdom ; annexed to the 
curacy of Vuca. It contains 300 inhabitants, and 
has the same productions as its capital. 

ECHECOUNA, a small river of the province 
and colony of Georgia ; it runs e. and enters the 
Ochesi. 

ECHETII, a settlement of Indians of Georgia, 
in N. Carolina; situate on the shore of the river 
Echesii, where the English have an establish- 
ment. 

bn. - ; if 9rf/J &amp;gt;t .ti 



EDA 



E D G 



ECH1, a settlement of Indians of the province 
and colony of S, Carolina ; situate at the source 
of the river Tugelo. 

ECH1LIS, a settlement of Indians of Georgia, 
in N. Carolina, where the English have a fort and 
establishment, on the shore of the river Apala- 
chicola. 

ECHOS, MOUNT, ATX, a mountain and esta 
blishment of the French, in their possessions of 
Ginanne. 

ECHUCANDIRO, a settlement and head settle 
ment of the alcaldia mayor of Valladolid in Nueva 
Espana, of the province and bishopric of Mecho- 
aciin ; situate in a spacious and very fertile valley. 
It has a convent of monks of St. Angustin, con 
tains 5) families of Spaniards, 42 of Mustees, 11 
of Mulattoes, and 76 of Indians. It is of a mild 
and somewhat moist temperature. In its district 
are several estates in which the inhabitants employ 
themselves in agricultural pursuits. It is 12 
leagues n. e. of the capital of Pasquaro. 

ECIJA, SAN CHRISTOVAL, DE LA NUEVA, a 
city of the province and government of Cumaiui. 
It is small, of a hot temperature, and in its district 
are abundance of cow-cattle, the hides of which 
form a great article of trade, as also does the 
Brazil-wood, together with the other productions of 
its jurisdiction, where likewise are many very 
abundant and fine salt-earths. 

Ecu A, another city, with the dedicatory title of 
San Miguel, the capital of the province of Sucum- 
bios in the kingdom of Quito ; situate on the n. 
shore of the river San Miguel. It is at present 
much reduced, and a miserable town undeserving 
of the name of city. Its jurisdiction includes four 
other small settlements, and it is of the Indians, 
reduced by the religious order of St. Francis. [It 
is in lat. 27 SO n. ^long. 75 38 w. 

ECLAVA, a river of the llanos of the Orinoco, 
in the Nuevo Rcyno de Granada. It runs s. and 
enters that river to the s. of the Duime. Its banks 
are very pleasant and luxuriant, and the waters are 
very pure. Here some Indians of the Saliva na 
tion fix their habitations. 

ECORS, a small river of the province and go 
vernment of Louisiana, which runs e. between the 
Bois and Cachee, and enters the Mississippi. 

ECO UM EN AC, a point of the n. coast of 
Nova Scotia or Acadia, one of those which form 
the entrance of the great bay of Miramichi. 

EDADES, LAS SIETE, an island of the N. sea, 
near the coast of Tierra Firme, in the province 
and government of Cumana, to the e. of the Ish 
Blanca. 



[EDEN, a township in Hancock county, dis 
trict of Maine, incorporated in 1796, taken from 
the n. part of Mount Desert.] 

[EDEN, a township in Orleans county, Vermont, 
n. w. of Craftsbury, adjoining.] 

[EDENTON, a district on the sea-coast of N. 
Carolina, bounded w. by the state of Virginia, e. 
by the ocean, w. by Halifax district, and s. by 
Newbern. It is subdivided into nine counties, viz. 
Cliowan. Pasquotank, Perquirnins, Gates, Hert 
ford, Bertie, and Tyrrel. It contains 53,770 in 
habitants, of whom 19,198 are slaves. Its chief 
town is Edenton. The wood is chiefly pine, 
oak, cypress, and juniper; of all which there is 
abundance.] 

[EDENTON, the capital of the above district, is a 
post-town and port of entry, at the head of a bay on 
the n. side of Albemarle sound, and at the n.e. side 
of the opening of Chowan river. It contains above 
150 indifferent wooden buildings, and a few hand 
some ones. The public buildings are an ancient 
brick Episcopal church, a court-house, and gaol. 
In or near the town lived the proprietary, and the 
first of the royal governors. Its situation is ad 
vantageous for trade, but unhealthy ; which doubt 
less lias tended to retard its prosperity. Its ex 
ports, in tiie year ending September 30, J794-, 
amounted to the value of 50,646 dollars. It is 97 
miles w. of Newbern, 257 n.n.e. of Wilmington, 
139 5. s. e. of Petersburg!), and 440 s. w. of Phila 
delphia. Lat. 36 6 n. Long. 76 52 w.~] 

[EDESTON, a plantation in Hancock county, 
district of Maine, containing 110 inhabitants.] 

EDEVA, a small river of the province and go* 
vernment of Guayana or Nueva Andalucia, one of 
those which enter the Orinoco on the e. near the 
torrent of Los Atures. 

[EDGAR, a port of entry and post-town of 
Massachusetts, and the chief town of Duke s 
county ; situated on the e. side of the island of 
Martha s vineyard. The fertile island of Chaba- 
quidick is within the jurisdiction of Edgarton, 
which has a small trade to the W; IndiesT The 
exports in 1794 for one year, ending September 
30th, amounted to 2257 dollars value. It lies 
about 14 miles s. of Uarnstable county, on the 
main, and 94 miles s. s. e. of Boston. It was in 
corporated in 1671, and contains 1352 inhabi 
tants.] 

[EDGCOMB, a township in Lincoln county, 
district of Maine, containing 855 inhabitants. It 
was incorporated in 1774, and lies ]80 miles n. by 
e. of Boston.] 

[EDGCOMB, a county of Halifax district, N. 



EGG 



53 



Carolina, bounded s. by Pitt county, s. w. by 
Wayne county and Tar river, which affords it 
communication with several counties in the state, 
w. by Nash county, and e. by Martin and Halifax 
counties. It contains 10,255 inhabitants, of whom 
2009 are slaves.l 

[EDGEFlEf.D County, in S. Carolina, is the 
southernmost in the district of Ninety-six ; bounded 
77. by Saluda river, which divides it from New bury 
county, s.zi). by Savannah river, which separates 
it from the state of Georgia, e. by Orangcburg 
district, and w. by Abbeville county. The ridge 
of elevated land which divides the waters of Saluda 
from those of Savannah river passes nearly through 
the middle of the county. Edgefield county is 
about 34 miles long and 24 broad, and contains 
13,289 inhabitants, of whom 3619 are slaves.] 

[EDGEFIELD Court-house, in the above county, 
where is a post-office, is 40 miles from Abbeville 
Court-house, 25 from Augusta, and 35 from Co 
lumbia.] 

[EDGEMONT,atownship in Delaware county, 
Pennsylvania.] 

EDIMBURG. SeeCALiDONiA. 
EDISTO, a settlement of the province and 
colony of Georgia. 

[EDISTO, or PONPON, a navigable river in S. 
Carolina, which rises in two branches from a re 
markable ridge in the interior part of the state. 
These branches unite below Orangeburgh, which 
stands on the n. fork, and form Edisto river, which 
having passed Jacksonburg, leaving it on the s. 
branches and embraces Edisto and several smaller 
isles.] 

EDISTO, a small island near the coast of the same 
province, and one of those called the Georgian ; 
situate between the mouths of the river Edisto, 
forming two entrances or channels, distinguished 
by the names of North and South. 

EDUARDO,S. a settlement of the province and 
government of Sonora ; situate between the settle 
ment of Batequi and S. Luis dc Bacapa. 

EDWARD, S. with the addition of Prince, a 
county of the province and colony of Virginia. 

[EDWARD, a fort in Nova Scotia, in the town 
of vVindsor in Hants county, said to be large 
enough to contain 200 men. It is situated on 
Avon river, which is navigable thus far for vessels 
of 400 tons : those of CO tons can go two miles 
higher.] 

[EDWARD, a fortification in Washington county, 
New York, now in ruins. It is situated on the e. 
bank of Hudson river, about 14 miles s. by e. of 
fort George, on the s. extremity of lake George, 



and 19 s. by K&amp;gt;. of Skenesborough, on South bay, 
an arm of lake Champlain. JLat. 43 13 n. Long.. 
73 32 w.] 

[EEL Cove and River, L Anse et la Riviere a 
rAnguiUe^ on the s. side of Chaleur bay, is about 
three leagues to. from Maligash. This cove 
abounds with salmon, and great, quantities of that 
fish is taken annually, by a few inhabitants who 
are settled here.] 

[EEL Rivm Indians inhabit the lands on Eel 
river, a head branch of W abash river. They 
were lately hostile ; but ceded some land at the 
mouth of the river to the United States, at the 
treaty of Greenville, in 1795; when government 
paid them a sum of money, and engaged to pay 
them in goods, to the value of 500 dollars annually 
for ever.] 

[EFF1NGHAM, formerly LEAVITSTOWN, a 
township in Strafford county, New Hampshire, 
s. e. of Ossipce pond, on Ossipee river, incorpo 
rated in 1766, and has 154 inhabitants.] 

[EFFINGHAM County, in the lower district of 
Georgia, is bounded by Savannah river on the n. e. 
which separates it from S. Carolina ; by Ogechee 
river on the s. w. which divides it from Liberty 
county. It contains 2424 inhabitants, including 
750 slaves. Chief towns, Ebenezer and Elberton.] 
[EGG HARBOUR, a town in Gloucester county, 
New Jersey, on Great Egg Harbour ; famous for 
the exportation of pine and cedar.] 

[EGG HARBOUR River, GREAT and LITTLI;. 
Great Egg Harbour river rises between Gloucester 
and Cumberland counties, in New Jersey. After 
running e. s. e. a few miles, it becomes the divi 
sional line between cape May and Gloucester coun 
ties, and falls into the bay of its own name. The 
inlet from the Atlantic ocean lies in lat. 3922 . 
The river abounds with sheepshead, rock-fish, 
perch, oysters, clams, &amp;c. which find a ready 
market at Philadelphia. This river is navigable 
20 miles for vessels of 200 tons.] 

[EGG HARBOUR Inlet, LITTLE, lies about 17 
miles n. e. of Great Egg Harbour inlet. It re 
ceives Mulicus river, which rises in Gloucester 
and Burlington counties, and forms part of the di 
visional line a few miles from the bay. It is navi 
gable 20 miles for vessels of 60 tons. The town 
ship of Little Egg Harbour, in Burlington county, 
consists of about 23,000 acres; the most of which 
being thin and barren is not under improvement. 
The compact part of the township is called Clam 
town, where there is a meeting-house for friends, 
and about 12 houses. It has a small trade to the 
W. Indies. During the late war, Captain Per- 



54 E L B 

guson and Collins burnt a number of privateers and 
other vessels in Little Egg Harbour, and destroyed 
the place.] 

[EoG Island, a small island on the n. e. side of 
Delaware bay, in Cumberland county. Lat. 39 
16 n. Long. 75 12 rc.] 

EGIDO, a settlement of the province and go 
vernment of Merida in the Nuevo Reyno de Gra 
nada. It is of a hot, but pleasant and healthy tem 
perature, abounding in fruits of its climate, such 
as cacao, sugar-canes, of which groat quantities 
of sugar are made in the mills for that purpose, 
this being the principal branch of its commerce ; 
also in conserves and honey-cakes, which are here 
called melotes, and which are carried to Mara- 
caibo ; it likewise produces a great deal of cotton, 
j/ttcttSy and plantains. Its population consists of 
500 housekeepers. 

[EGMONT, an island in the S. Pacific ocean, 
discovered by Captain Carteret. The Spaniards 
called it Santa Cruz. Lat. 19 20 s. Long. 164 
30 e. from Greenwich.] 

[EG RE MONT, a township in Berkshire coun 
ty, Massachusetts, containing 759 inhabitants, 
incorporated in 1760 ; 15 miles s. w. of Stock- 
bridsre, and 145 w. of Boston."] 

[EIGHTEEN-MILE or LONG BEECH, the 
coast of New Jersey, lies between Little Egg Har 
bour inlet, and that of Barnegat.l 

ELAJOI, a settlement of Indians of N. Caro 
lina, in the territory of the Cherokees. 

ELAND, a small river of N. Carolina, which 
runs n. and enters the Carbon or Coal. 

ELANS, a small river of New France or Ca 
nada, which runs s. e. between that of Bernard 
Blanc and that of Pie, and enters lake Superior. 

ELATO, a settlement of the missions belong 
ing to the Capuchin fathers, in the province and 
government of Guayana. 

[ELBERT, a new county in the upper district 
of Georgia, on the tract of land between Tugulo 
and Broad rivers. The s. e. corner of the county 
is at their confluence, at the town of Petersburg; 
on the n. w. it is bounded by Franklin county.] 

[ELBERTON, the seat of justice in the a 1 " 
county, is 23 miles n. w. of Petersburg, ai 
s. e. of Franklin court-house.] 
^ [ELBERTON, a post-town in Effingham county, 
Georgia, on the n. e. bank of Ogeechee river, 
containing about 30 houses. It is about 36 miles 
w. of Ebenezer, 48 11. w. of Savannah, and 55 
s. e. of Louisville. Lat. 32 31 n. Long. 82 
2 w.] 

ELBUN, a settlement of Indians, of the district 



above 
, and 30 



E L E 

and corregintiento of Rancagua iti the kingdom of 
Chile : situate on the shore of the river Maule. 

ELD1N, a settlement of the island of Barbadoes, 
in the district and parish of Santiago; situate on 
the w. coast. 

ELE, a river of the Nuevo Reynode Granada, 
which flows down from the mountains of Bogota 
into the llanos of Cazanare and Meta. It abounds 
in excellent fish, and in its district live some In 
dians, Airicos, Achaguas, and Chitanos. It is 
not more abundant in the rainy season than in the 
fine weather, for then it is that a greater quantity 
of the snow being melted on the mountains by the 
heat of the sun, causes its waters io swell prodi 
giously: it is always full of mud, which causes a 
very offensive odour, so much so that it has a sort 
of intoxicating effect upon many of the fish, who 
lying upon the shore with their heads out of water, 
to catch the fresh air, are often left ashore at the ebb 
tide ; then it is that the Indians of the settlement" 
of Macaguana enjoy themselves in the sport of 
catching these fish, making to themselves a sort 
of festival or holiday. This river runs directly 
into the Meta. 

ELEATARIO, S. a settlement and garrison of 
the kingdom of New Mexico, built for the purpose 
of checking the incursions of the infidel Indians. 

ELEN, a settlement of the province and corre- 
gimienlo of Riobamba in the kingdom of Quito, 
in the territory of the Purvayes Indians. It is one 
of the most delightful and pleasant of that juris 
diction ; its climate healthy and desirable the 
whole year round, it produces all sorts of the 
most exquisite fruits in abundance, and the waters 
here, which are always fresh and pure, are ex 
tremely salutary. It is in lat. 1 37 30" s. 

ELENA, S. Point of, a district of the province 
and government of Guayaquil in the kingdom of 
Quito. It is a long strip of land or point of the 
coast which runs into the sea for half a league, 
and is thus called from having been discovered by 
Francis Pizarro on the day of this saint, in 1525. 
It is of the most benign, mild, and healthy tem 
perature of any district in the province, and is 
resorted to for the cure of infirmities ; it abounds 
in flesh and fish, but it wants both fruits and 
vegetables, and the only water it has, is extracted 
from some very deep wells, save that which flowS 
from a stream out of a rock ; the one and the other 
are, however, well tasted and salutary; and it is 
to this that is attributed the very advanced period 
of life to which the natives arrive, the same being 
in general 80 years; indeed in 1735, no less than 
seven persons of quality were living at the great 



E L E 

age of 100 years, and one who had completed 130. 
They are for the most part robust, agile, and dex 
terous in hunting. This district produces much 
salt, neat cattle, and mules, wax and thread of 
caracal, from all which productions it carries on a 
great commerce ; it likewise produces and trades 
largely in black sealing-wax, which is made of a 
resin called cascol. Here is also found bitumen 
of Copey, with which is mixed a/gw /raw or naplha, 
translucent or sparkling lime, used for giving a 
lustre to walls: the way of taking the wax is as 
follows: Some liquid honey is smeared upon the 
branches of trees in some dark mountain groves 
on some fine sun-shiny day, and the odour is sure 
to entice the bees, who corne to sip it ; thus the 
natives are enabled to watch and follow them back 
to their hives, whether they be in the ground, 
when they are called amonanas, or whether they 
be on the branches of trees, when they are called 
moquinganas ; thus they take the wax, exposing 
it immediately to the sun and air, to purge it of all 
dross, though at the same time making turpentine 
of the useless matter. The thread caracol consists 
of cotton dyed with a white juice expressed by the 
hands from some snails or insects called caracolil- 
los, which are found in the hollows of the rocks ; 
it thus takes immediately a most beautiful purple 
colour, and which, however washed, will never 
fade, although it will in time get somewhat lighter ; 
the said insect being replaced in the hollow of the 
rock, regains its former properties, but after fre 
quent using, at last dies. There is a tradition that 
this district was inhabited by giants, and there 
are found some vast sepulchres, out of which have 
been taken some bones of an astonishing size, all 
of which bore evident symptoms of having belong 
ed to the human frame; and in 1735, L)on Juan 
del Castillo a serjcant-major of the batallion of 
militia of the city of Guayaquil, brought to Quito 
a perfect human tooth weighing five pounds, and 
which, according to the certificate which he made, 
\vasextractedfrorn a jaw of three quarters of a 
yard in length ; he brought also a piece of bone, 
which to all appearance was that which unites the 
arm to the wrist, the same being two-thirds of a 
yard in thickness. The capital of this district is 
the settlement of Chongon , and the other settle 
ments are, 

El Morro, Chaining. 

Colon che, 

ELTNA, S. another settlement, of (lie province 
and corrtgimicnto of Pilaya and Paspaya in 
Peru. ,.\ OR ,1 Jtaolxu ;-2i#-&amp;gt;y.O 

, an island of the coast of S. Caro- 



E L E 55 

lina ; situate between Port Royal and St. Helena 
sound. 

ELENA, S. another island, of the lake Michigan, 
in New France or Canada ; situate in the strait of 
Michilimakiuac, which communicates with lake 
Huron. 

ELENA, S. a cape or point of land on the coast 
which lies between the river La Plata and the straits 
of Magellan, and which is one of those which 
form the entrance of the bay of Camasones. It is 
in lat. 44 30 s. and long. GJ 23 w. 

ELEN1SA, PARAMO nrc, a very lofty moun 
tain desert of the cordillera in the kingdom of 
Quito, covered with eternal snow. I(s topis di 
vided into two parts, and in it many streams take 
their rise, of the which those that issue forth from 
the n. peak take a n. course, and those which 
issue from the s. a s. course ; all ofthe.se last pur 
sue their course towards the N. sea, by the river 
Maranon, and the former empty themselves into 
the Pacific or S. sea, by the river Esmeraldas. 
It is five leagues to the w. of the desert of Colo- 
pax.!. 

[ELEUTHEUA, one of the largest of the Ba 
hama islands, of very irregular shape. It is 
situated on the most e. point of the Great Bahama 
bank, and two high pieces of rock, known by the 
name of the Cozv and the Bull^ and usually the 
first land seen by vessels in their voyage to New 
Providence from Europe. The island is extremely 
narrow at this place, having the unfathomable 
Atlantic ocean on the one side, and a shallow, 
smooth, and white sea on the other. The scenery 
near this part of the island is of a most magnifi 
cent description. The storms of the Atlantic 
have forced their way through a -large arch in the 
rock, and have carried towards the opposite side 
of the island, fragments of rock of a great magni 
tude. The view of the Atlantic ocean through 
this tremendous opening, and the whole of (he 
wild scenery about it, is of a description seldom to 
be met with. There is no approaching it on the e. 
side, and from its difficult access and remote 
situation, it is seldom visited. Upon the &amp;&amp;amp;gt; . side 
of Eleuthera is the settlement of Wreck Sound, 
containing, 1803, about 400 inhabitants, includ 
ing Negroes; to the n. of this, (and on the same 
side of the island), (here is another small settlement 
at Governor s harbour ; and at the /?. zt\ extremity 
of the island is the settlement of Spanish Wells. 
which contained at the same period about ]20 in 
habitants, including blacks. 

But the largest settlement belonging (o Eleu* 
thera, ajid where the parish church is sitiwfed,, 



E L I 



E L I 



is at Harbour island, at the n. extremity: this 
island 1ms been long settled by a race of people of 
a description and manners considerably distinct 
from those of the inhabitants who removed to the 
Bahamas about the close of the American war ; 
they live chiefly upon fish ; their village, contain 
ing in 1803 about 560 whites and 330 blacks, 
is beautifully situated upon the s. side of the 
island, in front of the harbour, to which there is 
an entrance at each end, but only for vessels of 
small draft of water. 

The mainland of Eleuthera is upon the oppo 
site side of the harbour, and the inhabitants repair 
to that side for the purpose of cultivating fruit, 
and other vegetable productions, the soil there 
being better adapted for it than upon Harbour 
island : this latter island is considered to be the 
most healthy of all the Bahamas, and a small bar 
rack was on that account erected there in 1803, 
for the convalescents of the garrison from New Pro 
vidence. 

The number of acres granted by the crown for 
the purpose of cultivation, previous to May 1803, 
amounted to 12,785. It is contained between lat. 
24 S9 and25 31 . and between long. 76 22 
and 76 56 o&amp;gt;.] 

ELEHUA1CO, a small river of the kingdom 
of Chile, which runs zo. and enters, united with 
the Lontcihe, the Mataquino. 

ELI AS, S. a town of the Portuguese, in the 
county of Las Amazonas ; situate on the shore of 
the Rio Negro. 

[ELIAS, Mount ST. a mountain near the shore 
of the n. w. coast of N. America, n.w. of Admi 
ralty bay, and s. e. of Prince William s sound.] 

ELICURA, a spot of ground in the kingdom 
of Chile, to the s. of the fort Paicavi, celebrated 
for the renowned death which the fathers of the 
extinguished company, Martin de Aranda, native 
of Chile, Aracio Vechi, of Sena, and Diego Mon- 
talvan, of Mexico, met at the hands of the In 
dians, on the 14th December in the year 1612. 

[ELIZABETH CITY County, in Virginia, lies 
between York and James rivers, having Warwick 
and York counties on the w. and Chesapeak bay 
on the e. and n. There are several small islands 
on its sea-coast, the chief of which are Long and 
Egg islands. Point Comfort is the s. e. extre 
mity of the county. It contains 3450 inhabitants, 
of whom 1876 are slaves.] 

[ELIZABETH, some islands of the N. sea, near 
the coast of the province of Massachusetts, and at 
the entrance of Buzard s bay. They extend s. zo. 
from the extremity of Barnstable county in Massa- 



chusetts, and bearing n. w. from Martha s Vine 
yard ; situated between lat. 41 24 and 41 32 n. 
and between long. 70 38 and 70 56 w. They 
are about 16 in number; the chief of which are 
Nashawn, Pasqui, Nashawenna, Pinequese, and 
Chatahunk islands. All these belong to Duke s 
county.] 

ELIZABETH, an island of the straits of Ma 
gellan, where the pirate Juan Cliperton sent his 
people a-shore in a barge ; where they found a 
river which was frozen, but maintained themselves 
for some time in the island, which is dry and bar 
ren, and producing nothing more than an herb fit 
for sallad ; of which there is a great abundance, and 
which proved of great service to these mariners, in 
as much as they were much afflicted with the 
scurvy. This island produces also many birds, 
which live on the mountains, and on its plazas are 
found great quantities of shell-fish. 

[ELIZABETH, a short s. arm of James river in 
Virginia. It affords an excellent harbour, and 
large enough for 300 ships. The channel is from 
150 to 200 fathoms wide ; and at common flood 
tide it has 18 feet water to Norfolk, which stands 
near the mouth of its e. branch. The s. branch 
rises in the Dismal swamp. Craney island, at the 
mouth of Elizabeth, lies five miles s.w. of point 
Comfort, at the mouth of James river.] 

ELIZABETH, a river in N. Carolina, which 
empties itself into the sea, about eight miles w. from 
cape Fear. 

[ELIZABETH S Island, QUEEN, in the straits of 
Magellan, in S.America. Here fresh water, herbs 
fit for sallad, and wild fowl, may be had in great 
plenty. The shores also abound with shell-fish.] 

[ELIZABETH, a township in Lancaster county, 
Pennsylvania, containing about 50 houses, and a 
Dutch church ; 18 miles n. zo. by w. of Lancaster, 
and 84 w. by n. of Philadelphia.] 

ELIZABETH, a cape or point of land on the coast 
of the province of Connecticut, one of those of 
New England ; situate at the entrance of Buzard s 
bay. 

ELIZABETH, another cape on the coast of the 
province of Connecticut. See Cape ELIZABETH, 
and CASCO Bay. 

ELIZABETH Tovm, a post-town and borough 
of the county of Essex, New J ersey. The English 
first established themselves here, and the place has 
since increased rapidly. It contains 250 families 
and many plantations; the proprietors of which 
have established here a factory. This town is 
pleasantly situate on a small creek, wh ich empties into 
Arthur Kull. Its soil is equal to any in the state. 



ELK 

ID the compact part of the town, there are about 
130 houses, two brick churches, one for Presby 
terians, very handsome, the other for Episcopalians, 
and an academy. This is one of the oldest towns 
in the state, having been purchased of the Indians 
as early as 1664, and settled soon after. It lies six 
miles .v. of Newark, and 12 s-. ze. by u\ of New 
York.] 

ELIZABETH Town, in Pennsylvania; situate a 
little to the e. of Susquehanna river, 13 miles n. w. 
of Lancaster, and 17 s. e. of Harrisburg. 

[ELIZABETH Town, a village of Alleghany 
county, Pennsylvania ; situate on the s. e. side of 
Monongahela river, between Redstone Old Fort, 
and Pittsburg, about 18 miles from each, and six 
above the mouth of the Youghagany. Many boats 
are built here for the trade and emigration to Ken 
tucky, and in the environs are several saw-mills. 
Lat, 40 13 n. Long. 79 22 a&amp;gt;.] 

[ELIZABF.TH Town, a post-town of Maryland, 
and capital of Washington county, formerly called 
Hagarstown, seated in the fertile valley of Conego- 
cheague. It has several streets regularly laid out. 
The houses are principally built of brick and stone, 
in number about 300. Episcopalians, Presby 
terians, and German Lutherans have each a church. 
The court-house and market-house are handsome 
buildings, and the goal is of stone, and substantial. 
The trade with the w. country is considerable ; 
and there are a number of mills in the neighbour 
hood, on Aritietam creek. See HAGARSTOWN. ~j 

[ELIZABETH Town, a post-town and the chief 
in Balden county, N. Carolina, is situated on the 
n. w. branch of Cape Fear. It contains a court 
house, goal, and about 30 houses; 36 miles s. of 
Fayetteville, and 47 n. :&amp;gt;. of Wilmington.] 

[ELK, a creek iti North uinberland county, 
Pennsylvania, which uniting 1 with Penn s creek, 
falls into the Susquchannah, five miles below Sun- 
bury.] 

[ELK, a navigable river of the e. shore of Mary 
land, which rises in Chester count} , Pennsylvania, 
by two branches, Big and Little Elk creeks. At 
their confluence stands Elkton. The canals in 
contemplation from Elk river to Delaware bay, are 
noticed under DHL-AWARE Bay.] 

[ELK, a short navigable river, in the state of 
Tennessee. It rises on the n. w. side of Cumber 
land mountain,, runs.?, w. and falls into the Ten 
nessee a little above the Muscle shoals ; about 40 
miles w. n. w. of the Creeks crossing place.] 

ELK, a small river of the province and colony 
ot Maryland, in the county of Kent. It runs s. 
and enters the sea in the bay of Chesapeak. 

[ELK Lake, one of the chain of small lakes 
VOL. n. 



E L O 



57 



which connects the lake of the Woods with lake 
Superior. Lat. 48 41 n. Long. 93 w. ] 

[ELKHORN, a small water of Kentucky river. 
The Elkhorn lands are much esteemed, being 
situated in a bend of Kentucky river, in Fayette 
county, in which this small river or creek rises.] 

[ELKRIDGE, a small town in Ann Arundel 
county, Maryland; situate on the s. bank of Pa- 
tapsco river, and on the w. side of Deep run. 
This place is famous for the bright tobacco called 
kite s foot. It is eight miles s. w. of Baltimore, 
and 19 n. w. of Annapolis. Lat. 39 12 30" n.~\ 

[ELKTON, a post-town of considerable trade, 
at the head of Chesapeak bay, in Maryland, and 
the capital of Cecil county. It is situated at the 
confluence of the head branches of Elk river, 13 
miles from its mouth at Turkey point, and a mile 
above French town. The tide flows up to the 
town, and it enjoys great advantages from the 
carrying trade between Baltimore and Philadel 
phia. Upwards of 250,000 bushels of wJieat are 
collected here annually, for supplying those mar 
kets, or the neighbouring mills. Elkton consists 
of one street, in which are about 90 houses, a court 
house, and goal. On the w. side of the town is an 
academy. It is 12 miles s. w. of Christiana bridge, 
37 s.w. of Philadelphia, and 44 n.e. of Baltimore. 
Lat. 39 40 n. Long. 75 55 a?.] 

[ELLINGTON, a township of about 200 fa 
milies, in Tolland county, Connecticut. It lies 
about 12 miles n.e. of Hartford city, and. six ay. of 
Tolland.] 

[ELLIS River, in the district of Maine, is a 
branch of Snco river.] 

[ELMORE, the southernmost township in Or 
leans county, in Vermont; and contained, by the 
census, only 12 inhabitants.] 

ELOTA, a river of the province and alcaldia 
mayor of Culiacan in Nueva Espana. It runs 
into the sea at the entrance of the gulf of California, 
or Red sea of Cortes. 

ELOTEPEC, SAN JUAN DE. a settlement of the 
head settlement and alcaldia mayor of Ixquintepec 
in Nueva Espana. It contains 284 families of In 
dians, including those who inhabit the wards-of its 
district. It is 14 leagues to the e. of its capital. 

ELOTEPEC, another settlement, with the same 
dedicatory title, in the head settlement of Tiacolula, 
arid alcaldia mayor of Huamelula, in that kingdom ; 
situate between two mountains. It contains 29 fa 
milies of Indians, who trade in cochineal^ and in 
some degree in silk. It is three leagues to the n. of 
its head settlement. 

ELOXUCHITLAN, SAN MIGUEL DE, a set 
tlement and head settlement of the alcaldia mayor 



58 



E M O 



of Thehuacan in Nueva Espaila. It contains 246 
families of Indians, and is 16 leagues to the s. e. of 
its capital. 

ELQUE, a settlement of the province and cor- 
regimiento of Coquimbo in the kingdom of Chile ; 
to the which are annexed two other small settle 
ments of Indians. 

EMBALUBA, or BETUBA, a bay of the coast 
of Brazil, and province and captainship of Rey, 
between the bay of Birainiera and the new town of 

T T 

L*a Laguna. 

EMBALSADO, a small river of the province 
and government of Buenos Ayres, which runs e. 
and enters the river La Plata, between the rivers 
Caiman and Del Rey. 

EMBOSCADA, a settlement of the province and 
government of Paraguay ; situate on the shore of 
this river, and at the mouth of the Tobati-guaza ; 
at which spot also there is a fort built. [Its popu 
lation consists of Mulattoes. Lat. 25 7 42" s. 
Long. 57 24 5" a?.] 

EMBUDO, RANCHO DEL, a small settlement of 
the missions which are held by the religious order 
of St. Francis, in Nuevo Mexico. 

EMCHIE, a small river of the province and 
colony of Nova Scotia, which runs n. and enters 
the sea in the strait formed by the coast with St. 
John s island. 

EMENGUARO, SAN MIGUEL HE, a settle 
ment and head settlement of the district of the a/- 
caldia m^yor of Zelaya, in the province and bisho 
pric of Mechoacan. It contains 97 families of 
Indians. 

[EMERY, a small river in Tennessee, which 
runs s. e. into the Tennessee, seven miles n. by e. 
of the mouth of Clinch river.] 

EMICOVEN, a river of the province and colony 
of Virginia in N. America. It runs w, and enters 
the Illinois. 

EMIGDIO, a settlement of the province and go 
vernment of Cartagena, in the district of Sinu ; one 
of those which were founded by the Governor Don 
Juan Pirnienta in 1776. 

[EMMAUS, a Moravian settlement, eight miles 
from Bethlehem, in Pennsylvania.] 

[EMM1TSBURG, or EMMTSBURGII, a flourish 
ing village in Frederic county, Maryland ; situated 
between Flat run and Tom s creek, w. head wa 
ters of the Monococy. and about a mile s. of the 
Pennsylvania line. It is 24 miles n. c. by e. of 
Frederic, and 50 n. w. of Baltimore. Lat. 39 
42 w.] 

EMONDIS BURY, a settlement of the province 
and colony of Georgia; situate on the shore of the 
.river Ashepou. 



E N C 

EMPALADO, a small river of the province and 
government of Paraguay, which runs e. and enters 
the Menday. 

EMPEDRADO, a small river of the province 
and government of Buenos Ayres. It runs w. and 
enters the river La Plata, to the s. of the city of 
Corientes. 

EMP1RA, a settlement of the province and go 
vernment of Tucunuin, in the district and jurisdic 
tion of the city of Cordova, between the rivers Se- 
gundo and Tercero. 

ENCABELLADOS, a barbarous nation of In 
dians of the kingdom of Quito, to the n. of the 
river Napo. This name was given to them by the 
Spaniards, (who under the Captain Juan Palacios 
discovered them in 1635), in as much as all of them, 
both men and women, are accustomed to carry 
their hair extremely long, and flowing loose and 
unconfined down their backs. They are a deceit 
ful and treacherous race : their weapons are bows 
and arrows, and their dwellings consist of straw 
huts curiously built. They subsist by fishing and 
hunting, and are at continual warfare with their 
neighbours, the Scfios, Beeavas, Tamas, Chusias, 
and Ramos. The holy missionaries of St. Francis 
de Sucumbios, and the regulars of the company of 
Jesuits of the province of Mainas, succeeded in 
reducing some of these Indians to the Catholic 
faith . 

ENCABELLADOS, with the dedicatory title of 
San Juan Baptista, a settlement of the province 
and government of Mainas, a reduction of the In 
dians of this nation, made by the regulars of the 
extinguished company of Jesuits. 

ENC AHULL A DOS, a river of the same province 
and kingdom, taking its name from the above na 
tion. It enters the Maraiion, 20 leagues below the 
river Aguarico. Forty Portuguese established 
themselves at its entrance in the year 1636, and 
lived in peace and alliance with the Indians until 
that these rose up against the former. They were 
afterwards much harassed by the Spaniards, but 
at one time succeeded in taking 700 prisoners, most 
of whom lingered out their clays in confinement. 

ENCARAMADA, a settlement of the province 
of Guayana, and government of Cumana ; one of 
those belonging to the missions of the Orinoco, 
which were held by the regulars of the company 
of the province of Santa Fe ; situate on the shore 
of that river, and being to-day under the charge of 
the holy Capuchin order. 

ENCARNACION, a settlement of the missions 
that were held by the regulars of the company, in 
the province of Guaira, and government of Para 
guay ; situate on the shore of the river Tubagi ; 



E N F 

It was destroyed by the Portuguese of San Pablo, 
and the ruins of it alone remain. 

ENCARNADOS, SIERRAS, a cordillera of the 
mountains of the island of Jamaica, on the w. 
coast, called thus from the colour of the soil. 

[ENCHANTED Mountain. See TENNESSEE.] 

ENCRUCIJADA, a settlement of the province 
and government of Tucuman, in the jurisdiction 
of the city of Cordoba ; situate near the river 
Primero. 

ENCIIUCIJADA, another settlement, in the same 
province and government, of the jurisdiction of 
the city of Salta; situate s. of the fort of Los 
Cobos. 

[ENDLESS Mountains, a name sometimes ap 
plied to the Alleghany mountains.] 

[ENDEAVOUR Straits are between the n. 
point of New Holland, and the s. coast of New 
Guinea. Lat. 10. v. Long. 140 e. from Paris.] 

ENENEY, a river of the province and govern 
ment of Santa Marta in the kingdom of Tierra 
Firme. It rises in the serranias which lie to the 
n. of the valley of Upar, and enters the sea to the 
zc. of the Estero-hondo. 

ENERECAMU, a river of the province and 
county of Las Amazonas, to the n. of the Tigre. 
It runs e. 16 leagues, afterwards s. until it enters 
the last mentioned river on its n. side. In the woods 
at its entrance dwell the nation of the Ayacores In 
dians. Its mouth is in lat. 2 3 s. 

ENFADO, SIEURAS DEL, a cordillera of the 
province of California, which run on the sea-shore, 
i rom the bay of La Magdalena, until they unite 
themselves with the other sierra^ called Del Car- 
me!:\ 

ENFANT-PERDU, or LOST CHILD, an island 
of the N. sea, near the coast of the province and 
government of Guayana, opposite the mouth of 
the river Cayenne. 

ENFER, PORTAL, a port on the n. coast of the 
island of Guadalupe, between cape San Juan, and 
the point of Los Castillos. It is small and unse- 
cure. 

[ENFIELD, a township in Hartford county, 
Connecticut, on the e. bank of Connecticut river, 
opposite to Suflield, and bounded on the w. by the 
Massachusetts line. It was granted by the court 
of Massachusetts to Springfield in 1648, and was 
settled in 1681. lu 1769 it contained 214 English 
families. In the town are two Congregational 
churches, and a meeting-house for Shakers. The 
compact part of the town, contiguous to the river, 
is very pleasant. It is 16 or 18 miles n. of Hart 
ford.] 

[ENFIELD, a township in Grafton county, New 



E N N 59 

Hampshire, about 11 miles s. e. of Dartmouth col 
lege. It was incorporated in 1761, and has 724 
inhabitants, chiefly farmers.] 

ENGANO, Cape of, a point of land of St. Do 
mingo, at the e. coast and head, between the point 
San "Rafael and the river Higuey, and opposite the 
island of Puerto Rico, in lat. 18 36 n. Long. 68 
18 w. 

ENGARE, a river of the province and corregi- 
miento of Caxamarquilla in Peru. 

ENGATIVA, a rich and populous city in the 
time of the Indians, in the Nuevo Reyno de Gra 
nada. It was taken by assault by General Gonzalo 
Ximenez de Quesada in 1537, and plundered of 
immense riches. It is at present reduced to a very 
mean and poor village. 

ENGEENCH, REAL, a settlement of the island 
of Joanes, or Marajo, on the coast of Brazil ; situate 
on the s. part, and on the shore of the arm of the 
river of Las Amazonas, opposite the mouth of the 
Tocantincs. 

ENGLAND. See NEW ENGLAND. 

ENGLISH, a settlement of the island of Bar- 
badoes, in the district of the parish of St. Lucas. 

[ENGLISH Harbour, one of the best harbours 
in the island of Antigua, on the s. shore, a mile 
s. e. of the mouth of Falmouth harbour. It is well 
fortified, and has a royal navy yard and arsenal, 
with conveniences for careening ships of war. Lat. 
17 2 25" n. Long. 61 47 .] 

[ENGLISH NEIGHBOURHOOD, a village in Bergen 
county, New Jersey, on a n. e. branch of Hackin- 
sack river, w. of, and in the vicinity effort Lee.] 

[Esc LISH Town, in New Jersey, a small village, 
in the n. w. part of Monmouth county, on the road 
from Princetown to Shrewsbury, 21 miles from the 
former, six w. of Monmouth court-house, and IS 
e. of Princetown.] 

[ENGLISH Turn. See DETOUR DF.S ANGLOIS.] 

ENGRACIA, ST. a settlement and garrison of the 
Nuevo Reyno de Leon. 

ENIN, a small river of Peru, which unites it 
self on the n. with the Xauja, and enters the Apu- 
rimac before this runs into the Beny on its s. side^ 
in lat. M 46 s. 

ENNE, a river of the province and corregi- 
miento of Pataz, and district of the missions of 
Caxamarquilla, in Peru. It rises in the province 
of Tnrma, on the s. side, near the town of this 
name, runs n. n. e. forming a curve for many 
leagues, then turns n. n. w. and enters in a large 
body the Ilcayale, after collecting the waters of 
many other rivers. 

ENNE, a settlement of the same province and 



corregimiento. 



i 2 



60 



E N Z 



ENNENO, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Caxamarquilla in Peru. 

ENO, a river of the province and colony of N. 
Carolina, which runs to the s. c. [It unites with 
Little and Flat rivers in Orange county, and forms 
the Neus, about 17 miles below Hillsborough.] 

[ENOREE, a . w. branch of Broad river, in 
S.Carolina. It separates Pinckney and Ninety- 
six districts, and joins Broad river, about five 
miles below Tyger river.] 

[ENOSBURG, a township in Franklin county, 
Vermont, about 18 or 20 miles e. of Swanton.] 

ENQUENTHO River, in the province and 
government of Paraguay. It runs e. and enters 
the Parana, opposite the great island of Salto. 

ENRAGE, Cape of, on the n. w. coast of the 
island Martinique, between the bay of Giraurnont 
and the settlement of Caye Pilote or Cayo Piloto. 

EN T RAGE, another cape or point of land in the 
island of St. Christopher, one of the Antilles, on 
the n. w. coast, between the bay of Ouignes and 
that of La Fontaine. 

ENRICO, Bay of, on the coast of Terra Fuego 
in the S. sea, to the n. of the straits of Magel 
lan. It is very shallow and unsecure, being much 
exposed to the n. wind. It was thus named by 
Oliver Woort, in compliment to Prince Henry of 
Nassau. 

ENRIQUILLO, Lake of, a large lake of fresh 
water in the island of St. Domingo, in the limits 
which divide the Spanish from the French posses 
sions, towards the s. coast and the mountains of 
Borneo. It is situate in the valley of Neiba, and 
has in the middle of it three small islands. It pre 
serves the name of a cacique who was thus called, 
and who, after having embraced the Catholic faith, 
rose against the Spaniards, and fortifying himself 
in the mountains in the vicinity of this lake, 
waged a bitter war against them for the space of 
13 years, until he was reconciled, and induced to 
accept of terms of peace, by a letter which was 
written to him by the Emperor Charles V.J 

ENSENADA, HALL A DA, a river ot the n. 
coast, and of the part possessed by the French, in 
St. Domingo. Itrunss.*?. and enters the sea. be 
tween that of Los Rocheles and the port of Trou 
Forban. 

ENTRATUBA, a settlement of the province and 
country of Las Amazonas ; situate on the shore of 
that river. 

ENTREE, Island of, or Of the ENTRANCE, 
in the gulf of St. Lawrence; one of those which are 
called of Magdalen, the largest of them, and that 
which lies farthest to the s. 

ENZUCAll, a settlement of the province aud 



alcaldia manor of S. Salvador in the kingdom of 
Guatemala. 

EPARAGOIS, a barbarous nation of Indians of 
Nneva Andalucia, on the borders of the lake Cas- 
sipa. These barbarians live by fishing and hunt 
ing ; they are descended from the maritime Cari- 
bees, although they are not equally cruel. They 
are in amity, and carry on trade with the Dutch 
of the colonies of Esquivo and Surinam. 

EPATLAN, a settlement and head settlement of 
the alcaldia mayor of Izucar ; the district of whicli 
comprehends six settlements very close in its vi 
cinity ; the same containing 515 families of In 
dians, and 38 of Spaniards, Mustees, and Mu- 
lattoes. It is situate on a plain spot, and abounds 
in seeds and fruits. Close to it is a lake, in which 
are caught moj arras, a small fish of most delicate 
flavour. It is three leagues e. by . of its capital. 

EPAZEYUCA, a settlement and head settle 
ment of the district of the alcaldia mayor of Zem- 
poala in Nneva Espaiia. It contains 100 families 
of Indians. 

EPEXAM, SAN MIGUEL DE, a settlement of 
the head settlement and district of Puruandiro, 
and alcaldia mayor of Valladolid, in the province 
and bishopric of Mechoacan. It contains four fa 
milies of Spaniards, and 58 of Indians, who main 
tain themselves by the trading in tanned hides, and 
in sowing certain seeds. It is situate on a plain, 
14 leagues from the capital, Pasquaro. 

[EPHRATA, or DUNKAHD Town, a village in 
Lancaster county, Pennsylvania ; situated on the 
s. side of Calico creek, which joining the Cones- 
toga, falls into the Susquehannah. It lies 12 miles 
n. e. of the town of Lancaster, and 50 n. by w. 
of Philadelphia. It is situated in a romantic and 
sequestered vale, and possessed by a religious com 
munity called Tunkers, who are mostly of German 
descent, and believe in general redemption. They 
use great plainness of dress and language, and will 
neither swear, nor fight, nor go to law, nor take 
interest for the money they lend. They have many 
peculiarities ; but their innocent manners have ac 
quired them the name of the Harmless Tunkers. 
This settlement is sometimes called Tunker s town, 
and consists of about 40 buildings ; of which three 
are places of worship. They subsist by cultivating 
their lands, by attending a printing-office, a grist 
mill, a paper-mill, an oil-mill, &amp;c. and the sisters 
by spinning, weaving, sewing, &amp;c. Besides this 
congregation at Ephrata, there were, in 1770, 14 
others of this sect in various parts of Pennsylvania, 
and some in Maryland. The whole, exclusive of 
those in Maryland, amounted to upwards of 2000 
souls.] 



E R I 

EPILLO, a settlement of the province and 
correeirmento of Caxamarquilla in Peru. 

[JAPPING, a plantation in the district of Maine, 
of about 25 families, 12 miles fromNarraguague.] 

[EPPING, a township in Rockingham county, 
New Hampshire, taken from the . w, part of Exe 
ter, and incorporated in 1741. In 1790 it con 
tained 1233, now 1740 inhabitants. It is six miles 
n. w. of Exeter, and 18 w. of Portsmouth.] 

[EPSOM, a township in Rockingham county, 
New Hampshire, lies e. of Pembroke, adjoining ; 10 
miles e. of Concord, and 36 n.w. of Portsmouth. 
It was incorporated in 1727. In 1775 it contained 
387, and in 1790, 799 inhabitants.] 

EPUNGEO, S. FRANCISCO BE, a settlement of 
the head settlement of Irimbio, and alcaldia mayor 
of Maravatio, in the bishopric of Mechoacan, and 
kingdom of Nueva Espafia. It contains 26 fami 
lies of Indians, and lies one league to the e. of its 
head settlement. 

EQUANDUREO, Los REYES DE, a settlement 
of the alcaldia mayor of. La Piedad in Nueva 
Espana ; annexed to the curacy of the capital, 
Tlazasalca. It contains 64 families of Indians, 
who have no other trade than that arising from 
their scanty crops of maize, and some fruits which 
they cultivate. In its district are nine settlements 
or congregations, containing altogether 462 fami 
lies of Spaniards, Mustees, and Mulattoes, who live 
by the good management of their estates. It is 
five leagues from the capital. 

ERENA, a river of the province and country 
of Las Amazonas. It rises in the territory of the 
Abacates Indians, runs n.n.w. and enters the Ma- 
dera, close to the cataract of the Oranasa. 

ERIE, a large lake of New France or Canada, 
thus called from a barbarous nation of Indians who 
inhabit its shores. It is 100 leagues long e. w. and 
30 wide n. s. It is covered with many beautiful 
and fertile islands, and upon its banks are delight 
ful meadows and woods abounding witli game. 
The French had many establishments here, owing 
to the trade which they carried on with the Indians 
in skins ; and they have been heard to call it 
the most beautiful country of the whole province. 
This lake empties itself into the Ontario by a canal 
called the Fall of Niagara. [It all ords good navi 
gation for shipping of any burden. The coast on 
both sides of the lake is generally favourable for 
the passage of batteaux and canoes. Its banks in 
many places have a flat sandy shore, particularly 
to (he c. of the peninsula called Long Point, which 
runs upwards of 18 miles into the lake, and being 
composed of sand is very convenient to haul boats 
out of the surf upon it, when the lake is too rough 



ESC 61 

for sailing and rowing ; yet in some places, chiefly 
on the s. side towards both ends of the lake, it 
would be dangerous to approach and impossible to 
land, by reason of the perpendicular height of the 
rocks. Some of these (as at Cayahaga, which are 
already described) are magnificent beyond descrip 
tion, and must also inspire dread in the boldest 
breast, when viewed from the water. Lake Erie 
has a great variety of fine fish, such as sturgeon, 
eel, white fish, trout, perch, &amp;e. Lakes Huron 
and Michigan afford communication with lake 
Erie, by vessels of eight feet draught. There are 
portages into the waters of lake Erie from the Wa- 
bash, Great Miami, Muskingum, and Alleghany, 
from two to 16 miles. The portage between the 
Ohio and Potowmac will be about 20 miles, when 
the obstructions in the Monongahela and Cheat 
rivers are removed.] 

[ERIE, Fort, a strong fortification in Upper 
Canada ; situated on the w. shore of lake Erie, and 
on the w. bank of Niagara river, 24 miles s. by e. 
of Niagara fort, and 14 above the carrying place 
at the" falls of Niagara. Lat. 42 54 n. Long. 
78 59 30" w.] 

ERIES, a nation of Indians of New France or 
Canada, which gives its name to the former lake, 
and signifies, in the language of the country, Cats ; 
a name by which it is also known by the French, 
and which was given it from the abundance of 
those animals found in it. The Iroquees destroyed 
it in 1655; and although at the beginning of the 
war, fortune was much against them, they gained 
their end by valour and perseverance; and, in 
deed, were it not for the lake of this name, which 
afforded an asylum to the wretched fugitives, not 
even the memory of them would at present have 
remained. 

ERIN, a river of the island and government of 
Trinidad. 

[ERROL, a small town on lake Umbagog, in 
the n. easternmost settled part of Gnsiion county. 
New Hampshire; incorporated in 1774.] 

[ERV1NE, a township in Ontario county. New 
York. Of its inhabitants 93 are qualified to be 
electors.] 

ESCAL^DA, a settlement of the province and 
captains flip of the Rio Janeiro in Brazil ; situate 
near the coast, and to the s. of the Jacari. 

ESCAMA, a settlement of the province and 
captainship of S. Vicente in Brazil; situate between 
those of Pedrosa and Rongua. 

[ESCAMBIA, one of the most considerable 
rivers that fall into the bay of Pensacola, in W. 
Florida, empties itself near the head of the;?, branch, 
about 12 or 15 miles from I ensacola, through scvcv 



A 







62 ESC 

ral marshes and channels, which have a number of 
islands between them that are overflowed when the 
water is high. A shoal near its mouth prevents 
vessels drawing more than five or six feet from en 
tering ; but tliere is from two to four fathoms of 
water afterwards. Captain Hutch ins ascended it 
in a boat upwards of 80 miles, and from the depth 
of water there, it appeared to be navigable torpetti- 
aitgers many miles further. It is uncertain where 
its source is. The course is very winding. At 
the mouth ot the river, on the w. side, was the town 
of Camblcton, settled by French protestants in 
1766, but was afterwards abandoned. 
. The lands in general, on each side of the river, 
are rich, low, or swampy, admirably adapted for 
the culture of rice or corn. The great number of 
rivulets which fall into this river from the high 
circumjacent country, may be led over any part of 
the rice lands, at any season of the year. The nu 
merous islands at the mouth of the river, some of 
very considerable extent, are not inferior for rice 
to any in America. The settlements made by 
Messrs. Tait and Mitchell, Captain Johnson, Mr. 
M Kinnon, and some others, are very evident 
proofs of this assertion ; who within two years of 
their first settlement, had nearly cleared all the ex- 
pences they had been at in making very consider 
able establishments ; and would entirely have done 
it in another year, had not the Spaniards taken pos 
session of the country.] 

ESCANDON, a city of the province and go 
vernment of La Sierra Gorda, on the coast of the 
bay of Mexico, and kingdom of Nueva Espana; 
founded by the colonel of the militia of Queretaro, 
Don Joseph Escandon, Count of Sierra Gorda, Avho 
thus called it after his own name, in J748. 

ESCAPUZALCO, a settlement of the alcaldia 
mayor of Nueva Espana. It is the head settle 
ment of the district, and lies on the direct road 
which leads to Popantla. It is one of the best 
settlements of this jurisdiction, in which many 
Spanish families have established themselves. It 
contains also 535 families of Indians, and a con 
vent of the religious order of St. Domingo. For 
merly, and in the time of the Gentile Indians, it 
was a court, and the place where all the valuables 
of gold and silver were manufactured for the Em 
peror Motezuma ; where also was a foundery of 
metals, the artificers being noted for their great 
skill and ingenuity : indeed, at the present time, 
the brass-founderies are much celebrated, and in 
them are cast bells, keys, and hinges. It is three 
quarters of a league from Tacuba. 

ESCARA, a settlement of the province and cor- 
regimicnfo of Chichas and Tarija, in the arch- 



E S C 

bishopric of Charcas and kingdom of Peru ; an 
nexed to Hie curacy of its capital. 

ESCATARJ, a small island of N.America; 
five leagues to the w. of Louisburg in Cape 
Breton. 

ESCATEOPAN, SANTA MARIA DE, a settle 
ment and head settlement of the district of the 
alcaldia mayor of Zacualpa in Nueva Espana. It 
contains 175 families of Mexican Indians, and is 
32 leagues to the s. zc. of Mexico. 

ESCLA VOS, a settlement of the province and 
kingdom of Guatemala. 

ESCOBAR, a river of the province and go 
vernment of Buenos Ajres. It runs s. and enters 
the Rio Negro. 

ESCOCIA. SeeAcADiA. 

ESCOIPE, a settlement of the province and 
government of Tucmnan in Peru, belonging to the 
jurisdiction of the city of Salta, and annexed to the 
curacy of Chuquiana. 

ESCOLLOS, some isles of the S. sea, near the 
coast of Pern, in the province and corregtmiento of 
Nasca. 

ESCONDIDO, Port, on the coast of the 
province and government of Venezuela. It is 
large, convenient, and much frequented by foreign 
vessels, who come to carry on a contraband trade 
on these coasts. It is in the peninsula of Para- 
guana, between cape San Roman and the point 
Macolla. 

ESCONDIDO, another port, on the coast of the 
gulf of California, or Red sea of Cortes, opposite 
the island Carmen. 

ESGONDIDO, another, on the s. coast of the island 
of Cuba, between the ports Yatera and Guan- 
tanamo. 

ESCONDIDO, another, on the coast of the pro 
vince and alcaldia mayor of Tabasco in Nueva 
Espana. It is one of the three entrances of the 
lake Terminos, which are formed by the islands of 
Tris. 

ESCONDIDO, a cape or point of land of the coast 
of Florida ; one of those which form the bay of 
Apalache. 

ESCORGOVIVE, a river of the province 
and captainship of Seara in Brazil. It enters 
the sea between the point Calta and the port Abor- 
roen . 

ESCOVEDO, Mountain of, a settlement of the 
head settlement of the district and alcaldia mayor 
of Xerez in Nueva Espana. Seven leagues s. zo. 
of its capital. 

ESCLIDO River, in Veragua, of the province 
and government of this name, and of the kingdom 
of Tierra Finnc. It rises in the mountains of the 



E S M 

gold mines of Guerrero, and enters the sea oppo 
site the island of its name. 

ESC U I TLA, a settlement of the province and 
kingdom of Guatemala. 

ESCUPIL, a small river of the province and 
government of Paraguay. It runs s. s. e. arid en 
ters the Gatima. 

ESHEZET-TOOK, a settlement of the pro 
vince and colony of Nova Scotia or Acadia ; si 
tuate on the 5. coast, on the shore of the port and 
cape of Gidorc. 

ESMERALDAS, a town of the captainship of 
Caracas; situate on the n. shore of the river Ori 
noco, near the place where this river communicates 
with the river Negro by the canal of Casiriaqui. 
Lat. 3 1 1 n. Long. 66 3 w. 

ESMERALDAS, or ATACAMES, a province and 
government of the kingdom of Quito; situate 
between the two jurisdictions of Guayaquil and 
Barbacoas, on the coast of the S. sea ; bounded by 
the province of Popayan at the settlement of Us- 
mal, which is the line of division which on the s. 
separates it from the district of Guayaquil ; on the 
za. by the provinces of Quito and Ibarra. It is 
56 leagues in length, enjoys different temperatures, 
is very fertile, and abounds in all kinds of pro 
ductions ; the principal of which, and such as 
in which it traffics, are wax, copal, balsams, tar, 
pitch, bainilla, achote, brambles, the herb of 
which indigo is made, tobacco, and cacao of a 
most excellent quality, and such as is esteemed 
even above that of Guayaquil. In its mountains 
grow the most exquisite sorts of woods. It is wa 
tered by several rivers ; the principal of which 
are the Mira and the Santiago. These rivers are 
navigable, and upon their shores and in their 
creeks there is found washed up in their sand a 
considerable portion of gold ; the same having, in 
all probability, been rubbed oft from some of the 
many mines of this metal which these waters lave. 
The said mines, when worked, have produced, on 
account of their advantageous situation, more 
riches than even the mines of Barbacoas. Tin s 
province abounds greatly in cattle, and has 
likewise mines of excellent emeralds, and from 
this circumstance it takes its name. It was, as it 
were, uncultivated and neglected, through igno 
rance of its fertility and riches, until the same 
were discovered by Sebastian de Benalcazar, who 
also succeeded in subduing it. In 1621, i(s govern 
ment and population surrendered to the Captain 
Pablo Durango Delgadillo; at the same time stipu 
lating or obliging itself to suffer a pass to be 
opened through it as a communication to the other 



E S M 63 

provinces of llcy. This communication, however, 
was never put into effect, neither by the present con 
queror nor by Francisco Perez Menacho, who ob 
tained the same favour in 1628. Neither was the 
object obtained by Vicente Justiniani, a short 
time afterwards, nor by Don Hernando de Soto 
Calderon, in 1713, until that the king granted the 
government to Don Pedro Maldonado y Soto- 
mayor, a gentleman of the bed-chamber, an illus 
trious American, and a native of Quito. He in 
deed was the true discoverer of these treasures in 
1746; and his early death, which occurred in 
London, deprived the state of services which would 
eventually have succeeded in making this one of 
the most opulent and flourishing colonies of Ame 
rica, considering the advantages it possesses, and 
which he had not failed to increase, having been 
busied already in opening a road of connection to 
it from Quito, but which is at present entirely 
abandoned. He also founded various settlements, 
in order to establish its commerce in the five sea 
ports which it possesses, and of which the prin 
cipal or capital is Limones. 

ESMERALDASJ with the dedicatory title of San 
Mateo, a settlement of the former province and 
government ; situate on the coast of the S. sea, 
on a long strip of land which forms the mouth 
of the river Guaillabamba, on the shores of which, 
at no great distance from the sea, it was first 
founded ; but it was afterwards removed for the con 
venience of a port, which is now much frequented 
by vessels which come to lade with the produc 
tions of this province. Lat. 53 n. Long. 79 
25 w. 

ESMERALDAS, another, of the province and 
corregimiento of Pasto in the kingdom of Quito. 

ESMERALDAS, a large and abundant river of 
the province and government of its name, in the 
kingdom of Quito. It rises in the mountains of 
Pasto, near the settlement of Tulcan, and enters 
the S. sea in the bay of S. Mateo, first collecting 
the waters of many other streams. 

ESMERALDAS, another river, of the province and 
captainship of Puerto Segu ro in Brazil. It rises 
in the mountains of this province, in the which 
are mines of emerald, runs s. s, w. and enters the 
river Doce or Dulce. 

ESM1TA, a river of the province and govern 
ment of Popayan. It runs w. until it unites itself 
with the Boxoleo, with which it runs to the n. w. 
and then entering the Quilcase, empties itself into 
the Timbio, on the s. side, in lat. 2 21 n. 

ESMORACA, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Chiclias and Tarija in Peru, and 



ESP 



ESP 



of the archbishopric of Charpas, annexed to the 
curacy of S. Pablo, in the province of Lipes. 

[ESOPUS. See KINGSTON, New York.] 

ESPADA, Point of, at the e. head and coast of 
the island of St. Domingo, between the river 
Higuey and the bay ofYuinba, opposite the island 
of Puerto Rico. 

ESPAGNOLS, Bay of the, or Of the SPA- 
NIAUDS, on the e. coast of the isla Real or Cape 
Breton, between the bay of Coui and cape Ver- 
drone. 

ESPANA, NUEVA, a spacious kingdom of N. 
America, the limits of which towards the n. are 
not known, ft runs in length, from n. to s. from 
the port of Acapulco, in the Pacific, to the last 
settlements in the n. ; being 670 leagues long and 
1300 wide in the upper part, from the river of St. 
Lawrence or Canada, in the N. sea, to the pro 
vince of Los Apaches, on the s. coast, at its 
narrowest part, and where it forms the bay of Mex 
ico, which is the distance between the port of 
Vera Cruz and that of Navidad in the S. sea. It 
is only 280 leagues across ; and its territory forms 
in its figure here the gulf or bay called Cam- 
peche, from the cape of Florida to that of Cote- 
che, in the province of Yucatan. It runs from 
w. w. to s. e. forming, as it were, an isthmus 
obliquely between the two seas, from lat. 14 to 19 
between the e. and s. points, and then extends it 
self as far as the cape Tiburon and river of Con- 
f)s, where it is bounded by the provinces of 
ierra Firme. This extensive country was dis 
covered by Francisco Fernandez de Cordoba, 
through the province of Yucatan, in 1515, and 
was conquered and added to the dominions of the 
king of Spain by the renowned Hernan Cortes, 
Marquis del Valle, native of Medcllin, in Estre- 
madura, in 1521. The whole of it is governed by 
a viceroy, who is also a captain-general, whose 
government extends beyond that of any other mo 
narch. In his district is an archbishopric and 
nine bishoprics suffragan to the same ; these are 
as follows : The Puebla de los Angeles, Oaxaca, 
Durango, Guatemala, Mechoacan, Antequera, 
Gaadalaxara, Yucatan, and Chiapa. Here are 
three royal audiences, which are established in 
Mexico, Guadalaxara, and Guatemala ; and in 
these are contained the provinces of Cinaloa, 
Culiacan, Chiametlan,Xalisco, Mechoacan, Mex 
ico, Tlaxala, Oaxaca, Nueva Vizcaya, Zacate- 
cas or Nueva Galicia, Guadalaxara, Nuevo Leon, 
Guastecaor Panuco, Soconusco, Chiapa, Tobasco, 
Yucatan, Vera Paz, Guatemala, Honduras, Ni 
caragua, Costarica, and California ; the same be- 



ingdivided into the following 128 alcaldias mat/ores, 

governments, and corregimientos : 

Acapulco, S. Miguel el Grande, 

Actopam, Nexapa, 

Aparn, Nochistlan, 

Acayuca, Nuevo Reyno de Leon, 

Antigua, Nuevo Santander, 

Acatlan. Oaxaca, 

Amula, Orizava, 

Autliin, Otumba, 

Atrisco, Paclmca, 

S. Bias, Puebla de los Angeles, 

Chalco, Papantla, 

Cuyoacan, Quatro Villas de Oaxaca, 

Chietla, Quautla Amilpas, 

Chiautla, Quaulitlan, 

Coatepec, Queretaro, 

Cozamaluapan, Sayuiu, 

Cordoba, Temascaltepec, 

Cadereitn, Tepeaca, 

Chilapa, Tecali, 

Cuernavaca, Tehuacan de las Grana- 

Chalco, dus, 

Cuiseo de la Laguna, Teutitlan del Camino, 

Colima, Teutitla, 

Cholula, Teutitlan del Valle, 

Chiguagua, Tehuantepcc, 

S. Christoval, Teococuilco, 

Etzatlan, Tepozcolula, 

Guimeo, Tcpexi dc la Seda, 

Guanaxuato, Tacuba, 

Guejolotitlan, Toluca, 

Huamelula, Tenango del Valle, 

Huajuapan, Tetela del Rio, 

Huichiapan, Tancitaro, 

Huejutla, Tlazasalca, 

Huauchinango, Tlapujagua, 

Guejotzingo, Tasco, 

Ixtepexi, Tixtla, 

Ixtlahuacan, Tochimilco, 

Izucar, Tula, 

Ixmiquilpan, Tetepango, 

Isla del Carmen, Tehusitlan, 

Justlahnac, Tampico, 

S. Juan de los Llanos, Tulanzirigo, 

Lerma, Tetela and Xonotla, 

S. Luis de la Paz, Tezcuco, 

S. Luis de Potosi, Teotihuacan, 

Mexilcalzingo, Tlaxcala, 

Miahuatlan, Tabasco, 

Metepec, Tuxtla, 

Malinalco, Tlapa, 

Maravatio, Villalta, 

Mcxtitlan del a Sierra, Villa de Xalapa, 



E S P A N A. 



65 



Zapotlan, 

Zumpango, 

Zirnapan, 

Zacatlan de las Manza- 

nas, 

Zempoala, 
Zelaya, 
Zacatecas, 
Zimatlan. 



Villa de Leon, 

Valladolid, 

Villa de Valles, 

Vera Cruz, 

Xiquilpan, 

Xuchimilco, 

Xicayan, 

Xalapa de la Feria, 

Yahualica, 

Zacualpan, 

All these are divided into 235 curacies and 23 
missions, many of (hem, or indeed the greater 
part, having been founded and established by the 
regulars of the extinguished company of Je 
suits; the same being now under the charge of 
the monks of the order of St. Francis and of those 
of St. Domingo. This kingdom is watered by 
many large rivers, and an infinite number of small 
ones, which rise from innumerable springs ; it 
produces nearly all the fruits of the known world, 
such as wheat, garvanzas or Spanish peas, lentils, 
rice, flax, vines of the stunted and branching sorts, 
olives, maize, French beans, beans, barley, and 
many other fruits, not to mention wax, silk, pep 
per, saffron, and cinnamon, although the quality 
of the two latter are somewhat inferior, owing to 
the want of cultivation : it abounds in cacao, bal 
sams, resins, and medicinal herbs; also in sugar, 
honey, and sweetmeats, which are made in 
abundance ; in purple, cochineal, and other dyes ; 
in cotton, of which the finest and most excellent 
manufactures are made; in cattle of the large and 
small sort and of every species, as neat cattle, 
mares, sheep, and swine ; and all of these in such 
abundance, that although they were originally 
brought from Europe, they are now in sufficient 
numbers to supply other countries and kingdoms 
as large as itself; likewise the number of native 
animals, as well terrestrial as aerial and aquatic, 
is very great, and the variety of their species asto 
nishing. By all these productions, and by an in 
finite quantity of others, which it is not allowable 
for us to enumerate in the limits of our article, it 
maintains a very large commerce, and may be 
looked upon as one of the richest, most opulent, 
and flourishing kingdoms in the whole world. It 
contains 35 reales or silver mines, not to mention 
many others which have been, as it were, aban 
doned, owing to the great expence of labour ; from 
all of them, however, have been extracted, and are 
now actually extracted, immense riches, and there 
are not wanting mines of gold, copper, lead, tin, 
iron, and steel ; although these yield but incon 
siderably. 

"When this country was entered by the Spaniards, 

VOL. II, 



it was governed by an emperor, who was elective, 
and who was called Motezunra, and to whom 
many other kings, the rulers of an infinite number 
of nations, were tributary; their sub-governments 
comprehending many millions of idolatrous and 
superstitious Indians. The most numerous na 
tions were those of the Mcxicanos, and those of the 
Tlaxcalticas, who formed a republic independent of 
the aforesaid emperor : with all their barbarism they 
acknowledged the laws and principles of civil life ; 
they had a knowledge of agriculture and of the arts ; 
they adored different idols, the principal of which 
was lluitzilputzil, and to this they sacrificed as 
well as to many others, all of which had their 
respective temples, and were different amongst the 
thousand different tribes of Indians. 

These are valorous, and were not unacquainted 
with the stratagems and arts of war, having much 
harassed the Spaniards in the conquest of this 
kingdom. There are indeed at the present day 
many vast nations and provinces which could never: 
be reduced, and in which reside many apostolic 
missionaries, who are continually making prose 
lytes to the Catholic faith, though not without 
great labours, and even hazard of their lives, many 
having already perished in their laudable pursuits. 
This kingdom, to which the Spaniards gave the 
name of Nueva Espafia, from the similarity they 
thought it to possess to their native country, en 
joys, equally with that, climates that are cold, 
temperate, and warm : it has suffered various 
plagues, when thousands of Indians have perished, 
as particularly in that which happened in 1545, 
when no less than 800,000 fell a prey to its ravages ; 
also in that of 1756, which lasted nearly half the 
following year, and when more than 2,000,000 
died ; and this, without mentioning the frequent 
and distressing ravages of the small-pox, which 
disorder was known here before the arrival of the 
Spaniards : its population consists at present of 
these, of Mustees, Mulattoes, Indians, free Ne 
groes, and slaves who are employed in labour. 
[INDEX TO THE ADDITIONAL MATTER RE- 

SPICTING NUEVA ESPANA. 
1. Population. 2. Increase of taxes, roads, 8fc. 

3. Mines. 4. Agriculture and productions. 

5. Manufactures and commerce. 6. Revenue 

and military defence. 

1 . Population. The first observation that strikes 
us on the perusal of the work of Humboldt, and 
other recent works on Nueva Espafia, is the great 
and rapid improvement of that kingdom within 
the last 30 years. 

The rapid increase of its population appears 
from the registers of births and burials : these are 



66 



ESP ANA. 



[kept in many places with great accuracy by the 
parish clergy, whose emoluments depend, in part, 
on the casualties arising from baptisms and fune 
rals. Through the favour of the archbishop of 
Mexico, Mr. Humboldt had free access to these 
collections ; the result of his examination was, 
thatthe proportion of births todeathsthroughoutthe 
kingdom, is as 170 to 100; in some parts of the 
table-land of Mexico, the proportion was as high 
as 253 to 100 ; but at Panuco, on the coast of the 
N. sea, it wasaslow as 123 to 100: this difference 
arises from the great salubrity of the table-land in 
the centre of Nueva Espaila, compared with the 
lo\v, marshy lands upon the coast. Mr. Ilum- 
boldt justly remarks, that the salubrity of tro 
pical climates depends more on the dry ness of the 
air, than on any of its other sensible qualities. 
The burning province of Cumana, the coast of 
Coro, and the plains of Caracas, prove that ex 
cessive heat alone is not unfavourable to human 
life. It would seem, on the contrary, that in very 
hot but dry countries, mankind attain to a greater 
age than in the temperate zones. One extraordi 
nary instance of this longevity is related by Hum 
boldt, as having occurred within his own observa 
tion : while he was at Lima, a Peruvian Indian 
died at the age of 147: having been married for 
90 years to the same woman, who had lived to 
the age of 1 17 ; till he attained to the age of 130, 
this venerable personage used to walk three or four 
leagues every day, but for the last 12 years of his 
life he had lost his sight. Many instances of 
similar longevity are related in the Mercurio 
Peruano. 

But the table-land of Mexico, which constitutes 
three-fifths of the kingdom, enjoys not only a dry 
and light atmosphere, but a mild and temperate 
climate ; the winters are as gentle as at Naples ; 
the medium temperature of that season is from 13 
to 14 of the centigrade thermometer: sometimes, 
indeed, though rarely, the thermometer descends 
below the freezing point ; but in the greatest heat 
of summer, it never rises in the shade above 21. 
On the coast, the medium temperature of the 
whole year is, on the contrary, about 25 or 26 ; 
and wherever the air is moist as well as hot, the 
climate is exceedingly unwholesome: this is the 
case upon the n. coast of Mexico, from the mouth 
of the river Alvarado to the river Tarapico, and 
plains of New Santander ; and the s. coast is 
equally unhealthy, from San Bias to Acapulco. 
The combination of heat and moisture in the at 
mosphere, in like manner, renders the coast of 
Caracas unwholesome, from New Barcelona to 
Puerto Caballo. 



The population of the whole viceroyally of Nucva 
Espanu, as calculated by Mr. Humboldt from the 
proportion of births and deaths given by the 
parish registers, and from an actual enumeration 
of the inhabitants made in 1793 by the Count of 
Revillagigedo, viceroy of the kingdom, amounted 
at that Wrfie to 4,483,559 fcottlsj and in 1808, 
to 7,800,000. From an examination of the re. 
gisters of different parishes, he estimates the pro 
portion of births to the whole population as one t&amp;lt;. 
17, and that of deaths as one to 30 ; and he finds 
the number of male births to be greater than that 
of females, in the proportion of 100 to 97, which 
is somewhat less than the proportion observed in 
France. Our readers are probably aware or the 
extraordinary fact, that the number of females 
born in Chile greatly exceeds that of males, in 
the proportion, as some accounts slate, of two to 
one. 

The tithes, which are collected from all sorts of 
agricultural produce, have doubled in their amount 
in 21 years, and he describes the general face of 
the country as indicating the rapid progress and 
extension of its agriculture. Fields brought re 
cently into cultivation, country houses building 
or lately erected, populous, rising, and industrious 
villages, are the objects which meet the eye of 
the traveller in every direction in which he crosses 
the country. 

2. Increase of taxes, roads, $c. Another indi 
cation of the growing prosperity of Nueva Espaiia, 
is the increasing productiveness of the taxes levied 
on its internal trade and consumption : to this fact, 
as to the former, Mr. Humboldt bears witness in 
general terms ; and it is found in the Viagero Uni- 
veral, t. 27, p. 11, that the duty of alcabala in 
the kingdom of Nueva Espana, which, from 1766 
to 1778 inclusive, yielded only 19,844,054 dollars, 
produced, in the same number of years, from 1779 
to 1791 inclusive, 34,218,463| dollars; making 
a difference in favour of the second period, of 
14,374,409. The alcabala is a tax of 6 percent, 
on commodities sold in the interior of the country, 
and exacted as often as the sale is repeated. Its 
productiveness is consequently the best indication 
possible of the briskness of internal trade. 

Nothing more sensibly contributes to promote 
the industry and prosperity of a country, than the 
construction of roads for its internal commerce ; 
and no stronger proof can be given of its flourish 
ing and improving state, than the multiplication 
of these means of communication. Thus we find in 
Mexico, that the magnificent carriage-road from 
the capital to Vera Cruz, which had reached no 
further than Puebla, in 1795, has been carried,] 



E S P A N A. 



67 



["for some years past, as far as Perote, and is now, 
at the instance of the merchants of Vera Cm/, con 
ducted in part down the mountains to that city. 
A road was also made, in 1800, across the isthmus 
of Tehuantepec, from the river Huasacualcoto the 
river Chimalapa, for the purpose of conveying the 
indigo of Guatemala to Vera Cruz. Other roads 
have also been constructed in the interior of the 
kingdom. 

3. Mines. But the great and rapid progress of 
Nueva Espafia is nowhere so strikingly exem 
plified as in the increasing productiveness of its 
mines: it is a vulgar error, long since refufed by 
Ulloa, that the labour of the mines has been a 
principal cause of the depopulation of Spanish 
America: were that occupation more unwhole 
some than it really is, the number of persons em 
ployed in it is not sufficient to produce any sen 
sible effect on the general population of the coun 
try. The mines of Nueva Espafia are at this mo 
ment the most productive of any that were ever 
worked in any country, at any period of history ; 
and yet the whole number of persons employed in 
working these mines under ground, does not ex 
ceed 30,000, or one two-hundredth part of the 
whole population of the kingdom. Some of the 
occupations connected with mining are more la 
borious, and less favourable to health, than the 
employments of agriculture ; but the choice of 
such occupations is voluntary, for, in Mexico at 
least, the labour of the miner is perfectly free, his 
wages are high, in proportion to the unwholesome- 
ness, disagreeablencss, and severity of his work; 
and he is secure from bad usage, as he is at liberty 
to quit his master and employment when he pleases, 
and may hire himself, if he chooses, at another 
mine. The mita tanda, or forced labour of the 
Indians, has been abolished in Mexico for at least 
40 years ; Robertson was in error when he sup 
posed that it still existed. The circumstances of 
the principal Mexican mines are favourable to the 
health and accommodation of the miners : instead 
of being situated in barren mountains, adjoining 
to the limits of perpetual snow, like the mines of 
Potosi, Pasco, and Chota, in Peru, the richest 
and most abundant mines of Nueva Espana are 



Mtuu 



not more than 1700 or 2000 metres above the level 
of the sea, in the midst of cultivated fields, cities, 
and villages ; affording, in abundance, all that can 
be wanted for the use of the mine or convenience 
of the miner. It is accordingly found, that the 
mortality in the mining districts of Mexico, is not 
greater than in other parts of the kingdom. An 
examination of the parish registers of Gunnaxuato 
and Zacatecas, which are the seats of the two 
principal mines of Nueva Espafia, has convinced 
Mr. Humboldt of this truth ; he found, that in 
Guanaxuata the number of births from 1797 to 
1802 was, to the number of deaths, as 201 to 
100. 

But, if the labour of the mines is not that 
scourge of humanity, which well meaning but ill 
informed writers have imagined, there can be no 
boubtofthe propriety of stating the increased pro 
ductiveness of the mines as one of the symptoms 
of the growing prosperity of the country. An in 
crease of the produce of the precious metals tends, 
no doubt, to a depreciation of their value ; but 
this objection, which has been urged in Europe, 
against the further working of the American mines,, 
would apply, with equal force, against the exten 
sion of any branch of agriculture or manufactures : 
every increase of supply tends to diminish the 
value of the article produced ; but the natural cor 
rective of this evil, when it becomes one, is the re 
duction of profit to the grower or manufacturer, 
who will abandon his trade or occupation as soon 
as lie finds that he can no longer carry it on with 
advantage. But so far is the trade of mining from 
having arrived at this state in America, that at no 
period since the discovery of that continent, havfc 
there been so many opulent individuals engaged 
in mining, or such quantities of the precious metals 
extracted annually from the mines. In the king 
dom of Nueva Espana, in particular, the im 
provement of the mines has been rapid anc| con 
siderable, as will appear from the following table, 
which gives the average of the annual coinage of 
Mexico, during successive periods, from 1732 to 
near the present time, extracted from the registers 
of the mint. 



ii on 






TO 



ESP AN A. 



[AVERAGE OF THE ANNUAL COINAGE OF MEXICO. 





Silver Dollars. 


Gold Dollars. 


Total Dollars. 


From 1733 to 1742, ten years 
From 1743 to 1752, ten years 
From 1753 to 1762, ten years 
From 1763 to 1771, nine years 
From 1772 to 1782, eleven years 
From 1783 to 1792, ten years 
In 1793 


8,998,209-i. 
11,566,030 
11,971,835| 
11,777,909^ 
17,55 1,906A 
19,491,309^ 
23,428,680 


434,050! 
455,109 T 9 &amp;lt;j 
462,7731 
761,5531 
835,586 
644,040} 
884,262 


9,432,259| 
12,021,139/0 
12,434,603 T 9 o 
12,539,462J. 
18,387,492 T J T 
20,135,340! 
24,312,942 


From 1795 to 1804, ten years 


21,084,7871 







The first six rows of figures in the preceding 
table, are calculated from data furnished by the 
Mercurio Peruano, vol. x. p. 133 ; the seventh 
is extracted from the same work, vol. xi. p. 13; 
and 1 he last calculated from a statement furnished 
by Espinosa, director of the caxa de consolidation, 
or sinking fund, at Madrid. As very little bullion 
is exported from Mexico, the amount of the 
coinage is, in general, very nearly equal to the 
amount of the produce of the mines ; occasionally, 
however, it is less. In 1790, one million and a 
half of dollars were remitted, in bullion, to the king 
from Vera Cruz. It is unnecessary to point out 
the great increase of the annual produce of the 
precious metals, and particularly of silver, since 
1771 : the facts stated in the table speak plainly 
for themselves. 

It will surprise the generality of our readers, to 
be told that the silver mines of Nueva Espana, 
the most productive of any that have been ever 
known, are remarkable for the poverty of the 
mineral they contain. A quintal, or 1600 ounces, 
of silver ore, affords, at a medium, not more than 
three or four ounces of pure silver : the same 
quantity of mineral, in the silver mines of Marien- 
berg in Saxony, yields from 10 to 15 ounces. It 
is not, therefore, the richness of the ore, but its 
abundance, and the facility of working it, which 
render the mines of Nueva Espana so much supe 
rior to those of Europe. 

The fact of the small number of persons employ 
ed in the labour of the mines, is not less contrary 
to the commonly received opinions on this subject. 
The mines of Guanaxuato, infinitely richer than 
those of Potosi ever were, afforded, from 1796 to 
1803, near 40,000,000 of dollars in gold and silver, 
or very near 5,000,000 of dollars annually ; that 
is, somewhat less than one fourth of the whole 
quantity of gold and silver from Nueva Espana : 



yet these mines, productive as they were, did not 
employ more than 5000 workmen of every descrip 
tion. The labour of the mines is perfectly free in 
Mexico, and no species of labour is so well paid ; 
a mirier earns from 25 to 30 francs a week, 
that is, from five to five dollars and a half; 
while the wages of the common labourer are 
not more than a dollar and a half. The tena- 
teros, or persons who carry the ore on their 
backs from the place where it is dug out of the 
mine, to the place where it is collected in heaps, 
receive six francs for a day s work of six hours. 
No slaves, criminals, or forced labourers, are 
ever employed in the Mexican mines. 

Mr. Humboldt, who is well acquainted with 
the mines of Germany, points out many defects 
and imperfections in those of Nueva Espana : one 
of the most obvious is the clumsy, imperfect, and 
expensive mode of clearing them from water ; in 
consequence of which, some of the richest mines 
have been overflowed and abandoned ; another 
great defect is the want of arrangement in the 
disposition of the galleries, and absence of lateral 
communications, which add to the uncertainty, 
and increase prodigiously the working of the 
mines. No plan of the galleries is formed, and 
no contrivances used for abridging labour, and 
facilitating the transport of materials. When 
new works are undertaken, they are often begun 
without due consideration, and always conducted 
on a scale too large and too expensive. 

More than three-fourths of the silver obtained 
from America, is extracted from the ore by means 
of quicksilver : the loss of quicksilver in this 
operation is immense ; the quantity consumed in 
Nueva Espana alone is about 16,000 quintals a 
year, and in the whole of America, about 25,000 
quintals are annually expended ; the cost of which, 
in the colonies, Mr. Humboldt estimates at] 



E S P A N A. 



69 



[6,200,000 livres. The greater part of this quick 
silver has been furnished of late years by the mine 
of Almaden in Spain, and the residue was obtained 
from Istria in Carniola ; in 1802, Almaden alone 
supplied more than 20,000 quintals. Huenca- 
velica in Peru, which in the 16th century afforded 
for some years more than 10,000 quintals of quick 
silver a year, does not yield at present quite 4000 : 
such being the case, it comes to be a question of 
infinite importance to America, how its mines are 
to be provided with quicksilver, if the supply from 
Spain and Germany should be cut off. Humboldt 
seems to be of opinion that there are mines of cin 
nabar in America, sufficient for the purpose ; he 
enumerates several in Nueva Espana and Nueva 
Granada, as well as in Peru ; but till they are 
worked or examined with greater care than they 
have been hitherto, it is impossible to judge what 
quantity of mercury they are capable of yielding. 
It is the supply of mercury that determines the 
productiveness of the silver mines ; for such is the 
abundance of the ore both in Mexico and Peru, 
that the only limit to the quantity of silver ob 
tained from those kingdoms, is the want of mer 
cury for amalgamation. The sale of quicksilver 
in the Spanish colonies has been hitherto a royal 
monopoly, and the distribution of it among the 
miners a source of influence, and possibly of 
profit, to the servants of the crown. Gulvez, to 
whom America is indebted for the system of 
free trade, reduced the price of quicksilver from 
82 to 41 dollars the quintal, and thereby contri 
buted most essentially to the subsequent prosperity 
and increase of the mines. 

The annual produce of the mines of Nueva 
Espana, as calculated from the amount of the 
royal duties, and therefore considerably under the 
truth, amounts to TOGO Spanish marks of pure 
gold, and 2,250,000 do. of pure silver; the value, 
in dollars, of both is 22,170,740; the gold being 
estimated at 145-^ dollars, and the silver at 9/^ 
dollars, the Spanish mark ; besides this we must 
add for contraband 829.260 dollars, and the total 
produce will then be 23,000,000. 

4. Agriculture and productions. The back 
wardness of agriculture in Spanish America, has 
been usually attributed to its mines of gold and 
silver: this error Mr. Murnboldt successfully re 
futes; he admits, that in some districts, as in 
Choco and other parts of New Grenada, the people 
leave their fields uncultivated, while they mispend 
their time in searching for gold dust in the beds of 
rivers. It is also true, that in Cuba, Caracas, and 
Guatemala, where there are no mines, many 
highly cultivated tracts of country are to be found ; 



but, on the other hand, the agriculture of Peru is 
not inferior to that of Cumana or Guayana ; and 
in Mexico, the best cultivated district is the terri 
tory extending from Salamanca to Guanaxuato 
and Leon, in the midst of the most productive 
mines of the world. So far from mining being 
prejudicial to agriculture, no sooner is a mine dis 
covered and wrought, than cultivation is seen in 
its neighbourhood ; towns and villages are built ; 
provisions are wanted for the workmen, and sub 
sistence for the cattle employed in the mine : 
whatever the surround ing country can be made to 
produce, is raised from it in abundance. A flou 
rishing agriculture is established, which not un- 
frequently survives the prosperity of the mines, to 
which it was indebted for its origin ; the husband 
man remains and cultivates his fields, after the 
miner, who had at first set him to work, is gone 
to another district, in search of a more abundant 
or less exhausted vein. The Indians, in particu 
lar, who prefer a mountainous situation to living 
in the plains, seldom quit the farms they have 
established, though the mines are abandoned, 
which were, perhaps, their original inducement 
for settling there. Indian villages and farms are 
continually found in the valleys, and amidst the 
precipices of the highest mountains. In the same 
manner, the agriculture of Lombardy and Flan- 
bers continues to flourish, though the manufac 
turing industry of these countries has been long 
extinguished. 

In his account of the agriculture of Nueva Es 
pana, Mr. Humboldt enters into many curious 
and interesting details concerning the origin, na 
tural history, and cultivation of the different vege 
table productions of that kingdom, in which our 
limits will not permit us to follow him : we shall, 
therefore, confine ourselves to a few extracts from 
this part of his work. 

Of all the vegetable productions cultivated for 
the use of man, there is none which affords so 
much food from the same quantity of land, as the 
plaintain or banana tree : a field of 100 square 
metres in plantain trees affords 4000 Ibs. weight of 
food ; the same field in wheat will produce about 
30 Ibs. ; and in potatoes 90 Ibs. The quantity of 
food from the plantain tree is, therefore, to the 
quantity of food from wheat as 133 to one, and to 
the quantity from potatoes as 44 to one : the 
quantities of nourishment, it must be owned, are 
not proportioned to the weights, for the fruit of 
the plantain tree contains a greater portion of mu 
cilaginous juice than the seeds of the cerealia. 
An arpent, covered with plantain trees, will main 
tain 50 persons : the same quantity of ground] 



70 



ESP AN A, 



|"so\vn\vith wheat will not support two individuals. 
The plantain tree does not thrive where the me 
dium temperature is below 24 (centign. therm. 
or 75.2 F.), but there are 50,000 square leagues 
of (he Mexican territory in that situation. The 
fruit of the plantain tree is farinaceous, but con 
tains a small portion of vegetable gluten, and a 
great quantity of saccharine matter. Mr. Ilum- 
boldt remarks, that in all tropical countries, sac 
charine matter is considered to be eminently nu 
tritious. 

The same country that affords the plantain tree 
produces the cassava root ; the farina of the cas 
sava root, called manioc, is made into bread, 
which the natives, to distinguish it from the bread 
Of maize, call pan de tierra calicnte,. The flour 
of manioc has this inestimable advantage, that, 
when dried and toasted, it is secure from the de 
predations of worms and other insects : it contains, 
besides farinaceous fecula, a saccharine matter, 
and a viscous substance resembling caoutchouc. 
The cassava root is not cultivated in Nueva Es 
pana at a greater height than 600 or 800 metres 
above the level of the sea ; its poisonous juice be 
comes harmless by boiling, and separating the 
scum that rises to the top, and is then used by the 
natives for seasoning their food. The original in 
habitants of Haile, after the conquest of their 
country by the Spaniards, used to poison them 
selves with this juice, and for that purpose assem 
bled in parties of 50 or more to take it together. 

Maize is the chief food of the inhabitants of 
Nueva Espana : it is cultivated from the coast to 
the height of 2800 metres above the sea ; in very 
fertile lands, and in very good years, it gives a 
return of 800 for one; but the average return for the 
intra-tropical part of the country is not more than 
150 for one, and in New California it is from 70 
to 80 : in very hot and moist districts two or three 
crops are obtained in the year, but in most parts 
of the country only one is taken. No crop is more 
uncertain than maize, and as it is seldom equally 
good in every part of the kingdom, the transport 
of maize comes to be the principal branch of in 
ternal commerce: a general failure of the crop is 
followed by scarcity, or even famine : its price 
varies from two livres and a half to 25 livres the 
fanega, and when it exceeds 10 livres for a length 
of time, the common people are forced to use 
other and less wholesome nourishment. The an 
nual produce of Nueva Espana in maize is esti 
mated at 17,000,000 vffanesras annually. It may 
be preserved for three years at Mexico, and in 
colder climates for six or seven years. The In 
dians prepare a fermented liquor from maize, arid 



before the arrival of the Spaniards, they extracted 
sugar from its stalks. 

It appears, that a species of wheat and a species 
of barley were cultivated in Chile before the arri 
val of the Spaniards, but that none of the cerealia of 
the old continent were known in America when it 
was first discovered. The cerealia are not cultivated 
in the intra-tropical part of Mexico), at a lower 
elevation than 800 or 900 metres above the level 
of the sea, and in very small quantity at a less 
height than 1200 or 1300. At a greater eleva 
tion than 3500 or 4000 metres, neither wheat 
nor rye come to maturity, though the medium 
temperature of these regions is higher than in parts 
of Siberia and Norway, where both plants are 
cultivated with success:* but then, the heat in the 
the latter countries is very great for a month or 
six weeks in the middle of summer ; while, in the 
former, the thermometer never rises for a whole 
day above 10 or J2 (50 or 52.G F.) The 
Mexican wheat is of excellent quality, and the 
medium return throughout the kingdom is from 
22 to 25 for one : in some places it gives from 30 
to 40 for one; and in New California, only 17 or 
18. Much wheat is exported from Vera Cruz to 
Cuba : barley and rye thrive very well in Nueva 
Espana ; oats are very little cultivated ; the potato 
is a great object of culture in the high and cold parts 
of the country : rice is but little attended to, though 
well adapted for the marshy lands on the coast. 

The Spanish government has always discouraged 
in its colonies the cultivation of the vine, the olive, 
the mulberry tree, and the plants producing hemp 
and flax. While Humboldt was in Nueva Espana, 
an order came from Madrid to grub up all the 
stocks of vines in the n. part of the kingdom, 
where they had been cultivated with so much suc 
cess as to give alarm to the merchants of Cadiz, 
by the diminished consumption of wine from the 
mother country. There is but one olive planta 
tion in Nueva Espana, and that belongs to the 
archbishop of Mexico : tobacco is another branch 
of culture, which has been in a great measure 
sacrificed to political considerations. Since 1764, 
when the royal monopoly was established, no to 
bacco can be planted, except in particular dis 
tricts, and none can be sold, except to the king s 
officers. Parties of soldiers are employed to go 
about the country in search of tobacco fields ; and 
where they find one on forbidden ground, they 
impose a fine on the owner, and. direct the planta 
tion to be destroyed: this odious and vexatious 
monopoly produces to the king of Spain, in Mexico 
alonv , a clear revenue of more than 20,000,000 of 
livres annually.] 



E S P AN A. 



[Pulque, or fermented liquor, is prepared from the 
sap ofthe American aloe : it is the favourite drink 
of all the nations that speak the Aztetic tongue. 
If tastes like cider, but lias an offensive smell of 
meal in a state of putrefaction. The ardent spirit 
distilled from it is strictly prohibited by law, lest 
it . uld interfere with the sale of Spanish brandy ; 
but great quantities of it are clandestinely matte. 
The pita also furnishes thread ; and lite ancient 
Mexicans prepared from it a sort of paper. Next 
to the mai/A) and potatoe, Mr. Humboldt considers 
it the most useful production bestowed by nature 
on the mountainous countries of America, situated 
within the tropics. 

Of sugar, Vera Cruz exports annually more than 
half a million of ar rob as ; and Mr. Humboldt esti 
mates the consumption of tluit article in Nueva 
Espafia at more tlum twice as much. Cuba, as he 
informs us, exported in 1803, 2,576,000 arrobns 
of sugar, and used for her internal consumption 
440,000 more. By a statement of the export of 
sugar from the [Savannah, from 1801 to 1810 in 
clusive, it appears, that the average for the last ten 
years has been 2,850,000 arrobaa, or about 
()44,000 cwt. a year. Cotton, indigo, coffee, and 
cacao, are not cultivated to any extent in New 
Spain ; though the Mexicans, like all other Spa 
niards, are great consumers of chocolate. Mr. 
Humboldt was at pains to ascertain the quantity of 
cacao exported annually from the Spanish settle 
ments ; and, taking the average of four years, from 
1799 to 1803, he found it as follows : from Vene 
zuela and Maracaybo, 115,000 fanegas ; from Cu- 
mana, 18,000 ; from New Barcelona, 5000; and 
from Guayaquil, 600,000; total, 228,000. But 
in this calculation he omits the cacao of Guatemala, 
which is the most esteemed of all. The whole of 
the vanilla consumed in Europe comes from the 
provinces of Oaxaca and Vera Cruz in New 
Spain. Mr. Humboldt gives a minute account of 
the cultivation of this plant, which had not been 
formerly described. Great care and nicety are re 
quired in drying it. The demand for it is less than 
we should have expected. The quantity annually 
prepared for use, does not much exceed 900,000 
pods, the value of which, at Vera Cruz, is from 
30,000 to 40,000 dollars. Cochineal is another 
article of commerce, which till lately was the sole 
production of Nueva Espafia. According to Mr. 
Hnrnboldt s information, the province of Oaxaca 
furnishes annually 39,000 at rob as of cochineal, 
which, at 75 dollars, are worth 2,400.000 dollars. 

The whole of the annual produce of the agri 
culture of Nueva Espana is valued by Mr. Hum 
boldt at 29,000.000 of dollars ; and as this calcu 



lation is founded on accurate returns ofthe amount 
of the tithes, and has been revised and corrected 
by a very intelligent body, the municipality ot 
Valladolid, it may be considered as a near ap 
proximation to the truth. The value ofthe precious 
metals annually extracted from the mines ofthe same 
kingdom, may be estimated at about 22,000,000 
of dollars; and consequently, the wealth which 
Nneva Espafia derives from agriculture exceeds 
the wealth which it derives from the extraction of 
the precious metals in the proportion of 29 to 22, 
or nearly in that of 4 to 3. 

The obstacles to the improvement of agriculture 
are partly derived from nature, and partly from 
positive institution. Of the first class, the princi 
pal is the excessive dryness of the climate, and 
want of moisture in the ground. This evil has 
been increased since the arrival of the Spaniards, 
who have cut down the forests in the interior of tlie 
country, and have thereby exposed the soil to the 
stronger action of the rays of the sun, which in 
that attenuated atmosphere possess an extraordi 
nary power of evaporation, as Mr. Humboldt as 
certained by experiments. The dry season, on 
the table-land of Mexico, lasts from the beginning 
of October to the end of May, without any inter 
ruption from showers. Towards the end of that 
period, the verdure of the fields disappears, and 
the crops, particularly those of wheat, begin to 
suffer; and if the rains are delayed much beyond 
their usual time, nothing can save them but artifi 
cial irrigation, where that is practicable. Planta 
tions of trees, and a general system of irrigation, 
are the remedies for this evil. 

The obstacles from positive institution are chiefly 
the vast accumulations of landed property in the 
hands of a few persons, held under all the strict 
ness of Spanish entails, and the extensive tracts of 
country possessetl in common, and therefore ill- 
cultivated and neglected. The church lands are 
inconsiderable in extent, the fee-simple of them not 
being valued at more than % or 3,000,000 of dol 
lars. But in addition to the landed estate of tlie 
clergy, ecclesiastical bodies have mortgages on 
hind to the amount of 44,500,000 of dollars, for 
which the proprietors of the land pay them an an 
nual interest. In 1804, the greedy and necessi 
tous court of Madrid, hearing of this immense ca 
pital belonging to the church, ordained the whole 
of it to be seized upon for the benefit of the state, 
and directed its court of exchequer at Mexico to 
exact payment, not as heretofore of the interest, 
but of the principal itself, and to remit it by the 
first opportunity to the mother country, to be there 
paid into the sinking fund established for the ex-] 



E S P A N A. 



[Unction of the vales, or paper money, with which 
the kingdom was theninundaled. The execution of 
this order, which must have ruined the greater 
part of the landed proprietors of Nueva Espaiia, 
by withdrawing from them so large a portion of 
their capital, was attempted by the Mexican ex 
chequer, but with so little success, that, in June 
1806 , they had not received payment of more than 
J, 200,000 dollars of the sum demanded. 

The wages of labour in Nueva Espana are, as be 
fore observed, 24 rt als dc plata a day, on the coast, 
and two reals dc plata, or one fourth of a dollar, on the 
table-land. The average price of maize on the table 
land, where it is the principal food of the people, 
is estimated by Mr. Humboldt at five livres the 
fanega. Tbefanega is somewhat more than one 
bushel and a half; and consequently a labourer on 
the table-land of Mexico, earns about one peck 
and two thirds of Indian corn a day. The ordinary 
price paid for wheat upon the farm, in Nueva Es 
pana, is about four or five dollars the carga or load, 
which weighs 150 kilograms ; but the ex pence of 
carriage raises it, in the city of Mexico, to nine 
or 10 dollars ; the extreme prices being eight and 
15. The ordinary price of 150 kilograms of wheat 
at Paris, according to Mr. Humboldt, is 30 francs, 
or fi ve dollars and a half. W heat is therefore nearly 
twice as dear in the city of Mexico as it is at Paris. 
But, on the other hand, it must be considered, that 
wheat is not so much an article of the first necessity 
in Nueva Espana as it is in France. According to 
Mr. Humboldt, not more than 1,300,000 persons 
in the kingdom of Mexico use wheat habitually as 
an article of subsistence. There is, to be sure, a 
greater proportion of wheat-eaters in the city of 
Mexico than in any other part of the kingdom ; 
but one-half of its population, and that the poorer 
part, consists of Indians and of mixed casts. 

5. Manufactures and commerce. Spain has 
been less rigorous than the other states of modern 
Europe in the prohibition of manufacturing indus 
try in her colonies. The great extent and popu- 
lousness of her foreign possessions, the remoteness 
of her principal settlements from the coast, the 
difficulty of transporting bulky commodities in the 
interior of America, the want of industry and 
commercial enterprise in her subjects at home, the 
exclusive attention of her government to the ac 
quisition of the precious metals, and its indiffer 
ence and ignorant contempt for other sources of 
opulence, have all contributed to produce this dif 
ference ia her colonial policy. It may be thought 
that, as she was the only power in Europe which 
derived a direct revenue from her colonies, that 
consideration determined her to relax from the 



usual strictness of colonial discipline ; for it seems 
but fair, that where a colony is taxed for the be 
nefit of the mother country, its commerce and in 
ternal industry should at least be free. But no 
such views of justice or liberal policy actuated the 
court of Madrid in this instance. In all that re 
lated to the commerce or navigation of her foreign 
possessions, Spain was equally jealous with other 
nations ; and though her laws recognised the exist 
ence of many branches of manufacturing industry 
in her colonies, her government was ever ready to 
sacrifice those to the real or supposed interests of 
the mother country. About 60 years ago, an ex 
tensive plan for the establishment of European 
manufactures at Quito was proposed to the Spanish 
ministry, and undertaken with their consent and 
apparent approbation, but was defeated by secret 
instructions given to their agents in America ; and 
very lately a flourishing manufacture of Indian 
chintz, in Mexico, was prohibited by an order 
from Madrid, lest it should interfere with the cot 
ton manufactures of the peninsula. 

The chief manufactures of Nueva Espana are 
woollens, cottons, gold and silver lace, hats, lea 
ther, soap and earthenware ; but the total value of 
the goods which they produced, when Mr. Hum 
boldt was in the country, did not exceed 7 or 
8,000,000 of dollars annually. Some manufac 
tures of silk have been introduced since that time; 
and in general, all the manufactures, the finer sorts 
especially, have increased considerably in conse 
quence of the war with England and interruption 
of foreign commerce. Tobacco and gunpowder 
are royal manufactures and monopolies ; and the 
former brings in to the crown a clear revenue of 
4,000,000 of dollars annually. The Mexican 
tradesmen are remarkably skilful in works of plate 
and jewellery ; and, like some of the eastern na 
tions, they have a singular turn for imitation. 
Very good carriages are made at Mexico, though 
the best coaches come from England. 

There are carriage roads from Mexico to most of 
the principal towns of the kingdom ; but the 
transport of commodities is chiefly effected , as in 
the mother country, on the backs of mules. The 
new road from Perotc to V"era Cruz is compared by 
Humboldt to the roads of Simplon and Mont Ce- 
nis ; and appears, from his description, to be 
equally solid, useful, and magnificent. 

In time of war, the indigo of Guatemala, the 
cacao of Guayaquil, and even the copper of Chile, 
pass through Nueva Espana in their way to Europe. 
But during peace, there is little commercial inter 
course between the coasts of Mexico and Guate* 

mala and those of S. America, on account of the] 
o 



ESP A N A. 



73 



J slowness and uncertainty of the navigation to 
the s. From Acapulco to Lima the passage is 
sometimes longer than from Lima to Cadiz. Mex 
ico and Peru, though at no great distance, are 
therefore incapable of maintaining any consi 
derable; commerce with eacli other. The chief 
trade of Acapnlco continues still to be its com 
merce with Manilla. The Acapulco Manilla 
ship arrives once a year at Acapulco with a cargo 
of Indian goods, valued at 12 or 1300,000 dol 
lars, and carries back silver in exchange, with a 
very small quantity of American produce, and 
some European goods. 

The commerce of Nueva Espana with the mother 
country is carried on almost entirely through Vera 
Cruz. In time of peace, Mr. Humboldt estimates 
the annual value of the exports, in that commerce, 
at 22,000,000 of dollars, and the annual value of 
the imports at. 15,000,000. The following is his 
statement of the chief particulars. 

Ex POUTS. Dollars. 

Gold and silver, in coin, bullion, and 

plate 17,000,000 

Cochineal . &amp;gt;&amp;gt;. v * - w^ 2,400,000 
Sugar i/. *u .*.!&amp;gt; ;*. *. , . 1,300,000 

Flour 300,000 

Indigo, being the produce of Nueva 

Espana .. . . MA - : .;&amp;gt; 280,000 
Salt meat and other provisions ** : 100,000 

Tunned hides .... 80,000 

Sarsaparilla . . . 90,000 

Vanilla 60,000 

Jalap . . . ,J. - . 60,000 

Soap . . . ...i w - . 50,000 

Logwood . . . . . 40,000 

Pimiento 30,000 



21,790,000 

IMPORTS. 

Bale goods, including woollens, cot 
tons, linens, and silks . . 9,200,000 
Paper . . t ;m ?a . 1,000,000 
Brandy . . utirt . 1,000,000 
Cacao -v a. .?,; M.i., ,i^ 1,000,000 
Quicksilver . . * .-; . 650,000 
Iron, manufactured arid unmanufactured 600,000 
Steel .&amp;gt;;, ,, W r* ; v*r ... . 200,000 
Wine . , r,*i ,-v* *&amp;lt; -* 700,000 
Bees-wax . u*j jv * vs. -. * , 300,000 



14,600,000 

This statement, however, must be considered as 
* mere approximation by Mr. Humboldt, founded 
on the average of several years of peace; and, 

VOL. II. 



therefore, more applicable to the period antecedent 
to 1796, when the war with England broke out, 
than to the present times. Whoever wish for 
more exact details must look to his \vork, p. 699 
708, where they will find the accounts of the com 
merce of Vera Cruz, in 1802 and 1803, pub 
lished by the consu aJo of that place. Jt is ne 
cessary further to observe, that Mr. Humboldt 
docs not include, in this estimate, the contraband 
trade on the coast of Nueva Espana, and that he 
has also omitted the indigo of Guatemala, and 
cacao of Guayaquil, though exported at Vera 
Cruz, because these articles are not the produce of 
that kingdom. 

The beneficial effects of the system of a free 
trade have been experienced to a greater extent in 
Mexico than in any other part of Spanish Ame 
rica, Cuba perhaps excepted. This will appear 
evident from a comparison of the export of pro 
duce from Nueva Espana at different periods. 
The last Jlota under the old system sailed from 
Vera Cruz in 1778, and exported the produce of 
the four preceding years, which amounted in va 
lue to 

Dollars. 
2,470,022 
The exports of produce in 1787 90, 

the tour first years after the new 

system was completely established, 

were valued at . . . 11,394,664- 



Difference of the four years 



8,924,642 



Export of produce in 

The export of 1802 is not, perhaps, a fair sub 
ject of comparison, as that was the first year of 
peace after the termination of a long war, rn which 
the direct commerce with the mother country had 
been in a great measure suspended. But the same 
objection does not apply to 1803, the export of 
which was more than double that of four years 
under the old system, and nearly equal to the ex 
ports of two years immediately alter the introduc 
tion of the free trade. 

After considering the commerce of Nueva Es 
pana in all its branches, contraband included, Mr. 
Humbodt gives the following estimate of its total 
amount: 

Dollars . 

Annual importation of foreign goods 20,000,000 
- exportation of produce 6,000,000 

Balance to be discharged in money 14,000,000 &amp;gt; 



74 

[Annual produce of the mines 23,000,000 

Export of money on ac 
count of the crown, and 
of private individuals 
residing in Spain . 8,000,000 
Export to discharge the 

balance of trade . 14,000,000 
Money added to the cir 
culation of the colony 1,000,000 

23,000,000 

According to the above author, dollars imported 
into Nueva Espana and Guatemala, in 1803, 
amounted to 22,000,000 ; and the exports con 
sisted of produce to the value of 9,000,000 dol 
lars, besides 22,500,000 dollars in specie. He 
also states their population at 7,800,000, in 1808. 
6. Revenue and military defence. The follow 
ing tables, selected from a vast number of others, 
will show the progress of the revenues of Nueva 
Espafia, their present amount, and their general 
application. 



ES P AN A. 




I. 

Gross revenue of Nueva 
Espana, in vo . n 

II. 

Gross revenue, according to the esti 
mate of Mr. Humboldt, in 1804 

Expence of internal go 
vernment f mi . J0,500,000 

Remittances to the other 
colonies, in order to de 
fray the expences of their 
internal government . 5,500,000 

Clear revenue remitted to 

Madrid . . ., *&amp;gt;, .6,000,000 



JDollars. 
3,068,400 
5,705,876 
15,010,974 
19,605,574 
20,200,000 

20,000,000 



Thecolonies, to which regularremitfancesaresent 
from Nueva Espana, are Cubn, PortoRico, Florida, 
and Manilla. Thcgovenunent of Cuba has, besides, 
2,000,000 of dollars from the revenue of the 
island ; and that, of Manilla 1 ,700,000. The sub 
jects of Spain in the Philippine islands are reckoned 
at 1,900,000. 

The appointments of the viceroy of Nueva 
Espana arc inconsiderable, being only 60,000 dol 
lars, or little more than J3,000/. a year. But his 
indirect means of amassing wealth are immense. 
There arc viceroys, who, after a few years resi 
dence in Mexico, have retired with a fortune, 
which they had acquired there, of 8,000,000 of 
livres, or above 320,OOOA When we consider the 
fraud, injustice, and extortion, with which such 
fortunes must have been accumulated, we cease to 



wonder at the detestation in which the name of 
viceroy is held throughout America. 

The following is Mr. llumboldt s estimate of the 
clear revenue which the court of Madrid derives 
from its American possessions. 

Dollars. 
From Nueva Espana . . 6,000,000 

Peru 1,000,000 

Buenos Ayrcs . . . 700,000 

New Granada . . . 500,000 



8,200,000 

The receipts of Guatemala, Caracas, and Chile, are 
consumed within the country. Cuba, Porto Rico, 
and Manilla, require annual remittances from 
Mexico. The population of the Canary islands is 
reckoned at 180,000 persons, and their revenue at 
240,000 dollars ; but the expence of their govern 
ment is such, that they require an annual remit 
tance from Spain. 

The military establishment of Nueva Espana 
was composed, in 1804, of 10,000 troops of the 
line, and 22,000 militia ; about one-half of both 
consisting of cavalry. The light cavalry are re 
presented as good.] The capital is MEXICO, 
which sec. 

Series of Viceroys, Captains-General of Nueva 
Espana. 

1. Don Fernando Cortes, Marquis del Valie, na 
tive of Medellin in Estremadura. lie was the first 
governor and chief justice of this extensive empire, 
the conquest of which took place between the 
years 1521 and 1526 : afterwards, Don JLuis Ponce 
de Leon, corregidor of Toledo, was nominated 
as residentiary ; in as much as he died a lew days 
after his arrival, the office fell upon the Liccnciate 
Marcos dc Aguilar, who two months alter expe 
rienced the same fate. In his room the residency 
was substituted in the treasurer Alonso de Es 
trada; the same governing in company with the 
Marquis del Vallc until 1528, when the royal au 
dience was established. 

2. Nuilo de Guzman, governor of .Panuco, the 
first president; he governed until 1530. 

3. Don Sebastian Ramirez de Fuenleal, bishop 
of St. Domingo, second president, nominated on ac 
count of his singular reputation for virtue, pru 
dence, and able government : in i act, he may justly 
be called the founder of every thing good in Nueva 
Espana, and deserves the eulogium of every his 
torian. He it was that caused an aqueduct to be 
carried to the ward or small settlement of Tlateluco, 
now called Santiago ; he it was that raised bridges, 
opened roads, built churches, established divine 
worship, founded the city of the Puebla de los 



E S P A N A. 



11) 



Angeles, divided the jurisdictions of the settlements, 
and encouraged the breed of cattle, favoured agri 
culture and commerce, being at once the love and 
chiefly admiration of all, that he should have ac 
complished such great works in the short space of 
three years, from 1531 to 1534, when he was 
destined to the bishopric of Cucnca in Nueva 
Espafitti 

4. Don Antonio de Mendoza, Count of Tendilla, 
brother of the Marquis of Moridejar, and chamber 
lain of the Emperor Charles V". first viceroy of 
Nueva Espaila, who governed with much skill 
and reputation for 17 years; he of himself under 
took the conquest of the province of Xalisco or 
Nueva Galicia, and succeeded in his attempts, dis 
covered the coast of California, and the navigation 
of the S. sea. He was promoted to the viceroyalty 
of Peru in 1549, and Don Francisco de Sandoval, 
of the council of the Indies, remained governing as 
visitor of the royal audience. The latter com 
manded the Licentiate Vena to be whipped for 
having feigned himself to be visitor, and to be ba 
nished from the kingdom. 

5. Don Luis de Velasco, of the house of the 
Condestables of Castille, a man of great merit : he 
entered Mexico in 1550, and acquired the name of 
father and guardian of the county, in as much as 
he published some laws in favour of the Indians 
and against slavery, founded the towns of Durango 
and San Sebastian in the province of Chiametla, 
and that of San Miguel, to restrain the Chichi- 
mecas ; and in as much as he discovered the pro 
vince of Zacatecas, arid pacified that of Topia, 
sent an armada to Florida under Don Tristan de 
Lun:i, and commanded a causeway or barrier to be 
built, on account of the city having once suffered 
an extraordinary inundation. In his time the 
kingdom was visited by the Licentiate Valderrama, 
and he died in 1564. 

6. Don Gasior de Peralta, Marquis of Falces ; 
lie entered in 1566, and was much esteemed for his 
virtue and abilities ; he liberated the Marquis del 
Valle, and his brother Don Luis, from the impeach 
ments that were laid against them; on which ac 
count he was summoned to court, and proper per 
sons were appointed to inquire into his case. His 
government lasted until 1568. 

7. Don Martin Enriquez de Almansa, brother to 
the Marquis of Alcaniccs ; he established the gar 
risons for restraining the Indians, founded the 
towns of San Felipe and San Luis de Potosi, ap 
peased and chastised the Chichimccas Indians, 
and after having governed with credit and zeal, he 
was promoted to the viceroyalty of Peru in 1576. 

8. Don Lorenzo Suarez de Mendoza, Count of 



Coruna, a great warrior, of a discreet and affable 
disposition; he governed three years, from 1580 
to 158.3, when he died ; his remains were deposited 
in the church of S. Francisco, and afterwards trans 
lated to Spain. 

9. Don Pedro Moya de Contreras, archbishop 
of Mexico, nominated visitor of the audience, arid 
afterwards viceroy in 1584 ; he governed with sin 
gular address and zeal till the year 1585. 

10. Don Alvaro Manrique de Zuniga, Marquis 
of Villa Manrique, brother of the Duke of Bexar ; 
he entered Mexico in the above year, and had a 
dispute with the audience of Guadalaxara, when it 
was agreed that the same should be settled by 
arms: but the litigation was at last adjusted. In 
his time Francis Drake undertook the navigation of 
the Philippine isles ; he governed four years, and 
was separated from the viceroyalty by Don Diego 
Romano, bisliop of Tlaxcala, in 1590. 

11. Don Luis de Velasco, the second of this 
name and appellation, son of the former, a knight 
of the order of Santiago ; he was a discreet, pru 
dent, and zealous governor ; he established the 
serge and cloth works, made various decrees in fa 
vour of the Indians, and went over to his promo 
tion of the viceroyalty of Peru in 1595. 

12. Don Caspar de Zuniga, Acevedo y Fonesca, 
Count of Monterrey ; he entered Mexico in the 
above year, was exemplary for his justice and vir 
tue, reduced Nuevo Mexico, through the help of 
Juan de Oilate, sent Captain Juan Vizcaino to the 
discovery of the Californias, formed the design of 
doubling cape Mendocino, giving his name to the 
port Monterrey, appeased the insurrection of the 
Indians of Topia, and went over to his promotion 
of the viceroyalty of Peru in 1602. 

13. Don Juan de Mendoza y Luna, Marquis of 
Montes Claros ; he entered Mexico in 1603, and 
the following year, the city having suffered from 
inundation, he ordered to be erected the paved 
ways called the cahadas de Nitestra Scnora de 
G ua da f up e and San ChristoTal; he repaired the city 
of Antonio, together with its causeway, cleansed 
the aqueducts, paved the streets, and began the 
erection of the aqueduct which is built upon pillars 
and arches ; he was promoted to the viceroyalty of 
Peru in 1607. 

14. Don Luis dc Velasco, Marquis of Salinas. 
This was the second time he had taken up the staff 
in the said year ; he began to make the royal canal 
or waste- water of the Lake; he quelled the insur 
rection of the Mexican Negroes which happened 
about this time, and in 1611 he was nominated? 
president of the royal and supreme council of the- 
Indies. 



E S P A N A. 



15. Don Fr. Garcia Guerra, of the order of St. 
Do i inic, archbishop of Mexico, nominated on ac 
count of the departure, of the former; lie governed 
seven months, during which time happened a 
dreadful earthquake, which destroyed several 
buildings. At his death the government fell into the 
hands of the audience and of their eldest oidor Don 
Pedro Otalora, a minister celebrated for his virtue 
and science, until the year 1612, when arrived, 

16. Don Diego Fernandez de Cordoba, Marquis 
of Guadalcazar, an illustrious knight of Cordoba, a 
man of special talent and ability ; he made some 
very useful public works, and perfected the arches 
of the aqueduct of Santa Fe ; he went over to his 
promotion of the viceroyalty of Peru in 1621, 
leaving the government in charge of the audience. 

17. Don Diego Carrillo deMendoza y Pinientel, 
Marquis of Gelves, Count of Priego ; he entered in 
1621, and found very serious disturbances existing 
between the archbishop Don Juan Perez de la 
Serna, which were followed by an insurrection in 
1624, when the insurgents burnt the prison, and set 
at liberty the criminals. The audience at that time 
abrogated the government for 10 months. 

18. Don llodrigo Pacheco y Osorio, Marquis of 
Ceralvo ; he entered Mexico in 1624, and it was 
in his time that the city experienced the dreadful 
inundation which lasted two years, and came on 
again in the years 1631 and 1634 ; he displayed 
the greatest energy in guarding against the effects 
of these calamities ; he built the cahada or paved 
mound of San Christoval, together with the sluices 
which it at present has, to impede the communica 
tion between the lake Tezcuco and the other 
lakes; he governed till 1635, when he was suc 
ceeded by, 

19. Don Lope Diaz de Armendariz, Marquis of 
Cadereita, who had been at various times com 
mander of galleons ; he entered the aforesaid year, 
and governed in a pacific and just manner ; he re 
paired the mischiefs occasioned by the former inun 
dations, continued the canal or waste-water of 
Huehuetoca, established the Armada de Barlovento, 
and ended his government in 1640. 

20. Don Diego Lopez Pacheco, Marquis of Vil- 
lena, Duke of Escalona ; he entered the above year, 
endured many inquietudes, labours, and dissen 
sions, and returned to Spain in 1642 : as some satis 
faction for what he had gone through, he was 
again offered the vieeroyalty, but refused it : he 
was succeeded by Don Juan de Palafox y Mendoza. 

21. Don Garcia Sarrtiiento y Sotomayor, Count 
of Salvatierra, Marquis of Sobroso ; he entered the 
above year, was most piously, zealously, and de- 
voutedly interested for the public good and ser*&amp;gt; 



vice of the king, made a present of the greater 
part of the plate used at the altar of Nuestra Se- 
ilora de Guadalupe, and was promoted to the vice- 
royalty of Peru in 1648. 

22. Don Marcos de Torres y Rueda, bishop of 
Yucatan ; he took possession of the government in 
the said year, but held it a very short time, as he 
died in the following, leaving the concerns of go 
vernment in the hands of the audience and its elder 
oidor Don Matias tie Peralta, and 15 months after 
wards his successor arrived. 

23. Don Luis llenriquez de Guzman, Count of 
Alva de Liste, who entered in 1650; in his time 
the province was visited by Don Pedro de Galves : 
lie was promoted to the vicejroyalty of Peru in 
1653. 

24. Don Francisco Fernandez de la Cueva, 
Duke of Alburquerque, a man of great integrity ; 
he caused the highway robbers to be apprehended, 
some sodomites to be burnt, and took a vow with 
all the tribunals to defend the mysteries of La 
Purisium Concepcion ; in his time the cathedral 
church was finished, and he was promoted to the 
viceroyalty of Peru in 1660. 

25. Don Juan de Leiba y de la Cerda, Count of 
Bano.s ; he entered in the said year, and after a 
mild and peaceable government, which lasted four 
years, he returned to Spain, and having become a 
widower, entered the convent of the order of the 
barefooted Carmelites of Madrid. 

26. Don Diego Osorio Escobar y Llamas, bi 
shop of La Puebla de los Angeles, and archbishop 
elect of Mexico ; he governed from 1664 to the 
end of the same year. 

27. Don Antonio Sebastian of Toledo, Marquis 
of Mancera, a man of the most consummate policy ; 
in his time happened the irruption of the volcano 
of Mexico, when it vomited ashes for four days 
successively ; he returned to Spain in 1673. 

28. Don Pedro Nu no Colon, of Portugal and 
Castro, Duke of Vcragua ; he entered Mexico the 
said year, and died six days after his arrival. 

29. Don Fray Payo Henriquez de Rivera, of 
the order of San Agustin, archbishop of Mexico, 
nominated on account of the misfortune that oc 
curred to the former ; he took possession of the 
government the same year, repaired the calzadas 
or paved mounds and entrances of the city, and 
renounced the viceroyalty in 1680. 

30. Don Tomas Antonio Manrique de la Cerda 
y Aragon, Count of Pa redes, Marquis of La La- 
guna ; he entered the government in the said year, 
1680, made the most ample provisions for render 
ing succour to Vera Cruz when it was attacked by 
Nicolas Agraman and Lorenzo Jacome, although 



E S P A N A. 



77 



not so as to hinder them from sacking and plunder 
ing the same ; he gave orders for the caption and ex 
ecution of Don Antonio Benavides, Marquis of 
San Vincente, who was known by the name of El 
Tapado, he having feigned himself as visitor of the 
kingdom ; he governed until 1686. 

31. Don Melchor Portocarrero Laso de la Vega, 
Count of La Monclava, comendador of Zarra in 
the order of Alcantara, called Arm of Silver, or 
Brazo de Plata, from his having an arm of this 
metal, inasmuch as he had lo*t his right arm in 
battle ; he entered Mexico the same year, 1686, 
governed most ably, built an aqueduct for carry 
ing the water to San Juan de la Penitencin, and 
was promoted to the yiceroyalty of Peru in 16S8. 

32. Don Gaspar de la Cerda, Sauclov d Silva y 
Mendoza, Count of Galve; he entered the aforesaid 
year: in his time the Indians rebelled on account 
of a scarcity of maize, when they burnt (lie palace 
and houses of the cal ddo ; then it was that they 
were chastised with a severer discipline than that to 
which they had been accustomed, and were pro 
hibited from drinking their pulque: this scarcity 
of grain was succeeded by a plague and three 
earthquakes ; and with these calamites his govern 
ment ended, and he returned to Spain. 

33. Don Juan de Ortega Montanes, bishop of 
Mechoacan ; he took in hand the reins of govern 
ment in 1696, and held them until the arrival of 
the right successor in the same year. 

34. Don Joseph Sarmiento y Valladares, Count 
of Motezuma and of Tula ; he took possession the 
same year, and governed with great credit until 
1701. 

35. Don Juan de Ortega de Montanes, at this 
time bishop of Mexico ; he returned for the se 
cond time to manage affairs, when in the following 
year arrived, 

36. Don Francisco Fernandez de la Cueva 
Henriquez, Duke of Alburquerqne, Marquis of 
Cuellar ; in 1702, he received the cord of the 
golden fleece from the hand of the inquisitor 
deacon Don Francisco Deza ; he dedicated the 
grand temple of Nuestra Senora de Guadalupe, 
and returned to Spain in 1710. 

37. Don Fernando de Lancaster Noroila y 
Silva, Duke of Linares, Marquis of V atdefuentes ; 
he rendered himself notable by his amiable, liberal, 
and charitable government, during the time of the 
plagues which in his time invaded the kingdom ; 
he ceased to govern in 1716, and after returning 
to Spain, died in the following year. 

38. Don Baltasar de Zuniga Guzman, Soto- 
mayor y Mendoza, Duke of Anon, Marquis of Va 



lero ; he founded the convent of Corpus Christi, 
received as visitor of the audience Don Francisco 
Gurzaron, was inquisitor of Mexico, and destined 
to the presidency of the council of. the Indies in 
1722. 

3D. Don Juan de Acuna, ?larquis of Casafuerte, 
a knight of the order of Santiago, comendador of 
Adelfa in that of Alcantara, native of Lima, o-ene- 
ral of the artillery, a soldier of -consummate merit, 
and one who had served 59 years; also of acknow 
ledged talent, prudence, disinterestedness, and con 
stancy, on which account he fully merited the 
title of the Great Governor ; he made the fine edi 
fices of the royal store-houses and the mint ; he 
visited the interior garrisons, endowed a prison, in 
such a manner that its poor inhabitants should 
have a good dinner twice a week, left a sum for 
the purpose of making yearly a nun of some or 
phan female, and dividing the rest of his fortune 
in alms and pious works ; lie died in 1734. 

40. Don Juan Antonio de Vizarron y Eguiar- 
reta, archbishop of Mexico; he was nominated 
through the death of the former, and o-overned 
until 1740. 

41. Don Pedro de Castro y Figueroa, Marquis 
of Gracia Real, Duke of La Conquista, comen- 
dador of Castilseras in the order of Calatrava 
knight of the famous order of To isson, a gentle 
man of the chamber of his Majesty, captain-gene 
ral of the armies, and lieutenant-colonel of the re 
giment of Spanish guards ; nominated viceroy in 
1740; he died the"" folio wing year, when the go 
vernment fell to the charge of the audience, and its 
deacon Don Pedro Malo de Villavisencio. 

42. Bon Pedro Cebrian y Agustin, Counf of 
Fuenclara ; he entered Mexico in 1742, employed 
himself diligently in repairing and cleansing the 
city, repaired the causeway of San Antonio Abad 
and returned to Spain in 1746. 

43. Don Juan Francisco de Guemes y Horca- 
sitas, Count of Revillagigedo, knight of the order 
of Santiago, lieutenant-general ; he passed from 
the government of the Havana in 1746, augmented 
con&amp;iderably the royal revenues, and returned to 
Spain in 1755, the king having recompensed his 
merits by promoting him to the rank of captain- 
general of the army. 

44. Don Agustin de Ahumada y Villalon, Mar- 
quis of Las Amarillas, knight of the order of San 
tiago, lieutenant-general of the royal armies, and 
lieutenant-colonel of the regiment of Spanish 
guards, governor of the fortified place of Barce 
lona ; he governed ve years, until 1760, when he 
died, and left the reins to the audience, and its 



\s 



E S P A N A. 



deacon Don Francisco Cliavarri, until the arri 
val of, 

45. Don Francisco Cagigal de la Vega, knight 
of the ordrr of Santiago, lieutenant-general of the 
royal armies; he passed from the government of 
the Havana, and exercised the oilice of interme 
diate viceroy until the arrival of the proper suc 
cessor in the same year ; he designed and began 
the foundation of i\\e plaza mayor. 

46. Don Joaquin dc Montserrat, Marquis of 
Cruillas, comendador of Veniarres and Lorcha, in 
the order of Montcsa, a gentleman of the chamber, 
lieutenant-general of the royal armies, lieutenant- 
colonel of the regiment of Spanish guards, and in 
termediate commandant-general of the kingdom of 
Aragon, when he was nominated viceroy of Nueva 
Espana : in his time the country was twice visited 
with a plague, when an infinite number of Indians 
died ; he returned to Spain, throwing up the reins 
of government. 

47. Don Carlos Francisco de Croix, Marquis de 
Croix, native of Lila in Flanders, a knight of 
the order of Santiago, comendador of Molinos and 
Laguna Rota in that of Calatrava, a captain-gene 
ral of the royal armies, and of distinguished merit 
in the Walonian guards, the body-guards, and 
in the general commanderies of Ceulita, Andalu- 
cia, and Galicia ; he entered the situation of vice 
roy in 1766, and returned to Spain in 1772. 

48. Don Antonio Maria Bucareli Baylio, of the 
order of San Juan, lieutenant-general of the royal 
armies, native of Sevilla : he passed over from the 
government of the Havana to this viceroyalty, and 
he performed its functions with such skill, in 
tegrity, and uprightness, as to perpetuate his me 
mory in that kingdom ; he died in 1779. 

49. Don Martin de Mayorga, a knight of the 
order of Alcantara, brigadier of the royal ar 
mies ; he was president of Guatemala when he re 
ceived orders to pass over to the service of this 
viceroyalty, and he performed its functions until 
1784, when the proper successor arrived, who 
was, 

50. Don Matias dc Galves, native of Malaga, 
lieutenant-general of the royal armies, who also 
came from the presidency of Guatemala, and died 
the following year, in!785, leaving the government 
to the audience, until the arrival of, 

51. Don Bernardo de Galves, Count of Galves, 
son of the former, comendador of Bolanos in the 
order of Calatrava, lieutenant-general of the royal 
armies, having been shortly elevated to this rank 
by importunate circumstances: he entered Mexico 
in the taid year, 1785, but his government was 



equally short as that of his father, as likewise his 
career, inasmuch as he died the following year, in 
1786, causing throughout the kingdom an uni 
versal regret for his loss. 

52. Don Manuel de Florez, knight, eomendador 
of Lopera in the order of Santiago, a gentleman of 
the chamber, lieutenant-general of the royal ar 
mada, who had served with great address the of 
fice of viceroy of the Nuevo Reyno de Granada, 
and was actually at &amp;lt;his court when he was elected 
by the king, immediately that the news of the 
death of his predecessor arrived, in 1787. 

ESP AN A, NUTVA, a town and port of the 
island of Trinidad ; situate on the w. coast, in the 
bay of the gulf Tristc. 

ESPARZA, a settlement of the province and 
government of Costarica in the kingdom of Gua 
temala ; situate on the coast of the S. sea, on the 
shore of a small rivor. 

ESPELETA, a settlement of the province of 
Moqui in Nuevo Mexico. 

ESPERANZA, BUENA, a town of the province 
and corregimiento of Santiago in the kingdom of 
Chile ; situate on the shore of the river Biobio, 
and to the e. of its capital. 

ESPERANZA, a settlement of the province and 
captainship of Los Ilheos in Brazil ; situate at the 
mouth or entrance of the river of Los Ilheos, near 
the coast. 

ESPERANZA, a city, formerly of the province of 
Chaco and kingdom of Peru, but which was en 
tirely destroyed by the infidel Indians. 

ESPERANZA, a canal or narrow pass of the 
straits of Magellan, the first that is met with on 
entering the N. sea. 

ESPIGON, a settlement of the province and 
captainship of San Vincente in Brazil ; situate on 
the shore of the river Itapeba. 

ESPINA, a settlement of the province and 
government of Venezuela; situate between two 
streams which enter the river Portuguesa, and to 
the n. of the town of Araure. 

ESPINAL, a settlement of the head settlement 
of the district and alcaldia mayor of Papantla in 
Nueva Espana. It contains 70 families of Indians, 
and is seven leagues s. of Papantla. 

ESP1NAS, a small settlement of the head settle 
ment of Orizaba, and alcaldia mayor oflxmiquil- 
pan, in Nueva Espana. 

[ESP1N1LLO, a point of the province and go 
vernment of Buenos Ay res ; situate at a short dis 
tance from the Parana, about 60 miles n. of Bue 
nos Ayres, in lat. 33 33 30" s. Long. 58 12 
15" a".] 



ESP 

ESP1NO, a river of the province and govern 
ment of Cumana. It runs s. and turning after 
wards to the ID. enters the Manapire. 

ESPINOSA, a city which was once in the 
Nuevo Reytio de Granada, on the skirt of the 
mountains of Bogota, and at the entrance of the 
Uanuras of Cazanare. It was destroyed by the 
Jiraras Indians, when they rebelled in 1679. 

ESP1RITI, a settlement of the province and 
corrcgimieato of Vilcas Iluaman in Peru ; annexed 
to the curacy of Totos. 

ESPILllf U-CA.TA, a settlement of the province 
and corregimicnto ofAngaraes in Peru ; annexed 
to the curacy of Acobamba. 

EsPiuiTei-SANTo, a province and cap fa in ft flip 
of the kingdom of Brazil, one of the four that com 
pose it; bounded zo. by the province of Puerto 
Seguro, e. by that of the llio Janeiro, ?. by the 
mountains and nations of the infidel Indians, run 
ning but a small distance into the country, and n. 
by the sea, running 50 leagues along the coast. 
It was inhabited by the Tupinaes and Tupinan- 
qniris Indians, who were subjected by the Aimores. 
This province was taken from these by Vasco Fer 
nandez Coutino, a Portuguese, to whom it was also 
ceded by the king of Portugal, as a reward for the 
services he had performed in India. lie disem 
barked with his followers in the bay of Espiritu 
Santo, and from this lie gave the name to the 
whole province, which after many labours he suc 
ceeded in reducing. It is of a delightfully plea 
sant temperature, fertile in all fruits, although there 
.is no cultivation whatever, its natives being solely 
given to the employment of making sugar, from 
which they carry on a great commerce. Luis 
Gonzales de la Camera Coutino, governor and cap 
tain-general of Brazil, descended from its con 
queror, sold it to Gil de Araujo, of one of the 
noblest and richest families of that kingdom, who 
distributed amongst the inhabitants certain lands 
and estates, in order to induce them to employ 
themselves with still greater zeal in the manufac 
ture of sugar. It afterwards became the inherit 
ance of his sou, Manuel Garcia Pimcntel, who dy* 
ing without legitimate succession, it passed to 
Cosine de Mura, his cousin : of him it was bought 
and added to the crown by Don Juan V. This 
province; has different rivers, which water and fer 
tilize it, nearly all of which enter the sea. Its 
population consists of three towns, besides various 
other settlements, the towns being Nuestra Seiiora 
do la Victoria, Nuestra Senora de la Concepcion, 
and the capital, which has the same name as the pro 
vince. [Its present population is about .25,000 souls.] 
ESPIHITU-SANTO. This is a small city, having 



ESP 79 

a good port and castle, and standing upon the sea 
shore. Its territory is very delightful and fertile. 
It has a very good parish church, bearing the de 
dicatory title of Nuestra Senora de la Misericordia. 
It is in lat. 20 SO s. Long. 339 40 . 

ESPIKITU-SANTO, a bay of the province and go 
vernment of Las Texas in Nueva Espana. It has 
a good bottom, capacious, and fit to receive many 
vessels; but its entrance is filled with sand-banks, 
which arc formed by the whirlpools occasioned by 
the currents along the coast. Its situation is so ad 
vantageous, that if it were fortified it would defend 
the whole province, and facilitate the commerce 
with Vera Cruz. The French, commanded by 
Robert de la Sala, took possession of it in 1685, 
giving it the name of San Luis, establishing in 
it a French garri,-on ; the news of which obliged 
the Count of Monclova, the then viceroy of Nueva 
Espana, to send in 1687 to the governor of Coa- 
guila to dislodge them ; but he was prevented from 
doing this, owing to the circumstance of the Texas 
Indians having already put (he whole of them (the 
French) to death. In 1721 was built, by order of 
the king, the fort and garrison of Nuestra Senora 
de Loreto, afterwards called Del Espiritu-Santo, 
where there are 38 soldiers, with a captain and 
various subalterns. It is situate on an eminence 
commanding the country and the river Saii Ga 
briel ; but since it is more than 40 leagues w thin 
land, it cannot serve either as a defence for the bay 
or the coast, and is in fact only useful to restrain 
the incursions of the infidel Indians. 

ESPIRITU-SANTO, a settlement of the province 
and corregimiento of Cuenca in the kingdom of 
Quito. 

KSPIRITU-SANTO, another, of the province and 
government of Buenos Ayres ; situate on the coast 
which lies between the river La Plata and the 
straits of Magellan. 

ESPIRITU-SANTO, a town of the province and 
alcaJdia mayor of Goazaroalco in Nueva Espana, 
belonging, as to its ecclesiastical jurisdiction, tothe 
bishopric of Antequera; founded by Gonzalo dc 
Sandoval in I.o22. 

ESPIRITU-SANTO, another settlement, of the 
province and captainship of Itamaraca in Brazil; 
situate near the town of La Concepcion. 

ESPIKITU-SANTO, another, of the province and 
government of Antioquia in the Nuevo Reyno de 
Granada ; situate oti the shore of the river Cauca, 
where there is a good port much frequented bj 
small vessels. 

ESPIRITU-SANTO, a river of the province and 
captainship of its name in Brazil, which runs e. 
and enters the sea in the bay. 



80 



E S Q 



[ESPIUITU-SANTO, a bay on the w. coast of 
E. Florida. It has a good harbour, four fathom 
water, and safe anchorage ; but the land all about 
the coast is very low, and cannot be seen from 
a ship s deck when in seven fathom water. Several 
low, sandy islands and marshes, covered with 
mangrove bushes, lie before the mainland. Here 
are immense numbers of fish in the summer time, 
which may be caught with a line, enough to load 
a ship, (if the climate would admit of curing 
them), even in a few days.] 

ESPIIUTU-SANTO, a cape or point of land on 
the s. coast of the straits of Magellan, where they 
enter the S. sea. Lat. 52 38 s. Long. 68 25 w. 

ESPIHITU-SANTO, an island in the gulf of Cali 
fornia, or Mar Roxo de Cortes ; situate near the 
coast, with which it forms the great bay De la 
Paz. Lat. 24 35 n. Long. 110 27 w. 

ESPIIUTU-SANTO, another island, in the W. 
Indies, one of the Lucayes, inhabited by English 
fishermen ; lying between Hogs island and the 
.shoal of Mimbres. [See Axrmos Isles.] 

ESPIRITU-SANTO, a very lofty mountain of the 
province and government of Daricn, and kingdom 
of Tierra Firrne, on the shore of the river Cnpe, 
near the coast of the S. sea. 

ESPIIUTU-SANTO, a town of the province and 
government of Paraguay. 

ESPO1R, Cape of, or ROZIER, or DESPAIR, 
on the coast of New Brunswick or Acadin, in the 
gulf of St. Lawrence, between the bay of the Grand 
Etang, and the island of Buenaventura or Good- 
luck. Lat. 48 55 n. Long. 64 10 w. 

ESPRIT, S. a small island near the s. coast of 
the royal island of Cape Breton, between the ports 
of Riband and Michau. 

ESPUELAS, Si F.II n A r&amp;gt;E LAS, a cordittera of 
mountains of Nueva Espafia in N. America. 

ESQUENA, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Carabaya in Peru ; annexed to 
the curacy of Cbazri. 

ESQU1LACHE, S. ANTONIO DE, a settlement 
and .scat of the silver mines of the province and go- 
vmimcnt of Chucuito in Peru ; situate in the cor- 
dillera, on which account it is of a cold tempera 
ture. It has one of the richest mines of any in the 
kingdom, and which formerly yielded immense 
wealth, and would also at the present day, had it 
but sufficient hands to work it, and energy for the 
undertaking. It is said that of the persons work- 
^ug vn this mine alone, the bishop received yearly 
24.000 dollars for church dues; and in proof of 
(his, it is only necessary to add, that an inhabitant of 
this place, who had become very opulent, wishing 
to retire from his labour?, surrendered to another 



E S Q 

his mine, called La Fragua, and which was one of 
the 36 which lay close together, for no less a con 
sideration than J040 dollars a day. Notwithstand 
ing what we have said above, great quantities of 
silver are in fact extracted from these mines : in 
deed, as much gold is procured as is equal to 10, 
12, or 20 marks each c&amp;xon ; moreover, if some of 
these mines were to be emptied of their water, they 
would without doubt render^ some of them at least, 
from 120 to 500 marks. 

ESQUIMAUX, a barbarous and ferocious na 
tion of Indians of N. America, w ho dwell in the 
most e. part, on the side of the river St. Lawrence, 
extending c. and /?. in that immense tract of country 
called the Land of Labrador, opposite Newfound 
land, from lat. 50 to (j4 n. and from long. 59 to 
80 w. These Indians were discovered by the 
Danes at the beginning of the century before last, 
but they were found to be of so brutish a nature, 
arid their country so rude and barren, that little ad 
vantage was expected from any establishment or 
commercial intercourse that might be adopted 
amongst them. The name signifies that the coun 
try was csqu/mantsic, which in the Abinaquian lan 
guage means eaters of raw flesh ; these being the 
only Indians Avho in those parls thus took their 
food, the rest having a custom of cooking, or rather 
drying it by the sun. In their appearance, ens* 
toms, and language, they seem distinct from all the 
other Indians of America, and there is | robab) y 
reason for believing that they are descended from 
the Greenlanders. They are, however, of such a 
brutish and ferocious nature, that there is no Euro 
pean nation that has an inclination to have any 
commerce with them. The little trade they have 
consists in hides, which they give in exchange for. 
trinkets; but in any negociution with them it is 
necessary to be wary and to keep at a tolerable dis 
tance, and above all not to come near them when 
they are in any number, since they have an invari 
able practice of putting to death, when they find 
an opportunity, even those who come to treat with 
them. They, in short, abhor the Europeans, and 
are always inclined to do them mischief; they 
have been known to run down to the coast in the 
night-time, and slyly to cut the cables of vessels, 
in hopes that they might be drifted away and 
wrecked. They an; for the most part tall, robust, 
and active, of a white colour like Europeans, being 
always covered, even in the warmest season. Their 
beard is red ; and it is extraordinary that these are 
the only Americans who have beards: these beards 
they suffer to grow up to their eyes, so that their 
aspect is very fierce: their eyes are small, their 
teeth large and separated, and their hair is gene- 



ESQUIMAUX. 



81 



rally black or of a chcsnut colour and very curly ; 
neither do they in their manners or habits fall short 
of the fierceness of this their appearance. They 
are savage, cruel, restless, faithless, and ever dis 
posed to mischief, and on this account, and from 
the very little commerce carried on with them, few 
particulars of them are known. To clothe them 
selves, they make shirts of bladders, paunches, and 
fish-skins, fitting them very nicely ; but these ac 
coutrements in the men never reach farther than 
down to the middle, and down to the knees in the 
women. These have likewise a small jacket made 
of the skin of the bear, dog, or marine calf, with a 
hood hanging behind, used to cover their heads in 
bad weather, and which when up so entirely hides 
their faces that it is almost impossible to know 
them. They use likewise shoes and boots made of 
the same skins, adorned on the outside with other 
skins of a finer quality, such as those of the martes, 
ermine^ &amp;c. The coats or garments of the men 
reach only half-way down the thigh, and those of 
the women to the knee ; and either of them are at 
tached to the shape by means of a girdle, from 
which is hung some trinket made of the teeth of 
the bear or other animal, or of fish-bones, as also 
some trifling ornaments which they get from the 
Europeans. In the summer they live in cabins 
open to the air, and in winter in subterraneous 
caves. The French, at different times, have 
erected some forts and settlements on their frontiers, 
such as those of St. Nicholas, Chichequedec, Port 
Nuveau, Portobelo, &amp;c. with the expectation of 
civilizing them, and of establishing a commerce 
with them ; also for the sake of protecting the 
missionaries destined to preach to and convert them ; 
but the fierceness and intractable nature that has 
been universally manifested by these savages has 
operated far to the doing away some of the establish 
ments already effected. Those capable of bearing 
arms are computed at 30,000 ; but they are such 
cowards that it is no uncommon thing for 500 
Christian troops from Hudson s bay to conquer 
5 or 6000 Esquimaux. They are, however, as 
troublesome at sea as on land ; since in their 
canoes, of which some are capable of contain 
ing from 30 to 40 men, they greatly molest the 
whale fisheries ; so much so that the Maloinos of 
the n. and the Spaniards of port Chova, find them 
selves under the necessity of arming some vessels 
for the sake of guarding their fisheries. It is cus 
tomary for the Spaniards (o cruize only about the 
coast of Newfoundland and in the straits of Bellcisle, 
and they seldom venture farther, for fear of meet 
ing with some barbarians still more savage than 

TOL. II. 



these of whom we are speaking. Some travellers 
who have been in this country assert that there is 
here a curious race of pigmies, not exceeding 
three feet in height, and extremely wide and robust 
in proportion, the women being even still less ; and 
that there is no nation in the world that can sup- 
pass it in wretchedness. The Esquimaux, to whom 
the aforesaid race are slaves, treat them with great 
cruelty ; and it is thought a particular mark of 
grace, should the poor creatures be suffered by 
their barbarous masters to drink only a little fresh 
water. This article is however very scarce here, 
there being no other than such as is derived from 
the melted snow, since the excessive cold binds up 
the veins of the earth in such manner as not to 
permit any passage for the waters, save at a great 
depth. This was too fully proved by some mari 
ners of the n. who had recourse to the melting 
of some large pieces of ice which they found on 
the sea-shore, when they procured a very good and 
wholesome water. These Indians are, however, 
accustomed to drink good water from many lakes 
which lie in the interior of their country. The 
Danes, who in 10 05 navigated to the furthest n. 
latitude of any till that time in Hudson s bay, say 
they discovered a race of very small men, who had 
square heads, were of a dark complexion, thick- 
lipped, who ate raw flesh and fish, and whom it 
was impossible to make to eat bread or cooked 
meat, or to drink wine ; they drinking instead of 
this the oil of the whale. The canoes of these pig 
mies were from 10 to 12 feet long, and made of 
pieces of whalebone about the thickness of a finger, 
covered on both sides with skins of sea calfs, and 
sewed together with the sinews of animals : two 
other skins form the head of the canoe, an opening 
being left in the middle for the rower, who attaches 
the said skins to his waist, in such a manner that 
no water can possibly enter the canoe : the strength 
of this skiff consists in its two extremities, where 
the whalebone is well knit together, and sewed so 
tight as to be capable of resisting the effects of the 
strongest tempests. Each of these canoes is ma 
naged by a single person, who sits down upon his 
legs, the sleeves of his jacket being made extremely 
fast at the wrists, and his head being covered with 
a hood attached to the jacket, so as entirely to ex 
clude any water. He holds with both hands an 
oar, which is very wide and about five or six. feet 
long, which serves as an oar, rudder, and counter 
poise : these canoes are managed by the natives in 
this manner with the most astonishing skill. The 
Esquimaux have besides these other canoes of a 
larger sort, resembling- the European boats, the in- 
M 



82 E S Q 

side of which is composed of timbers, and being 
covered with skins, as are those of which we have 
spoken. These will carry 150 people, and arc 
made for rowing or sailing. These people are at 
continual war with the Europeans who dwell near 
the gulf of St. Lawrence, and have oftentimes been 
taken slaves by the latter; and thus being removed 
far from their native country and from their savage 
habits, have become in some degree civilized, for 
getting those customs which put them c:i a level 
with brutes in every thing but their human shape. 
The Esquimaux are the only Indians who come to 
the coast of Newfoundland from the continent of 
Labrador to fish and to trade with the Europeans ; 
and it is almost incredible that they should be found 
walking calmly about on the frightful and huge 
pieces of ice found in these seas, some of these 
pieces being as large as the islands in Hudson s bay. 
It is nevertheless a fact that they have often been 
seen as we have just mentioned, carried about at 
the mercy of the winds and tides, striking horror 
into the breast of the beholder, but exciting in 
their breasts not the least sensations of fear ; for it 
should seem, that carrying their canoes with them, 
wheresoever they may go, they can never hurt, let 
what will happen to them ; and if one piece of ice 
is too rough or difficult, they quit it for another ; 
but should the other lie at some distance, they 
take to their canoe : lastly, should their canoe 
break against one of these floating masses, they find 
an asylum in the very instrument that caused their 
ruin, and by which they were shipwrecked. The 
Mickmakers, who inhabit Acadia, have for a long 
time been at war with the Esquimaux ; and to at 
tack them in their caverns, they have not scrupled 
to take a voyage of 30 or 40 leagues in canoes made 
of the bark of trees. Lastly, the Esquimaux have 
no resemblance whatever to the other inhabitants 
of Canada, or any other Indians, in language, cus 
toms, manner of living, colour of their bodies or 
hair ; but, on the contrary, they so much resemble 
the n. people of Asia, that it is as reasonable 
to conclude they are descended from the same, as 
thai this country, merely because so uninhabitable, 
should be less .ancient in its population than any 
other nation of America. The English, in 1773, 
took away and introduced to the king at London, 
a woman of the Esquimaux. This country was 
ceded to Great Britain by the peace of Utrecht in 
1713 ; but they have no establishment here save 
that at Hudson s bay. The Indians and the French 
of Canada follow the chase here for the sake of 
kins. See NEW BRITAIN, and CANADA. 

[ESQUIMAUX, a large bay on the Labrador 



ESS 

coast, into Which a river of the same name empties. 
It lies in the n. w. part of the gulf of St. Lawrence, 
near the mouth of the straits of Bellcisle. Esqui 
maux islands lie across i!s mouth."] 

E8QU1NA, a settlement of the province and 
correginticnto of Arica in Peru ; annexed to the cu 
racy of Copta. 

ESQUINAPA, a settlement of the province and 
ttlcaldia mayor of Chiametlan in Nueva Espaiia; 
situate near the coast of the S. sea. Its inhabitants, 
who are Mexican Indians, are freed from the tribute 
imposed, for the rcconoitring and watching the 
coast, and for the giving advice of, and the guard 
ing against the invasion of an enemy, who has 
sometimes found his way even up to the settle 
ment itself. 

ESQU1R1, a settlement of the province and cor- 
regimiento of Porco in Peru. 

ESQUIVEL, a settlement of the island of Cuba, 
on the n. coast, between the woods and the bay of 
Metanzas. 

ESQUIVO. See ESSEQURBO. 

E8SENERU, a river of the province and go 
vernment of Moxos in the kingdom of Quito. It 
rises from a lake, runs n. making various turns, 
and enters the Cabieres. 

ESSEQUEBO, a large district and river of the 
province and government of Gnayana. The river 
rises from the great lake Parime, according to the 
discoveries and observations made in 1745. Its 
shores, which are covered with woods, shelter many 
barbarous tribes of Indians, who maintain them 
selves by fishing and the chase ; the same are 
Caribes or cannibals, and they all, men and wo 
men, go entirely naked. This river is one of the 
large rivers of America. It has its heads towards 
the s. but its channel diminishes in proportion as 
it approaches them. It is navigable a six-days 
voyage from its mouth by barges, and its waters 
arc perceived the whole way to get gradually more 
shallow, since it divides itself into different 
branches, which form several islands. It receives 
the waters of various other large rivers, and parti 
cularly of those called the Mazarroni and Cuyum ; 
which united enter it 10 leagues before that it runs, 
in a very large and copious stream, into the sea, 
through five mouths, all of which form canals ca 
pable of receiving small craft, although not safe 
for vessels of a large size. On two of its islands 
the Dutch have two plantations, with some houses 
for the habitation of the Negroes and Indians, the 
same forming part of the colony which the Dutch 
have established on the shores of the said river, 
and which may be reduced to some sugar-cane 



ESS 

estates of about SO leagues in extent, where sugar 
is manufactured. This article, with brandy, are 
the only commercial productions of these parts. 
Each housekeeper resides entirely on his own estate, 
and each estate is about three leagues distance the 
one from the other. Indeed there is no other re 
gular population, save that which is comprised in 
an island which lies towards the e. It may consist 
of about a dozen houses besides that of the gover 
nor of the colony. The same officer is command 
ant of the troops, surgeon and secretary, and one 
who favours the interests of the commercial com 
pany. Here are two royal storehouses, and a 
lodging house for the Negroes of the said company, 
also the church. In the most elevated part of the 
island, close to the house of the governor, is the 
fort of Zeland, built upon palisades upon a bold 
spot, surrounded and beaten by the waters of the 
river and the ocean ; it is consequently almost con 
stantly in need of being repaired by fresh stakes 
and piles ; besides this there is also another battery, 
even with the water s edge, with 12 pieces of 24 
pounds each, and this communicates with the fort. 
[Essequebo is now in the possession of the English, 
having been taken in the present war. See DEME- 
RAKA, and DUTCH AMERICA.] 

[ESSEX County, in Massachusetts, is bounded 
n. by the state of New Hampshire ; e. and s. by the 
ocean, and the town of Chelsea in Suffolk county ; 
w. by Middlesex county : in length about 38 miles, 
in breadth 25 ; and is shaped triangularly, Chelsea 
being the acute point. The chief islands on its 
coast belonging to it, are cape Anne and Plumb 
islands. It is subdivided into 22 townships, which 
contain 7644; houses, and 57,913 inhabitants; be 
ing the most populous of its size of any in the state, 
having about 135 souls to a square mile. The first 
settlement in Massachusetts Proper was made in 
Salem, the capital of the county, in 1628, by John 
Endicot, Esq. one of the original patentees, and 
many years governor of the colony. It was made a 
shire in 1643, being one of the three into which the 
colony was first divided. Essex county pays about 
one-seventh part of the state tax, elects six senators 
and counsellors for the government of the common 
wealth, and one representative in the legislature of 
the United States. The face of the country is 
pleasingly variegated with hills, vales, woods, and 
plains. The land is generally fruitful, but is 
more favourable to barley than most other parts of 
the state. Quarries of marble and limestone are 
found in this county, and the sea-coast is indented 
with a number of good harbours. Merrimack 
river intersects the n. part of Essex county ; be- 
it and the New Hampshire line are the towns 



E S T" 83 

of Methuen, Ilaverhill, Almsbv.ry, and Salis 
bury.] 

[ESSEX County, in Virginia, is bounded e. and 
n. e. by Rappahannock river, which divides it 
from Richmond. It is about 55 miles long and 12 
broad, and contains 9122 inhabitants, of whom 
5440 are slaves.] 

[ESSEX County, in New Jersey, is in the e. 
part of the state, and divided from Siaten island by 
Newark bay. It is about 25 miles in length and 
16 in breadth, and has three townships, viz. New 
ark, Elizabeth town, and Acquackanack, which 
contain 17,785 inhabitants, of whom 1171 are 
slaves. The soil is very fertile, and its fruits and 
other productions meet with a quick sale in New 
York city. Essex county has within it seven Pres 
byterian churches, three for Episcopalians, one for 
Anabaptists, and two for Dutch Calvinists.] 

[ESSEX County, in Vermont, is the n. eastern 
most in the state.] 

[ESSEX, a township in Chittcnden county, Ver 
mont, contains 354 inhabitants. It lies between 
Jericho on the s. e. and Colchester on the n. w.~] 

EST, Point of the, in the island of S. Juan in 
Nova Scotia. 

ESTACADA, SANTA ROSA DE LA, a settlement 
of the province and government of Moxos, in the 
kingdom of Quito, being a reduction of Indians 
made by the missionaries of the regulars of the 
company of Jesuits of this province. It is situate 
on the e. shore of the river Itenes. The Portuguese 
of Mato Groso invaded and took it in 1761, build 
ing in it a redoubt with artillery and garrison ; and 
although they abandoned it in 1765, yet they re 
turned to it the following year to recover it, after 
which they put it into a better state of defence. 

ESTACIO, a small island of the N. sea, one of 
the Antilles. It is uncultivated and desert. 

ESTADOS. See STATES, and STATI N-LAND. 

ESTADOS UNI DOS. [See UNITED STATCS.] 

ESTAIL, a settlement of the province and go 
vernment of Tucuman in Peru, on the shore of the 
river Salaclo. It is at present in a slate of ruins, 
caused by the infidel Indians. 

ESTANCIA, a settlement of the province and 
government of Buenos Ayres ; situate on the shore 
of the river La Plata, between those of Areco and 
Lilian. 

ESTANCIA, with the addition ofRey, a spot of t he 
kingdom of Chile, celebrated fora rich gold mine, 
which is the greatest in those parts; also where ^ 
upon the sands of a river which runs here, are found 
many pieces or grains of this precious metal. 

ESTANCIA, a fort of the province and govern 
ment of Tueumau. 



84 E S T 

ESTANCIAS, a curacy of the province and 
corregimieato of Huamuchuco in Peru, which 
contains 28 churches, dispersed and divided into 
four chapels of ease, in the settlements of Mille- 
pata, Turubamba, Marcabal, and Chuquisongo. 

ESTANC1LLA, a small river of the kingdom 
of Chile. It runs s. forming a curve, and enters 
the Valdivia. 

[ESTAN1OLADO, SAN, a settlement of In 
dians of the province and government of Paraguay, 
in lat. 24 38 3L&amp;lt; s. Long. 56 36 15" a&amp;gt;.] . 

ESTANISLAO, SAN, DE OTANAVIS, a settle 
ment of the missions which were held by the regu 
lars of the company of Jesuits in the province and 
government of Mainas, of the kingdom of Quito ; 
situate on the shore of the river Aguarico. 

ESTAMSLAO, another settlement, in the pro 
vince and government of Cartagena ; situate on 
the shore of the canal of the Dike, between the set 
tlements of Majates and Santa Catalina. 

ESTANISLAO, another, in the province of Califor 
nia, on the sea-shore, and in the interior of the gulf. 

ESTANISLAO, another, of the missions which 
were held by the regulars of the company of Je 
suits in the province and government of Sonora. 

ESTANGUES, a settlement of the province 
and government of Maracaibo, in the jurisdiction 
of Grita ; situate in the road which leads from 
Merida to the Nucvo Reyno dc Granada. 

ESTAPA, or ESTAPE, a city of the province 
of Tabasco in Nueva Espana; situate on the 
river of the same name, according to William 
Dampier, who also says that it is a place of great 
traffic, and by nature so well fortified, that Cap 
tain Hewit, who attacked it with 200 Buccaniers 
or adventurers, could make no impression upon it. 

ESTAPACHA, a river of the province and 
government of Louisiana. It rises in the territory 
of the Yasons Indians, runs s. and then turns e. 

[ESTAPO, a strong town in New Spain, inha 
bited by Spaniards and native Americans ; situate 
at the mouth of the river Tlaluc. Lat. 17 30 n. 
Long. 103 5 a&amp;gt;.] 

ESTAKCA, a settlement of the province and 
corregimienlo of Chicas and Tarija in Peru, of the 
district of the former; annexed to the curacy of 
Talina. 

ESTATLAN, a small settlement or ward of the 
alcaldia mayor of Guauchinango in Nueva Es- 
pafia ; annexed to the curacy of that of Pahuatlan. 

ESTECO, or NUESTKA SENORA DE TALA- 
VERA, a city of the province and government of 
Tucuman in Peru, founded by Diego de Ileredia, 
in J576, on a fertile, pleasant, and well-watered 
plain, covered with woods and pastures, on the 

2 



E S T 

shore of the river Salado. It was formerly very 
populous and of great commerce, but in 1692 
was entirely destroyed by an earthquake ; when, 
the earth opening at various parts, and vomiting up 
various floods of water, which inundated the whole 
territory, nothing remained in the town but the 
gallows, which Still stood in its place unmoved, 
looking, as it were, an emblem of justice. The 
natives of this province assert that this calamity 
came upon them from the prevalence of vice, 
pride, and scandalous living. Many, who fled 
from the impending ruin, met their death at the 
hands of the infidel Indians, who taking advan 
tage of the general distress, butchered them in a 
shocking manner ; others fled to the city of Santa 
Fe and to Santiago : and from the horror that this 
deluge occasioned, *never has there been a person 
anxious to engage in the rebuilding of this city, 
notwithstanding that in its vicinity there are some 
estates and farms of grazing and cultivated lands. 
This city was 40 leagues to the n. w. of that of 
Santiago del Estero. 

ESTEPEQUE, a settlement of the province 
and alcaldia mayor of Chiapa in the kingdom of 
Guatemala. 

ESTERO, SANTIAGO DEL, a small city of the 
province and government of Tucuman in Peru ; 
founded by Francisco Aguirre, in 1562, on the 
w. shore of the river Dulce, which fertilizes its 
fields. It is of a hot temperature, but very healthy. 
In it was the Episcopal see from the time of iU 
foundation until 1690, when the same was trans 
lated to the capital of Cordoba. It has a parish 
with three curacies, and three convents of monks 
of the orders of San Francisco, Santo Domingo, 
and La Merced ; also a college which belonged 
to the regulars of the company of Jesuits. Its 
natives are famous for their manufactures of car 
pets, and a small trade is carried on in these ar 
ticles. They are so valorous as always hitherto to 
have kept in check the Indians of the province of 
Chaco, with whom they are at present in amity. 
San Francisco Solano abode some years in thiscity ; 
and in the convent are still to be seen some oranges 
which were planted by him, as also a cotton vest 
ment in which he used to say mass, relics held in 
just veneration by the inhabitants. [It is about 226 
miles s. from Salta, on the great road from that 
city to ttuenos Ay res, and about 480 miles from 
the latter. Lat 27 54 s. Long. 63 19 a?.] 

ESTF.UO, a river of the province and govern 
ment of Darien, in the kingdom of Tierra Firme. 
It rises in the mountains of the n. part, and enters 
the sea at the gulf of Tucumari or Atrato, near 
cape Tiburon. 



E S T 

ESTERO, another, a small river of the island of 
St. Domingo, in the French possessions. It runs 
in the u\ head from w. to 5. 5. e. and enters the sea 
between the port of John Roger and the river of 
Rollona. 

ESTERO. another, which is also a small river of 
the same island as the former, at the e. head. It 
enters the sea in the great bay of Samaria, near the 
port of San Lorenzo or St. Lawrence. 

ESTERO, another, of the province and govern 
ment of Tucuman. See CHOROMOUOS. 

ESTEROS, a name given in America to 
the canals of sea-water which run some leagues 
inland. There are many of these in the provinces 
of Guayaquil, Panama, and Cartagena. The 
most noted are, 

In Guayaquil^ Estero de Pacheco, 
Estero del Morro, Estero Mayor, 

Estero Quemado, Estero de Capira, 

Estero del Pan, Estero Lucio, 

Estero Bravo, Estero de Gatos, 

Estero de Mandinga, Estero de Palmas, 
Estero de Balzas, Estero Seco. 

Estero de Manglares, In Cartagena, 

Estero de Hostiones, Estero Bobo, 
Estero Vicjo (or Old), Estero de Cocos, 
Estero Salado, Estero de Manoa, 

Estero del Rey, Estero de S. Joseph, 

Estero deS. Juan Bap- Estero de Tortugas, 

tista, Estero de Santa Maria, 

Estero de Salinas, Estero Grande, 

Estero del Buey, Estero del Hospital r 

Estero de Lagartos, Estero Salado, 
Estero de Santa Lucia, Esterillo, 
Estero de Chuchos, Estero de Patos, 
Estero del Zambo. Estero de Mercaderes, 

In Panama, Estero de la Punta, 

Estero del Rey, Estero de Juan, 

Estero Congo, Estero Gallego, 

Estero Maestro, Estero de Game. 

ESTETELA, SANTA CAT A LIN A DE, a settle 
ment of the head settlement of Iluixtcpec, and 
alcaldia mayor of Ixquintepec, in Nueva Espana ; 
annexed to the curacy of this head settlement. It 
contains 34 families of Indians, and is three leagues 
between the e. and s. of the capital. 

ESTEVAN, S. a settlement of the head settle 
ment and alcaldia mayor ofTetela Xonotlain Nueva 
Espana ; being three leagues to the w. of the same. 

ESTRV AN, S. another, a small settlement or ward 
of the head settlement and alcaldia mayor of Gue- 
jozingo in the same kingdom. It contains nine 
families of Indians, and is subject to the settle- 
jrieh t of S. Lorenzo Tlauzingo. 



E S T 



85 



ESTEVAN, S. another, of the head settlement and 
alcaldia mayor of Zapopan in the same kingdom, 
inhabited by some Mustees, Mulattocs, and In 
dians, who live by agriculture. 

ESTEVAN, S. another, of the province and go 
vernment of Venezuela ; situate near the lake Ta- 
carigua, on the n. side, at a small distance from 
the city of INirua. 

ESTEVAN, S. another, of the province and go 
vernment of Tucuman in Peru ; situate on the 
shore of the river Salado. 

ESTEVAN, S. a river of the province and govern 
ment of Buenos Ayres. It runs s. and enters the 
Rio Negro, near the mouth where this runs into the 
Parana. 

ESTEVAN, S. a small island of the gulf of Cali 
fornia, or Mar Roxo de Cortes ; situate in the in 
terior of it, and half-way between that coast and 
that of Nueva Espana. It is one of those islands 
which are called De Sal si Puedes. 

ESTHER Town, a city of the county of Lan 
caster, in the province and colony of Pennsylva 
nia ; situate on the c. of the bank of the river Sus- 
quehanna, 10 miles to the s. w. of Middletown, 
and 12 to the n. e. of Carlisle. 

ESTIQUE, a settlement of the province and 
corregimienlo of Arica in Peru ; annexed io the 
curacy of Taena. 

ESTOIVI, a settlement of Indians of N. Ca 
rolina ; situate to the s. of the river Tugelo. 

ESTOTILAND, an imaginary country, which 
some authors suppose to have been discovered in 
1477, by a native of Poland, named John Scalve ; 
and that the same was part of the Land of Labra 
dor. The fact is, that this country never had any 
existence but in the imaginations of the two bro 
thers of the name of Zanis, Venetian noblemen, 
who had no particular information whatever re 
specting the expedition of this Polish adventurer; 
and that, in 1497, Juan Cabot or Gabot left 
England, with three of his sons, under the com 
mission of King Henry VII. when he discovered 
Newfoundland, and part of the immediate conti 
nent, where this country is supposed to exist. 

ESTRELLA, a settlement of the province and 
government of Antioquia in theNuevo Reyno de 
Granada ; situate on the skirt of a mountain. 

ESTRET.LA, a river of the province and govern 
ment of Costarica in the kingdom of Guatemala. 
It runs nearly due w. and enters the S. sea between 
the rivers Higueron and Cartago. 

ESTRELLA, another, a small river of the pro 
vince and corregimiento of Pataz or Cajamarquilla 
in Peru. It rises in the territory of the Untucailis 



86 



E T L 



Indians, runs n. and turning w. enters the Gual- 
laga. 

ESTREMADUHA, NUEVA. See COROPA, 
MANOA, DOIIADO. 

ESUNXAQUE, a settlement of the province 
and government of Alaracaibo; situate to the s. of 
the city of Truxillo, and on the shore of a river 
which enters the Bocono. 

ETANG, GRAND, a bay of the coast of the 
river of S. Lawrence, in the province of New 
Brunswick, between the bay of the Small valley 
and the river St. Bernard. 

ETANG, another bay on the same coast, between 
cape Espoir and the point of the isles. 

ETECHIM1NES, a nation of savage Indians, 
bounded by Acadia in N. America. See MALI- 
CITES, and SCOODICK. 

ETEN, a settlement of the province and corre- 
frimiento of Sana, and bishopric of Truxillo, in 
"Peru, annexed to the curacy of Chiclayo ; situate 
on a sandy spot, where the cordilleras rise as 
though they were mountains of sand, the same 
being known by the name of medan&amp;s, as being 
shifted about by the wind ; and it was on this ac 
count that the settlement was removed further in 
land, since it had been buried in the sand. In 
1649, happened the well-authenticated prodigy of 
a beautiful child appearing in the tabernacle of 
the sacred host, which was seen by the whole set 
tlement. In its vicinity are two great uneven 
stones, which, being stricken by a small one, give 
forth the sound of a bell, the force of the blow 
causing no difference in the sound. 

ETEN, MORRO DI:, a mountain on the coast of 
Uiis province and corregimiento, in the vicinity of 
which are some abundant salt-earths. 

ETJLA, S. PABLO DK, a settlement of the head 
settlement of Cuilapa, and alcaldia mayor of Qua- 
tro Villas, in Nueva Espaiia. It contains 84 fa 
milies of Indians, who occupy themselves in the 
cultivating and selling of cochineal, seeds, fruits, 
coal, and bark of trees. It is four leagues to the . 
*i&amp;gt;. of its head settlement. 

ETLA, another settlement, with the dedicatory 
title of S. Agustin, in the head settlement of Tla- 
pacoya, of the same alcaldia mayor and kingdom ; 
situate to the . and being lour leagues from its 
head settlement. It contains 35 families of In 
dians, who employ themselves in the cultivation 
and commerce of some cochineal, seeds, arid fruits, 
and in cutting timber and woods. 

ETLA, another, with the dedicatory title of S. 
Miguel, in the same head settlement and alcaldia 
wayor. It contains 42 families of Indians, who 



cultivate the same fruits as the former ; and it is 
somewhat more than two leagues and a half to the 
n. W. of its head settlement. 

ETUQUAR1LLO, a settlement and head set 
tlement of the alcaldia mayor of Cinagua in Nueva 
Espaiia. Its population is scanty, since it is in 
habited only by 17 families of Indians, employed 
in the cultivation of sugar-canes, of which honey 
and sugar are made, it is annexed to the curacy 
of Tauricato, and is 14 leagues to the e. of its ca 
pital. 

ETUQUARO, S. FRANCISCO DE, a settlement 
and head settlement of the alcaldia mayor of Valla- 
dolid, in the province and bishopric of Mechoacan, 
of the kingdom of Nueva Espaiia ; situate in a 
glen formed by two mountains, the one to the . 
the other to the s. and through which runs a river, 
which fertilizes the whole country with its waters, 
and which are supplied, in a great measure, from 
two fountains which rise at a moderate distance 
from the spot. The town is so much reduced as 
to contain only 18 families of Indians; though it 
nevertheless has a convent of monks of S. Angus- 
tin, and some families of Spaniards and Mustees t 
all of whom are employed in cultivating fruits, 
making lime, and cutting wood. It is 10 leagues 
w. of its capital. 

ETZATLAN, a province and alcaldia mayor 
of Nneva Espaiia. 

EUCH1, a small river of the province and co 
lony of Georgia, in N. America. It runs s. e. and 
enters the Apalachicola. 

EUCHI, a settlement of this province ; situate on 
the shore of the former river. 

EUGEN1O, S. a settlement of the province and 
government of Sonora in Nueva Espana ; situate 
in the country of the Apaches Indians, on the 
banks of the source of the large river of Gila, be 
tween the settlements of S. Fernando and S. Pau- 
taleon . 

EULAL1A, S. a town and real of silver mines, 
of the province of Taraumara and kingdom of 
Nueva Vizcaya ; situate on the e. part of that of 
S. Felipe de Chiguagua. The whole of its popu 
lation consists of miners and labourers, and mer 
chants who traffic in the silver. It lies at ihe be 
ginning of the entrance to the other mines, and is 
the residence of a lieutenant of the alcaldia mayor. 

EUNZHA. See FUNZHA. 

EUPHALAU, a settlement of Indians of S. 
Carolina ; situate at the source of the river Albama. 

EUPHASEE, a river of N. Carolina. It runs 
n. w. and enters the Cherokces, just after its falls, 
as far as which it "is navigable. 



fi u s 

EUPHASEK, a settlement of the above province; 
situate on the shore of the former river, \vhcrc the 
English have a fort. 

EUROPA, a river of the province of Nucva 
Andalucia. It flows from the mountains to the ze. 
where dwells tlie nation of (he Peritos Indians. It 
rtms in a serpentine course towards the zs. and 
after receiving the waters of the river Snyma, it 
enters the sea in the gulf of Pavia. 

EUSTACE, EUSTACIA, or EUSTAQUIA, an 
island of the N. sea, immediately on the coast of 
Florida, also called De Massacre by the French, 
ami Matanza by the Spaniards, from ihe slaugh 
ter which these made of the former when they dis 
lodged them from it. It forms, with a point of 
land which runs out far into the sea, the entrance 
of the port of San Agustin : it is large and wide, 
and it has in it only one mountain, and this is 
about 20 miles in circumference. 

[EUSTATIA Town, in the island of Eustatia 
or Eustatius, in the Caribbean sea, in the West 
Indies. Lat. 1729 w. Long. 63 5 w.~\ 

EUSTATIUS, or EUSTAQIJIO, ST. an island 
of the N. sea, one of the Antilles, of the Caribes ; 
situate in the Atlantic ocean, nine miles n. w. of 
that of St. Christopher s. It is the strongest, on 
account of its situation, and one of the finest and 
best cultivated islands belonging to the Dutch, and 
is somewhat larger than that of Saba ; it has a 
mountain in the form of a truncated pyramid, 
nearly round ; and between it and the island of 
S. Christopher, is a narrow canal. Its principal 
production is tobacco, with which the whole of 
the circumference of the mountain is planted ; the 
same being well fortified. It is inhabited by 5000 
whitesand 15,000 Negroes, who labour in thesugar 
manufactories ; it has a tolerable port, defended by 
a fort mounting 16 guns ; on the top of the moun 
tain only is found any wood, and the whole of the 
other parts are cultivated. As here is neither river 
nor fountain, every house has a cistern for pre 
serving a necessary supply of water, and which is 
replenished by a vessel which is constantly em 
ployed to go backAvards and forwards to St. Chris 
topher s, for the purpose of procuring this neces 
sary article. The inhabitants are famous for their 
breeds of pigs, rabbits, and all kinds of birds, not 
only for their own consumption, but for sale 
abroad. Throughout the whole island there is not 
more than one church, but there are many store 
houses provided with all the necessary European 
supplies, which are sold at a very dear rate to the 
inhabitants of the other islands, when these fall 
short of their supplies from England or France. 
The climate is healthy, but exposed to terrible 



87 



thunder-storms, tempests, earthquakes, and hur 
ricanes; the latter occur most frequently during 
the months of August and September, and have 
often laid waste the houses and plantations, and 
destroyed the shipping : the birds are said (o an 
ticipate instinctively the occurrence of these dread 
ful phenomena, and to throw themselves upon the 
earth : the rain preceding them has a bitter, brack 
ish taste. The Dutch took possession of this 
island in 1635, and the right of it was ceded by 
the states of this republic to some merchants of 
Flushing, who immediately established a colony 
of 600 families, amounting to about 16,000 souls. 
In 1665, it was taken by the English of Jamaica, 
but immediately recovered by the interposition 
and assistance of the French, when a garrison of 
these were formed in it, and it was at last yielded 
to its rightful owners by the treaty of Breda. It 
was again taken by the French in 1686, and from 
these by the English, under the command of 
Timothy Thornhill, in the same year, with the loss 
only of eight men, killed and wounded, notwith 
standing that the fort was well garrisoned, and sur 
rounded by a double and strong palisade and a 
deep ditch, over which was a pass by means of a 
bridge, so narrow as to admit only one person 
abreast. It was restored to the Dutch by the peace 
of Riswick, who for some time maintained it in 
peaceable possession ; but in 1758 and 1759, there 
having been an attempt made to carry to France 
in their vessels French goods, on the account of 
the latter, it was construed by the British nation 
into an infraction of treaty, and many of the 
vessels, having been taken by the English, Avere 
by their court of admiralty declared lawful prizes. 
This island, like that of Curacao, does the smug 
gling trade of the Spaniards. The English, under 
Admiral Rodney, again took it in 178 1, when they 
pillaged it of immense wealth, but it was returned 
to the Dutch in the peace of 1783, [and once more, 
in 1810, came into the possession of the Eng 
lish. 

The official value of the imports and exports of 
St. Eustatia amounted, in 1810, to 1559/. ; the 
exports consisted of sugar of foreign plantation, to 
the amount of 1133 cwt. It is in lat. 17 31 n, 
and long. 63 5 o&amp;gt;.] 

E^ANGELIS IAS, islands of the S. sea ; they 
are four, and lie at six leagues distance from eight 
others which are closer to the continent. The 
whole of the 12 go under one name, being called 
the Twelve Apostles ; they lie near the a?, mouth 
of the straits of Magellan ; they are all barren 
and desert. In some of the Dutch geographical 
charts they are named Sugar Islands. 



EXE 



EVANS, a settlement of the island of Barba- 
does ; situate towards the s. 

[EVANSHAM, the capital of Wythe county, 
in Virginia, is situated on the e. side of Reedy- 
creek, which falls into the Great Kanhaway, 
Woods, or New river. It contains a court-house, 
gaol, and about 25 houses ; 30 miles re. by s. of 
Christ ianburg, 170 in a like direction from Rich 
mond.] 

[EvESHAM, a township in Burlington county, 
New Jersey ; situated between the forks of Moore s 
creek, which runs n. w. to Delaware river. It is 
seven miles e. of Haddonfield, 16 e. of Philadel 
phia, and 25 s. of Burlington. Here is an Indian 
settlement called Edge Pittick, a tract of land re 
served by the ancient natives. They have some 
hundreds of acres of improved lands, about 30 
houses, and a meeting-house ; they formerly had 
a minister of their own order, who at times officiated 
in the Indian language.] 

EXALTACION, River of, in the province 
and country of the Amazonas. It rises from the 
lake of Rongagualo, runs e. and enters in a large 
stream into the Mamore : on its shores, on the n. 
part, dwell the Mobimas, Cabivas, and Tibois In 
dians, famous for their large heads. 

EXALTACION, a settlement of the province and 
government of Moxos in the kingdom of Quito; 
situate on the shore of the river Marnore. 

EXEAQU1L, AN CON DE, a mountain of the 
coast of the straits of Magellan, at the entrance of 
the narrow pass of the Passage. 

[EXETER, a post-town in Rockingham coun 
ty, New Hampshire, and next to Portsmouth, 
the most considerable sea-port town in the state. 
It is situated at the head of navigation on Swam- 
scot or Exeter river, a branch of the Piscataqua, 
15 miles s. w. of Portsmouth, and a like distance 
n. w. of Newburyport, in Essex county, Massa 
chusetts : the tide rises here 1 1 feet. It is well 
situated for a manufacturing town, and has already 
a duck manufactory in its infancy, six saw-mills, a 
fulling-mill, slittirig-vnill, paper-mill, snuff-rnill, 
two chocolate and ten grist mills, iron works, and 
two printing-offices; the saddlery business is car 
ried on here to greater extent than in any town on 
this side Philadelphia. Before the revolution, 
ship-building was a profitable business, and the 
vessels were employed in the W. India trade: 
notwithstanding the loss of this market, there are 
four or five vessels, of different burden, built here 
annually, the river being capable of floating down 
those of 500 tons ; an equal number is also em 
ployed in the foreign trade, chiefly to the W. 
Indies. The situation of this place bids ftiir for 



E X U 

extensive population. The public edifices are two 
Congregational churches, an elegant building ap 
propriated for the academy, a handsome and ca 
pacious court-house, and a gaol. The public of 
fices of the state are kept here at present. Besides the 
celebrated Exeter academy, there are here an 
English school, and six or eight private schools, 
chiefly for females. This township is of irregular 
figure, and about four miles square. It was in 
corporated in 1638; prior to which, it had the 
name of Swamscot Falls, from the falls of the 
river, which separate the fresh from the tide 
water, where the body of the town is situated, 
chiefly on the w. side of the river. The number 
of inhabitants in 1775 was 1741, and in 1790, 
1722. It lies 54 miles n. of Boston, and 402 n. e. 
of Philadelphia. Lat. 42 56 n. Long. 71 w. 

" Phillips Exeter Academy" was founded and 
endowed by the Honourable John Phillips, LL. D. 
of Exeter, and incorporated by act of assemby in 
1781: it is a very respectable and useful institu 
tion, under the inspection of a board of trustees, 
and the immediate government and instruction of 
a preceptor and an assistant : it has a fund of 
15,000/. a part of which is in lands not yet pro 
ductive : the present annual income is 480/. : it has 
commonly between 50 and 60 students. In 1794, 
a building was erected, 76 by 36 feet, two stories 
high, which in point of convenience, and perhaps 
elegance, is exceeded by few buildings of the kind 
in the United States.] 

[EXETER, the n. westernmost township in 
Washington county, Rhode Island state, has 
North Kingston on the e. and Voluntown in Con 
necticut on the w. The several branches of 
Wood river unite here, and take a s. course be 
tween Hopkinton and Richmond. It contains 2195 
inhabitants, of whom 37 are slaves.] 

[EXETER, a township in Luzern county, Penn 
sylvania.] 

[EXETER, a town in New Hanover county, in 
Wilmington district, N. Carolina j situated on 
the n. e. branch of Cape Fear, about 26 miles n. 
from Wilmington, and 22 from theN. river.] 

EXTRARAY, a small river of the province 
and country of Las Amazonas. It runs nearly due 
e. and enters the Madera, opposite the Yamary. 

EXUMA, an island of the N. sea, one of the 
Bahamas; situate to the e. of the Great bank and 
to the w. of Long island, or Yumo. It is inhabited 
only by two families, notwithstanding that it is 
favoured more than any of the oilier islands here, 
as well for its fertility as for its anchorage in the 
straits which give it its title ; the same serving, in 
time of distress, as an asylum to English ships. 



F A I 

The plantation of sugar-cane, that was begun here, 
was lately destnrfed. 

[Exuma is a name given to several of the Ba 
hama islands. There is a long chain of small 
islands, called the Exuma Keys, reaching for a 
yery considerable extent along one edge of the 
Great Bahama bank, generally in a s. w. direc 
tion ; they commence at Ship Channel Key, 10 
leagues e. s. e. from the e. end of the island of 
New Providence, and extend to Great Exuma, 
the harbour of which lies about 50 leagues 
from New Providence; the harbour, about eight 
miles long, has an entrance at each end, and is 
formed principally by Great Stocking island, 
which is about four miles in length. There is a 
port of entry established here. Great Exuma, 
Little Exuma, and the adjoining island of Hog 
Key, are inhabited. A considerable quantity of 
salt is annually exported from these islands, 
chiefly to America. The population of the Exu- 
mas, in 1803, amounted to 1253 souls, including 
^$113 blacks; and previous to May 1803, 28,500 
acres of land were granted by the crown for the 
purposes of cultivation. The e. end of the har 
bour is about eight leagues s. w. from the n. end 



F A I 



,89 



of Long island, and the whole island is included 
between long. 74 28 ; and 74 48 zo. and between 
lat. 23 21 and 23 3 ! .] 

EXUMA, a strait or canal formed between the 
bank of the Great Bahama and the island Guana- 
hani, or S. Salvador. 

EXUTLA, SANTA MARIA DE, a settlement 
and head settlement of the district of the alcnfdin 
mayor of Antequera, in the province and bishop 
ric of Oaxaca, and kingdom* of Nueva Espana. 
Jt is of a hot and dry temperature, contains 4:55 
families of Indians, and ] Oof Spaniards and AIus- 
lees, and is 12 leagues to the s. s. e. of its ca 
pital. 

EXUTLA, another settlement, of the head settle 
ment and alcaldia mayor of Autlau in that king 
dom, in the district of which are some sugar-mills 
and breeds of cattle of the large kind. It contains 
18 families of Indians, and is nine leagues s. .&amp;?. of 
its head settlement. 

EYOU, a river of the kingdom of Chile, which 
flows down from the cordillera of the Andes, and 
with the Puraraba forms the lake Puren, out of 
which it afterwards runs, and takes a w. course 
until it enters the river Imperial. 






F 



notauiiten 

LJr ABIANE, a river in Louisiana, which runs 
s. e. into the Mississippi, in lat. 39 30 n. 16 miles 
above Jaftioni river, and 50 below the Iowa town 
and rapids. 1 

[FABIUS, one of the military townships in 
New York.] 

FACATATIVA, a settlement of the corregimi- 
ente of Bogota in the Nuevo Reyno de Granada ; 
situate in a plain of a very cold but healthy tem 
perature, in the road which leads from Santa 
Fe to Honda and Maraquita. In it the zipas 
of Bogota had a fortress, of which now nothing 
but the recollection remains. At the present day 
its inhabitants should amount to 300 housekeepers 
and 150 Indians. It is four leagues s. w. of 
Santa Fe. 

[FAIRFAX County, in Virginia, is about 25 
miles long, and 18 broad, on the w. bank of Po- 
towmack river. It contains 12,320 inhabitants, of 
whom 4574 are slaves. Chief town, Alexandria.] 

[FAIRFAX, a township in Franklin county, Yer- 

VOL. II. 



-*&amp;lt; on/in 



raont, e. of Georgia, and on the bank of La Moille 
river, and contains 254 inhabitants, and is about 
nine miles from lake Champlain,] 

[FAIRFIELD, a plantation in Lincoln county, 
district of Maine, on the s. e. bank of Kennebeck 
river, s. of Canaan, and opposite Hancock, about 
35 miles from Pittstown, and seven from fort Hali 
fax. It contains 492 inhabitants, and is 157 miles 
n. e. of Boston.] 

[FAIRFIELD, a new township in Herkemer 
county, New York.] 

[FAIRFIELD, a township in Franklin county, 
Vermont, e. of St. Alban s; and contains 129 in 
habitants. It is 13 miles s. of the Canada line, 
and as far from the nearest part of lake Cham- 
plain.] 

[FAIRFIELD, a township in Washington county, 
New York. By the state census of 1796, 29 of its 
inhabitants are electors.] 

[FAIRFIELD, a township in Cumberland county, 
New Jersey, on Cohanzy creek, and at the head oif 



90 



F A I 



Black creek; 17 miles s. by e. of Salem, in Salem 
county.] 

[FAIHFIELD, the Unquowa of the Indians, a 
post-town and port of entry of Connecticut, and 
capital of the above county, is pleasantly situated 
on Mill-run, a little above its entrance into Long 
Island sound, 12 miles s. w. by w. of New Haven, 
and 50 n. e, from New York. It contains about 
200 houses, a neat Congregational church, and a 
court-house. About four miles n.w. of the body 
of the town, and in the township, is the beautiful 
parish of Greenfield, in which is a flourishing aca 
demy. A high eminence in the centre of the pa 
rish commands a delightful prospect. Fairfield 
wqs settled from Weathersfield in 1639, and in 
1736 contained 400 families. It was burnt by a 
party of tories and British, under the command of 
Governor Tyron, in 1777; the loss sustained 
amounted to upwards of 40,0007. Fairfield car 
ries on a considerable trade to the W. Indies. The 
exports for one year, ending September 30, 1794, 
amounted to 77,425 dollars.] 

[FAIRFIELD, a township in Westmoreland 
county, Pennsylvania.] 

[FAIRIIELD County, in Camden district, S. 
Carolina, between \Vateree river, which divides it 
from Lancaster county, and Broad river, which 
separates it from Newbury and Union counties. 
It contains 6138 white inhabitants, and 1485 slaves. 
Its chief town is Winsborough.] 

FAIKFIELD, a county of the province of Con 
necticut and colony of New England, the which, 
with Newport, forms that which takes this name, 
and is united to that of Connecticut. This terri 
tory was formerly called Mohegin, and was in part 
established by the Dutch. It is bounded on all 
its s. side, and on the s. w. by the province of 
New York, and on the n. e. by Newport. The 
interior of the country, at the distance of eight or 
10 miles from the coast, is full of mountains and 
morasses, which render it uninhabitable ; but it 
abounds in animals of the chase, and consequently 
its traffic in hides is considerable. [It is divided 
into 13 townships, of which Fairfield and Danbury 
are the chief; and contains 36,250 inhabitants, in 
cluding 433 slaves. It is separated from New 
Haven county and part of Litchfield county by 
Stratford river. The other parts of the country are 
watered by small streams, as Sagatuck, Sasco, 
Peganook, Five Mile, Rodens, Mill, and Mayamus 
rivers. Several harbours and a number of small 
isles lie along the sound, in the towns of Green 
wich, Stamford, Norwalk, Fairfield, and Stratford. 
The face of the county is rough, but the soil is 
good.] 



F A L 

[FAIRHAVEN, in Bristol county, Massachu 
setts, lies on the n. w. side of Buzzard s bay, and 
on the e. side of Accushnet river, opposite to BED 
FORD ; which see.] 

[FAIRHAVEN, a considerable township in Rut 
land county, Vermont, n. w. of Poultney. It con 
tains 545 inhabitants, and is 51 miles n. of Ben- 
nington.] 

[FA1RLEE, a township in Orange county, 
Vermont, on the w. bank of Connecticut river, 16 
miles n. of Dartmouth college. The township is 
hilly, but of a good soil, and has several glades of 
excellent land. It contains 463 inhabitants.] 

[FAIR-WEATHER, Cape, on the e. coast of 
Patagonia in S. America, lies n. from cape Virgin 
Mary. Lat. 51 45 s. Long. 68 JO w. from 
Greenwich.] 

FALAI8E, a small river of the island of Marti 
nique. It runs n. and enters the sea at this point, 
betAveen the settlement and parish of Basse Point 
and the river Capot. 

[FA LA Y A . See F A u v E . J 

FALKLAND. See MALVINAS. 

[FALL River is an inconsiderable stream, rising 
in Watuper pond in Rhode Island, and after a 
short n. w. course, empties into Taunton river.] 

FALLEN, City of, or ANCIENT JERUSALEM, a 
string of rocks or isles between the Virgin islands 
and the Virgin Gorda, to the s. w. of this. 

[FALLING Spring, a branch of James river 
in Virginia, where it is called Jackson s river, 
rising in the mountain, 20 miles s. w. of the Warm 
spring. The water falls over the rock 200 feet, 
which is about 50 feet higher than the fall of Nia 
gara. Between the sheet of water and the rock 
below, a man may walk across dry.] 

[FALLS, a township in Bucks county, Penn 
sylvania.] 

FALMOUTH, a small city of the county of 
York, and province of Massachusetts, in New Eng 
land, which was destroyed in 1776 by the English 
troops, on account of the provisions they demanded 
having been denied to them. It at that time con 
tained 60 families, who were divided into the three 
parishes of New Casco, Sapoodock, and Stroud 
Water. The principal part of this city was si 
tuate in an isthmus of land to the e. of Stroud 
Water, and formed a kind of mole with Little Cove. 
In this part stood the church, the town-hall, and 
112 other houses, which formed two streets parallel 
to the bay, and five which intersected these at right 
angles ; in which also there were many buildings. 
The bay is large and commodious ; it was well 
filled with timber and naval stores, which were the 
commerce of the place, and used to be carried, 



F A M 

tviih other effects, to the islands: here is likewise 
a dock, at which many ships have been built. 

[FALMOUTH, a township, formerly including 
Portland, in Cumberland county, Maine; contain 
ing 2991 inhabitants. It is situated on Casco 
bay, 85 miles n.n.c. of Boston. Incorporated in 
1718.] 

[FALMOUTH, a township in Hants county, Nova 
Scotia ; situated on the s. e. side of the basin of 
Minas, opposite Windsor, 28 miles n. w. of Ha 
lifax.] 

[FALMOUTH, a maritime township in Barnstable 
county, Massachusetts; situated on the n.e. part 
of the Vineyard sound, on the w. side of the bay 
of its name ; 77 miles s. e. by s. of Boston, 18 from 
Sandwich, and nine from Holme s hole. It was 
incorporated in 1686, and contains 1637 inhabi 
tants. Lat. 4L 33 . Long. 70 35 w. It is a 
post-town.] 

[FALMOUTH, a post-town in Stafford county, 
Virginia ; situated on the n. bank of Rappahan- 
nock river, nearly opposite to Fredericksburg. It 
is irregularly built, and contains an Episcopalian 
church, and about 150 houses. It is 23 miles s. w. 
of Dumfries, 70 n. by e. of Richmond, and 145 
s. w. of Philadelphia. Considerable quantities of 
tobacco are inspected here.] 

[FALMOUTH, a town in Lancaster county, Penn 
sylvania ; situated on the s. e. side of Conawago 
creek, 20 miles w. of Lancaster. It has been 
lately laid out.] 

[FALMOUTH, a town and harbour on the s. shore 
of the island of Antigua, in the W. Indies. It has 
English harbour on the e. and Rendezvous bay on 
the w. ; and situated in St. Paul s parish, at the 
n. w. corner of the harbour, which is well for 
tified.] 

[FALMOUTH, in the island of Jamaica, in the 
\V. Indies, commonly called the Point, is situated 
on the s. side of Martha Brae harbour; and in 
cluding the adjoining villages of Martha Brae and 
the Rock ; is composed of 220 houses. Here 30 
capital stationed ships load for Great Britain, ex 
clusive of sloops and smaller craft.] 

FALSE, Cape, a cape or point of land of the 
coast of the province of Maryland, between the 
bay of Rohoboth and the port Poguatanquaton. 

[FALSE Cape HOUN, the s. w. point of Terra del 
Fuego.] 

[FALS1NGTON, a village in Pennsylvania, 
in Bucks county, 28 miles n. e. of Philadelphia.] 

FAMATIMA, a settlement of the province and 
government of Tucuruaii, in the jurisdiction of 
the cily of Rioxa. 

FAMATIMA, a beautiful, fertile, and extensive 



FAR 



91 



valley of this province, which extends itself from 
n. to s. ; and is bounded by the kingdom of Chile. 

FAME. See FILIFOLIS. 

FAMINE, a small river of the province anil 
country of the Iroquecs Indians. It runs w. and 
enters the lake Ontario. 

[FAMINE Port, a fortress seated on the n.e. 
coast of the straits of Magellan in S. America. 
Here a Spanish garrison perished for want ; since 
which time it has been neglected. Lat. 55 44 s. 
Long. 70 20 w.~] 

[FANNET, a township in Franklin county, 
Pennsylvania.] 

FANTASMA, CANO DE, an arm of the river 
Guarapiche, in the province and government of 
Venezuela, which runs to the s. 

[FAQU1ER County, in Virginia, is bounded 
n. by London, and e. by Prince William. It is 
about 55 miles long and 20 broad, and contains 
17,892 inhabitants, of whom 6642 are slaves.] 

FARAB1TOA, a large and populous city of 
the Nuevo Reyno de Granada, in the confines of 
the province of Sagamoso, of Mozcas Indians. It 
was discovered by Captain Juan de San Martin 
in 1537. It is at present destroyed, and the me 
mory of it alone remains. 

FARALLON, Rio DEL, a river in the juris 
diction and alcaldia mayor of Penonome, of the 
province and kingdom of Tierra Firme. It rises 
in the mountains of that settlement, and enters the 
S. sea opposite the isle of Chiru. 

FARALLON, an isle of the river La Plata, near 
the n. coast, opposite the colony of Sacramento. 

FARALLON, another isle of the S. sea, in the bay 
of Panama, of the province and government of 
Tierra Firme ; situate as it were to the e. of the 
isle of Perico. 

FARALLONES, some islands of the archi 
pelago or gulf of Chiloe, distant somewhat more 
than a league from the island of Dona Sebastiana, 
which divides into two mouths the entrance of the 
gulf. They are five in number, and are barren 
and desert. 

FARALLONES, some small isles or rocks near 
the coast of the province and corregimiento of 
Truxillo, not far from the island of Gnara. 

FARALLONES, some small isles or rocks near the 
n. coast of the straits of Magellan, before Posses 
sion bay. 

FAREA, a settlement of the province and go 
vernment of Santa Marta ; situate in the valley of 
Upar, on the shore of the river Cesare, four leagues 
from the city of Los Reyes. 

FARE1RI, a river of the province and govern 
ment of Paraguay. It rises in the sierra which lies 



92 F A U 

between the rivers Parana and Paraguay, runs w. 
and enters the latter, between the rivers Tepaci and 
Mbobenboi. 

[FAREWELL, Cape, the s. point of W. 
Greenland, on the n. side of the entrance of 
Davis s straits, N. America. Lat. 59 8 n. Long. 
4442 o&amp;gt;.] 

FARILLAO, an isle or rock of the N. sea, near 
the coast of the province and government of Vene 
zuela, opposite cape Blanco. 

[FARM1NGTON, a very flourishing township 
of excellent land in Lincoln county, district of 
Maine, on Sandy river, 12 miles w. of Norridge- 
\vorth, 44 miles n. zt). of Hallowell, and 160 n.n.e. 
of Boston. Number of inhabitants about 1200. 
A very few years since this township was a wil 
derness.] 

[FARMINGTON, a large, pleasant, and wealthy 
town in Hartford county, Connecticut, eight miles 
s. w. of Hartford city, 23 n. e. of New Haven, and 
25 e. of Litchfield. Farmington river, a water of 
Connecticut, meanders delightfully through charm 
ing intervales, which beautify and enrich this 
town. The houses, in the compact part of this 
town, stand chiefly on a street which runs w. and s. 
along the gentle declivity of a hill, which ascends 
e. of the intervales; about the centre of the street 
stands a large and handsome Congregational 
church. This town was settled as early as J645, 
and its limits then were very extensive. Several 
towns have been since taken from it.] 

[FARMINGTON, a small river of Connecticut, 
which passes through the town of Farmington, 
where it receives Cambridge or Poquabock river 
from the s. w. when it acquires the name of Wind 
sor river, and falls into Connecticut river in the 
town of Windsor, about four miles above Hart 
ford city.] 

FAUSTINO, S. DE LOS Rios, a city of the 
Nuevo Reyno de Granada, founded in the country 
of (he Chinatos Indians by Antonio de los Rios, 
the then governor of this province, in 1622, on the 
plains or sabanas of Vivas. It is the capital and 
head seat of government, but now in such a state 
of dilapidation as to consist of scarcely more than 
six houses, if they deserve the name ; the greater 
part of its inhabitants having been compelled to 
desert it from the constant invasions they experi 
enced from the infidel Motilones Indians, as well 
as from its hot and unhealthy climate. To-day 
its productions are next to nothing, although the 
territory is fertile in cacao, tobacco, maize, sugar 
cane, and other fruits. It is 12 leagues to the 
. w. of the town of S. Christoval. 

FAUSTINO, a settlement of the province and go- 



FAY 

vernment of Curaana ; situate on the sea-coast, 
near the settlement of Carvalleda. 

FAUSTINO, a river of the government and juris 
diction of this name in the kingdom of Granada. 
It rises in the mountains of Pamplona, very near to 
the n. part of this city, runs continually s. passes 
before the capital, from which it takes its name, 
although being called by some the river of Gold, 
inasmuch as it carries a portion of this metal in 
its sands. It enters the Sulia at the part which is 
called the Embacadero de San Faustino. 

FAUSTO, S. a settlement of the province and 
government of Maracaibo ; situate on the shore of 
the river of its name. This river rises in the moun 
tains of the Guajiros Indians, and running almost 
continually n. enters the great lake of Maracaibo, 
in the most interior part of the same, and almost 
opposite its mouth or entrance. 

[FAVOURABLE Lake, in lat. 52 48 n. long. 
93 10 w. is the source of two large rivers, at the 
mouth of one of which, emptying into Winnipeg 
lake, stands the Canadian house. The other is the 
s. w. branch of Severn river.] 

[FAWN, a township in York county, Pennsyl 
vania.] 

FAXARDO, an island of the river Orinoco, op 
posite the mouth of the Caroni, to the s. It is 
divided into two parts, Superior and Inferior, by a 
canal of the same river. The first part, which 
looks to the w. is entirely covered by the waters of 
the river when the tide is up ; the other, on the 
e. is lofty, and a very convenient spot for building 
a fort on, for the purpose of excluding the Caribes 
Indians from the navigation of this river. This 
island is 3000 toises long, and 1387 wide. It is 
desert, and lies in lat. 6 23 n. 

FAUVE, or FALAYA, a small river of W. Flo 
rida. It runs s. e. and enters the Tornbechbe river 
near its mouth, in the bay of Mobile. 

FAUVE, a point of land or cape of the coast of 
Florida. It is one of those points which form the 
bay of San Joseph. 

[FAYETTE, a settlement in Tioga county, 
New York, between the Unadilla and the main 
branch of the Chenengo. It is laid out into 100 
lots of a square mile each, as nearly as the ground 
will permit.] 

[FAYETTE County, in Pennsylvania, is bounded 
n. by Westmoreland, s. by part of Maryland and 
Virginia, and w. by Monongahela river. It is 
39 miles in length and 29 in breadth, and contains 
473,280 acres ; divided into 11 townships, of which 
Union is the chief. The number of inhabitants is 
13,325, of whom 282 are slaves.] 
[FAYETTE, a district of N. Carolina, compre- 



FAY 

bending six counties, viz. Moore, Cumberland, 
Sampson, Richmond, Robeson, and Anson. It is 
bounded w. by Hillsborough, s. e. by Wilmington 
and Newbern, w. by Salisbury, and s. by the state 
of S. Carolina. It is 120 miles in length and 50 
in breadth, and contains 34,020 inhabitants, of 
whom 5678 are slaves.] 

[FAYETTE, a county of Kentucky, surrounded 
by Clarke, Bourbon, Scott, Franklin, Woodford, 
Maddison, and Mercer counties. Chief town, Lex 
ington.] 

[PAYETTEFILLE, so called in honour of the 
Marquis La Fayette,a flourishing post-town of N. 
Carolina, the seat of justice for the above district, 
and pleasantly situated in Cumberland county, on 
the w. side of the n. w. branch of Cape Fear river, 
nearly at the head of navigation, and 80 miles 
above Wilmington, and 45 s. of Raleigh. On the 
bank of the river stand a few buildings, and the to 
bacco warehouses, which have received in one sea 
son 6000 hhds. of tobacco, equal in quality to that 
of Petersburg!!. The compact part of the town is 
situated about a rnile from the river, near the junc 
tion of Blount s and Cross creek, on which last it 
is chiefly erected ; and from that circumstance was 
formerly named Cross creek. On both sides the 
creek are about 400 houses, two handsome edi 
fices for the supreme, district, and county courts, 
and the meetings of the town officers and its citi 
zens. The free masons lodge is also a large and 
handsome building. The town is regularly laid 
out, and its principal streets are 100 feet wide. 
Here are three mills, two considerable distilleries 
and breweries, and several extensive tan-yards. 
The trade to Wilmington is very considerable, to 
which it sends down tobacco, wheat, flour, beef, 
pork, flax-seed, hemp, cotton, butter, lumber, 
staves, naval stores, &amp;c. The boats used in trans 
porting these .articles to Wilmington contain about 
120 barrels, and make their returns of European 
and Indian goods, &amp;c. in from 10 to 20 days. The 
situation of the town is agreeable and healthy, and 
well adapted for establishing manufactories. The 
country immediately round the town is consider 
ably elevated, and the soil dry and barren ; but 
near the water-courses, which are numerous, the 
soil is as rich as any in the stale. Since the fire in 
1792, which destroyed many houses, the people 
begin to build with brick, which are here made of 
a good quality, and sold reasonably. The town 
stands in a settlement of Scotch Highlanders, and is 
100 miles s.w. of Camden in S. Carolina, 125 5. w. 
of Columbia, and 85 w. of Newbern.] 

[FAYSTOWN, a township in Chittenden 
county, Vermont, uninhabited in 1790.] 



F E 



93 



FEAR, Cape, a point of the coast of the pro 
vince and colony of N. Carolina, one of those 
which form the large bay. Lat. 33 51 n. Long. 
78 10 w. 

FEAK, an abundant river of this province, which 
runs s. e. and enters the sea at the cape from which 
it takes its name; 

FE, SANTA, DE BOGOTA, a city, the capital of 
the Nuevo Reyno de Granada, and of this vice- 
royalty, in lat, 5 24 s. Long. 74 T w. Founded 
in 1538 by Gonzalo Ximinez de Que.sadn, con 
queror of the kingdom, who built at first 12 houses 
in honour of the 12 apostles, on the skirt of two 
mountains, where the town extends itself from n. to 
s. not far from some lofty sierras which lie towards 
the e. and which follow the course of the cotdillera 
of the Andes from Santa Marta to Peru. The town 
is large and beautiful ; the streets are wide and well 
paved. It has four plazas or public squares, and 
five bridges upon the small rivers San Francisco 
and San Agustin, whose crystalline, fresh, cool, 
and salutary streams have their rise in the moun 
tains, and which take their names from passing the 
convents of these titles. They then run from e. to 
w. laving the city and its plain, (this being 20 
leagues in length, and 1 1 in width), until they incor 
porate themselves in the Funza, which passes at a 
quarter of a league s distance. Its temperature is 
fresh, and it enjoys a duplicate of the four seasons 
within the year ; indeed it may be rather said to 
have a constant spring, producing the same fruits 
twice in the year with such fertility and abundance, 
that there are regularly two harvests, the one of 
which is called &amp;lt; the whole-year harvest," when 
the seed, being sown in February, is reaped in 
July, and the other called " the half-year har 
vest," when the seed is sown in September, and the 
crop reaped in the January following, though this 
is sometimes much injured by the cold and frost. 
The wind, which constantly blows from the s. and 
which is called Ubaque, which is the name of a set 
tlement on the height of the mountain from which 
quarter it proceeds, is cold and piercing, but so 
healthy that the natives say that it ought to be re 
ceived with an open mouth ; and that wind which 
blows from the n. and which is guarded against as 
being unhealthy, is moist and tempestuous. The 
city is 25 manzanas or plots of isolated houses in 
length, and 12 in width ; and the regular width of 
its streets is about 12 Spanish yards. It is the 
head of a metropolitan bishopric, erected by his 
holiness Pius V. in 1561, and has for suffragans, 
the bishoprics of Cartagena, Caracas, Popayan, 
Panama, Santa Marta, and Merida de Maracaibo. 
The cathedral is magnificent and rich, and amongst 



F E, SANTA. 



its other treasures, is much venerated &amp;lt;he head of 
St. Isabel, the gift of the archbishop Don Fr. Luis 
Zapata de Cardenas: it has 16 prebendaries, and 
three parishes ; the first called Nuestra Sciiora de 
las Nieves, which contains in its district its own 
liouse and one for the noviciate, the second Santa 
Barbara, and the third San Yictorino ; also two 
convents of the religions orders of St. Domingo, 
one of Recollection^ with the name of Nuestra Senora 
de las Aguas; three of the order of San Francisco, 
one being on the side of the river of its name, ano 
ther with the title of Vera Cruz, and the third of 
the recollects of St. Diego. On leaving the city, 
in the road which leads to Tunja, are tw r o convents 
of St.Augnstin ; of the which,oneisofthemY&amp;gt;//tr/s, 
with the title of Nuestra Senora de Montserrat, and 
is upon the top of a mountain, commanding the 
same; and another, which lies towards the part 
where the cathedral stands, being an hermitage 
dedicated to Nuestra Senora de Egipto, and in this 
are the monks of the order of La Merced. Here 
is also a college, which belonged to the regulars of 
the company of Jesuits, the most sumptuous and 
celebrated building that was ever devoted to the 
purposes of religion, with the exception of that of 
Jesus at Rome. Here are venerated the bodies of 
the holy martyrs, Maurus, Fortunatus, Dionysius, 
Eusthimius, and Anastasius : also here is another 
convent called La Compana Chiquita, and a house 
for novices, in which was the crucifix whereon 
St. Francis de Borja expired ; a convent of San 
Juan de Dios, having under its charge the grand 
hospital of San Pedro ; four monasteries of nuns, 
one of LaCoiicepcion, another of Santa Clara, ano 
ther of the barefooted Carmelites, and another of 
Santo Ines de Monte Policiano ; three colleges for 
students, the finest of which has the dedicatory title 
of Del Rosario, founded in 1652, where there are 
four fellowships established by the king for the 
sons of ministers, enjoying as it does the same pri 
vileges as that of the archbishopric of Salamanca ; 
another seminary of San Bartolome, and the third 
of Santo Tornas, with an university, founded in 
1621 by the pontifical and royal authorities, where 
also there is a large public library, which was esta 
blished in 1772. In addition to these buildings, 
this city is farther ornamented with those of the 
chapel of Sagrario, of Nuestra Senora de Belem, 
of Guadalupe, of La Pena, of Las Cruces, of San 
Felipe, and of Humilladero, which is in the small 
square of San Francisco, in remembrance of the 
first mass having been said there ; the whole num 
ber amounting to 28, without mentioning various 
private chapels and oratories. Here is also a tri 
bunal of audience, and the royal chancery erected 



in 1548, with a president, who was afterwards pro 
moted to the viceroyalty in 1718, the same office 
having been suppressed in 1724, and re-established 
in 1739 : also a head tribunal of accounts, which 
was founded in 1605, another for the direction of 
the royal rents, established in 1780, another of the 
holy crusade, another for the charge of the pro 
perties of the defunct, an office for the clerk of the 
markets, and a mint, which is governed by an in 
spector, accountant, treasurer, and other officers. 
The Emperor Charles V. granted it the title of 
" most noble and most loyal city," in 1548, and 
for its arms a shield, on which is a black eagle 
upon a field of gold, with an open grenade in each 
claw; the whole being bordered round with some 
branches of gold on a blue field. The population, 
which consists of more than 30,000 souls, [and 
according to later accounts of 40,000], is com 
posed of many illustrious families, who are de 
scended from the most noble houses in Spain, and 
of the first conquerors of the kingdom. They are 
of good manners and education, gentle, ingenious, 
of good stature and aspect, but phlegmatic and 
indolent. Amongst their sons are enumerated 
many illustrious men, to enumerate whom would 
form a large catalogue ; we shall therefore only 
mention some of those who have far outstripped the 
rest, and who have left an eternal memory of their 
exalted merits. These are as follows : Don Fer 
nando Arias de Ugarte, who was auditor to the 
army of Aragon, oidor of Lima, bishop of Quito, 
archbishop of the churches of his country, of 
Charcas, and of Lima ; where he died, full of vir 
tues ; Don Lucas Fernandez de Piedrahita, bishop 
of Santa Marta and of Panama, author of the cele 
brated history of the conquest of the Nuevo Reyno 
de Granada ; and Don Alonzo Perez de Salagar, 
president of the audiences of Quito and of Charcas. 
Archbishops who have presided in Santa Fe. 

1. Don Fray Martin de Calatyud, first bishop 
who entered Santa Fe ; but not being consecrated at 
the time, he was willing for that purpose to take a 
voyage to Lima through Popayan and Quito ; and 
this wish was complied with by the con vocation of 
the archbishop and bishops of the council of Li- 
mense. He was one of the commissaries of Gon- 
zalo Pizzaro to the Licentiate Gasca. Herrera and 
other authors call him bishop of Bogota, although 
he found himself residing at Santa Fe at the time 
previous to his translation to the church of Santa 
Fe. He died of the infirmities he had acquired in 
his dangerous voyage to Lima. 

2. Don Fray Juan de los Barrios, a monk of the 
order of San Francisco. Gil Gonzalez Davila, in 
the Theatre of the Churches of Paraguay, Santa 



F E, SANTA. 



95 



Marta, and Santa Fe, says that he was the first 
bishop of Paraguay and the llio de la Plata, 
having been created in Aranda of Duero; and 
that having been detained, he was nominated 
bishop of Santa Marta, and of the Nuevo Reyno 
de Granada, with orders to reside in Santa Fe ; to 
this place he accordingly transferred the cathedral, 
thus making use of the creation he had undergone 
in Spain ; "he made the said cathedral a metro 
politan, arid to this end he sent to the court his 
dean, Don Francisco Adame, when he obtained 
the permission of Pope Pius IV. by the bull of 
1562, the same being verified in 1564. This church 
then took for its suffragans the churches of Popayan 
and Cartagena, and the abbey of Santa Marta ; 
but neither did any investiture nor any bulls arrive 
previous to his death, which took place before the 
return of the dean. 

3. Don Luis Zapata de Cardenas, of the order 
of San Francisco, a native of Llerena in Estre- 
madura, a knight of the order of Alcantara. He 
served under the Emperor Charles V. in the mili 
tia, and in the German war ; and being colonel of 
militia, it is related of him, that he had made a mu 
tual promise with another friend, that whichever 
should die first should come to tell the survivor 
what might be his own situation ; that accord 
ingly, as he, the colonel, was one day standing in 
the Plaza of Valladolid, together with other gen 
tlemen, he was spoken to by this friend, who had 
died in Flanders ; when all the company were 
astonished to find the colonel holding a conversa 
tion, and not seeing any one to whom it was ad 
dressed. From this moment, however, his co 
lour forsook his cheeks, and he entered as a monk 
into the convent of San Francisco of that city. 
He was afterwards commissary-general of the king 
doms of Peru, all of which he visited as far as 
Chile ; and having performed the visitation to the 
satisfaction of all, he was presented to the bishop 
ric of Cartagena, and before he embarked, pre 
ferred to the archbishopric of Santa Fe. Of this 
he took possession in 1573, founded the college and 
seminary of San Luis, convoked a provincial coun 
cil, which was non-effective, through the impedi 
ments that denied the attendance of Don Fr. Agus- 
tin de Corurla, bishop of Popayan ; and full of 
virtues arid years, for he was above 80, and Avith 
a hearty disgust of the world, he died in 1590. 

4. Don Alonso Lopez de Avila, radonero of the 
church of Cordoba, inquisitor of this city, arch 
bishop of Santo Domingo ; promoted to Santa Fe ; 
he died before he arrived, in 1591. 

5. Don Bartolome Martinez Menacho, native of 
the town of La Torre, bishop of Badajoz, chaplain 



of the college of Santa Maria de Sevilln, archdea 
con of Lima, bishop of Panama ; promoted to this 
archbishopric in 1593 ; he died before he arrived 
at Cartagena, in 1594. 

6. Don Fr. Andres Caso, a monk of the order of 
St. Domingo, prior of the convent of Atocha in 
Madrid ; elected archbishop of Santa Fe, before 
he was promoted to the bishopric of Leon in 
Spain. 

7. Don Bartolome Lobo Guerrero, native of 
Honda in Andalucia, collegiate of Maese liodrigo 
in Sevilla, professor de prima, fiscal of the inqui 
sition of Mexico ; elected archbishop of Santa F6 
in 1599 ; he was afterwards promoted to the arch 
bishopric of Lima in 1608. 

8. Don Fr. Juan de Castro, of the order of San 
Agustin, native of Toledo; elected archbishop of 
Santa Fe, but he did not go over to his office, re 
maining in Madrid as preacher to his majesty ; he 
died in 1611. 

9. Don Pedro Ordonez Florez, native of Bro- 
zas in Estremaduni, a friar of the order of Al 
cantara, rector of his college of Salamanca, inqui 
sitor of Lima ; presented to the archbishopric of 
Santa Fe in 1609 ; he took possession in 1613, and 
died in 1614. 

10. Don Fernando Arias de Ugarte, native of 
Santa Fe, a man of immortal memory, and of 
whom great mention is made in the list of the bi 
shops of Quito ; from whence he was removed to 
to the archbishopric of this metropolitan church, 
in 1616, and from hence to the see of Cliarcas, 
in 1626. 

11. Don Julian de Cortazar, native of Durango 
in Vizcaya. He was collegiate of the Sancti-Spi- 
ritus, in the university of Onate, and catedi citico 
of vespers, afterwards collegiate in the college of 
Santa Cruz of Valladolid, magisterial canon of St. 
Domingo of La Calzada, and bishop of Tucti- 
man; from whence he was promoted to this me 
tropolitan see, in 1627; he died in 1630. 

12. Don Bernardino de Almansa, native of 
Lima, a student in its university; graduated as 
doctor of canons, made by the holy archbishop 
of Toribio a curate of the Indians in the settle 
ments of Guadalchili and Pachacama, and after 
wards of the parish of San Sebastian of thai city. 
He was treasurer of the church of Cartagena, and 
vicar-general of its bishopric, where he began to 
give proofs of his learning ; and from a sentence 
which he passed here, and which was carried to 
Rome, his Holiness observed, on reading the same, 
that the bishop of Cartagena had a very great 
vicar. From thence he went to be archdeacon of 
Charcas, and thence pro visor and vicar-general- 



FE, SANTA. 



and commissary of Cruzada. He came to Spain, 
and founded at Madrid the convent of Jesus 
Maria and Joseph of the Franciscan nuns, which 
is also called Del Caballero de Gracia. He was 
made inquisitor of Logrono, and afterwards of To 
ledo, and archbishop of St. Domingo ; and be 
ing at the moment about to embark for Cadiz, he 
was promoted to this metropolitan see, in 1630. 
He was the first archbishop in America who re 
ceived the pall ; he died in 1633, and his remains 
were carried to Madrid, and deposited in the con 
vent that he had founded. 

13. *Don FT. Christoval de Torres, a Domini 
can monk, native of Burgos, where he studied 
and read arts ; he was master, presentado, and 
prior in the different convents of his order, and ac 
credited for a great knowledge and science ; he was 
selected to be companion to Don Fr. Diego Mar- 
dones, bishop of Cordoba ; he was also confessor 
to the Duke of Lerma, preacher to King Philip 
IV. and elected bishop of Santa Fe in 1635. He 
governed this church 19 years, and died in 1654. 

14. Don Diego del Castillo y Artiga, native of 
Tudela in the kingdom of Navarra; he studied at 
Alcala, was collegiate in Malaga, and in its univer 
sity professor de prima of arts, afterwards of theo 
logy, doctor and magisterial canon of the church 
of Avila, author of the excellent work of Ornatu 
et Vestibus Aronis ; was elected bishop of Carta 
gena, which office he did not accept, and after 
wards of Truxillo in Peru ; from whence he was 
promoted to this metropolitan see of Santa Fe, in 
1655 ; but before he embarked he was promoted to 
the bishopric of Oviedo. 

15. Don Fr. Juan de Arguinao, native of Lima, 
of the order of St. Domingo, bishop of Santa 
Cruz of the sierra ; from whence he was promoted 
to this bishopric, in 1661. 

16. Don Antonio Sanz Lozano, who passed over 
from the bishopric of Cartagena, founded two fel 
lowships in each college, and two chaplainships 
of the choir. 

17. Don Fr. Ignacio de Urbina, of the order of 
San Geronimo ; promoted to the bishopric of 
La Puebla de los Angeles, and to the viceroyalty 
ofNueva Espana, in 1700; he died before he 
reached Santa Fe. 

18. Don Francisco Cosioand Otero, inquisitor of 
Murcia, and afterwards of Corte, one of the judges 
of the celebrated cause of Fr. Froylan Diaz, con 
fessor of King Charles II. ; he had the reputation 
of being a man of great letters ; elected archbishop 
in 1703; he consecrated the church of the sanc 
tuary of Nuestra Senora de Chiquinquira, founded 
and endowed the celebrated chapel of Sanio Tori- 



bio of Llebana in the mountains, sending thither a 
plan taken from the tabernacle of the cathedral of 
Santa Fe, of which place he was intermediate pre 
sident. 

19. Don Francisco del Rincon, a man of con 
summate political genius ; he was promoted from 
the bishopric of Caracas in 1716, and nominated 
president of the audience and captain-general of 
the kingdom ; fulfilling, with the greatest address, 
the political and ecclesiastical charges committed 
to him. 

20. Don Antonio Claudio Alvarez de Quiiiones, 
who passed over from the archbishopric of Santo 
Domingo in 1724. 

21. Don Fr. Juan Galavis, of the order of the 
canons, ihepremostatenses regulars ; he passed over 
from the archbishopric of Santo Domingo in 1737. 

22. Don Fr. Diego Firmin de Vergara, of the 
order of San Agtistin ; he was promoted from the 
bishopric of Popayan in 1740, and died in 1744. 

23. Don Pedro Azua Iturgoyen Peruano, bishop 
of La Concepcion in Chile, where he formed sy 
nods, which were approved by the council, and 
when also others were ordered to be made in Santa 
Fe to correspond with the same; he was promoted 
to the archbishopric of this latter place in 1745, 
gave origin to other institutions ; and after having 
had great encounters and competitions, he died 
in 1753. 

24. Don Francisco Xavier de Arauz, native of 
Quito, where he had studied, and had been curate 
of one of its parishes, as also canon of that holy 
church ; he was promoted from the bishopric of 
Santa Marta in 1754, and died in 1764. 

25. Don Manuel de Sosa and Betancur ; he was 
promoted from, the church of Cartagena, but had 
died in 1765. 

26. Don Francisco Antonio de la Riva Mazo, 
elected archbishop of Santa Fe, being doctoral 
canon of Coria in 1766, and he died eight months 
after his arrival. 

27. Don Fr. Lucas Joseph Ramirez Galan, of 
the order of San Francisco ; elected archbishop of 
Santa Fe, being bishop of Tuy in 1770, but died 
before he embarked. 

28. Don Fr. Agustin Manuel Camacho and 
Roxas, of the order of St. Domingo, native of 
Tunja in the Nuevo Reyno de Granada ; he was 
promoted from the bishopric of Santa Marta to this 
metropolitan see in 1771, where, immediately 
upon his arrival, he convoked a provincial assem 
bly, which was only in its origin when he died, 
narrely in 1774* 

29. Don Agustin de Alvarado y Castillo, who 
was abbot of Olivares and bishop[of Cartagena; 

2 



F E 

from whence he was promoted to the see of Santa 
F6 in 1755 ; and, owing to the great competition 
which prevailed, removed to the bishopric of 
Ciudad Rodrigo in Spain, in 1778. 

30. Don Antonio Caballero y Gongora, magis 
terial canon of Cordoba in Spain, bishop of Yucatan, 
and archbishop of Santa Fe, in 1778, where he 
is actually presiding in the two-fold character of 
temporal and ecclesiastical governor, holding, as 
he does, the staff of the viceroy with the crooA-, 
and discharging the duties of both offices with such 
address, as to ensure him the eulogy of all men. In 
J784, there was nominated to assist him in the ec 
clesiastical functions, with the titte of caristo, Don 
Joseph Carrion y Marfil, who was promoted to 
be the first bishop of the new cathedral of Cuenca, 
in the kingdom of Quito. 

FE SANTA, another city of the province and go- 
vernment of Buenos Ayres, founded, in 1573, on 
the w. part of the river Parana or La Plata, by Juan 
de Garay, a little above where this river enters the 
Salado. It is of a hot temperature, also moist 
and unhealthy. All the goods of Paraguay and 
of the settlements of Parana come to this city, 
and from hence they are carried in carts to Buenos 
Ayres, since, although they might go by the river, 
this rout is enjoined in preference, as a means of 
checking a contraband trade. It has frequently 
been destroyed by the infidel Indians of Chaco, 
in the district of which it is ; and to avoid the re 
petition of this calamity, it maintains a body of 
horse-militia called Blandengues ; for the main 
tenance of which, a toll of nine dollars three reals 
is levied on every cart that passes, if the same be 
long to the inhabitants of the city, and 28 if to 
strangers. Besides the parish church, it has three 
convents of the religious orders of San Francisco, 
Santo Domingo, and La Merced, and a college 
which belonged to the regulars of the company. 
It is about 100 miles to the n. TO. of La Trinidad of 
Buenos Ayres. Lat. 31 40 s. Long. 60 5 w. 

FE, SANTA, another city, with the additional 
title of Antioquia, the capital of the province and 
government of this name, founded by the Brigadier 
Jorge Robledo, in 1541, on the e. shore of the river 
Cauca, from whence it was transferred the follow 
ing year, 1542, by Juan Cabrera, to two leagues 
distance from that river, on the shore of the river 
Tonuzco, in the valley ofNori, where it remains 
at the present day, but is by no means large. It 
is of a temperature so benign and salutary that the 
the evening dew is never hurtful, and the natives 
constantly sleep out of doors, exposed to the night 
air. It abounds in gold mines, cattle, and fruits, 
but its commerce is very inconsiderable. It is 270 

VOL, n. 



F E 



97 



miles . by e. from Popayan. Lat. 7 14 s. Long. 
75 17 a&amp;gt;. , 

Frc, SANTA, another city, the capital of Nuevo 
Mexico; situate on the shore of the river Grande 
del N. between the settlements of Pecost and Ga- 
liste, where there is a garrison furnished with 
troops for the defence of the frontier of the infidel 
Indians. Lat. k&amp;gt; 13 n. Long. J04 54 w. 

FE, SANTA, a town, the capital of the alcaldia 
mayor of Guanajuato in Nueva Espana, in a nar 
row defile, hemmed in by different mountains on 
either side : its buildings are very handsome, al 
though the streets have not an uniform appearance, 
from the irregular order in which they are built. 
It has three convents^ one of the barefooted Fran 
ciscans of San Pedro de Alcantara; another, which 
is an hospital of the Bethlehemite fathers ; and a. 
college, which belonged to the regulars of the com 
pany. The parish church is large, handsome, 
and rich ; and in it is highly venerated a very mi 
raculous image of Nuestra Seiiora, which they call 
Guanajuato, and which was brought from Europe 
from the city of Granada by a certain devout per 
son. It has two chapels of ease and five hermit 
ages. The population is large, and of very civi 
lized habits, as far as relates to the Spaniards ; and 
that part which consists of Muslces, Mulattoes, 
&amp;c. exceeds 5000 families ; out of which a regi 
ment of cavalry, is composed, consisting of six 
companies, and the proper complement of officers : 
besides this it has two other regiments of infantry. 
Its principal commerce is derived from its gold and 
silver mines ; and here are about 80 shops, which 
contain clothes and other effects brought from Cas- 
tilla, and, besides, 40 others filled with the goods of 
the country. It has a beautiful stone causeway, 
which leads from the hospital of the Indians to the 
sanctuary of Nuestra Senorade Guadalupe, a work 
peculiarly useful for the traffic of the mines. It is 
60 leagues to the w. n.w. of Mexico, in lat. 22 
4 . Long. 274 22 . 

FE, SANTA, a settlement, with the additional title 
of LaLaguna, of the head settlement of Cocupao, 
and alcaldia mayor of Valladolid, in the province 
and bishopric of Mechoacan, and kingdom of 
Nueva Espana ; situate near the lake, at the skirt 
of a mountain just opposite to it. It is very plea 
sant, and contains 120 families of Indians, who 
employ themselves in making troughs and paint 
ing boxes and writing desks in a most beautiful 
manner. It lies a quarter of a league to the w. of 
its head settlement. 

FE, SANTA, another settlement, with the addi 
tional title of the Rio, in the head settlement of 
Puruandiro, and of the former alcaldia ?/,flyor, 



98 



PEL 



PEL 



also of the same kingdom and bishopric. It is in 
the middle of a plain which lies close to the large 
river. It contains 24 families of Indians, and is 
28 leagues to the w. of the capital, Pasquaro. 

FE, SANTA, another settlement, of the missions 
that are held by the religious order of San Fran 
cisco, in the kingdom of Nueva Galicia, lying 
seven leagues to the e. of the settlement of La 
Junta de los Jiios. 

FE, SANTA, another, of the head settlement and 
alcaldia mayor of Tepatitlan in the kingdom and 
bishopric of Nueva Galicia. It is eight leagues 
to the s.w. of its capital. 

FE, SANTA, another, of the missions which 
were held by the regulars of the company, in the 
province and government of Paraguay ; situate at 
the foot of some mountains, between the rivers Pa 
rana and Tabiquari. 

FE, SANTA, another, of the island of La Laxa, 
in the kingdom of Chile ; situate on the shore of 
the river Biobio, opposite the mouth of the river 
Vergara. 

FE, SANTA, another, a small city, at the present 
day destroyed, but which was in the province and 
government of Paraguay, until it was laid waste 
by the infidel Indians. It stood on the shore of 
the river Paraguay, to the n. n. w. of the settle 
ment of Itatin. 

FE, SANTA, another settlement, with the name 
of Baxada de Santa Fe, in the province and go 
vernment of Buenos Ayrcs ; situate on the shore of 
the river Parana, opposite the settlement of S. Ge- 
ronimo, on the shore fronting the same. 

FE, SANTA, a bay on the coast of the king 
dom of Tierra Firme, and province and govern 
ment of Cumana. It is large, convenient, and 
frequented by foreign vessels, who carry on a con 
traband trade on these coasts. 

[FEDERAL City. See WASHINGTON City.l 

[FEDERALSBURGH, a village in Maryland, 
on the e. side of Chesapeak bay ; situate on 
Marshy Hope creek, partly in Dorchester and 
partly in Caroline county, five miles e. n. e. of 
Hunting Creek town, and about 20 n. e. of Cam 
bridge.] 

FEISLE, a town of the French, in their pos 
sessions in St. Domingo; situate on the*, coast, 
on the. shore of the bay of Gros Gravier. 

FEL1CIANO, a small river of the province and 
government of Buenos Ay res, which runs w. and 
enters the Parana, between the Verde and the An 
tonio Tomas. 

FELIPE, S. EL REAL, a city, the capital of 
the province and corregihdento of Aconcagua in 
the kingdom of Chile, founded by the president, 



Conde de Poblaciones, in 1754, in a beautiful 
and extensive valley near the place of the name 
of the province, and which was formerly the 
capital. It contains two convents of monks, 
one of the order of St. Domingo, and another of 
La Merced. In its district are some gold and 
copper mines, but they scarcely yield enough to 
pay the expences of working. Lat. 32 11 s. 
Long. 70 13 w. 

FELIPE, S. another city, in the province and 
government of Venezuela ; situate on the shore of 
the river Yaraqui, to the n. n.e. of the town of 
Nirua. 

FELIPE, S. a town and head settlement of the 
district of the alcaldia mayor of S. Miguel el 
Grande, in the province and bishopric of Mechoa- 
can, and kingdom of Nueva Espafia. It contains 
500 families of Spaniards, Mttstees, and Mulat- 
toes, and a convent of monks of S. Francisco. It 
is 20 leagues from its capital, and 70 from 
Mexico. 

FELIPE, S. another town, of the province and 
government of Sonora in Nueva Espafia. It is in 
the country of the Comaricopas Indians, on the 
shore of the grand river Gila. 

FELIPI,, S. a settlement of the head settlement 
of the district of Zitaquaro, and alcaldia mayor of 
Maravatio, in the bishopric of Mechoacan, and 
kingdom of Nueva Espafia. It contains 392 fa 
milies of Indians, including those of the very small 
settlements in its vicinity ; and it is two leagues to 
the n, of its head settlement. 

FELIPI., S. another, of the head settlement of 
the district of Amatepec, and alcaldia mayor of 
Zultepec, in the same kingdom. It is of a warm 
and moist temperature, contains SO families of In 
dians, who maintain themselves by breeding large 
cattle, by sowing maize and other fruits. It is four 
leagues to the w. of its head settlement. 

FELIPE, S. another, which is the head settle 
ment of the district of the alcaldia mayor of Me- 
tepec in the same kingdom. It contains 1752 
families of Indians, and is JO leagues to the&amp;&amp;amp;gt;. n. w. 
of its capital. It is the head of a curacy, and 
to it are anexcd many other settlements. 

FELIPK, S. another, of the head settlement of 
the district of Amatlan, and alcaldia mayor of Za- 
catlan, in the same kingdom; three leagues distant 
from its head settlement, by a road of very craggy 
sierras. 

FELIPE, S. another, of the province and alcaldia 
mayor of Tlaxcala in the same kingdom. It is 
the head of a curacy. 

FELIPE, S. another, of the province and corrc- 
gimiento of Latacunga in the kingdom of Quito, 



PER 

In its district are two very rich estates, called Mi 
lan and Selipulo. 

FELIPE, 8. another, of the province and go 
vernment of Jaen de Bracamoros in the .kingdom 
of Quito. 

FELIPE, S. another, with the surname of Jesus, 
in the province and government of California ; 
situate on the sea-shore, in the interior of the gulf, 
between the settlements of San Buenaventura and 
San Fermin. 

FELIPE, S. a fort of the province and govern 
ment of La Guayana ; situate on the shore of the 
river Negro, and facing the fort of San Carlos, on 
the opposite side. 

FELIPE, S. an arm of the river Gamalota!, call 
ed the Caiio de San Felipe, which runs to enter 
the Portuguesa, and takes a n. course, as far as the 
mountain of Tacazuruma. 

FELIX, S. a settlement of the province and 
government of Cumana, one of the missions which 
are held here at the charge of the Aragonese Capu 
chin fathers, and situate near the river Guara- 
picha. 

FELIX, S. another settlement, in the province 
and government of Veragua, of the kingdom of 
Tierra Firme ; situate on the height of a moun 
tain, not far from the coast of the S. sea, and on 
the confines of the province of Costarica, upon 
the royal road. It is two leagues from the city of 
Nuestra Senorade los Remedies. 

FELIX, S. another, with the additional title of 
ArrabaldeNuevasTierras, (SuburbofNew Lands), 
in Brazil ; situate on the shore of the river Tocantines. 
FELIX, S. a bay on the coast of the straits of 
Magellan, on the s. part, in the island of Capli- 
toilgua. 

FELIX, S. a cape or promontory of the kingdom 
of Chile, and of the sea-coast, nine leagues to the 
s. of the cape or point of Ballena ; where very 
fine gold is found. 

[I ELI x, ST. some small islands in the Pacific 
ocean, n. n. w. of Juan Fernandes, and due w. of 
Copiapo, in S. America. Lat. 26 22 s. Long. 
80 w.~\ 

[FELL S Point. See BALTIMORE.] 
[FEN WICK. See FALSE.] 
FER, a small river of the island of Guadalupe. 
It rises in the mountains to the s. e. runs in the 
same direction, and enters the sea between the two 
of Bailie Argent. 

[FER, POINT AU, on the w. coast of lake Cham- 
plain, lies in Clinton county, nearly five miles s. 
of the division line between New York and Lower 
Canada, and 25 miles s. of St. John s. The Bri- 



FEE 99 

tish occupied a barrack here, furnished with one 
field-piece, a few men, and a subaltern oilieer. It 
has been given up according to treaty.] 

[FERDINANDO NARONKA, a island on the 
coast of Brazil, S. America, lies in lat. 3 56 s. 
Long. 32 43 w.] 

[FERMANAGH, a township in Minim county, 
Pennsylvania.] 

FERM1N, S. a settlement, and also the name of 
the Aguage or Impetuous Current, of the Indians 
of the province of California. The settlement is 
situate on the shore of the coast, at the inmost ex 
tremity of the gulf. 

FERMOSO, a river of the province and cap 
tainship of Pernarnbuco in Brazil. It rises near 
the coast, runs e. and enters the sea between that of 
Los llheos and the island of San Alexo. 
FERNAMBUCO. See PEUNAMBUCO. 
FERNANDO, S. a city of the province and 
government of Sierra Gorda, in the bay of Mexico, 
and kingdom of NuevaEspana; founded, in 1748, 
by Don Joseph de Escandon, Count of Sierra 
Gorda, and colonel of militia of the city of Que- 
retaro, who engaged with King Ferdinand VI. to 
pacify and to settle this territory, in honour of whom 
he thus called it. This city is small, the houses 
are of straw, and they have not increased as they 
were expected. 

FERNANDO, S. a town, the capital of the pro 
vince and corregimiento of Colchagua in the king 
dom of Chile, founded, in 1741, by Joseph Manso, 
Count of Superunda, president of that kingdom, 
who gave it this name in honour of the Prince of 
Asturias, who afterwards reigned with the title of 
Fernando VI. It has six vice-parishes, and a con 
vent of monks of the order of San Francisco, 
which was formerly a college of the regulars of the 
company of Jesuits. It is situate on the n. shore 
of the river Caguataqua, G9 miles in a s. direction 
from Santiago. 

FERNANDO, S. another town, of the province 
and government of Curnaria ; situate on the shore 
of the river Chivata, to the n. of the Orinoco. 

FERNANDO, S. another town, of the province 
and government of Texas or Nuevas Felipinas, 
founded, in 1731, by order of the viceroy of New 
Spain, who was the Marquis de Casa-Fuerte : he 
would not permit his name to be given it according 
to the avowed custom, but titled it according 
to that of the Prince of Asturias. It was peopled 
by colonies coming from the islands. 

FERNANDO, S. a settlement of the province and 
government of Guayana ; situate on the shore of 
the river Orinoco, at the part where it divides into 
o 2 



100 



F E R 



arms to run into the sea, opposite the city of Santo 
Tomas de la Guayana ; on the shore facing the 
same. 

FEU NANDO, S. another, of the province and go 
vernment of Cartagena, in the district of the town 
of Mompox ; situate on the shore of the grand 
river Magdalena. 

FERN AN no, S. another, of the province and go 
vernment of Cumana ; situate on the shore of a 
small river between the cities of Cumana and Cu- 
managoto. 

FERNANDO, S. another, of the missions that 
were held by the regulars of the company of Je 
suits, in the province and government of Mainas, 
of the kingdom of Quito ; situate on the shore of 
the river Maranon or Amazonas, between this ri 
ver and a lake formed by an arm of the river 
Manay. 

FEUNANDO, S. another, of the province and 
government of Sonora in Nueva Espana ; situate 
in the country and territory of the Apaches In 
dians, on the 5. bank of the head of the great river 
Gila, between the town of Casa-Grande and the 
settlement of Victoria. 

FERNANDO, S. another, of the province of Ya- 
pizlaga or llanos of Manso in Peru ; situate on the 
shore of the river Paraguay, opposite the city of 
Corrientes, in the government of Buenos Ayres. 

FERNANDO, S. another, called Minas de, in the 
province and corregimiento of Coquimbo, of the 
kingdom of Chile ; situate on the coast opposite 
the island of Choros. 

FERNANDO, S. a cordillera of mountains of the 
province and government of the Chiquitos Indians 
in Peru. They run n. serving as a mark of divi 
sion between this province and the government of 
Paraguay, from the river Latirequiqui. 

FERNANDO, S. a point of land or cape of the 
coast of the straits of Magellan, near their en 
trance into the S. sea ; the same which looks upon 
the e. of the island of Louis le Grand. 

FERNANDO, S. a fort of the province and go 
vernment of Paraguay, built on the shore of the 
river of this name, and at the mouth of the Ibiquari 
or Tibiquari. 

FERNANDEZ. See JUAN FERNANDEZ. 

FEROL, a cape of the a&amp;gt;. coast of the island of 
Newfoundland, and entrance of the straits of Belle- 
isle by the gulf of St. Lawrence. 

FiiiioL, a small river of the same island, which 
runs w. in the 5. part, and enters the sea at the 
entrance of the straits of Belleisle. 

FERRE, Cape, a point of land which runs into 
the sea, on the s. e. coast of the island of Marti- 



F I M 

nique, between the point Macabou and the Guide 
Sac Anglois. 

FERREIRO, PASO DE, a settlement of the pro 
vince and government of Tucuman, and jurisdic 
tion of the city of Cordoba ; situate on the shore 
of the river Tercero. 

[FERRISBURGH, a township in Addison 
county, Vermont, on lake Clmmplain. It con 
tains 481 inhabitants. Otter creek, Little Otter 
and Lewis s creeks, fall into the lake here. The 
mouth of Otter creek lies in lat. 44 11 45* n. 
Long. 73 13 o&amp;gt;.] 

FERROL, a port of the coast of the S. sea, in 
the province and corregimiento of Santa in Peru. 

FESTE, Point of, a cape of the s. coast of the 
island of St. Domingo, in the part possessed by 
the French, between the bay of the Gros Gravies 
and the point of Margot. 

FEVERSIIAM, a river of the province and co 
lony of Pennsylvania. 

FICHOT, a small island of the N. sea, near the 
coast of Newfoundland, between the ports of St. 
Julian and Petite Maistre. 

[FIDL ER S Elbow, a bend of Wood creek, be 
tween the outlet of S. bay and the mouth of the 
creek at the n. end of lake Champlain, opposite 
the mouth of E. bay.] 

FIERRO, part of the n. coast of the island of 
St. Domingo, in the French possessions 3 and close 
to the cape of St. Nicolas. 

[FIG-TREE Baylies on the s. w. side of the 
island of St. Christopher s, in the W. Indies, at the 
head of which stands Sandy-fort town. The bay 
is secured by a fort on each side.] 

FIGUARA, a small river of the province and 
country of Las Amazonas. It runs e. between the 
rivers Yuru and Nusi, and enters the river 
Negro. 

F1LADELFIA. [See PHILADELPHIA.] 

FILAMA, a settlement of the province and cor 
regimiento of Quillota in the kingdom of Chile; 
situate in the valley of Putaendo, at the source of 
the river Quilimari. In its vicinity is an estate 
called Los Patos. 

F1LLES, LES, some isles of the N. sea, near 
the coast of the province and government 01 French 
Guianne, opposite the island of Cayenne. 

FILIARA, a settlement of the province and go 
vernment of Tucuman, in the jurisdiction of the 
city of Xuxuy, on the shore of the river Laquiaca. 

FIL1POLIS. SeePniLOPOMs. 

FIMAYOS, a barbarous nation of the Indians 
of Peru, descended from the Pantaguas, but little 
known. 



F I S 

[FINCASTLE, a post-town in Virginia, and 
capital of Boltetourt county ; situated on the e. 
side of Catabaw creek, a small stream which falls 
into James river, on the w. side of the North moun 
tain. Here arr about 50 houses, a court-house, 
and gaol. It lies on the post-road from Richmond 
to Kentucky, 28 miles s. w. of Lexington, and 116 
w. of Rich mend.] 

[FlNDLEY,atownship in Washington county, 
Pennsylvania J 

FIN1STERRA, Cape of, or Point, on the s. 
coast of the straits of Magellan ; that which looks 
to the e. of the island of Louis le Grand. 

FINNEY, a settlement of the island of Barba- 
does, in the district of the parish of Santiago, near 
the w. coast. 

FIRAB1TOBA, a settlement of the province 
and corregimientoof Tunja in the Nuevo Key node 
Granada ; situate in a pleasant and beautiful val 
ley on the shores of a river, from the floods of 
which it suffers very frequent inundation. Its 
temperature is moderately cold, and it abounds in 
wheat, maize, and potatoes. Its breeds of neat 
cattle and sheep are very great, and of the fleeces 
of the latter, much cloth is manufactured. It con 
tains upwards of 200 housekeepers, and 100 In 
dians. It is six leagues from Tunja, between the 
n. and n. e. very close to the settlement of Soga- 
moso. 

F1RME, a settlement of the province and go 
vernment of Cartagena; situate on the shore of a 
small lake formed by the river Cauca. It is of the 
district of the town of Zimiti. 

F1SCA, a settlement of the province and go 
vernment of Tucumari ; situate to the w. of the 
city of San Miguel. 

FISHERS, an island of the N. sea, five leagues 
from the coast, in the province of Connecticut, and 
colony of New England, at the entrance or mouth 
of the river Thames. It is five miles long from e. 
to w. and nearly one arid a half wide, n. s. Lat. 
48 12 n. Long. 72 w. 

FISHES, River of, in the province and colony 
of N. Carolina. It is small, runs s. c. and enters 
the Yadquin. 

[FISHERSF1ELD, a township in Hillsborough 
county, New Hampshire, incorporated in 1763, 
containing 331 inhabitants. Sunapee pond lies 
partly here, and in the township of Wendel. It 
is about 16 miles e. of Charlestown.] 

[FISHING Bay, in Maryland, lies on the e. 
side of Chesapeak bay, partly in Dorchester and 
Somerset counties. It receives several rivers from 
each county, the chief of which are Wicomico, 
Nanticoke ; also Transquaking and Blackwater 



101 

creeks. The entrance into this large bay lies be 
tween Goldsborough and Devil s islands.] 

[FISHING Bay, on the s. side of lake Ontario, 
is about 37 miles &amp;lt;?. of fort Niagara.] 

[FISHING Creek, a township on Susquehannah 
river, in Pennsylvania. See NOUTHUMBERLANJD 
County.] 

[FISH-KILL, a post-town in Dutchcss county, 
New York, five miles e. of Hudson river, on Fish- 
kill or creek, at the foot of the highlands which 
rise s. of it; containing about 30 houses, a church 
for Episcopalians, and one for Low Du ch. The 
township is very extensive, and contained!, in 1790, 
5941 inhabitants, of whom 601 were slaves. It 
lies 14 miles s. by e. of Poughkeepsie, opposite 
Newburgh, and 50 n. of New York city. There 
are a few houses only at the Landing, on the mar 
gin of" the river.] 

[Fisii-KiLL, or CREEK, on which the town 
above described stands, and from which it derives its 
name, is small, and empties into Hudson river 
about a mile below the Landing, and nearly op 
posite New Windsor.] 

[FisH-KiLi,, also the name of a small stream 
which runs s. w. into Oneida lake.] 

[Fisn-KiLL, likewise a stream which rises from 
Saratoga lake, and runs six miles e. to the Hudson. 
Its mouth is oppoiste Batten kill, two miles above 
Saratoga town ; and on the n. side of which, Ge 
neral Burgoyne s army laid down their arms as 
prisoners.] 

[F1TCHBURG, a post-town of Massachusetts, 
Worcester county, 17 miles n. of Worcester, 24 
from Concord, and 38 n. w. of Boston. It has 
1J51 inhabitants.] 

FITHAM, a settlement of the same island as 
the former, and situate near it. 

FlTT, a settlement of the island of Barbadoes ; 
situate in the district of the parish of Santiago, near 
the ZD. coast. 

[F1TZ WILLIAM, a township in Cheshire 
county, New Hampshire, about 16 miles e. of Con 
necticut river, and separated from Royalston in 
Worcester county, Massachusetts, by the state 
line. It was incorporated in 1773, and contains 
1038 inhabitants.] 

FIVE MILLS, a small island of the N. sea, near 
the coast, in the province and colony of New 
Jersey, between those of Cold Spring and Seven 
Miles. 

FLAMAND, BONNET, a sand-bank near the 
coast of the island of Newfoundland. 

FLAM BOROUGH, Cape of, a point of land 
on the e. coast of the island of Newfoundland, at 
the entrance of Concepcion bay. 



102 



FLA 



[FLAMBOHOUGII, a factory of the Hudson bay 
company, on the s. w. side of Hudson bay. J 

FLAMENCO, a settlement of the province and 
government of Cartagena ; situate on the side of 
the swamps of Maria. It is one of the new towns 
which were founded by the governor Don Juan 
Pimiento, in 1776. 

FLAM UNCO, a small isle of the S. sea, near the 
coast of the district of Raposo, in tin; province and 
government of Choco. It is close to that of La 
Gorgona. 

FLAMENCOS, a small island of the S. sea, in 
the bay of Panama ; situate close to that of Perico. 

FLAM ENCOS, a bay of the island of St. Domingo, 
on the s. coast and w. head of the French posses 
sions, between the bay of Cavallon and San Luis. 

FLAMENCOS, a bay of the same island, and in 
the part belonging to the French, on the w. coast, 
between the river Boucanbrou and the point Ar- 
cahay. 

FLAMENT, a small river of the island of 
Guadalupe. It rises in the mountains, runs e. and 
enters the sea between those of La Rose and 
Goyaves. 

FLAT, a bay of the coast of the province and 
colony of New Jersey. 

FLAT, some islands of the N. sea, near the s. 
coast of Newfoundland, at the entrance of the gulf 
of St. Lawrence. They differ much, but are all 
small, and should more properly be called isles. 

[FLAT Rock is an expansive, clear, flat rock, 
but a little above the surface of the ground, and 
near the banks of a delightful rivulet of excellent 
water, which is one of the head branches of Great 
Ogeechee river in Georgia. This is a common 
rendezvous or camping place for traders and In 
dians.] 

[FLATBUSH, the chief town of King s county, 
Long island, New York. It is a pleasant and 
healthy town, situated on a small bay which opens 
e. from New York harbour, and is five miles s. by 
e. from New York city. It contains a number of 
dwelling houses, mostly in one street; many of 
which are elegant and commodious. The inhabi 
tants are chiefly of Dutch extraction. It contains 
941 inhabitants, of whom 107 are qualified electors, 
and 378 are slaves. The productions are various 
kinds of fruit, vegetables, grain, &amp;c. which find a 
ready market in the metropolis. The land lies low ; 
and in summer the whole township appears like 
an extensive garden. The public buildings are, 
a Dutch church, a court-house, and an academy, 
called Erasmus Hall, the most flourishing of all the 
academies in the state. It is in a pleasant and 
healthful situation, four miles from Biookline ferry. 



FLO 

A bloody battle was fought near this town on the 
27th of August 1776, when the Americans were 
defeated by the British with great loss The re 
mains of the American army retreated to New 
York, under the cover of a thick fog.] 

[FLATLANDS, a small township in King s 
county, Long island, distant from New York city 
six or seven miles. It contains 423 inhabitants, of 
whom 4.4 are qualified to be electors, arid 137 are 
slaves.] 

FLATON, a small river of the province of Sa- 
gadahock, which runs s. and enters the sea, op 
posite the Mochises isles, at the entrance of the bay 
of Furidy. 

[FLATTERY, Cape, so named by Captain 
Cook, on account of its promising at a distance 
what it denied on a nearer approach. Lat. 48 15 . 
Long. 235 30 e. This cape, Captain Ingraham, 
of Boston found to be the s. side of the entrance 
of the straits of Juan de Fuca. Lat. 48 25 n. 
Long. 124 52 w. See FUCA.] 

[FLEMINGTON, a small post-town of New 
Jersey, in Hunterdon county, lies about six miles 
n. e. of Arnwell on Delaware river, 16 n. n. w. of 
Trenton, nines, e. of Pittstown, and 34 n. e. by 
w. of Philadelphia. It contains about a dozen corn- 
pact houses.] 

[FLETCHER, a township in Franklin county, 
Vermont, containing only 47 inhabitants. It ha* 
Cambridge on the s. e. and Georgia o&amp;gt;.] 

[FLINT River, a considerable river of Georgia, 
which rises in the country of the Creek Indians, 
and running a s. and thence a s. w. course, joins 
the Appalachicola, at its entrance into Florida. 
The Flint is about 30 rods wide, and from J 2 to 15 
feet deep in summer, and has a gentle current. 
The territory lying on this river, especially on the 
upper part of it, presents every appearance of 
becoming a delightful region in some future day ; 
it being a rich soil, and exceedingly well situated 
for every branch of agriculture, and offers an un 
interrupted navigation to the bay of Mexico and 
Atlantic ocean, and thence to the W. India islands, 
and over the whole world. There are a number of 
villages of Creek Indians on this river.] 

[FLINT, a small river, about 28 miles long, in 
the Genessee country, in New York, which runs 
n. n. e. into Canandarqua creek.] 

[FLINTSTON, a plantation in Cumberland 
county, Maine, having 180 inhabitants. It has one 
eminence in it, called Saddle-Back Mountain, but 
the country in general is level enough for cultiva 
tion. One half of it is covered with pine and white 
oak.] 

FLORA, a small island, also called Las Flores, 

2 



FLO 

at the entrance of the river La Plata, in the pro 
vince and government of Buenos Ayres. To its n. 
lies the shore of the river. It is neither inhabited 
or cultivated, from its being much exposed to inun 
dations from the river. On its coast are many ma 
rine wolves. In lat. 34 58 3" s. Long. 56 
3 w. 

FLORELL, a small island of the gulf of St. 
Lawrence, on the coast of Nova Scotia or Acadia ; 
situate close to cape Hosiers. 

FLORES, a river of the province and govern 
ment of Buenos Ayres, which rises from a lake 
called Lobos. It runs e. and enters the sea on the 
coast of the Patagones. 

FLOHES, another river, of the province and go 
vernment of Texas in Nueva Espana. It runs s. 
and enters the sea in the gulf of Mexico, between 
the river Magdalena and that of Santa Susana. 

FLORIDA, an extensive country of N. Ame 
rica ; bounded on the w. by Louisiana, on the n. 
by the United States, on the e. by the Atlantic 
ocean, and on the s. by the gulf of Mexico. It 
was discovered by Juan Ponce de Leon in 1512, 
on Easter Sunday, on which account this name 
was given to it, as well also from the great luxuri 
ance of its trees. Its territory is very fertile, and 
the climate good, abounding in fruits and pulse, 
and particularly in oak, fir, pine, walnut, white 
and red lentish, yew, laurel, cedar, chesnut, palm, 
and cherry trees, which are used as fuel, although 
the fruit of some of them is very delicate. Here 
is also Campeche wood, but the most esteemed is 
sassafras, called by the natives palama or pavama; 
and of this an immense quantity is exported to 
England, from its fine medicinal qualities, which 
were first discovered by the Indians, who persuade 
themselves that there is no disease that can resist 
the efficacy of this plant. They, indeed, do not 
less esteem the plant called apoyomntsi or patri- 
sizanda, the leaves of which appear similar to those 
of a leek, although they are larger arid more deli 
cate : the stem is a sort of reed, full of pulp, 
knotty, of a small flower, with roots long and 
slender, also covered with round knots, which 
being cut oft and exposed to the sun become hard, 
being black within and white without : the Spa 
niards give it the name of de rosarios de Santa 
Elena, (rosaries of St. Helen), and the French call 
it palenotes. This country is watered by a great 
many rivers, the principal of which is the Missis 
sippi, which not only produce abundance of fish, 
but water and fertilize very many leagues. The 
woods are inhabited by wild beasts, such a&amp; dantas, 
lions of two kinds, leopards, wolves, tigers, buffa 
loes, panthers, bears, wild cats, castors, and foxes; 



FLO 



103 



and of these is a species which carries a bag under 
their tail, in the which to put their young when they 
are pursued. Of birds there is no less variety : here 
are partridges, parrots, pelicans, bustards, phea 
sants, pigeons, turtle-doves, thrushes, starlings, 
storks, cranes, woodcocks, eagles, falcons, swans, 
ocas, ducks, and others of very peculiar soits, and 
some the most beautiful of any in the known 
world for the brilliance of their plumage. This 
country produces, without cultivation, much cot 
ton, excellent figs of the titra plant, which, when 
ripe, are very delicate and wholesome, and are 
called by Europeans the cordial julap. On its 
coasts most excellent amber is found ; as also 
abundance of pearls, and these are sp little esteemed 
by the natives, that they give them in exchange 
for glass beads, with which they adorn themselves. 
Here are two sorts of cochineal, and the plant from 
which indigo is made is very common, and in the 
very many lakes of the territory are found the 
purest salt : here are also mines of coal, quick 
silver, and orpiment. It was once peopled by in 
finite nations of warlike and valorous Indians, who 
have given much trouble and anxiety to the Eu 
ropean nations : some of the most civilised of the 
said nations or tribes clothe themselves at the pre 
sent day in a kind of very white linen, made of the 
interior bark of a tree which is very durable, and 
of which threads and cords are also made. In 
1536, Hernando de Soto marched into this country 
to conquer it with a fine army, hut after various 
combats he died, without being able to obtain his 
object. After that, several Spaniards attempted the 
same thing at different times ; and the names of 
these were, Lucas Vazquez de Ay lion, Pamfilo de 
Narvaez, Francisco Vazquez Coronado, Don Tris 
tan de Luna y Arellano, and the adelantado Pedro 
Menendez de Aviles ; all having undertaken the 
conquest of this country about the year 1564, but 
with as little success as Hernando himself. The 
only part of this country that was properly under 
stood by the title of Florida, was the territory pos 
sessed by fhe Spaniards, the same being a peninsula 
or point of land, projecting from the coast in a di 
rection from n. to s. for a distance of 100 leagues, 
arid is 25 leagues in widtii opposite the island of 
Cuba, forming the mouth or entrance of the bay of 
Mexico, and the coast of the channel of Bahama. 
Although the Spaniards have made various settle 
ments here, there ore none at present existing, save 
those of Panzacola and San Agustin, which is the 
capital. This country is a subject almost of con 
tinual war amongst the Spaniards, the English, the 
French, and the natives. The former ceded it to 
the English in 1762, by the peace of Versailles, and 



FLORIDA. 



these divided it into E. and W. Florida. The 
first comprehended the Spanish peninsula, and was 
bounded n. by Georgia, and w. by the river Apala- 
chicola. The second extetulcd from this river, 
and had for its limits to the s. the gulf of Mexico, 
to the n. the parallel of 31 lat. and to the w. the 
lakes Maurepas, Pontchartrain, and the river Mis 
sissippi, its extent being bO leagues ; but in the 
peace of 1783, it was restored to its former posses 
sors, who hold it at the present day. 

Governors who have presided in Florida. 
I.Juan Ponce de Leon, the first discoverer of this 
country, in 1.312, after having engaged with the 
Emperor Charles V. that he would conquer it. 
This governor died in the island of Cuba from the 
wounds he had received in Florida in 1521. 

2. The Licentiate Lucas Vazquez de Ayllon, on 
whom the government, conquest, and settlement of 
this country devolved, o\ying to the death of the 
former; he also met his death at the hands of the 
Indians, in 1524. 

3. Hernundo de Soto, native of Villanueva of 
Valcarrota in Estremadura ; he also undertook the 
conquest of Florida; he entered this country with 
A fine army, in 1538, and after many labours died 
here in 1542. 

4. Don Tristan de Luna y Arellano, through 
the nomination of the viceroy of Nueva Espana, 
Don Luis de Velasco, to whom the emperor had 
entrusted the conquest of Florida ; he left Mexico 
in 1559, and retired from the attack in 1561, hav 
ing lost the greater part of his people, with as little 
promotion of his views as any of his predecessors. 

5. Pedro Menendez de Aviles, native of the 
town of this name in Asturias, comendador of La 
Santa Cruz of La Zara in the order of Santiago, 
governor, captain-general, conqueror, and perpe 
tual adelantado of Florida, he and his heirs ; cap 
tain-general of the armada of the guard of the In 
dies, founder of the city of S. Agustin, and of some 
other small settlements; he returned to Spain in 
1572. 

6. Pedro Menendez Marques, nominated gover 
nor of Florida by his uncle the adelantado^ in 
virtue of the capitulation that he had made with 
the king ; he governed but a short time, from his 
having been put to death by the Indians in 1574. 

7. Hernando de Miranda, the husband of the 
daughter of the adelantado Pedro Menendez de 
Aviles ; through whom he, Hernando, acquired the 
right of the title of adelantado, governor, and cap 
tain-general of Florida, as well as other conces 
sions declared by the schedule of Philip J.I. in 
1575 ; he died in 1593. 

8. The Captain Juan de Salinas, nominated by 



the king, when at the same time the right of nomi 
nation to the government of Florida being vested 
in the heirs of the adelantado Pedro Menendez de 
Aviles was dissolved ; he governed until 1619. 

9. Don Diego de Rebolledo, who proposed to 
the king the erection of San Agustin to a bishopric ; 
and although this was approved by the council, it 
did not take effect. 

10. Don Pablo de Hita Salazar. 

1 1. Don Juan Marquez Cabrera, who retired in 
1680. 

J2. Don Diego de Quiroga y Losada. 

13. Don Francisco de la Guerra. 

14. Don Laureano de Torres y Ayala, who was 
the same that built the wall of the city of Sari Agus 
tin ; he entered upon the government in i693. 

15. Don Joseph de Zuniga y la Cerda, who per 
fected the castle, and defended the city invaded by 
the English ; he governed with great credit until 
1708. 

16. Don Francisco de Coreoles Martinez. 

17. Don Juan de Ayala, serjeant-major of the 
Plaza of San Agustin ; he was governor in the in 
terim, his predecessor having concluded his go 
vernment and having embarked for Spain. 

18. Don Antonio de Benavides, of the Spanish 
company of the royal body-guards ; he was nomi 
nated governor in 1719, and so satisfied was the 
king with his great services, that after six years he 
continued him still longer in the office, until 1730. 

19. Don Manuel de Montiano, captain of grena 
diers of the infantry regiment of Aragon, afterwards 
exalted to the rank of colonel ; he did himself great 
credit in the defence that he made in 1740 ; in 
1749, he was promoted to the government of Tierra 
Firrne, having been also a field-marshal. 

20. Don Lucas Fernando Palacios, knight of 
the order of Alcantara, comendador in the order of 
Calatrava, field-marshal of the royal armies, in 
which he had served with extraordinary zeal from 
the rank of cadet up to that of captain in the regi 
ment of Spanish guards ; he was nominated governor 
of Florida in 1758, and exercised these functions 
until 1762, when he was killed by the Indians in a 
sally that he made again.st them ; he was the last 
governor, for in the following year the court ceded 
this country to the king of England in the peace of 
Versailles ; and although it was recovered in the 
peace of Paris, in 1783, yet this government re 
mained under the command of the commandant- 
general of Louisiana. 

[Scarcely any portion of America has been a 
scene of greater dispute in regard to proprietor 
ship, since the time Ahpedo wrote, than that known 
generally by the mime of Florida. Florida, East 



FLORIDA. 



105 



[and West, is situated between lat. 4 49 31" w. 
and between long. 79 54 and 91 27 w. ; about 
600 miles in length. Its breadth is various ; the 
broadest part of W. Florida is about ISO miles, 
while (lie narrow peninsula of E. Florida extends, 
in the same direction, from s. to n. 400 miles. 
Among its rivers that fall into the Atlantic, St. 
John s and Indian rivers are the chief. Seguana, 
Appalachicola, Chatahatchi, Escambia, Mobile, 
Pascagoula and Pearl rivers, all rise in Georgia, and 
run s. into the gulf of Mexico. The principal 
bays are St. Bernard s, Ascension, Mobile, Pensa 
cola, Dauphin, Joseph, Apalachy, Spiritu Sancto; 
and the chief capes are Blanco, St. Blaize, An- 
clotte, and cape Florida, at the extremity of the 
peninsula. The climate is little different from that 
of Georgia. There are in this country a great va 
riety of soils ; the e. part of it, near to and about 
St. Augustine, is by far the most unfruitful; yet 
even there two crops of Indian corn are annually 
produced. The banks of the rivers which water 
the Floridas and the parts contiguous, are of a su 
perior quality, and well adapted to the culture of 
rice and corn. The fine lands near the river Es 
cambia are described under the account of that 
river. The interior country, which is high and 
pleasant, abounds with wood of almost every kind, 
particularly white and red oak, live oak, laurel 
magnolia, pine, hickory, cypress, red and white 
cedar. The live oaks, though not tall, contain a 
prodigious quantity of timber ; the trunk is gene 
rally from 12 to 20 feet in circumference, and rises 
10 or 12 feet from the earth, and then branches 
into four or five great limbs, which grow in nearly 
a horizontal direction, forming a gentle curve. " I 
have stepped," says Bartram, " above 50 paces 
on a straight line, from the trunk of one of these 
trees to the extremity of the limbs." They are 
evergreen, and the wood almost incorruptible. 
They bear a great quantity of small acorns, which 
is agreeable food when roasted, and from which the 
Indians extract a sweet oil, which they use in cook 
ing hominy and rice. 

The laurel magnolia is the most beautiful among 
the trees of the forest, and is usually 100 feet high, 
though some are much higher. The trunk is per 
fectly erect, rising in the form of a beautiful co 
lumn, and supporting a head like an obtuse cone. 
The flowers, which are on the extremity of the 
branches, are large, white, and expanded like a 
rose, and are the largest and most complete of any 
yet known; when fully expanded, they are from 
six to nine inches diameter, and have a most deli 
cious fragrance. The cypress is the largest of the 
American trees. " 1 have seen trunks of these 

VOL. II. 



trees," says Bartram, " that would measure 8, 
JO, and 12 feet in diameter, for 40 and 50 feet 
shaft." The trunks make excellent shingles, boats, 
and other timber, and when hollowed make durable 
and convenient canoes. The garden vegetables 
are in high perfection ; the orange and lemon trees 
grow here without cultivation to a fine size, and 
produce better fruit than in Spain and Portugal. 
The intervals between the hilly parts of this coun 
try are extremely rich. The principal town in 
W. Florida is Pensacola ; in E. Florida, St. Au 
gustine. 

The Spanish strength in the Floridas and Loui 
siana, in 1790, was as follows, according to Mr. 
Mel ford s account : Troops and levies at St. Au 
gustine and on St. John s river, 400 ; St. Mark s, 
100 ; Pensacola , 350 ; Mobile and Tombigbee, 150; 
at the Natchez, 200; Red river, 100; Illinois 
river, 300 ; in all 1600 men, called the Orleans or 
Louisiana regiment. 

The number of American families that have 
been Spanish subjects since 1783, amounts to 1720, 
viz. at Tensau, near Mobile bay, 90; on Tombig 
bee river, 130 ; at the Natchez, on the Mississippi, 
1500. All the settlers in these districts are under 
the immediate orders of the military commandants, 
and subject to martial law ; with an appeal from 
stage to stage, up to the viceroy of Mexico. The 
property of the subject at his decease is to be ma 
naged by the commandant, whose fees by law are 
enormous. 

Florida, as we have before stated, has frequently 
changed masters, belonging alternately to the 
French and Spaniards. W.Florida, as far as 
Perdido river, was owned and occupied by the 
French ; the remainder, and all E. Florida, by the 
Spaniards, previous to their being ceded to the 
British at the peace of 1763. The Floridas were 
never distinguished by the terms East and West, 
until the 7th day of October 1763. It was then 
effected by a proclamation of the British king, in 
consequence of the " extensive and valuable acqui 
sitions in America, secured to his crown by the de 
finitive treaty of peace concluded at Paris, the 10th 
of February" preceding : that is to say, the treaty 
by which France and Spain ceded the territory to 
Great Britain. 

This proclamation establishes on the continent 
of America three " new" governments, viz. th 
government of Quebec, that of E. Florida, and that 
of W. Florida. The latter is designated in the 
following terms : 

" Sdly, The government of West Florida, 
bounded to the s. by the gulf of Mexico, includ 
ing all islands within six leagues from the coast, J 



106 



FLO 



[from the river Appalachicola to lake Ponchartrain; 
to the w. by the said lake, the lake Mancepes, and 
the river Mississippi ; to the n. by a line drawn 
due e. from that part of the river Mississippi 
which lies in lat. 31 n. to the river Appalachicola 
or Chatahouchee; and to the e. by the said river." 
Annual Register, 1763. vol. vi. p. 209. 

Hence it appears, that W. Florida was a pro 
vince of British institution, formed out of a por 
tion of Louisiana ceded to them by the French, 
and out of a part of what the Spaniards ceded, and 
what they had called Florida. And what incon- 
testibly proves that W. Florida was erected into a 
separate government, independent of French or 
Spanish limits, is the boundary assigned to it 
by the British king s proclamation, which states, 
" Appalachicola or Chatahouchee river, as the e. 
limit;" whereas the Spaniards claim for ancient 
Florida an extent w. to Pensacola. 

By a treaty in 1783, Great Britain retroceded to 
Spain all the territory which both Spain and 
France had ceded to Great Britain in 1763 ; and 
France having, by an act of cession, in 1762, 
given to Spain the territory of Louisiana, w. of the 
Mississippi, including the island and town of New 
Orleans, Spain became possessed of Louisiana, 
" with the same extent it had when France pos 
sessed it." 

By the treaty of St. Ildephonso, of the 1st of 
October 1800, between France and Spain, the 
latter ceded to France, " the colony of the pro 
vince of Louisiana, with the same extent that it 
then had in the hands of Spain, and that it had 
when France possessed it, and such as it should be 
after the treaties subsequently entered into between 
Spain and other states." 

The question respecting the right to the dis 
puted part of W. Florida seems to resolve itself 
into this : That France never included, or thought 
she included, the disputed territory in that portion 
of land which she sold to America ; for that she 
never received it, or thought she received it, from 
Spain by treaty ; and that consequently the claims 
of America (built upon these two assumptions, 
1st, That France believed the territory to have 
been hers; and, 2dly, As such, parted with it to 
the United States) are totally unfounded. But, 
be the question of right what it may, this province, 
which was lately delivered up by the Spanish go 
vernor, Folch, on account of disturbances then 
prevailing, to the United States, will, in all pro 
bability, remain in the hands, and constitute a 
branch, of the latter power. 

In September 1810, a convention of independ 
ence was formed in W. Florida under General 



FLU 

Thomas; and a committee, called "a committee o 
public safety," was ordered to draft a constitution 
similar to that of the United States. The conven 
tion resolved to send a minister to the United 
States after the adoption of a constitution. The 
tax on the slaves of emigrants to the commonwealth 
of W. Florida is abolished. See LOUISIANA.] 

[FLOR i DA, Cape, situate on the e. coast of Florida, 
in the Gulf stream, and nearly opposite the Bernini 
islands, in lat. 25 47 30" . Long. 80 6 o&amp;gt;.J 

[FLORIDA, a township in Orange county, New 
York, six or eight miles s. of Goshen, and 40 
n. r. of New York city ; 377 of its inhabitants are 
qualified to be electors. It has been lately incor 
porated.] 

[FLORIDA Keys, or MARTYRS Islands, a num 
ber of rocks and sand-banks, bounded w. by the 
gulf of Mexico, and e. by that of Florida. The 
great sand-bank extends from the peninsula of E. 
Florida inward, to the gulf of Mexico, in the form 
of a hook ; its w. point is divided from the bank 
called the Dry Tort u gas, by Tortuga channel.] 

[FLORIDA, Gulf of, is the channel between the 
peninsula of Florida and the Bahama islands, n. of 
the island of Cuba ; and through which the Gulf 
stream finds a passage, and runs to the n. e. alone* 
the American coast. See GULF Stream, and 
Mexico.] 

FLOR1DO, a river of the province and king 
dom of Nueva Y r izcaya, 

FLOURIDE, Cape, a point of land of the island 
Scatary, in Acadia or Nova Scotia. 

[FLOWERTOWN, in Pennsylvania, is a small 
village about 12 miles n. of Philadelphia, in Mont 
gomery county.] 

[FLOYD, a new township in Herkemer 
county.] 

[FLUSHING, a town in Queen s county, New 
York ; situated on the n. w. part of Long island, 
and on the s. side of Hell Gate, seven miles e. by 
n. of New York city. It contains 1607 inhabi 
tants, of whom 210 are qualified electors, and 340 
are slaves.] 

[FLU V ANNA. See JAMES River.] 
[FLTJVANNA, a county of Virginia, bounded n. 
by Albemarle, n.e. by Louisa, e. by Goochland, 
to. by Amherst,and .?. by Fluvanna or James river, 
which divides it from Buckingham. It is about 
22 miles long and 20 broad, and contains 3921 in 
habitants, including 1466 slaves. There is great 
plenty of marble, both white and variegated with 
blue, red, and purple veins, found here, on James 
river, at the mouth ofRockfisb, where it forms a 
large precipice, overhanging a navigable part of 
the river.] 



F O N 

[FOGGY Cape, on the n. w. coast of N. Ame 
rica, is situated on the ,9. e. side of the peninsula of 
Alaska, and w. of Kishtac island.] 
. [FOGGY Isle, on the same side of the peninsula 
as the above, lies a short way s. by w. of Foggy 
cape.] 

[FOGO, an island of the N.sea, near the coast 
of Newfoundland, about 20 miles to the n. e. of 
New Work island. Lat. 50 2 n.~] 

FOG ONES, a river of the province and coun 
try of Chaco in Peru. It runs s. s.e. for many 
leagues, and enters the river Paraguay. It is the 
same that others call Yabebiri or Confuso. 

[FOLLOWFIELD, a township in Washing 
ton county, Pennsylvania. E. arid W. Follow- 
field are also two townships in Chester county, 
Pennsylvania.] 

FOMEQUE, a settlement of the corregimiento of 
Ubaqne in the Nuevo Reyno de Granada. It is 
of a mild temperature, and consequently abounds 
in all the vegetable productions peculiar to a warm 
and cold climate ; but it is nevertheless subject, in 
a like manner as those neighbouring to it are, to 
venomous snakes, which they call lay as. It con 
tains more than 200 housekeepers and 150 Indians. 
It is in the indirect road which leads to San Martin 
de los Llanos, lying 10 leagues to the s. w. of 
Santa Fe. 

FOND-PLAT, a river of New France or Ca 
nada. It runs n. w. and enters lake Superior, be 
tween the Atohas and the island of Tour-meet. 

FONDO, PEQUENO, or LITTLE, a settlement of 
the French, in the part that they possess in the 
island of St. Domingo ; situate near the river Arti- 
bonito, on the n. side. 

FONDO, with the addition of Los NEGROS, an 
other settlement and parish of the same island, near 
the s. coast of the or. head, between the settlements 
of Acul and Torbcck. 

FONUO, also with the name of Cayos del 
Fondo, a parish of the same isknd and district, on 
the s. coast, on the shore of the bay formed by the 
point of Abacu. 

FONDO, a bay, which is called Sin Fondo, or 
Bottomless, on the s. coast of the same island, at 
the point of Beata on the w. between this point and 
cape Colorado. 

FONSECA, or AM AP ALA, a large and beautiful 
bay of the province and government of Nicaragua, 
in the kingdom of Guatemala and S. sea. It is be 
tween the port of La Posesion and the town of San 
Miguel. 

FONTAINE, ANCE DE LA, or Bay of the Foun 
tain, in the island of St. Christopher, one of the 
Antilles, on the n, w. coast, between the bay of 



FOR 



107 



Caret and cape Enrage, in that part which the 
French possessed before the island was ceded by 
the English. 

FONTAINC, with the addition of Petite, a point 
of land or cape of the island of Gnadalupe, on the 
s. w. coast, between the bay of La Cruz and the 
point of Vieux Fort. 

[FONTAINE, BELLE, a settlement in the n.w. 
territory ; situated on the e. side of the Mississippi, 
about 18 miles n. of St. Phillips, and 23 below 
Cahokia,] 

FONTENAC, a fort of the English, in the 
country of the N. Iroqueses Indians, built on the 
shore of the river Ontario, at the mouth of the 
river Cataruhui. 

FONTIVON, a settlement of the corregimiento 
of Bogota in the Nuevo Reyno de Granada ; si 
tuate on a beautiful plain, of a cold temperature, 
abounding in the fruits and seeds peculiar to this 
climate, and especially in onions, in which its prin 
cipal commerce consists. It was instructed in the 
faith by the regulars of the extinguished company 
of Jesuits. It contains 100 whites and somewhat 
more Indians, and is one league to the w. of 
Santa Fe. 

[FORALONES, in the island of Gunra and 
coast of Peru in S. America, are old walls of some 
ancient building in the time of the Incas, which 
serve here as light-houses for the shipping which 
sail from Callao to Paita, on the S. sea coast.] 

FORANDOY, a river of the province and go 
vernment of Maracaibo. It rises on the side of the 
settlement of Timotes, between Merida and Trux- 
illo, runs n. and enters the lake of Maracaibo on 
the s. side. 

FORBAN THOU, a small port of the n. coast, 
in the island of St. Domingo, and part possessed by 
by the French, between the river of La Ensenada 
Hallada and the isle of Miraguana. 

Foti BAN, with the addition of West, another 
small port of the w. coast, in the same island and 
district, thus called to distinguish it from the 
former. It is between the point of Pature and the 
river Ruiseaux. 

FORBISHER, Strait of, thus called by its dis 
coverer Martin Forbisher in 1578, in Int. 63 n. 
in the voyage he made to Greenland ; where, after 
encountering severe frost and those n. seas, he 
arrived at a place which he called Strait of the 
Countess of Warwick ; and here he sought to 
build a fort, but having lost much of his timber 
that he carried from England, he returned back 
with a cargo of a kind of lucid sand, in which he 
expected to find gold. See GREENLAND. 

FORELAND, Point of, on the w. coast of the 
r $ 



108 



FOR 



island of Newfoundland, between the cape Brolle 
and the island of Croix. 

[FOREST, a small island in the British territo 
ries, at the mouth of lake Ontario, between which 
and Grand island is a narrow channel. It lies 
nine miles s. of fort Frontinac, and six n. w. of 
Roebuck island in the same lake, and within the 
line of the United States.] 

[FORESTERTON, a village in Burlington 
county, New Jersey, which lies between Ayerston 
and Evesham ; about 15 miles e. of Philadelphia, 
and 11 s. of Burlington city.] 

FORKED. SeeFouRCHir. 

[FORKED DEER, a navigable river in Tennessee, 
"which runs w. into Mississippi river, between the 
Obian and Hatchy. It is about 76 yards wide, 
seven miles from its mouth.] 

[FORKS, a township in Northampton county, 
Pennsylvania.] 

[FORMOSE, a small settlement at the s. e. 
end of Newfoundland island, at the head of Bear 
cove.] 

[FORT ANNE, a village on the head waters of 
"Wood creek in Washington county, New York, 
CO miles n. e. of Albany city. It has its name from 
a small picket fort, erected in the reign of Queen 
Anne, of which there is no vestige left.] 

[FORT BALIZE, at the mouth of Mississippi 
river, lies 105 miles below the city of New Or 
leans.] 

[FORT BLOTJNT stands on Cumberland river, in 
the state of Tennessee.] 

[FORT BREWINGTON, in New York state, is 
situated at the w. end of Oneida lake, and on the 
n. side of Onondago river, at its mouth in the 
lake.] 

[!&amp;lt;ORT CJIARTRES, in the n. w. territory, is situ 
ated on the e . bank of Mississippi river, six miles 
w. by s. of St. Phillips, and 19 w. n. w. of Kaskas- 
kias village.] 

[FORT DAUPHIN, a small lake, or rather arm, 
of Little Winnipeg lake, and w. of it.] 

[FonT EDWARD, a pleasant village in Wash 
ington county, New York, on the e. bank of Hud 
son river, 34 miles n. of Albany. It has its name 
from the large fort built here in 1755, of which 
there are no remains but large mounds of earth.] 

[FouT GEORGE lies at the s. end of lake 
George, 4.3 miles n. of Albany. Here are the re 
mains of the old forts, George and William Henry. 
The situation is pleasant, but there is hardly the 
appearance of a village. See GEORGE, Lake.] 

FORT Luis, a fortress of the French, in the 
island of Cayenne, built in 1643. It was taken by 
the Dutch in 1678, but it was recovered in the 



F O S 

following year, 1679, by the Marshal Count de 
Etrees. 

FORT ROYAL, a city and capital of the island 
of Granada, one of the Antilles; situate on the 
shore of a spacious bay, where vessels lie with 
great safety. It is to the s. w. of the island 
wherein the governor resides. See ST. GEORGE. 

FORT ROYAL, another city, of the island of 
Martinique, capital of the same, and residence of 
the governor. The streets are regular, and the 
houses handsome and well adorned, since the na 
tives are much addicted to luxury. To the e. on 
an isthmus of land, is a fort of an irregular figure, 
from which the town takes its name. The port in 
which the vessels of war are accustomed to winter 
is the best that the French have in the Indies, and 
it is not long since that they have built a good 
citadel for its defence. 

FORT VIEUX, a point and extremity of the 
coast of the island of Guadalupe, which runs 5. e. 
to the sea. 

FORT VIEUX, a river of the above island, which 
runs n. w. and enters the sea, between the fort San 
Pedro and La Grand Ance. 

FORTALEZA, LA, a city of the province and 
country of Las Amazonas, in the part possessed by 
the Portuguese; situate on tlie shore of the river 
Negro very near its mouth, by which it enters the 
Ma ran on. 

FORTESCUE, Bay of, on the n. coast of the 
straits of Magellan. 

FORT UNA, Island of, situate to the n. of the 
w. head of the island St. Domingo, near Crooked 
island. 

FORTUNA, another island, in theN. sea, near the 
coast of the island of Newfoundland, in the mouth 
of the channel formed by the coast and the island 
of Miklon. 

[FORTUNE, a large bay towards the s.w. 
part of Newfoundland island ; across the mouth 
of which lies Micklon island, and s. of it Peter s 
island. This extensive bay is interspersed with 
small isles, and within it are many bays. It has 
great depth of water throughout.] 
FORWARD. See SAN ISIDUO. 
FOSCA, a settlement of the coTregimiento of 
Ubaque in the Nuevo Reyno de Granada. Its 
population of Spaniards is small, and there are not 
many Indians : It is situate between some mountains 
to the e. of Santa Fe, at eight leagues distance from 
this place. These mountains divide the kingdom 
of Los Llanos from San Juan, and were discover 
ed by Jorge de Spira and Hernan Perez, in 1541. 
Amongst the woods here dwell the nations of the 
Macos and Guapis Indians, some -of whom have 



FOX 

become reduced to small settlements. These 
mountains are impenetrable, full of wild beasts 
and venomous insects ; the climate is most severe, 
and the territory covered with lakes and swamps. 

[FOSTER, a township in Providence county, 
Rhode Island, containing2268 inhabitants. Seven 
teen miles w. of Providence, and 31 n. w, of New 
port.] 

FOSTER, a settlement of the island of Barba- 
does; situate in the district of the parish of San 
Felipe. 

FOUGUE, a small island of the e. coast of the 
island of Newfoundland, between the islands Tou- 
liguetand Pingouin. 

FOURCHE, a settlement of the province and 
colony of Georgia ; situate at the mouth of the 
river Ocmulgi, where this enters the Alatamaha. 

Fouu CHE, a small river on the e. coast of the 
island of Newfoundland, towards the n. ; it runs 
e. and enters the sea between the ports of Pincet 
and Orange. 

FOURCHE, a point of land on the coast of Nova 
Scotia or Acadia. 

FOURCHES, TROIS, a fort and establish 
ment of the English, in the province and colony of 
Virginia, established in 1748, at the source of the 
river Miamee Grande, and in the part where this 
is entered by two other rivers, thus taking its 
name. 

FOURCHES, a town of the English, in their pro 
vince and colony, in the county of Hampshire, in 
the neighbourhood of which a battle was fought 
between some of these people and the French. 

FOURCHU, Cape of, a w. point of the coast 
of Nova Scotia or Acadia, between the island 
Tarquet and that of Ducks. 

FOURCHU, another point. See SAN JULIAN. 

FOUUCHU, a small river of the county and land 
of Labrador. It runs s. between those of Boix 
and Chateaux, and enters the sea in the straits of 
Belleisle. 

FOWL, a city of the island of Barbadoes. 

[FOX, a river in the n. w. territory, which 
rises in the s. and runs about 50 miles n. where it 
approaches verj r near to, and parallel with, Ouis- 
consing, a n. e. branch of the Mississippi river. 
From the great carrying place here, through lake 
^Vinnebago, it runs e. then n.e. to bay Puan, 
about 180 miles : from the carrying place to Win- 
nebago it is navigable for canoes four or five miles : 
from bay Puen its current is gentle, from thence 
to Winnebago lake it is full of rocks and very 
rapid: its breadth is between 70 and JOO yards. 
The land on its borders is good, thinly wooded 



F R A 



109 



with hickory, oak, and hazel. See O in SCON - 

SING,and WlNJtfEBAGO.] 

[Fox, a n. water of Illinois river, 34 miles 
below the mouth of Plein river.] 

[FOX BOROUGH, a township in Norfolk 
county, Massachusetts, containing 674 inhabitants, 
26 miles .s. of Boston. It was formerly a part of 
Dorchester, and was incorporated in 1778. J 

FOXO, a settlement of the provide and go 
vernment of Tucuman in Peru ; situate on the 
shore of a river, to the e. of the town of Tarija. 

FRACATOA, a settlement of the missions that 
are held by the Portuguese Carmelite fathers, in the 
country of Las Amazonas ; situate on the shore of 
this river, and at the entrance or mouth of the 
Eltay. Don Juan de la Cruz and Mr. La Con- 
damine write it Fraquatoa, but we follow the Por* 
tuguese authors. 

FRAGUA, an abundant river of the province 
and government of San Juan de los Llanos in the 
Nuevo Reyno de Granada. It rises to the s. of 
the city of Caguan, where stood the settlement 
called by Nicolas de Fedreman De la Fragua, (of 
the Forge), from one that was erected here by him 
for shoeing his horses, and from thence the river 
also took its name, which runs in a curve to tht 
e. and enters the Caqueta. 

[FRAMING!! AM, a township in Middlesex 
county, Massachusetts, containing 1598 inhabi 
tants. It was incorporated in 1700, and is 24 
miles w. s. w. of Boston.] 

FRANCE, NEW. See CANADA. 

FRANCES, or FRANCOIS, Cape, a division 
or district of the French, in the island of St. Do 
mingo, one of those which compose the colony 
which these have established here, and one of tlue 
best favoured of any in regard to situation, extent, 
and fertility. Here is the royal plain, on which 
the Admiral Christopher Columbus encountered 
the Indians. This district is 20 leagues long and 
four wide, bounded n. by the sea, s. by a Cordillera 
of mountains, which in some parts extend them 
selves to the width of eight leagues: no part of 
the world is so well irrigated by rivers, and so 
well supplied with water, as this ; but the rivers 
are all small and may be forded, with the excep 
tion of that called the Grande : the most consider 
able alter this are the Marion, Bayaba, laqueci, 
and Limbe. Here are mines, but the French, 
who are more given to agriculture as a surer way 
to riches, do not work them. In the Red moun 
tain is a copper mine, and in the division of Santa 
Roxa, besides one of this metal, there is another 
of loadstone ; also in the mountains called Pela- 



110 



FRANCE S. 



das, we are assured by the French that there are 
others of gold and iron. The principal produc 
tion, however, of this country is indigo and sugar; 
for the manufactory of the last article here, there 
are no less than 200 mills, and these prepare an 
nually 400 barrels of 500 Ibs each , their average 
price being 13 livres Tournois ; so that without 
taking into account the liqueurs and syrups, each 
mill produces 30,000 livres per annum ; this be 
ing multiplied by 200, makes the yearly product 
of this district equal to 6,000,000 of livres, arising 
from sugar solely, and the produce of the indigo 
is little less. Here is also some cacao and coffee. 
The whole district is intersected by beautiful 
straight roads, 40 feet wide, and adorned with 
Jernon trees. The temperature is hot, and would 
be intolerable, were itnotfor the wind called Brisn, 
which renders the nights agreeable. In the val 
leys, however, between the mountains, there exists 
an eternal spring. The country is delightful, being 
always covered with flowers and fruits, and at 
every step is seen a rivulet of the purest water. 
The most common fruits are the mameyes, zapotes, 
zapotillos, caimitos, papayas, hicacos, nomegra- 
nates, cherries, cocos, dates, and plantains. The 
birds are turkeys, others of curious plumage, com 
mon fowl, and pigeons. Here are many horses 
and mules, and large and small cattle ; also pigs, 
who fatten at little cost in the sabanas, on the 
pieces of sugar-canes that they find there ; and all 
these animals, of whatsoever kind they be, multi 
ply exceedingly. 

This district consists of the 21 following parishes : 
The capital, Accul, 

Fort Delfin, Limbe, 

Port de Paz, Terre Rouge, 

Petite A nee, Port Margot, 

Quartier Morin, Plasencia, 

Limonade, Gros Morne, 

Grand Riviere, Little S. Louis, 

El Trou, Juan Rabel, 

Dondon, Mole de S. Nicolas, 

Llano del N. Le Borgne. 

Ovanamintho, 

The capital, which is of the same name, is a town 
situate on the shore of a good port, and of one of 
the most secure and convenient in the whole island 
for vessels coming from France, and consequently 
one of the most frequented and of the greatest 
merchandise. It is exposed to no wind but the 
n. e. from which it cannot receive any molestation ; 
at its entrance are some shoals or ridges of rocks, 
which render precaution necessary. The town is 
beautiful, situate on a plain, on the shore of a 



river, which empties iisolf into the port ; the 
streets are equal, straight, and intersected by 
others at right angles; and being thus divided 
into manzanas, or insulated lots of houses, they 
appear of perfect symmetry. It had its origin, in 
1668, from a country-house or estate where a certain 
Calvinist pirate, named Gobin, once endeavoured to 
establish himself: it has a very beautiful parish 
church, a grand market-place, and many gardens, 
which render it delightful and fertile: it is of an 
agreeable and benign temperature. The English 
took and burnt it in 1690. It is the residence of 
a governor and of a supreme council. It is 74 
leagues from San Nicolas. 

[The jurisdiction of Cape Fransois is in the 
n. division of the island, in what was called the 
French part of it, and contains 13 parishes. Its 
exports from Jaunuary 1, 1789, to December 31, 
of the same year, wereas follows : 31, 187,636 Ibs. 
white sugar, 7,268,531 Ibs. of brown sugar, 
32,545,524 Ibs. coffee, 269,240 Ibs. cotton, 245, 177 
Ibs. indigo, tanned hides, molasses, spirits, &amp;c. 
to the value of 21,789 livres ; total value of duties 
on exportation, 253,590 dollars, 37 cents. Cape 
Francois exceeds Port an Prince in the value of 
its productions, the elegance of its buildings, and 
the advantageous situation of its port. The city, 
which is the governor s residence in time of war, 
is situated on a cape at the edge of a large plain, 
20 leagues long, and on an average four broad, 
between the sea and the mountains. There are 
few lands better watered, but there is not a river 
that will admit a sloop above three miles : this 
space is cut through by straight roads, 40 feet 
broad, uninterruptedly lined with hedges of lime 
and lemon trees, intermixed with long avenues of 
lofty trees, leading to f plantations which produce 
a greater quantity of sugar than any spot of the 
same size in the world. The town, which is 
situated in the most unhealthy place of this ex 
tensive and beautiful plain, had, some years since, 
several elegant public buildings, as the governor s 
house, the barracks, the magazine, and two hos 
pitals, called the Houses of Providence, founded 
for the benevolent and humane purpose of sup 
porting those Eurepeans who came thither with 
out money or merchandise. The reason of its 
harbour being so admirably well situated for ships 
which come from Europe, is, amongst others, from 
its entrance being sprinkled over with reefs that break 
the force of the waves. Before its destruction in 
1793, this city contained about 8000 inhabitants, 
whites, people of colour, and slaves. See ST. 
DOMINGO.] 



FRANCES, a port of the coast of the kingdom 
of Tierra Firme, in the province and government 
of Venezuela, contiguous to the cape Codera ; 
where there is a small settlement, and an isle or 
farallon of the same denomination. 

FRANCES, an arm of the river Orinoco, called 
Cano Frances, which runs from s. to n. of the 
island of Chuquanas. 

FRANCES, a port of the w. coast, in the island 
of Puertorico, between cape Roxo and the river 
Guanagive ; at its entrance is a sand-bank, which 
renders it dangerous. 

FRANCES, a sand-bank or shoal, near the coast 
of the river La Plata, and at its mouth or en 
trance. 

FRANCES, a cape or point of land on the n. 
coast of the island of St. Domingo, between the 
island La Pena and the point of Sabanetas. 

FUANCES, a river of the straits of Magellan, 
which runs e. and enters the sea in the point of 
Santa Isabel. 

[FiiANCi s. See FKANSOIS, and FRANCIS.] 

FRANCESSES, PUERTO DE LOS, a port in 
the province and captainshp of Paraiba in Brazil, 
between the river Grama and the city of La Con- 
cepcion. 

FRANCESSES, some islands situate near the 
coast of the province and captainship of Esperitu 
Santo in that kingdom, between the Bcrmejas and 
the bank of La Buena Pesca. 

[i RANCESTOWN, an interior township in 
HiSlsborough county, New Hampshire, on the e. 
side of Contecook river,. about 17 miles to the s. w. 
of Concord. It was incorporated in 1772, and 
contained in 1775, 200 inhabitants; in 1790, 
982.1 

FRANCH, an island or rock of the N. sea, 
between the island of Maguana and the Caico 
Grande. 

FRANCIS, ST. a lake or extension of the river 
St. Lawrence, between Kingston and Montreal, 
through which passes the line dividing Upper 
from Lower Canada.] 

[FRANCIS, ST. a river in the province of Lower 
Canada, which rises from lake Mem phrernagog, 
and runs n. into th&amp;lt;- river St. Lawrence. It is not 
all the way navigable, else it would afford an im 
portant communication from the n. parts of Ver 
mont-Jo the markets of Montreal and Quebec.] 

[FRANCIS, ST. a small river in Louisiana, wnich 
runs a .v. e. course into the Mississippi, 108 miles 
above Arkinsas river, and 70 miles above Margot 
river, on the e. side of the Mississippi. It is re 
markable for nothing but the general rendezvous 
for the hunters from New Orleans, who winter 



F R A 



there, and collect salt meat, suet, and bear s oil, 
for the supply of that city. Kappas Old fort for 
merly stood at the mouth of this river, on the s, 
side. It was built by the French during their wars 
with the Chickasaw Indians.] 

[FRANCIS, ST. also the name of a small river in 
the n. w. territory, which runs a s, w. by w. 
course into Mississippi, between Cold and Rum 
rivers, 60 miles above St. Anthony s falls. The 
country a little above it is hilly, and the soil pretty 
good. To the n. e. are the small lakes called the 
Thousand Lakes. The Mississippi here is not 
above 90 yards wide.] 

[FRANCIS, ST. in Brazil, S.America, along 
and large river which runs n. e. and thence s. e. 
till it empties into the ocean, n. e. of the town of 
Seregippe del Key. It has a number of towns 
and settlements, chiefly on its head waters.] 

[FRANCIS. See FRANCES, and FRANCOIS.! 

[FRANC1SBOROIJGH, a settlement in York 
county, district of Maine, containing 311 inhabi 
tants.] 

FRANCISCA, a river of the province and go 
vernment of Darien in the kingdom of Tierra 
Firme. It runs into the N. sea, between the rivers 
Oro and Chepo. 

FRANCISCO, S. a settlement of the head 
settlement of Tamazunchale, and alcaldia mayor 
of Valles, in Nueva Espaiia. It consists of 
Fames Indians; situate on the craggy parts of a 
sierra inhabited by few others than gentiles, in as 
much as they admit of no other sacrament than 
those of baptism and matrimony. It is three 
leagues from its head settlement. 

FRANCISCO, S. another settlement, of the head 
settlement of Zumpahuacan, and alcaldia mayor 
of Marinalco, in the same kingdom. 

FRANCISCO, S. another, of the head settlement 
of Amatepec, and alcaldia mayor of Zultepec. 
It is small, consisting only of seven families of 
Indians, who maintain themselves by breeding 
large cattle, and by sowing maize and other fruits. 
It is of a hot and moist temperature, and is five 
leagues distant from its head settlement. 

FRANCISCO, S. another, of the head settlement, 
and a real of the mines of Temascaltepec. It 
contains 66 families of Indians, who trade in 
wheat, maize, beans, and barley, which it pro 
duces in abundance. It is six leagues to the n. of; 
its capital. 

FRANCISCO, S. another, of the head settle 
ment and alcaldia mayor of Toluca. It contains 
61 families of Indians, and lies at a small distance 
to the n. ot its capital. 

FRANCISCO, S. another, of the head settlement 



F R A 



of Ahuacatlan, and alcaldia mayor of Maravatio; 
situate to the e. and at a small distance from its 
head settlement. 

FRANCISCO, S. another, of the head settlement 
of Xonotla, and alcaldia mayor of Tecali. It 
contains 116 families of Indians. 

FRANCISCO, S. another, of the head settlement 
of Tecomaxtlahuaca, and alcaldia mayor of Juxt- 
lahuaca. 

FRANCISCO, S. another, of the head settlement 
of Coronango, and alcaldia mayor of Cholula. 

FRANCISCO, S. another, a head settlement of the 
alcaldia mayor of Leon, in the province and 
bishopric of Mechoacan. It contains 98 families 
of Spaniards, 97 of Mustees, and 70 of Mulattoes, 
who employ themselves in cultivating wheat and 
maize, and in breeding large cattle, the same 
being the productions of its district; and this ex 
tends as far as the river Grande, which marks out 
the division of the jurisdictions of Salamanca, 
Pasquaro, and Tlazasalca, both on the s. and on 
the w. It is 20 leagues from its capital. 

FRANCISCO, S. another, of the head settlement 
and alcaldia mayor of Periban. It contains 23 
families of Indians, and is two leagues to the n. of 
its capital. 

FRANCISCO, S. another, of the head settlement 
and alcaldia mayor of Nejapa; the population of 
which were almost entirely swept away by the 
plague of Matlazahua in 1736. It is three leagues 
to the n, e. of its capital. 

FRANCISCO, S. another, of the head settlement 
of Macuilzuchil, and alcaldia mayor of Teutitlan. 
It contains 87 families, who are employed in 
trading in cochineal, cotton, fruit, and rnaize. 
It is two leagues s. e. of its capital. 

FRANCISCO, S. another, with the surname of 
Del Mar, in the head settlement and alcaldia 
mayor of Tehuantepec ; situate on the coast of the 
S. sea. It is of a hot temperature, and its popu 
lation are chiefly fishermen, who carry on a great 
trade, and who have also considerable breeds of 
cattle, owing to its extensive and abundant pas 
tures. This part of the territory is peculiarly well 
watered, and on this account, from the fertility of 
the land, some seed crops are not wanting. It is 
four leagues 5. w. of its capital. 

FRANCISCO, S. another, of the province and 
government of Venezuela, founded by Francisco 
Faxardo in 1560, near the town of San Carlos to 
the e. 

FRANCISCO, S. another, called De Paula, of 
the missions that were held by the regulars of the 
company of Jesuits, in the province of Naya- 
rith, and kingdom of Nueva Galicia. It is six 



F R A 

leagues to the e. n. e. of the settlement of La 
Mesa. 

FRANCISCO, S. another, with the surname of 
Vizarron, of the missions and conversion of the 
Peyotes Indians, in the province and government 
of Coaguila, founded by order of the archbishop 
and viceroy of Nueva Espaiia, Don Juan An 
tonio Vizarron, on (he shore of an arm of the river 
St. Domingo. It is 25 leagues to Ihe . w. of the 
garrison of San Juan de Rio Grande. 

FRANCISCO, S. another, with the surname of 
Vulle, the head settlement of the district of the 
alcaldia mayor of San Luis de Potosi. It contains 
304 families of Spaniards, IMustees^ and Mulat 
toes, and some of Indians, all of whom are em 
ployed in rearing large and small cattle, in raising 
seeds and grain in the cultivated estates, which 
are in the valley wherein this settlement is situate. 
It also abounds in vines, of the productions of 
which it makes wine and brandy. It is five leagues 
to the s. s. w. of its capital. 

FRANCISCO, S. another, of the province of 
Barcelona, and government of Cumana ; one of 
those that are under the charge of the Aragonese 
Capuchin fathers ; situate on the short of the river 
Gueza, to the s. of the port of the Piritu. 

FRANCISCO, S. another, with the surname of 
Los Aguanos,of the missions that were held by the 
regulars of the company of Jesuits, in the pro 
vince and government of Mainas in the kingdom 
of Quito ; situate on the shore of the river JVapo, 
by the father Raymundo de Santa Cruz. 

FRANCISCO, S. another, called De Paula, of 
the missions that are held by the fathers, the Ca 
puchins of Andalucia, in the province and govern 
ment of Guayana, on the shore of the river 
Negro. 

FRANCISCO, S. another, called De los Gayes, 
in the province and government of Mainas, of the 
kingdom of Quito, one of the missions that were 
established and held there by the regulars of the 
company of Jesuits, and consisting of Indians of 
the Gayes nation, who were thus settled, in 1660, 
by the Father Sebastian Cedeno. 

FRANCISCO, S. another, of the missions that 
were held by the regulars of the same company, 
in Orinoco; situate on the shore of this river, a( the 
strait of Marumaruta, with a fortress to defend it 
against the attacks of the Caribes Indians. Mr. Bellin 
errs in placing it on the shoreofthe river Pararuma. 

FRANCISCO, S. another, dedicated to San Borja, 
a reduction of the Saruras Indians, of the missions 
that were held by the same regulars of the com* 
pany, on the same river Orinoco ; situate in the 
llanura or plain which lies between the rivers 



F R A 

Mcta and Sinaruco, and being at the present day 
under the charge of the Capuchin fathers. 

FIIANCISCO, S. another, dedicated to San Xa- 
vier, of the same missions of the regulars of the 
company ; situate on the shore of a river which 
enters the Casanare. 

FRANCISCO, S. another, of the province and 
government of Venezuela; situate on the shore of 
the river Guarico, near the town of San Sebas 
tian. 

FRANCISCO, 8. another, of the province of 
Barcelona, and government of Cumana ; situate 
on the shore of a river which enters the Guara- 
piche. 

F ii AN Cisco, S. another, dedicated to San Xavier, 
of the province and government of the Chiquitos 
Indians in Peru, a reduction of the missions that 
wi re held there by the regulars of the company of 
Jesuits ; situate to the e. of a lake which is on the 
shore of the river Ubay. 

FRANCISCO, S. another, also dedicated to San 
Xavier, in the province and government of Moxos, 
a reduction of the missions that were held there by 
the regulars of the company of Jesuits ; situate on 
the shore of the river Marmore Grande, between 
this river and 1 hat of San Xavier, from whence this 
settlement is called. 

FRANCISCO, S. another, dedicated to San Fran 
cisco Solano, in the province and corregimiento of 
Caxamarquilla of the kingdom of Peru. 

FRAN c isco, S. another, dedicated to San Xavier, 
in the province and government of Paraguay ; si 
tuate on the shore of the river Parana, and at the 
mouth of the river S. Xavier, 80 miles ??. e. from 
Santa Fe. 

FIIANCISCO, S. another, of the province and go 
vernment of Tucuman ; situate on the shore and 
at the source of the river San Miguel, a reduction 
of the Pampas Indians, of the missions that were 
held there by the regulars of the company of Je 
suits, and being at the present day under the 
charge of the religious order of San Francisco. 

FRANCISCO, S. another, which is a parish of the 
French, in the island of Guadalupe ; situate on the 
5. coast, near the point of La Gran Salina. 

FRANCISCO, S. another, dedicated to San 
Xavier, of the missions that were held here by the 
regulars of the company of Jesuits, in the province 
of Guaira, and government of Paraguay ; situate at 
the source of the river I bay. The Portuguese of 
San Pablo destroyed it at the end of the last cen 
tury but one, and at present nothing but its ruins 
remain. 

In AN Cisco, S. another, of the missions that 
were. held by the same regulars of the company, in 

VOL. II. 



F R A 113 

the province and government of La Sonora in 
Nueva Espana; situate three leagues to the n. n. e. 
of the garrison of Pitiquin. 

FRANCISCO, S. another, dedicated to San Xavier, 
in Nuevo Mexico. 

FRANCISCO, S. another, in the island of San 
Juan de Puertorico ; situate on the w. coast, on 
the shore of the bay of Aguada. 

FRANCISCO, S. another, of the province of Ta- 
raumara, and kingdom of Nueva Vizcaya ; situate 
on the shore of the grand river of the N. between 
the settlements of Socorro and of San Juan. 

FRANCISCO, S. another, dedicated to San Borja, 
in the province of Paraguay, of the missions which 
were held there by the regulars of the company of 
Jesuits; situate on the shore of the river Parana. 

FRANCISCO, S. another, also dedicated to San 
Borja, in the province of Taraumara, and kingdom 
of Nueva Vizcaya, of the missions that were held 
by the regulars of the company of Jesuits. It is 24 
leagues to the 5. e. one fourth to the e. of the real 
of the mines of San Felipe de Chiguagua. 

FRANCISCO, S. another, of the province of Osti- 
muri, dedicated to San Xavier. 

FRANCISCO, S. another, of the province and go 
vernment of Cartagena, one of the towns founded 
in 1776, by the Governor Don Juan Pimienta, in 
the mountains of the district of the to\vn of Maria. 

FRANCISCO, S. another, of the missions that were 
held by the regulars of the company of Jesuits, in 
the province of California ; situate near the coast, 
between the settlements of Comondu and Sau Luis 
Gonzaga. [This village, of the intendancy of New 
California, was founded in 1776, with a fine port. 
The port is frequently confounded by geographers 
with the port of ])rake further n. under lat. !&amp;gt;8 
10 , called by the Spaniards the Puerto de Bodega. 
The population of San Francisco is 820 souls. 

FRANCISCO, S. another, dedicated to San 
Xavier, of the province and government of La So 
nora in Nueva Espana ; situate on the shore of the 
river of this name. It has, at a small distance, a 
good port in the gulf of California, or Mar Roxo 
de Cortes, the which also bears the same name. 

FRANCISCO, S. another, of the same province 
and government as the former ; situate in the 
country of the Sobaipuris Indians, on the shore of 
a river, between the settlements of San Cosine and 
San Cayetano. 

FRANCISCO, S. another, dedicated to San 
Xavier, of the missions that were held by the re 
gulars of the company of Jesuits, in the province 
and government of Paraguay ; situate on the shore 
of the river Uruguay. 

FRANCISCO, S. another, also dedicated to San 



114 



F R A 



Xavier, of the missions that were held by the re 
gulars of the company of Jesuits, in the country of 
the Chiquilos Indians in Peru. 

FR A NCI -co, S. a town of the province and 
country of Las Amazonas, in the territory of Mata- 
groso ; situate on the shore of the river Itenes, and 
at its source, in the limits of the province and coun- 
tiy of the Chiquitos Indians. 

FH AN cisco, S. another town, of the province 
and captainship of Key in Brazil; situate on the 
sea-coast, opposite the island Aracori. 

FRANCISCO, S. a large and abundant river of the 
province and captainship of Sergipe in Brazil. It 
runs n. for many leagues, with an inclination to the 
n. n. e. and then turning e. and after receiving the 
waters of an infinite number of tributary streams, 
it enters the sea in the aforesaid captainship. At 
its head it has also the name of the river Sin 
Fonda* 

FRANCISCO, S. another, of the province and go 
vernment of La Louisiana. It runs s. for many 
leagues with an abundant stream, and enters the 
Mississipi, close to the lake of Metchigamia. 

FRANCISCO, S. another, of the province and co 
lony of Georgia, in the limits which divide this 
province from Florida. It runs w. and enters the 
river San Pedro. 

FRANCISCO, S. another, of the province and 
alcaldia mayor of Tabasco in Nueva Espana. It 
runs w. and then enters into the lake of Ter- 
minos. 

FRANCISCO, S. another, of the province and go 
vernment of Moxos in the kingdom of Quito. See 
ESSENERU, and CABIERES. 

FRANCISCO, S. another, of the province and 
country of Las Amazonas, in the territory of Ma- 
togroso. It rises in the mountains of the road that 
leads to Villa-boa, runs n. making many windings, 
and unites itself with the river Santa Ana to form 
the Pricto. 

FRANCISCO, S. another, a small river of the pro 
vince and government of Buenos Ayres, which 
runs n. n. w. and enters the river La Plata in front 
of the capital, on the opposite shore. 

FRANCISCO, S. another, of the same province 
and government as the former. It runs w. and en 
ters the Uruguay, near the mouth of the river 
Negro. 

FRANCISCO, S. another, of the province and 
captainship of San Vincente in Brazil. It rises 
near the coast, runs e. and enters the sea opposite 
the island of Aracori. 

FRANCISCO, S. another large and abundant stream 
of the kingdom of Brazil. It rises in the interior 
of the mountains to the w. of the town of Rica ; end 



F R A 

collecting the waters of many other streams, runs 
n. to enter the Guiguitari. 

FRANCISCO. S.an island of the gulf of California, 
or Mar Roxo de Cortes. It is about 2 miles long, 
and about seven in width ; the middle of the island 
is in lat. 29 T n. Long. 112 45 w. 

FRANCISCO, S. a rock or isle called El Arecife, 
on the coast of the province and captainship of Per- 
nambuco in Brazil. 

FRANCISCO, S. a point of land or cape of the w. 
coast, in the island of Newfoundland, one of those 
which form the entrance of the bay of La Concep- 
cion . 

FRANCISCO, S. another, on the w. coast of the 
island of Puertorico, between the bay of La Aguada 
arid the port Calvachi, one of those which form the 
entrance of the said bay. 

FRANCISCO, S. a port on the coast of the straits 
of Magellan, and in the third narrow pass called 
the Passage. 

FRANCISCO, S. a lake of New France or Ca 
nada, being a stagnant water formed by the river 
Utabes, just before this river enters the St. Law 
rence. It is 17 leagues long n. n. w. and three 
wide at its broadest part, e. n. e. The territory on 
its banks is very low, but of good quality. 

FRANCOIS, a bay of the island of Guadalupe, 
on the w. coast of La Basse Terre, between the 
river of the Jacobins and the Bailiff. 

FRANCOIS, another settlement, of the missions 
that were held by the regulars of the company of 
Jesuits of France, in Canada ; situate on the shore 
Of the waste-water of the lake Kitchigamin, to enter 
the lake Superior. 

FRANCOIS, a river of New France or Canada. 
It rises from the lake Huron, runs e. having many 
falls in its course, and enters the lake Nipissin. 

FRANCOIS, a lake of the province and country 
of the Iroquees Indians, being a stagnant water 
formed by the river Utawas, a little before this 
enters the St. Lawrence. 

FRANCOIS, a small river of the province and 
country of the Iroquees Indians. It runs n. and 
enters the lake St Peter, which is formed by the 
river St. Lawrence. 

FRANCOIS, another smallriver, of New France, 
on the confines of Acadia or Nova Scotia. It runs 
s. and enters the lake Orangabena. 

FRANCOIS, another small river, of the country 
and land of Labrador. It runs s. between the cas 
cade and bay of Saint Clare, and enters the sea in 
the straits of Belleislc. 

FRANCOIS, a sand-bank near the coast of Nova 
Scotia, on the s. side. 

FRANCOIS, CUL DE SAC, a settlement and pa- 



F R A 

rish of the island of Martinique ; situate on the s.e. 
coast. It is a curacy of the monKs of St. Domingo, 
lias a good port between the Cul de Sac de Roseaux 
and tiie Cul de Sac Simin. 

[FRANCOIS, OLD Cape, the n. easternmost 
point of the island of St. Domingo or Hispaniola, 
haying Balsamo bay n. w. and Scotch bay s. s. e.] 

[FHANCOIS. See FRANCES, and FRANCIS.] 

[FRANCONIA, a township in Grafton county, 
New Hampshire, 11 miles n. e. of Haverhill, New 
Hampshire, on Connecticut river. Incorporated 
in 1764, first called Morristown. It contains 72 
inhabitants.] 

FRANKFORT, a city of the county of Phila 
delphia, in the province and colony of Pennsyl 
vania : it is large, and its buildings are handsome. 
Its first inhabitants were Dutch and Swedes, who 
lived in different parts of this province, but who 
afterwards became united. It has a good church, 
and consists of more than 80 families. It is four 
miles to the n. e. of Philadelphia, upon an arm of 
the river Delaware. 

[FIIANKFOIIT, a township in Hancock county, 
district of Maine, on the to. side of Penobscot bay. 
It has a few houses, regularly built, and lies 10 
miles n. w. of Penobscot, 86 s. w. of Passama- 
quoddy, and 175 n. e. of Boston. The township 
contains 891 inhabitants.] 

[FRANKFORT, a new township in Herkemer 
county, New York, e. of Whitestown, adjoining.] 

[FRANKFORT, a thriving village in Hampshire 
county, Virginia, on a creek which empties into 
Potowmack river. It is nine miles n. w. of Rum- 
ney, four miles s. of the Potowmack, and 10 s. s. e. 
effort Cumberland.] 

[FRANKFORT, the capital of Pendleton county, 
Virginia, is situated on the w. side of a s. branch 
of Potowmack river. It contains a court-house, 
gaol, and about 30 houses; 130 miles n. w. of 
Richmond.] * 

[FRANKFORT, the metropolis of Kentucky, is 
situated in Franklin county, on the n. e. bank of 
Kentucky river, about24 miles from its confluence 
with the Ohio. It is a flourishing town, regularly 
laid out, and has a number of handsome houses. 
The state-house is a handsome stone building. 
Here is also a tobacco warehouse. It is 19 miles 
n. of Harrodsburg, 25 ;?. by zo. of Danville. Lat. 
37 57 n. Long. 94 43 w.~] 

FRANKFORT, a fort of the English, in the pro 
vince of Sagadahock, on the shore and at the 
month of the river Kenebec. 

1 RANKLAND, a port of Nova Scotia or 
Acadia, on the .9. coast. 

[FRANKLIN, Fort, is in Alleghany county, 



F R A 



115 



Pennsylvania, near the post called Venango, and 
was erected in 1787, in order to defend the frontiers 
of Pennsylvania from the depredations of the 
neighbouring Indians. It is seated on the s. w. 
bank of Alleghany river, opposite the month of 
French creek. Lat. 41 23 n. Long. 79 51 w. 
53 miles s. s. e. of Presque isle, and 57 n. of Pitts- 
burg.] 

[FRANKLIN County, the n. westernmost in Ver 
mont, bounded n. by Lower Canada, and w. by 
lake Champlain. It was lately taken from Chitten- 
den county, and contains 20 townships.] 

[FRANKLIN County, in Pennsylvania, bounded 
n. by Mifflin, n. e. by Cumberland, e. by York, 
s. by Washington county in Maryland, w. by Bed 
ford county, and n. w. by Hunterdon. It is com 
puted to contain 800 square miles, equal to 512,000 
acres. It lies chiefly between the N. and S. moun 
tains, and comprehends the middle part of the 
beautiful and rich valley of Connegocheague ; 
which is watered by the creek of its name, which 
falls into Potowmack at William s port in Mary 
land. This county exhibits a most luxurious 
landscape in summer, from the top of South moun 
tain. Iron ore is found here sufficient already to 
furnish work for a furnace and forge. The county 
is divided into 11 townships, which contain 15,655 
inhabitants, of whom 330 are slaves.] 

[FRANKLIN County, in Kentucky, is bounded 
n. by Scott county, n. w. and w. by Shelby, s. e. 
by Fayette, and s. by Woodford. Chief town, 
Frank tort.] 

[FRANKLIN County, in Halifax district, N. Ca 
rolina, contains 7559 inhabitants, of whom 2717 
are slaves. It is bounded n. by Greenville, s. by 
Johnston, n. e. by Warren, s. w. by Wake, and w. 
by Orange county. Chief town, Louisburg.] 

[FRANKLIN County, in Virginia, is bounded n. 
by Bedford, . w. by Botetourt, w. by Montgo 
mery, s. w. by Henry, s. by Patrick, and e.lby 
Campbell county. It is about 40 miles lon&amp;lt;j, and 
25 broad, and contains 6842 inhabitants, includmo- 
1073 slaves. A range of the Alleghany mountains 
passes through it on the n. w. It is consequently 
hilly in general.] 

[FRANKLIN County, in Georgia, is situated in 
the Upper district; bounded e. and n. e. by Tu- 
gulo river, which separates it from the state of S. 
Carolina, zo. and n. ra. by the country of thfe 
Cherokees, s. by the head branches of Broad river, 
and s. e. by Elbert county. It contains 1041 in 
habitants, of whom 156 are slaves. The court 
house is 17 miles from Hatton s ford, on Tugulo 
river, 25 from Elberton, and 77 from Wasjbinfiv 
ton.] 

q 2 



116 



F R A 



[FBANKLIN College. See LANCASTER, in 
Pennsylvania.] 

[FRANKLIN, a township in Norfolk county, 
Massachusetts; taken from Wrentlmm, and in 
corporated in 1778, and contains 17,000 acres of 
land. It has 1101 inhabitants; is bounded n. by 
Charles river, which separates it from Mcdway, 
and lies 30 miles s. of Boston.] 

[FRANKLIN, a small isle at the mouth of St. 
George s river, in Lincoln county, Maine. Four 
leagues s. of Thomaston.] 

[FRANKLIN, a new township in Dutchess 
county, New York. By the state census of 1796, 
it appears there are 210 of its inhabitants qualified 
to be electors. Also, a new township in Delaware 
county, of whose inhabitants 239 are electors. It 
lies s. v). from, and borders on Harpersfield, and 
its w. line runs along the s. e. bank of Susquehan- 
nah river. This town was divided by an act of 
the legislature, 1797.] 

[FRANKLIN, a township in Westmoreland 
county, Pennsylvania. Also, three others in the 
same state, viz. in York county, Fayette county, 
and in Washington county.] 

[FRANKLIN, a township, the northernmost in 
New London county, Connecticut, six miles n. w. 
of Norwich. It contains above 1000 inhabitants, 
\vho are chiefly wealthy farmers.] 

FRANKSTO WN, a city of the county of Cum 
berland, in the province and colony of Pennsyl 
vania ; situate between some mountains to the n. w. 
in the extremity of the said province. Twenty-two 
miles s. w. of Huntingdon, on the bank of a river 
which enters the Susquehannah. 

FRASCAVINAS, a barbarous nation of In 
dians, but little known, who inhabit the woods 
which are at the entrance of the river Guassaga, to 
the w. of Pastaza. It is thought that these Indians 
are of the race of the Muritas. 

FRAYLE, a settlement of the province and 
government of Venezuela, founded in the serrania 
by the commercial company of Guipuzcoana, just 
after this company was established. 

FIIAYLE, with .the addition of Mvierto, ano 
ther, a small settlement of the province and go 
vernment of Tucuman in Peru, thus called from 
the mutrte or death inflicted on a monk by the 
Pampas Indians. It is 35 leagues from Cordoba, 
between the rivers Tercero and Saladillo. 

[FRAYLES, an island near the coast of New 
Andalucia, Tierra Firme.] 

[FRAYLES, Los, a clump of rocks which rise 
above water on the s. side of the island of St. Do 
mingo, four leagues n. w. of the island of Beata, 
nearly opposite the isles called the Seven Bio- 



F R E 

thers, in the bay of Monte Christ!, on the n, side 
of the island. These? rocks are also called flie Bro 
thers or Monks. The rapidity of the currents 
renders this part of the coast very dangerous.] 

FRAYLES, a settlement and real of the silver 
mines of the province of Cinaloa in Nueva Es- 
pana ; situate between the rivers Mayo and Del 
Fuerte. 

FRAYLES, some isles of the S. sea, near the 
coast of the province and government of Vera- 
gua, and kingdom of Tierra Firme. They are de 
sert and uncultivated, and lie between the moun 
tain of Puercos and the Punta Mala. 

FRAYLES, some other isles near the s. coast of 
the island of St. Domingo, opposite the Punta 
Beata. 

FRAYLES, others, near the e. coast of the island 
Margarita. 

FRAYLES, an island near the coast of Brazil, in 
the province and captainship of Todos Santos; 
situate within a bay. 

FRAYLES, a small river of the province and 
captainship of Puerto Seguro, in the same kingdom 
of Brazil. It rises near the coast, runs e. and 
enters the sea between those of Puerto Seguro and 
Jaco. 

FREDERICA, a city of the province and co 
lony of Georgia, called thus by the late Prince of 
Wales. It stands in the centre of the island of 
San Simon, near the coast, surrounded with good 
fortifications, particularly a regular fortress at the 
mouth of the river Abatamha, the same consisting 
of four bastions and an advanced work, with suf 
ficient artillery. It has a magistrate, as has the 
Savannah, thisexpence being defrayed by the pro 
vince. The Spaniards took the fort in 1742, and 
whilst premeditating an attack uponthetown, they 
were forced by General Oglethorpe to raise the 
siege. The island is 13 miles long and four wide. 
It is 75 miles to the n. of St. Augustin of Florida ; 
and has at the entrance of the river other small 
isles, which are also fortified. Lat. 31 14 
Long. 81 34 . 

[FuEDKRicA, a village in Kent county, state of 
Delaware ; situated between the two main branches 
of Mother Kill, a stream which falls into Dela 
ware, seven miles from the town, and three s. e. of 
James s creek, which leads up to Dover. It con 
tains about 40 houses, and lies 10 miles e. of Do 
ver, and 58 s. w. from Philadelphia.! 

[FREDERICK County, in Maryland, isbound- 
edw. by Pennsylvania, w. and n.w. by Washing 
ton, e. by Baltimore, and s. ze. by Potowmaefc 
river. On the Monocacy river and its branciies 
are about 37 grist-mills, a furnace, irou forge, and 



F R E 

a glass manufactory, called the Etna Glass-works, 
which are in a thriving state. This county is 
about 30 miles each way, reckoning from the ex 
treme parts. The Cotoctiny mountain extends 
from the Potowmack in a n. direction through this 
county into Pennsylvania, between the S. moun 
tain and Monocacy creek ; the e. parts are gene 
rally level. It contains 30,791 inhabitants, in 
cluding 3641 slaves. Chief town, Frederick- 
town.] 

[FREDERICK County, in Virginia, is bounded 
n. by Berkley, s. by Shanandoah, w. by Hamp 
shire, and e. by Shanandoah river, which sepa 
rates it from London county. It is 30 miles in 
length, and 20 in breadth, and contains 19,681 
inhabitants, of whom 4250 are slaves. Iron ore 
is found here in great plenty ; and works have 
been erected which produce 160 tons of bar-iron, 
and 650 tons of pig, annually. In one year 300 
tons of bar-iron were manufactured. Pots and 
other utensils, cast thinner than usual of this iron, 
may be safely thrown into or out of the waggon in 
which they are transported. Both this and Berk 
ley county has a good soil. Between the waters of 
Opeckan creek and the Shanandoah is the richest 
limestone land in the e. parts of the state. Near 
the N. mountain in this county is a curious cave, 
by some called Zaney s cave. Its entrance is on 
the top of an extensive ridge : you descend 30 or 
40 feet as into a well, from whence the cave then 
extends, nearly horizontally, 400 feet into the 
earth, preserving a breadth of from 20 to 50 feet, 
and a height of from five to 12 feet. After enter 
ing this cave a few feet, the mercury, which, in the 
open air, was at 50, rose to 57 of Fahrenheit s 
thermometer. Alter this may be added the natu 
ral well on the lands of Mr. Lewis. It is some 
what larger than a common well, and rises as near 
the surface of the earth as in the neighbouring ar 
tificial wells ; and is of a depth as yet unknown : 
it is used with a bucket and windlass as an ordi 
nary well. It is said there is a current in it tend 
ing sensibly downwards. Chief town, Winchester .] 
[FREDERICK, a fort in Washington county, 
Maryland ; situated on the n. e. bank of Potow 
mack river, near the *- line of Pennsylvania.] 

[FiiEDEuitK, a township in Montgomery 
county, Pennsylvania.] 

[Fiicoi RICK, a town on the n. side of Sassafras 
river, in Cecil county, Maryland, and separated 
by that river from George town, in Kent county. 
It lies six miles s. w. of Warwick, and 14 e. of 
Grove point, in Chesapeak bay. Lat. 39 22 30" .] 
[FREDERICK House, a trading station in Upper 
Canada, near the head waters . of Warotowba 



F R E 



117 



river and Ootawas river. Lat. 48 30 n. Long. 
82 zv.l 

[FKEDERICKSBURG, a post-town in Spot- 
sylvania county, Virginia ; situated on the *. w. 
bank of Kappahannock river, 110 miles from its 
mouth in Chesapeak bay. It is an incorporated 
town, and regularly laid out into several streets, 
the chief of which runs parallel with the river, 
and in all contains upwards of 200 houses, two to 
bacco warehouses, and several stores of well-as 
sorted goods. Its public buildings are an Episco 
pal church, an academy, court-house, and gaol. 
It is a place of considerable trade, and contains 
about 2000 inhabitants, of whom 587 are slaves. 
A forge in this neighbourhood made some time 
ago about 300 tons of bar-iron in a year, from 
pigs imported from Maryland. It is 42 miles 
s. s. w. of Washington, 50 n. by e. of Rich 
mond, 68 s. w. of Baltimore, and 145 s. w. of 
Philadelphia. Lat. 38 22 n. Long. 77 36 zo.l 

[FREDERICKS WN, a township in Dut- 

chess county, New York, which contains 5932 
inhabitants, of whom 188 are qualified to be elec 
tors, and 63 are slaves.] 

[FREDER1CKTON, a considerable township 
in the province of New Brunswick, 90 miles 
up St. John s river, which is thus far navigable 
for sloops.] 

[FREDER1CKTOWN, a post-town of Mary 
land, and capital of Frederick county; situated on 
both sides of Carrol s creek, a small stream that 
empties into Monocacy river, over which are two 
bridges. The streets are regularly laid out, inter 
secting each other at right angles. The dwelling- 
houses, chiefly of stone and brick, are about 700 in 
number, many of which are handsome and commo 
dious. The public edifices are, one church for 
Presbyterians, two for German Lutherans and Cal- 
vinists, and one for Baptists, an elegant court 
house, a gaol, and a brick market-house. It is a 
very flourishing town, and has considerable trade 
with the back country. The Etna glass-works 
are situated four miles above the town, on Tuska- 
rora creek. Fredericktown is four miles e. of Co- 
toctin mountain, 35w.byn. of Baltimore, 15 e. 
of Sharpsburg, and 108 s. w. by w. of Philadel 
phia. Lat. 39 28 w.] 

[FREEHOLD, a town in Monmouth comity, 
New Jersey, 15 miles a\ of Shrewsbury, and 20 
s. e. by ?. of New Brunswick. In this town was 
fought the obstinate battle, called the Monmouth 
battle, on the 28th of June 1778. Sec MON 
MOUTH. There is ftn academy in this town. 
Freehold contains 3785 inhabitants, of whom 627 
are slaves. See UPPER 



118 



[FREEHOLD, a township in Albany county, 
New York, containing 1822 inhabitants, of whom 
562 are qualified electors, and five are slaves.] 

[FREEPORT, a township in Cumberland 
county, district of Maine ; situated at the head of 
Casco bay ; adjoining to Durham on the n. c. 
and to North Yarmouth on the s. w. ; about 10 
miles n. e. of Portland, and 140 w. by e. of Bos 
ton. It was incorporated in 1789, and contains 
1330 inhabitants.] 

[FREESTONE GAP, a place so called, in Ten 
nessee, 25 miles from Hawkin s court-house, and 
12 from Cumberland mountain.] 

[FREETOWN, a thriving township in Bris 
tol county, Massachusetts, incorporated in 1683, 
contains 2202 inhabitants, and lies 33 miles s. of 
Boston.] 

FREHEL, Cape of, a point of land on the 
coast of the island of Falkland or Faulkland. 

[FRENCH , a small river in Massachusetts, has its 
source inasmallpond on the borders of Leicester and 
Spencer, in Worcester county, and runs through 
Oxford and joins Quinebauge river, in Thomson 
township in Connecticut. It derives its name 
from the French Protestants, who obtained a set 
tlement in the town of Oxford, after the revoca 
tion of the edict of Nantz, in 1685.] 

[FRENCH AMERICA. There is no part of 
the American continent which the French nation 
now possess, save that called French Guayana. 
In the W. Indies they formerly claimed the fol 
lowing islands, to which the reader is referred for 
a particular description : St. Domingo or Hispa- 
niola, Guadalupe, St. Lucia, Tobago, St. Bar 
tholomew, Deseada, and Marigalante. The French 
were among the last nations who made settlements 
in the W. Indies; but they made ample amends 
by the vigour with which they pursued them, and 
by that chain of judicious and admirable measures 
which they used in drawing from them every ad 
vantage that the nature of the climate would yield, 
and in contending against the difficulties which it 
threw in their way.] 

[FRENCH BROAD, a navigable river in Tennes 
see, which rises on the s. e. side of the Great Iro7i 
and Bald mountains in N. Carolina. It is formed 
by two main branches, which receive several 
streams in their course. These unite about 58 
miles from the source of the Nolachucky, the e. 
branch ; thence it flows n. w. about 25 miles, and 
Joins the Molston 11 miles above Knoxville, and is 
100 or 500 yards wide. The navigation of this 
branch is much interrupted by rocks, as is also 
the Tennessee branch, which joins the main river 
50 miles below this. A large, clear, medicinal 



F R E 

spring, said to be efficacious in curing many dis 
eases, has been lately discovered on the waters of 
this river, about 30 miles in a direct line from its 
mouth. The water is so hot that a patient at first 
going 1 into it can scarcely support it. Nearer the 
mouth of the river, a valuable lead-mine has beea 
discovered.] 

[FRENCH Creek, a n. w. water of Alleghany 
river, into which it falls along the n. side of fort 
Franklin, 80 miles n. by e. of Pittsburg. It af 
fords the nearest passage to lake Erie. It is navi 
gable with small boats to Le Beuf, by a very 
crooked channel ; the portage thence to Presque 
isle, from an adjoining peninsula, is 15 miles. 
This is the usual route from Quebec to Ohio.] 

FRENCH KEYS, two of the uninhabited Ba 
hama islands. The largest is about four or five 
miles long, and lies about five leagues c. from the 
n. end of Acklin s (or S. Crooked) island. There 
is fresh water upon it. It is divided from the Les 
ser French Key by a passage of above a mile wide, 
with deep water. The e. point of the French Keys 
bears about ten leagues w. n. w. from the s. w. 
point of the island of Mayaguana. See BAHAMAS. 

[FRENCH LICK, in Tennessee, is the name of a 
salt spring, near which the town of Nashville 
now stands.] 

[FRENCH Town, in Cecil county, Maryland, 
lies on the e. side of Elk river, a mile s. of Elkton, 
from which it is separated by Elk creek. Elk 
ferry is six miles below this.] 

[FRENCHMAN S Bay lies on the sea-coast of 
Lincoln county, Maine, and is formed by Mount 
Desert island on the a", and the peninsula of Golds- 
borough township on the e. Round Mount De 
sert island it has an inland circular communica 
tion with Blue Hill bay.] 

[FRENEUSE, a settlement of Nova Scotia or. 
Acadia ; situate on the shore of the river San 
Juan, and to the n. of a lake of the same name.] 

[FUENEUSR Lake, a large collection of water, 
through which St. John s river, in New Bruns 
wick, passes. In some maps this appears only as 
a dilation of the river ; but in others it appears as 
a large lake of very irregular figure, and receiving 
considerable streams from the circumjacent country.] 

FRENTONES, a barbarous nation of Indians 
of Peru ; bounded e. by the river Vermejo, w. by 
the Salado, and n. and n. a&amp;gt;. by a branch of the 
cordillera of the Andes, and s. by the nation of 
the Yuanes Indians. There have been sometimes 
couriers established between the e. part and Para 
guay These Indians are but little known. 

FRERES TROIS, some isles of the river Es- 
sequebo, belonging to the Dutch, in the province 



F R I 

and government of Guayana : they are but 



FRO 



119 



FRESNILLO, a town, the capital of the alcal- 
dia mayor oflhis name and real of the silver mines 
in Nueva Espana, of the kingdom of Nueva Gali- 
cia, and bishopric of Guadalaxara. It has been 
celebrated and rich fromthe abundance of the metal 
found in its mines ; and this used to be prepared in 
a large copper, so that no quicksilver was lost, 
saving what might by chance be spilt through 
carelessness. These mines are at present greatly 
fallen to decay ; the population of the town is 
consequently lessened, and amounts to little more 
than 50 or 60 families of Spaniards and Mustees, 
some Mulattoes, and more Indians, who occupy 
themselves in the labour of the mines, as also in 
ihe estates and grazing and breeding farms. It is 
of a cold temperature, but the air is very healthy, 
and it abounds in productions. On the w. part, 
within the distance of six and 12 leagues, are the 
estates of Santa Cruz, Dolores, Truxillo, and 
Abrego ; in all of which are immense numbers of 
cattle ; and, in short, the farms are a matter of 
greater consideration with the inhabitants than are 
the mines. It is 54 leagues to the n. n.e. of Gua- 
dalaxara, and 12 to the n.w. of Zacatecas, to the 
intendancy of which it belongs. Lat. 23 22 n. 
Long. 10l58 K&amp;gt;. 

FRET W ELL, a settlement of the island of Bar- 
badoes, in the district of the province of St. Joseph. 

FRET WELT,, another, in the same island and pa 
rish, of the district of St. Thomas. 

FRIA, SIERRA, a cordillera of mountains, 
eternally covered with snow, and where the cold is 
most intense, in the kingdom of Brazil. They 
Tun e. from the river of San Francisco. 

FRIAS, a settlement of the province and corre- 
gimimto of Pinta in Peru. 

[FRIEDBURG, a Moravian settlement in 
Wachovia or Surry county, N. Carolina.] 

[FR1EDENSHUETTEN, a Moravian settle 
ment, whose name signifies Tents of Peace ; situated 
on Susquehannah river, in Pennsylvania, about 24 
miles below Tioga point ; established by the United 
Brethren in 1765. It then consisted of 13 Indian 
huts, and upwards of 40 houses, built after the 
European manner, with a neat chapel. Next to 
the houses the ground was laid out in gardens ; and 
between the settlement and the river, about 250 
acres were divided into regular plantations of In 
dian corn.] 

[FR1EDENSTADT, or TOWN OF PEACE, a 
Moravian settlement, which was established be 
tween Great Beaver and Yellow cieeks ; about 40 



miles n. w. of Pittsburg. It was abandoned in 
1773.] 

[FRIEDLAND, a Moravian settlement, in 
Wachovia.] 

FRIO, NUESTRA SfiNOitA BE LA ASUNCION 

DE CABO FRIO, a city of the province and cap 
tainship of Rio Janeiro in Brazil. It has, besides 
the parish church, which is very beautiful, a con 
vent of the monks of San Francisco, and contains 
more than 500 inhabitants. It is situate on the 
coast, near the cape of its name, in lat. 22. 
Long. 42 1 w. 

FRIO, a river of the province and government 
of Popayan. It runs e. and enters the Cauca. 

FRIO, another river, of the province of Gila in 
Nueva Espana. 

FRIO, another river, of the province and go 
vernment of Merida in the Nuevo Reyno de Gra 
nada : it enters the river Lebrija, near the city of 
San Juan Giron. \f. 

FRIO, a cape or point of land of the coast of the 
province and captainship of the Rio Janeiro in 
Brazil, which lies between the river of this name 
and the cape Santo Tomas. 

FRIT1S, AGUA DE, a settlement of the pro 
vince and corregimiento of Copiapo in the king 
dom of Chile ; situate on the shore of the river 
Totoral. 

[FROBISHER S Straits lie a little to the n. 
of cape Farewell and W. Greenland, and were 
discovered by Sir Martin Frobisher. Lat. 63 n. 
Long. 42 w.~\ 

[FROG S Point or Neck, inW. Chester county, 
New York, lies on the coast of Long Island sound, 
nine miles from Harlaem heights.] 

FRONSAC, Canal of, between Acadia or Sco 
tia arid Cape Breton. It is three common French 
leagues in length undone in width. 

FRONTENAC, a fort built by the French, 
who were commanded by Count Frontenae, who 
gave it his title : the natives call it Cataracocui. 
It is in New France or Canada, on the river St. 
Lawrence, 100 leagues above Quebec, and one 
from the mouth of the river running into lake On 
tario. It was built by the said count, he being 
governor of the province, to restrain the irrup 
tions of the Iroquees Indians, it being so situate as 
that from it a march might be made into the very 
centre of the country in 24 hours. The winter 
is shorter here than at Quebec, and the territory is 
so fertile, that when cultivated it produces all kinds 
of Indian and European grain and other fruits. 
This fort was at first inconsiderable, and sur 
rounded with fascines and palisades, but after- 



320 



FRO 



wards it was protected with ramparts, bastions, 
and other works of stone, found in abundance in 
the lake, on the n. shore of which the fort stands. 
It is a square of four bastions, being nearly a 
quarter ol a league in circumference: its situation 
is extremely agreeable, since the banks of the river 
here form a delightful country ; the same prospect 
continuing as far as the entrance of the lake, in 
which are various islands full of wood ; also, not 
far from hence, is a port where all kinds of vessels 
may lie at anchor. Some of the first colonists who 
established themselves here, brought with them va 
rious kinds of birds and other animals, which have 
multiplied all of them in a manner truly astonish 
ing : indeed, the colony itself was in such a thriv 
ing state that it would have been of the last import 
ance, but for the difficulty of any communication 
with Quebec and Montreal, owing to the rocks and 
cascades with which the river abounds; nay, so 
much so, as to impede the navigation of the Iro- 
quees Indians, who occupy either of its shores. 
On this account the fort was abandoned by the 
French, in 1G89, when they destroyed the works: 
they afterwards, however, rebuilt the fort, and re 
mained in it until 1759, when it was taken by the 
English, under the command of Colonel Bradstreet, 
and afterwards ceded to the Spaniards with all the 
province, in the peace of Paris, in 1762. 

[A river has lately been surveyed by the deputy 
surveyor-general of Canada, from its entrance into 
the lake at Kenty, near Cadaraqui, to its source 
in lake St. Clie ; from which there is an easy and 
short portage across n. w. to the n. e. angle of lake 
Huron, and another that is neither long nor dif 
ficult to the 5. to the old settlement of Toronto. 
This is a short route from fort Frontenacto Michil- 
limackinack. See KINGSTON.] 

FRONTERA, SAN LORENZO EL REAL DE 
LA, a city, the capital of the province and govern 
ment of Santa Cruz de la Sierra [by which name 
it is at the present day better known] in Peru ; 
founded by the Captain Lorenzo Suarcz de Figue- 
roa, in 1594. It is situate in a beatiful plain of 
more than 20 leagues long, and surrounded on all 
sides by country estates, on the source or head of 
the river Pirao, and not far from the kingdom of 
La Plata. Its population consists of GOOD souls, 
without mentioning 1500, who are servants, and 
are descended from the infidels taken from the 
woods by the people of La Cruz, when they made 
their sallies against the Chiriguanos, Chanaes, 
Tobas, Yuquis, Itonamas, Chiquitos, Baures, and 
Movibas ; the same sallies having been made regu 
larly twice a year, at the instigation of the founder 



FRY 

of the said city, but afterwards prohibited at the 
repeated instances of the regulars of the company 
of Jesuits. Jri this city there are no public shops, 
in us much as necessity has instructed every per 
son to make whatsoever may be necessary for them 
selves. It is the head of a bishopric erected in 
1605, contains a convent of the religious order of 
La Merced, and had a college of the regulars of 
the company of Jesuits. It is in lat. 17 25 5. 
Long. 64 24 w. 

FfJONTKRA, also with the dedicatory title of 
S,m Juan, another city of the province and corre- 
gimie&amp;gt;/io of Mendoza in the kingdom of Chile, 
founded by Don Garcia Hurtado de Mendoza, 
who gave it his name, being at the time president 
of the kingdom. It is beautifully and agreeably 
situate, fertile, and abounding in wheat and cattle, 
and no less in gold mines. His small, and in its 
district are various estates, called San Miguel, El 
Leoncito, Vado, Hornillos, Quillayes, Babida, 
Jaques el Peiion Teatino, and Los Pedernales. It 
is 94 miles n. by e. from Mendoza, and 158 to 
the n.e. of Santiago, in lat. 31 17 s. Long. 
68 36 is. 

FRONTERA, another city, with the same dedica 
tory title as the former, the capital of the pro 
vince and corregimiento of Chachapoyas in Peru ; 
founded by the Mariscal Alonso de Alvarado, in 
1536, in a beautiful plain, and very advantageous 
situation. It is not large, its population is small, 
and it is 120 leagues to the n. e. of Lima. It has 
been the native place of the Father Onofrc Estevan, 
of the extinguished company of the Jesuits, an 
apostolic missionary of singular eminence, and 
a man of extraordinary virtues. 

FRONTERA, a town and garrison of the province 
and government of Sonora in Nueva Espana. 

FRONTERA, a paribh of the province and go 
vernment of Paraguay ; situate on the Paraguay, 
about six miles s. e. from Asuncion, in lat. 
25 23 50" s. Long. 57 35 26" w. 

FRONTON, Isle of the, near the coast of 
Peru, in the province and co&amp;gt;regimitnto of Get- 
cado, near the isle of San Lorenzo. 

[FROWSACK Channel, or the GUT OF CHANSO, 
a strait between Nova Scotia and Cape Breton 
island, five French leagues long and one broad.] 

FHUTAS, a settlement of the province and cap 
tainship of San Vicente in Brazil ; situate near 
the settlement of Tomido. 

[FRYDUFFRIN, a township in Chester county, 
Pennsylvania.] 

[FRYING-PAN, a dangerous shoal, so called 
from its form. It lies at the entrance of Cape Fear 



P U E 

river, in N. Carolina; the.?, part of it is in 1st. 
33 32 n. six miles from Cape Fear pitch, and 
24s. e. by s. from the light-house on Bald-head.] 

[FRYSBURGH, or FRYBURGH, a township, 
pleasantly situated in York county, in the district 
of Maine, in a bow formed by the n. branch of 
Great Ossipee river. It was incorporated in 1777, 
has a flourishing academy, and contains 447 in 
habitants. This is the ancient Indian village Peck- 
\valket, through which the upper part of Saco 
meanders; 37 miles from the sea, and 100 n. of 
Boston. Lat. 43 57 n. Long. 70 53 a?.] 

[FIJCA, Straits of JUAN DE, lie on the n. w. 
coast of N. America. The entrance lies between 
cape Flattery on the s. side, inlat. 48 20 n. long. 
124 23 w. to the opposite coast of the Quadras 
isles, in lat. 48 40 n. It communicates with Pin- 
tard s sound, and thus forms Quadras isles ; in the 
s.m. coast of which lies Nootka sound. See PIN- 
TARD S Sound. The Spaniards, jealous of their 
right to the American coast, established a settle 
ment at this place.] 

FUEGO, TIERUA DEL, some islands situate 
to the s. of the straits of Magellan, thus commonly 
called on account of the fire and smoke that were 
seen to issue from them by their first discoverers, 
and which were caused by some- volcanoes which, 
although they have not yet been observed in the 
day, may be plainly seen in the night, at a great 
distance. These volcanoes throw tip a great 
quantity of pumice-stone, which is found in the 
sea surrounding these islands : the largest of them, 
and that which is with the greatest propriety 
called the Tierra del Fucgo, extends itself along 
the whole coast of the straits of Magellan, nearly 
400 miles from e. to w. Jt was formerly believed 
that it was united to the continent, until that Her- 
nando de Magallancs discovered and navigated 
the straits, and discovered that the Tierra del Fuego 
was only an island ; others, who passed the straits, 
discovered that here were many islands divided 
by small channels, and that the largest next to 
this was that which lies farthest n. between the 
said island and the Magellan coast, being sepa 
rated by a channel SO leagues long, called the 
strait of San Sebastian. The other islands are 
smaller, and are not deserving of a description. 
Some assert that there is a more easy and secure 
pass into the S. sea, obviating the necessity of pass 
ing through this strait or by cape Horn, which 
may be left to the s. an e. course being taken 
through the bay of Nassau. One of the modern 
navigators, who gives an account of his voyage 
through this strait, says, that in 1719 he coasted 
along the Tierra del Fuego, on the s. shores of the 



VOL. IT. 



P U E 

straits of Magellan, in a small vessel, in order to 
discover the pass, through which a French Tartan 
was said to have entered into the S. sea, but 
could not find it. The land of the Tierra del 
Fuego is, for the most part, mountainous and 
craggy, although it is not without some plains 
and fertile valleys abounding in pastures ; it also 
abounds in bays capable of containing many ves 
sels, and there are not wanting forests for timber, 
or stones fit for ballast. The winds, and particu 
larly the w. are so impetuous, and rise so sud 
denly, that there is scarcely time to furl the sails 
of the vessels ; and these are often driven from their 
anchors, and stand a great chance of being wreck 
ed; and thus it is requisite that those who are 
sailing w. should bear as much as possible to the 
s. The natives of this country are white, like 
Europeans ; they go naked, and paint their bodies 
of various colours, each following their own whim, 
and carrying this to such a pitch, that some of 
them will be seen to be all red before, and white 
behind ; they are tall, robust, and well formed, 
and their hair, which is very black and long, 
flows loose : the women also paint their bodies, 
covering one half with skins ; they also carry neck-* 
laces made of fish bones. Their cabins are made 
of wood, but they are small and wretched. Their 
arms are bows and arrows, and darts, on the tops of 
which are fixed pieces of flint or bone. Their 
canoes are of the barks of trees, well made, and 
generally from 10 to 16 feet long and two wide ; 
each contains six or eight rowers, who manage it 
with an extraordinary velocity ; indeed, they have 
no dread of sinking it, since they all, men and 
women, swim like fish. Their customs and mode 
of living is similar to that of wild beasts ; they 
have not the least notions of religion, and eat ani 
mals alive, like lions and tigers. If they at any 
time appear affable to foreigners, it is with a view 
to surprise and kill them : all this, however, can 
only be said of those who inhabit the s. and the 
vicinity of the bay of Nassau; since Mr. Bau- 
chine Guin, spoken of by Rogers in his voyage 
that he made to the strait in 1699, represents 
them affable, and incapable of doing mischief. 

The s. coast of the Tierra del Fuego is but little 
known. In some maps we perceive a great number 
of islands without any name, from cape Horn to 
the strait called by the natives Jelonchete, which 
divides these islands from the island nearest that 
part. This island may be about 40 leagues from e. 
to w. and 10 or 12 from n. to s. ; in it are three 
ports, which are called San Martin, Vanelle, and 
La Navidad. The island contiguous to this, which 
is the last which belongs to the more w. part, cou- 



122 



FUN 



tains only two, which are port Felix and Eng 
lish, and terminates in the cape Pillar, the last of 
the straits of Magellan on the s. part, as the cape 
Victory is on the rt. The island called " Of the 
States" forms the entrance of the straits of Maire, 
and between this and the e. part of the Tierra del 
Fuego, is a small strait, which is 10 leagues long, 
and from five to six wide ; and at the distance of 
12 or 15 leagues is the strait called " Of Brower," 
commonly used by vessels which are proceeding from 
the coast of Magellan to the S. sea, the same be 
ing reckoned more easy and secure to pass than 
that of Maire or Magellan; and this it was that 
was navigated by Mr. Bauchine Guin, when he 
returned from those seas, in 1701. The English 
admiral George Anson discovered, in 1741, on 
the w. coast of this country, a port with such con 
veniences and advantages, that according lo his 
description, it should appear a very paradise. 
The navigators who have visited this country, 
have recounted so many fables about it, that one 
might almost be induced to think it altogether 
imaginary. See SAIIMIENTO, SEIXAS, ROGGERS, 
FKEZIEUE, DAMPIERE, ANSON, LE MAIRE, and 
others. 

FUENCLARA. See CONCEPCIOS. 

FUERTE, a town of the province and govern 
ment of Cinaloa in Nueva Espana. 

Fin: RTF, a settlement of the province ofOsti- 
muri in Nueva Espana ; situate at the source of 
a river which runs into the gulf of California. 

FUERTT, another, of the province and cap 
tainship of Pernambuco in Brazil ; situate on the 
coast, near the cape of San Aguslin. 

FUERTE, an island of the N. sea, on the coast 
of the province and government of Cartagena, 
near the mouths of the river Sinu, opposite the 
point of Piedras. &amp;lt; 

FUERTE, a river of the province and govern 
ment of Cinaloa, which runs into the gulf of Cali 
fornia, or Mar Roxo de Cortes, near the port 
A home. 

FUERTE, a point of land or cape of the n. 
coast of the island of St. Domingo, in the French 
possessions, where they have built a fort. It lies 
between the rivers Little and Tapun. 

FULCARSONS, a small river of N. Carolina, 
which runs n. e. and enters theCorihaway. 

[FULL MOON Shoal. See HATTEHAS.] 

FUME, Cape of, a point of land on the e. 
coast of the Royal island or Cape Breton, between 
the point Plate and the bay of Niganichc. 

[FUNDV, a large bay in N. America, which 
opens between the islands in Penobscot bay, in 
Lincoln county, Maine, and cupe Sable, the $.. w* 



F U II 

point of Nova Scotia. It extends about 1 200 miles 
in a n. e. direction, and with Vcrte bay, which 
pushes into the land in a s. w. direction from the 
straits of Northumberland, forms a very narrow 
isthmus, which unites Nova Scotia to the conti 
nent; and where the division line runs between 
that province and New Brunswick. From its 
mouth up to Passamaquoddy bay, on its n.w. 
side, situated between the province of New Bruns 
wick and the district of Maine, are a number of 
bays and islands on both sides, and thus far it 
contracts its breadth gradually : it is 12 leagues 
across from St. John s, in New Brunswick, to the 
gut of Annapolis, in Nova Scotia, where the tides 
are rapid, and rise 30 feet. Above this it pre 
serves nearly an equal breadth, until its waters arc 
formed into two arms, by a peninsula, the w. 
point of which is called cape Chignecto: at the 
head of the n. e. arm, called Chignecto channel, 
which, with bay Vertc, forms the isthmus, the 
tides rise 60 feet. In the basin of Minas, which is 
the e. arm or branch of this bay, the tides rise 40 
feet. These tides are so rapid as to overtake 
animals feeding on the shore.] 

FUNES, a settlement of the province and go 
vernment of Past os in the jurisdiction of the district 
of the kingdom of Quito ; situate on the shore of the 
abundant river Guaitara, which is passed en taroGita, 
which means a machine ma^lc of leatberand osiers, 
attached by a cable to a tree on either side of the 
river; and the passenger getting into this machine, 
is thus hauled over by the cable running through 
a large ring fixed for the purpose, in each of the 
aforesaid trees; in the like manner baggage, 
chests, coffers, and all articles, are conveyed 
across ; horses also are brought over in the same 
manner, after having been secured by slings. 

[FUNKSTOWN. Sec JERUSALEM, in Mary- 
land.] 

FUNZI1A, a large and abundant river of the 
Nuevo Reyno de Granada, in the province of Bo 
gota. See this article. 

FUQUENE, a settlement of the Nuevo Reyno 
de Granada, in the ancient province of Ebate, 
founded upon a hill. It was very large and po 
pulous in the time of the Indians : at the present 
day it has fallen into such a state of decay that it 
is a miserable place. 

FUQUENE, a. large lake in the same province 
and kingdom. It is ten leagues long and three 
wide: it is also called Siguazinsa, and from it 
rises the river Sarabita. It is near a settlement to 
which it gives its name. 

FUREADO, JUAV, a settlement of the island 
of Joanes dc Marajo on the Brazil coast ; situate 



GAB 



G A B 



on thes. part, on the shore of the arm of the river 
of Las Amazonas. 

FUSAGASUGA, an ancient province of (he 
JNuevoReyno de Granada, also called De los Sn- 
tagaos, by the nation of this name, "who inhabited 
it. Jt is 18 leagues long, and from six to seven 
wide; its territory is mountainous and craggy, 
and of a diversity of climates : it abounds in wild 
wax, honey, tobacco, pita, and coca ; it is water 
ed by the river of its name, from which the pro 
vince is called, and also by the rivers of Sumapaz 
and Lexia. It is bounded e. by the mountains of 
Bogota, and w. by the nation of the Panches In 
dians : at present it belongs to the corrcgiiniento 
of Pasca. 

FUSAGASUGA, a settlement of the former pro 
vince and corregimifnto. It is of a hot tempera 
ture, abounding in sugar-canes, maize, and plan 



tains. It is near a large river of ihe same name, 
contains 150 housekeepers and 100 Indians, the 
greater part of them having come hither from the 
city of Alta Gracia, which became extinct, and 
being known by the name of Clinch umecos. This 
settlement had for its doctrinal curate the cele 
brated Don Lucas Fernandez de Piedrahita, 
bishop of Santa Marta and of Panama, and author 
of the history of the conquest of the Nuevo Reyno 
de Granada. 

FUSAGASUGA, a large river of the same pro 
vince, on the shores of which are found innume 
rable crocodiles or alligators of an enormous size. 
This river runs into the Magdalena. 

FUTUMAYO, a small river of the province 
and corregimiento of Pataz or Caxamarquilla in 
Peru. It runs n.n.w. and enters the sources of 
the Gualla&amp;lt;ra. 






vT 



ft 

IjTALAN, S. a small province and corregimi- 
cnto of Peru, bounded n. by the province of Cara- 
baya, s. by those of Omasuyos and Larecaxa, w. 
by that of Asangaro, and e. by the missions and 
mountains of Apolabamba. 

GALAN, S. the settlement, the capital of the 
same province, which is at the present day de 
stroyed. 

GABARON, or GABARY, a bay of the s. 
coast of Royal island or Cape Breton, to the w. of 
Louisburg. 

GABORY, Bay of, on the s. coast of Royal 
island or Cape Breton, atthe entrance of the same, 
and 20 leagues distance from the island of San 
Pedro. It is one league wide, and lies amongst 
islands and rocks, close to which ships may safely 
ride ; some of them are a league and a half long. 
This bay runs two leagues inland, and its anchor 
age is good. 

GABOTO, Tower of, a fortress of the pro 
vince and government of Buenos Ayres in Peru, 
constructed by Sebastian Gaboto, who gave it his 
name, on the shore of the river La Plata, at the 
mouth of that of Caracaranal, in 1526. It re 
mained but a short time, since the Spaniards aban 
doned it, after having suffered much from hunger 
nd a siege by the infidel Indians,who destroyed it. 



The ruins of it are, however, still to be seen 80 
leagues above Buenos Ayres. 

GABRIEL, S. an island of the river La Plata, 
near its n. coast, and opposite the colony of Sa 
cramento, which was held by the Portuguese ; in 
it is a castle of the same name. 

GABRIEL, S. a settlement of the head settlement 
of Tlacotepec, and alcaldia mat/or of Tepeaca, in 
Nueva Espafia. It contains 11 families of Indians, 
and is two leagues distant from its head settle 
ment. 

GABRIEL, S. another, of the head settlement 
of Coronango, and alcaldia mayor of Cholula, in 
the same kingdom. It contains 44 families of In 
dians, and is half a leagues, of the capital. 

GABRIEL, S. another, of the head settlement 
and alcaldia mayor of Periban in the same king 
dom. It contains 23 families of Indians, and is 
three leagues to the n. of its capital. 

GABRIEL, S. another, of the head settlement 
of Tlapacoya, and alcaldia mayor of Quatro Vil 
las, in the same kingdom. It contains 21 families 
of Indians, who cultivate some cochineal, seeds, 
and fruits, and employ themselves in cutting 
woods. It is somewhat more than four leagues to 
the n. of its head settlement. 

GABRIEL, S. another, of the head settlement 
R 



GAG 



of Tuzcacuesco, anil nlcaldift mayor of Amola, in 
the same kingdom. It contains 50 families of In 
dians, who serve as labourers in the estates and 
the ranrhos of the district. It is 10 leagues e. by 
. of its head settlement. 

GABIUET,, S. a celebrated port of the river La 
Plata, in the province and government of Buenos 
Ayres, formed by seven islands. It is 30 leagues 
from the mouth of this river, and eight from the 
capital. 

GABRIET,, S. a channel in the straits of Magel 
lan, formed by the s. coast and different islands, 
from the mountain of Three Points to Handsome 
bay. 

GACHANEQUE, a very lofty mountain of 
the province and government of Tunja in the 
Nuevo Reyno de Granada, on the s. part. It is 
one of the many which form the cordillera of Bo 
gota : from its e. side rises the river Meta, and rims 
to the llanos or plains of San Juan. 

GACHANZiPA, a settlement of the corregi- 
miento of Lipaquira in the Nuevo Reyno de Gra 
nada ; situate in a beautiful, fertile, and delight 
ful valley, abounding in wheat, maize, potatoes, 
barley, and other fruits of a cold climate. Such 
indeed is its temperature, though at the same time 
salutary. Here are made quantities of pots, jars, 
and other earthen vessels for preparing salt, and 
with which the salt earths of Ncmocon and Lipa 
quira are supplied. It contains 80 white inhabi 
tants, and more than 100 Indians, and it is close 
to the settlement of Tocancipa, in the same road 
that leads to Tunja, seven leagues to the n. of 
Santa Fe. 

GACHETA, a settlement of the corregimiento 
of Guatavita in the Nuevo Reyno de Granada. It 
is of a hot temperature, abounding in sugar-canes, 
plantains, and yucas. It contains some salt earths, 
from whence much salt is collected, the same being 
very white, and of the best quality of any in the 
kingdom. It also abounds in cattle ; and its po 
pulation is composed of more than 300 housekeep 
ers and 150 Indians. It is 17 leagues to the e. of 
Santa Fe. 

[GACHPAS, an Indian tribe, formerly in alli 
ance with the Delawares.] 

GAEBAR, S. JUAN DE, a town of the province 
and corregimiento of Copiapo in the kingdom of 
Chile ; situate on the confines of the province of 
Tucuman. 

[GAGE S Town, a settlement in Snnbury 
county, New Brunswick, on the lands granted to 
General Gage, on tin? &amp;&amp;amp;gt;. side of St. John s river, 
on the . shore of the bay of Fundy. The Gene- 

Vs grant consists of 20,000 acres of land j the np- 



GAL 

land of which is in general very bad. There is 
some intervale on the river side, on which are a few 
settlers : exclusive of these settlements, there is very 
little good land of any kind.] 

GAGUELLAGUAI, a settlement of Indians 
of the kingdom of Chile; situate in the interior of 
the kingdom, on the shore of the river Como- 
Leuvu or De los Sauces. 

GAIRA, ENSENADA DE, a bay on the coast of 
the province and government of Santa Marta, much 
frequented by strange vessels, who come hither to 
carry on a contraband trade. It has a port, the in 
habitants of which were a conversion of the religi 
ous order of St. Domingo ; situate on the sea-shore, 
and to the s. of the capital. 

GAIRA, a river to the w. of this province and 
government. It rises from the mountains of the 
Sierra Nevada ; and after running many leagues, 
enters the N. sea, forming the former bay, which 
is full of sand-banks, constantly changing their 
position, and rendering the entrance dangerous for 
large vessels. 

GAIRA. See GUAIRA. 

GAJOLOLIPAC, SANTIAGO DE, a settlement 
of the head settlement of Huitepec, and alcaldia 
mayor of Ixquintepec,in Nueva Espana. Its po- 
pufation was formerly very numerous, but it was 
almost depopulated in 1736, by the epidemical dis 
order of the mallazafiua, for it was felt more se 
verely in this jurisdiction than in others. It is two 
leagues s. by c. of its capital. 

GAL AND, Cape of, on the n. coast of the straits 
of Magellan, one of those which form the port of 
the same name. 

GALAPA, a settlement of the province and go 
vernment of Cartagena. 

GALAPAGOS, or GAMPAGOS, some islands of 
the S. sea; also called the Enchanted Isles. They 
are many, and of different sizes ; the larger of them 
are Mascarin, Tobacco, Devil, Health, Barnabas, 
and Santiago, this being the only one in which 
there is sweet water. The English captain Cowley 
gave them other names at his own discretion, call 
ing the first Charles, the second Crosman, the third 
Bindlos, the fourth Eiires, the sixth Norfolk, and 
after the same manner christening several others* 
All these islands are barren and desert, but the cli 
mate is mild, delightful, and healthy. They are 
situate almost under the equinoctial line, and some 
rather to the s. of it, by a degree and some minutes,, 
others being to the n. by two Y&amp;lt; degrees. They are- 
about 200 leagues to the w. of the coast of Puerto 
Viejo of Peru. They abound greatly in tortoises ; 
and from this circumstance they take their name. 
The largest of them should be about 10 leagues 



GAL 

long, and six wide. Amongst them arc many capa 
cious channels, fit for the navigation of large ves 
sels. [These islands lie between lat. 1 45 n. and 
1 31 s. ; and between long. 89 2 and 92 w. 
There are only nine of them of any considerable 
size, the largest of which is about 65 miles in 
length, and 45 in width, called by the English Al- 
bemarle. A number of small isles View, from these, 
on both sides the equator; one of which, Gallego 
isle, lies in the first degree of w. lat. and 102 of zt). 
long. Many of these isles are well wooded, and 
some have a deep black mould. Vast quantities of 
the finest turtle are to be found among these islands, 
where they live the greatest part of the year ; yet 
they are said to go from thence over to the main 
to lay their eggs, which is at least 100 leagues 
distant.] 

GALAPAGOS, another, a small island of the gulf 
of California, or Mar Koxo de Cortes, very close to 
the coast, between the cape San Marcos and that 
of Las Virgenes. 

GALBAN, CERRO DE, a very lofty mountain 
of the province of Chaco in Peru, on the shore 
and at the source of a river which takes the same 
name. 

GALBAN. This river, which is called the Cauo 
or Channel of Galban, runs e. between the former 
mountains, to which it gives its name, and that of 
Peiias, and enters the river Paraguay. 

GALEA, a settlement of the province and go 
vernment of Pastes in the kingdom of Quito, and 
jurisdiction of its presidency. 

[GALEN, a military township in the state of 
New York ; situated on Canadaque creek, 12 
miles n. w. of the n. end of Cayuga lake, and 13 
s. by e. of Great Sodus. It is bounded s. by 
Junius.] 

GALERA, a point of land, thus called from the 
figure it assumes. It is on the coast of the pro 
vince and government of Cartagena. 

GALERA, another point, on the n. coast of the 
island of Margarita, towards the centre of that 
coast. 

GALERA, another, on the coast of the province 
and corregimicnto of Chancay in Peru, and of the 
S. sea. 

GALERA, another, in the province and govern 
ment of Esmeraldas, also in Peru, and in the S. 
sea, on the side of the settlement of Atacamcs. 

GALERA, an island of ^Ue S. sea, near the coast 
of the province and government of Panama, and 
kingdom of Tierra Firme ; situate at the mouth of 
the gulf of San Miguel.j mnfK te 

GALERA, a river of the province and alcaldia 
of Tecoantepec in Nueva Espana, It runs 



GAL 



12 3 



s. and enters the Pacific ocean near the port of 
Los Angeles. 

GALERA, another, a small river of the territory 
of Matagroso in the province and country of Las 
Amazonas. It rises to the . of the settlement of 
Santa Ana, runs w. and enters the Itenes. 

GALETTE, or GALLTTS, an isthmus or long 
strip of land of the river St. Lawrence, in New 
France or Canada : from its extremity, opposite 
the island of Montreal, a road might be made to 
this place, by which means a very difficult, and 
always very troublesome navigation, owing to the 
cascades, would be avoided. [This isthmus is 
about 190 geographical miles n. e. from Ni;tgara, 
and about 235 s. w. from Quebec.] 

GALETTE, a fort, constructed by the French, in 
the country of the Iroquees Indians, on the shore 
of the river Catarakui, 120 miles from lake On 
tario. 

GALIBIS, a settlement of Caribes Indians of 
this nation, in the province and government of 
La Guayana, and in that part possessed by the 
French ; situate on the shore of a river. See CA- 
RIBES. 

GALICIA, NUEVA, a kingdom of N. America, 
bounded by Nueva Espana in its whole extent, by 
a line drawn from s. s. e. to e. n. e. ; from the 
settlement of Autlan in the S. sea, to the mouth of 
the river Panuco in the N. sea, and bay of Mexico ; 
bounded n. by the provinces of Cinaloa, Nuevo 
Reyno de Leon, and Nueva Vizcaya ; and s. s. w. 
by the Pacific, from &amp;lt;he aforesaid settlement of 
Chiametla, which is at the entrance of the gulf of 
California ; so that it is a triangle, being more 
than 300 leagues long, and its extent along the 
coast 200. This country was dicovered and con 
quered by order of the audience of Mexico, by 
Funo Guzman, in 1531, although Don Hernundo 
Cortes affirms, that it had been previously dis 
covered by the Captain Gonzalo de Sandoval, 
when he went forth to conquer Panuco : it was 
then called Xalisco, from a settlement which was 
then its principal or head, and which still pre 
serves its name. Its temperature is for the most 
part mild, but there is a great propensity to heavy 
rains, tempests, and earthquakes. The winds are 
generally very strong, and particularly to the s. 
whicli is the most general : yet, notwithstanding 
all this, this country is esteemed very healthy, and 
people not uncommonly arrive here to a very good 
old age. It abounds in mosquitoes and bugs as 
large as beans. The greater part of this country 
is mountainous and rugged, although it is not 
without some pleasant llanitras or plains, which 
are very fertile. In the sierras are found 



126 



G A L 1 C I A. 



sticks of pine and oak, and in these woods dwell 
very blood-thirsty and daring wolves. Here are 
also most abundant mines of silver and of copper, 
and in those which are called chalchihuites, are 
some green stones, to which some ascribe the virtue 
of curing the sciatica (hip-gout). Here is much 
saltpetre and salt, also many tuna trees and wild 
cochineal, of which no use is made; the Chichi- 
mecas and Guachichiles Indians subsisting solely 
upon the native fruits the whole year round. It is 
much in want of water, since it has no more than 
one river, which is however large and abundant, 
and which rises from the lakes of Mechoacan, and 
running n. w. enters the S. sea, having, at four 
leagues from Guadalaxara, a fall of upwards of 10 
fathom. It is not fordable ; the horses pass it by 
swimming, and the people and effects are conveyed 
over by rafts. Near Icatlan is a lake 20 leagues 
in circumference, and in Tacualco another of 12, 
and on the shores of both are abundance of pastures 
for cattle. In the llanos or levels of Buena Vista, 
nine leagues from Guadalaxara, a fountain gushes 
from a rock, and presently forms itself into one 
abundant stream, which is not fordable, and run 
ning 20 leagues, enters the river above mentioned. 
In all the valleys or llanuras are found the mez- 
qnite, which is similar to the carob tree of Eu 
rope ; the maguey, and the tuna, and the Cas- 
tillan fruits in great abundance, such as grapes, 
quinces, pomegranates, figs, peaches, pears, Me- 
locoton peaches, and every kind of grain, seed, 
and garden herb : the cherries, however, bear no 
fruit, since they run too rapidly to wood and be 
come rank : the olives yield sparingly, owing to 
the destruction made by the ants. The pigs feed 
and fatten on a root called castanuela, which is as 
common here as is the acorn in Estremadura and 
the other provinces. Throughout the year grow 
abundance of flowers, pepper-plants, black and 
white French beans, and calabashes. The ants 
are perpetually destroying the vegetable produc 
tions, as are also the crows : these birds are black 
only on their bodies, their wings being white and 
red, and their beaks similar to those of sparrows : 
one flight of them is sufficient to destroy a crop 
of wheat of a whole field, since they attack the 
corn as soon as it runs to grain, and will not be 
frightened away however you may shout. The 
animals produced here are similar to those of the 
other parts of America, and great has been the in 
crease of swine, goats, sheep, cows, and horses, 
and not less so of the several kinds of birds. 
There is but little fish in the rivers, and the bees, 
from which however a sufficient quantity of honey 
is procured, are very few. Here is a territory 



abounding in tuna trees, of 50 leagues in length, 
where upwards of 10,000 bushels of cochineal 
might be gathered annually, were it cultivated. 
The Indians are docile and fickle, leaving on the 
slightest pretence their former settlement for an 
other spot, being always sure of finding materials 
for building themselves houses; and they some 
times Avill prefer retiring to the less frequented and 
solitary parts, again abandoning themselves to 
their ancient idolatry. These Indians are in sta 
ture taller and more robust than those of Mexico, 
and have more native genius; but they are much 
inclined to idleness, and never work but by com 
pulsion. Their dress consists of a cotton shirt and 
a square mantle of the same materials, made fast by 
a knot on each shoulder. Their shoes are merely 
soles attached to their feet by thongs, and their 
beds are mats of reeds and cotton blankets. They 
adorn their neck, arms, and legs, with strings of 
green glass beads and small shells. They have 
great pleasure in dancing the whole day long with 
a drum, which is made of an hollow piece of wood, 
and makes a very discordant sound : then it is that 
they particularly paint and deck themselves out in 
feathers of different colours, and their great luxury 
is to inebriate themselves with wine made of the 
maguey, this being the only one of all the vege 
table productions that they cultivate. They have 
no love for their country, and treat with equal in 
difference whatsoever they inherit. They are fond 
of a drink infused with maize and pepper ; and 
these they always carry ready mixed in a little 
bag, adding water according to their necessity. 
They make some very good woven manufactures 
of wool, cotton, and feathers, by looms which they 
carry about with them, and which they, when they 
w ish to work, suspend to the first tree they meet. 
They totally neglect the cultivation of cotton, 
though it would thrive extraordinarily well. The 
principal commerce of this kingdom consists in its 
silver mines; and the Indians who inhabit it, and 
who are of the nations of the Cazcanes, Guachi 
chiles, and Gumares, all speak ing different idioms, 
let themselves out to hire for loading and carrying 
effects. Its population consists of 38 alca/dias 
mayores, of which the capital is Guadalaxara; the 
same being the seat of the tribunal of the royal 
audience by which it is governed, and belonging 
in its whole extent to one bishopric. The alcaldias 
are, 

Guadalaxara, 

Autlan, 

Arnola, Sentipac, 

Zayula, Tequepespa, 

Zacatecas, Tonala, 



Xala, 
Tepic, 



GAL 



GAL 



127 



Ostotipaquillo, 

Analco, 

Mazapil, 

Aguas Calientes, 

Zapopan, 

Tala, 

Caxititlan, 

Tlajomulco, 

Zapotlan, 

Izatlan, 

Huahucliinango, 

Purificacion, 

Ostotipac, 

Compostela, 



Acaponeta, 

Nayarinth, 

I? area, 

Tecpatitlan, 

Lagos, 

Cuquio, 

Tecualtichi , 

Juchipihi, 

Colotlan, 

Xciez, 

Frcsnillo, 

Ibarra, 

Sierra do Pinos, 

Ch areas. 



[GALIPAGOS. See GALAPAGOS.] 

GALISTEO, a settlement of the kingdom of 
Nucvo Mexico ; situate at the source of a river 
which enters the grand river of the N. between the 
settlements of Pecos and S. Juan. 

[GALLAN, ST. a small island on the coast of 
Peru, in lat. 13 50 s. Fifteen miles n. w. of the 
high land Morro Viejo, or Old Man s Head ; be 
tween which island and the high land, is a most 
eligible station to cruize for vessels bound for Cal- 
lao, n. or s.~\ 

GALLARDO, Bay of, in the kingdom of Chile, 
at the confluence of two rivers. 

GALLE, a new land or country discovered by 
Captain Cook in 1770. 

GALLEGOS, or DESAGUADEUO DE LOS, a 
river of the coast and country of the Patagonians, 
a little to the n. of the strait of Magellan. It runs 
f. and enters the S. sea between cape Las Virgenes 
and cape Bruntievnpo. Lat. 51 38 s. Long. 
69 SO a&amp;gt;. 

GALLINA, a small isle of the gulf of California, 
or Mar lloxo de Cortes ; situate within Jobe s 
bay, and opposite the entrance formed at its mouth 
by the island of Espii itu Santo. 

GALLINAZOS, a river of the province and 
corregimiento of Tunja in the Nuevo Reyno de 
Granada. It runs n. and enters the Chicamoeha 
or Sogamoso. 

GALLION, a large river o/ (he island of Mar 
tinique, which rises ;it the foot of the great moun 
tain of Pitous de Carbet, runs n. n. w. and enters 
the sea opposite the bay of the same name, and the 
island of Monsieur, forming at its mouth a capa 
cious and beautiful fort. 

GALLION, another river of the island of Guada- 
lupe; which rises in the mountains, runs w. and 
enters the sea, between those of llerbes and Sence. 
On its banks is a castle called de Basse Tcrre, for 
the defence of that part of the island. 

GALLION, a bay on the s. e. coast of the island 



of Martiriica. It is very capacious and conve 
nient, and lies between Buc bay and the river of its 
name. 

GALLIPAVA, a small river of the kingdom of 
Chile. 

[GALLIPOLIS, a post-town in the N. W. terri 
tory ; situate on a bend of the Ohio river, arid 
nearly opposite the mouth of the great Kanhaway. 
It is said to contain about 100 houses, all inhabited 
by French people. It is 90 miles e. of Columbia 
on the Ohio, 136 s. w. from Pittsburgh This town 
is said to be on the decline, the rights of the inha 
bitants to the lands not being sufficiently secure. 
Lat. 38 33 n. Long. 82 D 9 w.~] 

GALLO, a settlement and presidio of the pro 
vince and nlcaldia mayor of Tepeguana in the 
kingdom of Nueva Vizcaya. It is the residence 
of a serjeant-major, with a lieutenant and three 
soldiers, stationed there as a guard against the in 
cursions of the infidel Indians. The territory is 
barren, from the want of water. It is 40 leagues 
to the n. n. w. of the capital of Guadiana, the 
river of Las Nasas intersecting the road to this 
place. 

GALLO, an island of the S. sea, of the coast of 
the province and government of Barbacoas. On 
the n. side it covers a bay where there is sufficient 
depth of water for small vessels. It is surrounded 
by sand-banks and rocky shoals : the land lies 
high, well wooded, and watered by a river called 
Tomaco. It has in it a small settlement of In 
dians, who provide themselves with great facility 
with all kinds of food from the continent, from 
whence they are only three leagues distance. This 
island was discovered by the pilot Bartholomew 
Ruiz in 1525, arid at it Francisco Pizarro stopped 
15 days, in order to refresh his comrades after the 
labours of their navigation, when they sailed for 
the discovery of Peru, in the following year, 1526. 
Lat. 1 26 s. Long. 80 33 w. 

GALLO, another, a small and barren island in 
the N. sea, near the coast of Brazil, in the province 
and captainship of Rev, to the n. of the island of 
Santa Catalina. Lat. 27 10 s. .Long. 48 45 w. 

GALLO, a point or extremity of the coast of the 
island of Trinidad, looking to (he s. and forming 
the mouth or entrance of the bay or channel of 
Chagnararnas. 

[GALLO WAY, a township in Gloucester 
county, New Jersey.] 

GALOP, a small river of New France or Ca 
nada, which runs t, and enters lake Superior, bo 
tween Mamens and the river Charon. 

GALOTS, a cascade which runs into the river 
St. Lawrence in Canada, and is the last of those ifi 



128 



G A M 



these parts : between it and the isthmus of Galete 
is an admirable plain country full of the mostbeau- 
ful woods. 

GALOIS, an island of the river St. Lawrence in 
the same province, three leagues distant from that 
of Cabras or Aux Chevres. Lat. 43 33 . 

GALVE, SANTA MARIA DE, a bay of the pro 
vince of Florida, discovered in 1559 by Don Tris 
tan de Luna y Arellano, and afterwards reconnoi 
tred by the Lieutenant-general Don Andres de 
Fez, who added to it the surname of Galvc, in ho 
nour of the count of this title, who was then viceroy 
of Nueva Esparia. It is very large and conve 
nient : its mouth or entrance is only 39 yards wide, 
and opposite the island of Santa Rosa. It has 
within it different lakes and salt marshes, and its 
shore is indented with many rivers. It is 40 leagues 
from the bay of San Joseph. 

[GALWAY, a township in the new county of 
Saratoga in New York. By the state census of 
1796, it appears that 491 of its inhabitants are 
qualified to be electors.] 

GAMALOTAL, a river of the province and go 
vernment of Venezuela. It rises to the s. of the 
mountain of Tacazecruma, in its course forms the 
shape of an S, and receives many tributary streams, 
until it runs into the river of La Portuguesa. 

GAMAS, S. ANDRES DE LOS, a settlement of 
the alcaldia mayor and real of the mines of Te- 
rnascaltepec in Nueva Espafia. It contains 46 
families of Indians, who serve as labourers in the 
mines, and is eight leagues to the w. of its 
capital. 

GAMBITA, a settlement of the province and 
correg/micnlo of Tunja in the Nuevo Reyno de 
Granada ; of a hot temperature, but healthy, and 
abourtding in the vegetable productions peculiar to 
its climate. It contains 150 housekeepers, and is 
10 leagues to the n. w. of its capital. 

[GAMBLE S Station, a fort about 12 miles w. 
from Knoxville, in Tennessee.] 

GAMEZA, a settlement and capital of the cor- 
regimiento of this name, in the province of Tunja, 
of the Nuevo Reyno de Granada. It is of a cold 
temperature, abounding in papas , maize, &amp;c. It 
contains 100 housekeepers and as many Indians ; 
in whose time it was a populous city, and capital 
of a state, having for its proprietor the Prince of 
the Four States, in which a power was vested of 
electing the king of Tunja. At the present day, 
the memory of its greatness alone remains, and it 
is reduced to a small and wretched hamlet. It 
lies 10 leagues to the n. of Tunja. 

[GAMMON, Point, anciently called Point Gil 
bert, by Gosnold, forms the e. side of the harbour 



OAR 

of Hyanis or Hyennes, in Barnstable county, Mas- 
sac husettsj 

GANABARA. See JANEIRO. 

GANE1DOES, a settlement of Indians of the 
province and country of the Northern Iroquees ; 
situate on the side of a small lake, near lake On 
tario, on the n. side. 

GANENTAHA, a settlement of Indians of the 
same country as the former, where the English 
have a fort and establishment for their commerce. 
It is situate on the shore of a small lake of salt 
water, which empties itself into the river Onon- 
dago. 

GANEROSKE, a settlement of Indians of the 
same province and country as the former ; situate 
on the shore of the lake Ontario, on the n. coast. 

[GANNELOR, a small island in the gulf of St. 
Lawrence, in . lat. 48 near Bird island.] 

GANOS, a place and parish of Canada or 
New France, where the Ohio or Beautiful river 
enters the St. Lawrence. It is 60 leagues from the 
mouth of this river, in which, at the distance of 
10 leagues from the place where it enters the for 
mer, is a fountain, the waters resembling oil, and 
having a ferruginous taste : they are used by the 
savages for the curing of infirmities. 

GARABATAY, a river of the province and 
captainship of San Vincente in Brazil. It runs w. 
and enters the sea. 

GARACH1NE, a cape or point of the coast of 
the province and government of Darien, in the 
kingdom of Tierra Firme, and S. sea. Here ves 
sels are constantly subject to tempests of a fright 
ful nature, and to frequent shifting of the winds. 
The land here is high, covered with wood, and in 
habited by some barbarian, infidel, and very trea 
cherous Indians of the Tarabes nation ; friends 
and allies to the Indians of Darien. This cape or 
point to the s. and that of St. Lawrence to the n. 
form the entrance of the gulf of San M iguel. Lat. 
8 7 30" n. Long. 78 14 w. 

GARAGOA, a settlement of the corregimiento 
of Tunja, and Nuevo Reyno de Granada; of a 
mild temperature, producing abundance of sugar 
cane, maize, plantain, yucas, potatoes, anniseed, 
and garvanzos or Spanish peas. It contains up 
wards of 100 housekeepers. It was entered in a 
pacific manner by Gonzalo Ximinez de Quesada in 
1537: it was then very rich. It stands on the 
shore of a river of its name, 14 leagues to the s. e. 
of Tunja, and as many to the w. e. of Santa Fe. 

GARAGOA, the aforesaid river, which is very 
abundant, rises in the cordillera of Gachaneque, 
one league from the settlement of Turmeque, and 
traverses the province. 



G A II 

GARAGU, or CARAGUATARA, a settlement of 
the province and captainship of Pernarabuco in 
Brazil. It lias the title of city, and in its vicinity 
are some sugar-presses, this being the article of its 
commerce. The climate is very mild, but the e. 
wind, which blows continually, is somewhat trouble 
some. It has a small port fit only for small vessels. 
The road however is large, but of little depth, and 
much exposed to all the winds. Its district is re 
duced, thinly peopled, and uncultivated. The 
settlement lies on the shore of a river which enters 
itself into the port on the s. side. It was taken by 
the Dutch in 1632, and recovered by the Portu 
guese in 1646. It is 28 miles s. byw. from Olinda, 



GAS 



129 



GARRANATOS, a small river of the district 
and territory of Baba, in the province and go 
vernment of Guayaquil. It runs s. and enters 
the Caracol or Ojiba on the n. in lat. 1 51 s. 

GARROTE, a bay of the coast of the kingdom 
of Tierra Firme, in the N. sea, and jurisdiction of 
the government of Portobelo. Jt is the ordinary 
watering place for foreign vessels which carry on 
a contraband trade, owing to its convenience in 
being so close to the aforesaid port; and it is 
mostly filled with bilanders, cutters, and other ves 
sels, English, French, and Dutch. 

GARZA, a small river of the province and go- 
verment of Maracaibo. It rises in the table-land 



and is in lat. 8 58 s. Long. 35 11 w. See in- of Cachicamo, in the valley of Chama, runsw. and 
dex to additional matter respecting the history, &amp;c. enters the great luke of Maracaibo, in the part op- 



of Brazil. 

GARATUBA, a small river of the province and 
captainship of Rey in Brazil. It runs e. and en 
ters the sea between the bay of Ipctuba and the 
town of San Francisco. 

GARATUBA, another, also a small river, of the 
province and captainship of the Rio Janeiro in that 



posite the mouth of the same. 

[GARZAS, a settlement of Indians of the pro 
vince and government of Buenos Ayres ; situate at 
a short distance from the e. bank of the Parana, 
about 60 mites s. of Corricntes. Lat. 28 28 49" s. 
Long. 58 5 1 40" re).] 

GARZON, a small river of the province and 



kingdom. It runs s. and enters the sea opposite government of Paraguay. It runs s. through the 



the island Marambava. 

GARB EL, Point of, on 
island of Newfoundland, within Trinity bay. 

GARCIMENDOZA, a town of the province 
and corregiiniento of Paria in Peru. It is small. 

GARDEN, a small river of Nova Scotia or 
Acadia, which runs s, e. and enters the sea on the 
s. coast, close to the bay of St. Catalinc. 



country of the infidel Indians, and unites itself 
the e. coast of the with the river Verde, to enter the Amambay. 

GARZON, another, also a small river, of the 
province and government of Buenos Ayres. It 
runs s. in the extremity of the coast formed by the 
mouth of the river La Plata. 

GASCON, S. JUAN, a settlement of the pro 
vince and kingdom of Guatemala, according to 
[GARDNER, a township in Worcester county, Fr. Antonio Remcsal. 
Massachusetts, incorporated in 1785. It contains GASPAIt, S. a settlement of the head settlement 
about 14,000 acres, well watered, chiefly by Otter of Zumpahuacan,andafcWfo mayor of Marinalco, 
river. The road from Connecticut river, through in Nueva Espana ; situate between two dry and 
Petersham, Gerry, and Tcmpleton, on to Boston, barren barranca^ being of a very hot temperature, 
passes through it. It contains 531 inhabitants, It is annexed to the curacy of the capital, contains 
and is 26 miles n. by w. of Worcester, and 60 n. w. 90 families of Indians, and a very decent church, 
of Boston.] adorned with rich silver plate ornaments. It is 

[GARDNER S Island, or Isle of WIGHT, lies at three leagues to the s. of its head settlement. 
the e. end of Long island, in New York state, CASPAR, another, a small settlement or ward of 
sheltered within Oyster pond and Montauk points; the same head settlement and alcaldia. 
10 miles n. w. of the latter, and as far s. w. of GASPAR, another, which is the head settlement 
Plumb island. It contains about SOOO acres of of the alculdia mayor of Metepec in the same king- 
fertile land, the property of one person, and yields dom, containing 161 families of Indians, 
excellent grass, wheat, and corn. Fine sheep and GASPAR, another, of the head settlement and 
cattle are raised on it. It is annexed to E. Hamp- alcaldia mayor of Lagos in the same kingdom, four 
ton, and lies 50 miles s. w. of Newport, Rhode leagues to the n. e. of its capital. 

GASPAR, another, of the province and kingdom 
of Guatemala. 

GASPE, a bay and cape of N. America, to the 
s. of the cape of Rosicrs in Canada. In this bay 
is a sort of island, which in reality is nothing more 



Island.] 

GARGALES, a small river of N. Carolina, 
which runs s. and enters the Yadkin. 

GA ROD PAS, a bay of the province and cap 
tainship of San Vicente in Brazil, between the 
hny o( Ipctuba and the island of Aracori. 



than a rock of about 30 tpises long, 10 high, and 



ISO 



GAS 



four wide ; (lie which some assert to be the ex 
tremity of an ancient wall, which is said to have 
been formerly united to the mountain Jolly in New 
foundland. In its centre is an opening in the 
form of a bow, through which a Biscayan sloop 
sailed, and from that period the isle was known by 
the name of the Iloradada. Sailors know when 
they are near this bay by a mountain which is 
level at the top, and standing higher than the 
others surrounding it, the same being known by 
the name of the Round Table. The natives who 
inhabit the district of Gaspe, are distinguished by 
the names of the rivers on the shores of which 
they dwell ; and the principal of these are San 
Juan Ristegonetie, and Migamiche or Miramichi, 
called by the French Santa Cruz. Thejr are tall, 
well formed, civil and affable to strangers, and the 
women are beautiful and chaste, with the excep 
tion of those inhabiting a certain part at a distance 
from the coast ; where, from the abuse of spirits in 
troduced among them by the French, they have lost 
this estimable virtue ; the men also that affability 
which was peculiar to them. They are, on the 
contrary, constantly provoking to fight whomso 
ever they meet, upon the smallest pretext, and often 
without any motive at all, not only the Europeans 
but their friends, wives, and children ; offering 
violence to every thing that comes in their way, 
and with difficulty restrained from laying violent 
hands upon themselves. One peculiarity ob 
served by the Father Clerc, who resided several 
years amongst them, and particularly those called 
the Miramichi, is, that although they have no 
symptom of any religion further than the mere 
act of prostrating themselves before the sun when 
it shines, they had, even before the arrival of 
Europeans in their country, a profound veneration 
for a cross, which they used to carry about with 
them, esteeming the same to be a most powerful 
preservative. It was on this account that the 
French gave them the name of the Cross-bearers, 
and to (heir river the name of La Cruz or the Cross. 
Some affirm that these Indians are the most expert 
mariners of any in these regions ; that they had a 
good knowledge of the ebb and flow of the tides, of 
the compass, which they divided into five parts or 
rhumbs, and of various other particulars, which 
are related by the above Father Clerc in his work 
called the Gaspesia, printed at Paris in 1691. 

[GASPEE or NAMQUIT Point, seven miles s. 
of Providence, (Rhode Island), projecting from the 
w. shore of Providence river, remarkable as being 
the place where the British armed schooner, called 
the Gaspee, was burnt, June 10, 1772, by about 
60 men from Providence, painted like Narraganset 



GAY 

Indians. For the cause of tiiis transaction, see 
(Gordon s History of the American Revolution, vol. 
i. p. 311.] 

GASPERAU, a settlement of Nova Scotia or 
Acadia; situate on the e. coast, near the bay of 
Verde, in the strait of Canseau. The English have 
built a fort there. 

[GASPESIA, a tract of country on the s. side 
of the mouth of St. Lawrence river, and on the n. 
side of Chaleurs bay, in Lower Canada. Its e. 
extremity is cape Rosiers. The Indians called 
Gaspesians inhabit here.] 

GATA, SIERRAS DE, some very lofty moun 
tains of the coast, in the province and government 
of Honduras, between the rivers Comecueros and 
Cangrejo. 

GATA, a point of land on the same coast and 
province as the former mountains, between the 
rivers Tian and Ocboa. 

GATATUBA, a small river of the province and 
captainship of Sergipe in Brazil. It runs into the 
sea close to the great river of San Francisco. 

[GATES County, in Edenton e. district, N. 
Carolina, is bounded n. by the state of Virginia, s. 
by Chowan county. It contains 5392 inhabitants, 
including 2219 slaves. Chief town, Hertford.] 

GATIME, a river of the province and govern 
ment of Paraguay, which runs e. and enters the 
Parana. 

GATO, BUGIO DE, a watch-house on the top 
of a rock close to the coast of the province and go 
vernment of Cartagena, between the Galera de 
Zamba and the point of Carvajal. It serves to 
give advice of vessels. 

GATOS or CAT Island. [See St. SALVA 
DOR.] 

GATUN, a fort of the province and government 
of Panama, in the kingdom of Tierra Firme, built 
on the point of land on the shore of river Chagre, 
and at the mouth where it is entered by a river of 
this name. This fort is well situated to command 
the enlrance of the river. 

GAVAINS, or GAVAYNES, a nation of infidel 
Indians, but little known, who inhabit the borders 
of the river Yetau. 

GAVITOS, some isles of the N. sea, near the 
coast of the government of Maracaibo, and pro 
vince of Venezuela : they are five, and are situate 
on the side of the cape of S. Roman, on the 
e. part. 

GAUCHE, a river of Hispaniola or St. Do 
mingo, in the part possessed by the Frenclr. It 
rises i,i the mountains at the w. point, runs e. and 
enters the Jaquemel. 

[GAY Head is a kind of peninsula on Martha s 



GEM 

Vineyard, between three and four miles in length, 
and two in breadth, and almost separated from the 
other part of the island by a large pond. The 
Indians inhabiting this part, when lately num 
bered, amounted to 203. The soil is good, and 
only requires cultivation to produce most vege 
tables in perfection. There are evident marks of 
there having been volcanoes formerly on this pen 
insula. The marks of four or five craters are 
plainly, to be seen. The most s. and probably the 
most ancient, as it is grown over with grass, now 
called the Devil s Den, is at least 20 rods over 
at the top, 14| at the bottom, and full 130 feet at 
the sides, except that which is next the sea, where 
it is open. A man now alive relates, that his mo 
ther could remember when it was common to see 
a light upon Gay head in the night-time. Others 
say, their ancestors have told them, that the whale 
men used to guide themselves in the night by the 
lights that were seen upon Gay head. The sea 
has made such encroachments here, that within 
30 years it has swept oft* 15 or 20 rods. The ex 
tremity of Gay head is the s. w. point of the Vine 
yard. Lat. 41* 18 n. Long. 70 45 w. from 
Greenwich.] 

GAYES, COLLADO DE, a settlement of the pro 
vince and government of Quixos and Macas in 
the kingdom of Quito, belonging to the district of 
the division of the former, on the shore of the 
river Bobonaza. It is, at the present day, entirely 
ruined. 

GEAPA, a settlement and head settlement of 
the alcaldia mayor of Yahualica in Nueva Es- 
pafia. It contains 283 families of Indians. 

GEBROEDERS, a small island of the N. sea ; 
situate near the coast of the province and captain 
ship of S. Vicente in Brazil, close to the island 
Grande. 

GEGUA, a settlement of the province and go 
vernment of Cartagena ; situate on the shore of 
the river S. George, or S. .Torse. 

[GEKELEMUEKPECHUENK,atownofthe 
Delaware Indians, on a creek of the srrne name, a 
head water of the Muskingum. This wa the 
northernmost Moravian settlement on Muskingum 
river. It lies 12 miles n. e. by n. of Salem, and 
78 n. w. of Pittsburg.] 

GEMES, a settlement of the kingdom of Nucvo 
Mexico ; situate on the shore of a river which en 
ters the Grande of the N. 

GEMESIA, a fort constructed by the French 
on the shore of the river San Juan, after the capture 
of Pontaugoet. In 1674, it was taken by surprise 
by J 10 English. 



GEN 



131 



GENES, a river of the province of Guayana, 
in the part possessed by the French. 

GENES, an island of this province, in which the 
French have an establishment. 

[GENESSEE, a township in Ontario county, 
New York, having 217 electors.] 

[GENESSEE Country, a large tract of land in the 
state of New York, bounded n. and n. w. by lake 
Ontario, s. by Pennsylvania, e. by the w. part of 
the military townships in Onondago county, and 
w. by lake Erie and Niagara river. It is a rich 
tract of country, and well watered by lakes and 
rivers ; one of the latter, Genessee river, gives 
name to this tract. It is generally flat, the rivers 
sluggish, the soil moist, and the lakes numerous.] 
f GENESSEE River. See CHENESSEE.] 
[GENEVA, a lake in Upper Canada, which 
forms the w. extremity of lake Ontario ; to which 
it is joined by a short and narrow strait.] 

[GENEVA, a post-town in Onondago county, 
New York, on the great road from Albany to 
Niagara ; situated on the bank of the . w. corner 
of Seneca lake, about 37 miles w. of Oneida castle, 
and 95 s. e. from Niagara. The Friends settle 
ment lies about 18 miles below this. Here were 
20 log-houses, and a few other buildings se 
veral years ago, which have much increased 
since.] 

[GENEVIEVE, ST. or MTSSIRF, a village 
in Louisiana, on the w. bank of the Mississippi, 
nearly opposite to the village of Kaskaskias, eight 
miles 5. of fort Chartres. It contained, about 20 
years ago, upwards of 100 houses, arid 460 inha 
bitants, besides Negroes.] 

GENIBABU, a small river of the province and 
captainship of Rio Grande in Brazil. It rises 
near the coast, runs e. and enters the sea between 
the rivers Cinimaniri and Grande. 

GENIZAROS, a settlement of the missions 
which are held by the religious order of San Fran 
cisco in Nuevo Mexico. 

GENOVES, a river of the province and go 
vernment of Buenos Ayres, which runs n. and en 
ters the Rio Negro. 

GENTE, Bay of the, on the coast of the straits 
of Magellan, where the Admiral Pedro Sarmiento 
took possession, for the twelfth time, of the sur 
rounding territory for the Spanish crown, found 
ing the colony and city of San Felipe ; which af 
terwards was destroyed, from its inhabitants hav 
ing perished with hunger. Thomas Candish, on 
passing it, also called it Port of Hunger or Famine, 
from the above circumstance. 

an island of the straits of Magellan, 



132 



G E O 



G E O 



at the n. entrance of the third narrow pass called 
the Passage. 

GENTE, a bay in the same strait, and on the n. 
coast, between the cape Quade and the baj of San 
Joseph. 

GEORGE S, ST. the capital of the island of Gra 
nada, one of the Antilles, founded after the peace 
of 1762. In 1771, it was entirely destroyed by 
a terrible fire ; which misfortune again occurred in 
1775, nearly the whole of the houses having been 
built of wood : the loss was estimated at 500,000/. 
[The town now makes a very handsome appear 
ance, has a spacious square or parade ; the houses 
are built of brick, and tiled or slated; some few 
arc built of stone, excepting the warehouses and 
dwelling-houses round the harbour, which are 
mostly wooden buildings. These are, in a great 
measure, separated from the town by a very steep 
and rocky hill, the houses on which, with the 
trees which serve for shade, have a romantic ap 
pearance. The town is computed to contain about 
2000 inhabitants, many of whom are wealthy mer 
chants. This was its situation before the insurrec 
tion of the Negroes : of its present state we have 
not authentic information.] 

[GEORGE S, ST. a cape and island nearly oppo 
site to the river Appalachicola, on the coast of E. 
Florida. Cape St. George s lies about six leagues 
to the e. of cape Blaize, being an elbow of the 
largest of St. Georges s islands, in lat. 29 28 n. 
There is a large shoal running out from it a consi 
derable way, but how far has not yet been ascer 
tained. The coast between it and cape Blaize 
forms a kind of hollow bay, with deep soundings 
and a soft bottom. There are two islands to the 
n. w. of St. George s cape; that nearest to it is 
small, and remarkable for a clump of straggling 
trees on the middle of it ; the other is prelty large, 
and of a triangular form, and reaches within three 
leagues of cape Blaize, having a passage at each 
end of it for small craft into the bay, between 
these islands and the river Appalachicola ; but 
this bay is full of shoals and oyster-banks, and 
there is not above two or three feet water at most in 
any of the branches of that river.] 

[GEOUGE, Fort, was situated on point Comfort, 
at the mouth of James river, and five miles n. e. of 
Craney island, at the mouth of Elizabeth river, in 
Virginia. See COMFORT.] 

[GEORGE, Fort KING, an ancient fort in 
Georgia, which stood five miles n. e. of the town 
of Darien, in Liberty county ; situated at the head 
of a creek which flows into the ocean opposite Sa- 
pelo island. It is now in ruins.] 



[GEORGE, Lake, in E. Florida, is a dilation of 
the river St. Juan or St. John, and called also 
Great Lake. It is about 15 miles wide, and gene 
rally about 15 or 20 feet deep, excepting at the 
entrance of the river, where lies a bar, which car 
ries eight or nine feet water. The lake is beauti 
fied with two or three fertile islands. The largest 
is about two miles broad, and commands u most 
delightful and extensive prospect of the waters, 
islands, e. and w. shores or the lake, the capes, the 
bay, and mount Royal; and to the s. the view is 
very extensive. Here are evident marks of a large 
town of the aborigines, and the island appears to 
have been once the chosen residence of an Indian 
prince. On the site of this ancient town stands a 
very pompous Indian mount, or conical pyramid 
of earth, from which runs, in a straight line, a 
grand avenue or Indian highway, through a mag 
nificent grove of magnolias, live oaks, palms, and 
orange trees, terminating at the verge of a large, 
green, level savanna. From fragments dug up, it 
appears to have been a thickly inhabited town. 
See ST. JOHN S River.] ;. , 

[GEORGE, Lake, lies to the s. of lake Cham- 
pVun, and its waters lie about 100 feet higher. 
The portage between the two lakes is a mile and a 
half; but with a small expence might be reduced 
to 60 yards ; and with one or two locks might be 
made navigable through for batteux. It is a most 
clear, beautiful collection of water ; 36 miles long, 
and from one to seven wide. It embosoms more 
than 200 islands, some say 365 ; very few of whicli 
are any thing more than barren rocks, covered 
with heath, and a few cedar, spruce, and hemlock 
trees and shrubs, and abundance of rattle-snakes. 
On each side it is skirted by prodigious moun 
tains, from which large quantities of red cedar are 
annually carried to New York for ship timber. 
The lake is full of fishes, and some of the bes.t 
kind, as the black or Oswego bass, also large 
speckled trouts. It was called lake Sacrament by 
the French, who, in former times, were at the, 
pains to procure this water for sacramental uses in 
all their churches in Canada ; hence probably it 
derived its name. The remains of fort George 
stand at the s. end of the lake, about 14 miles n. 
by w. of fort Edward, on Hudson river. The 
famous fort of Ticonderoga, which stood at the n. 
side of the outlet of the lake, where it discharged 
its waters into lake Champlain, is now in ruins. 
See CHAMPI.AIN, and TICONBEROGA.] 

[GEOIIGE S, ST. an island and parish belonging 
to the Bermuda isles, in the West Indies. Lat. 
32 45 . Long. 63 30 w.] 



G E O 

[GEORGE S, ST. a large and deep bay on the tit). 1 
side of Newfoundland island. Lat. 48 12 n.} 

[GEORGE S Bank, ST. a fishing bank in the At 
lantic ocean, e. of cape Cod, in Massachusetts. 
It extends from n. to s. between lat. 41 li&amp;gt; 
and 42 22 w.] 

[GEORGE S KEY, ST. was one of the principal 
British settlements in the bay of Honduras. It 
was taken by the Spaniards during the American 
"War, but retaken by the British soon after. 

The British settlements on the Mosquito shore, 
and in the bay of Honduras, were surrendered to 
the crown of Spain, at the Spanish convention, 
signed at London the 14th of July 1786.] 

[GEORGE S River, ST. in St. Mary s county, 
Maryland, is a very broad but short creek, whose 
mouth lies between Piney point and St. Mary s 
river, on the n. bank of the Potowmack, opposite 
the island of the same name.] 

[GEOKGE S River, ST. in Lincoln county, dis 
trict of Maine, or rather an arm of the sea, lies 
about two leagues s. w. of Penobscot bay. Four 
leagues from the mouth of this river stands Tho- 
rnaston. This river is navigable for brigs and 
ships of large burden up to the narrows ; and from 
thence about four miles higher, to nearly the head 
of the tide, for-sloops and schooners of 80 or 90 
tons. It is about half a league wide up to the nar 
rows. Of late several considerable vessels have 
been built in this river, which are employed in 
coasting, and sometimes in foreign voyages. There 
are now owned in this river, though it does not 
in all exceed four leagues in length, one brig, two 
topsail schooners, and nine sloops : in all about 
1100 ions. The navigation, however, is generally 
interrupted in winter, when not only the streams 
through the country, but the salt-water rivers, are 
locked up until spring. Fish abound here, of al 
most all kinds, in their season ; and even lobsters, 
oysters, clams, and other delicacies of the aqueous 
kind, are plentiful in this river.] 

[GEORGE S, ST. a village nearly in the centre of 
Newcastle county, Delaware, on a creek of its 
own name, which falls into Delaware river four 
miles below, a little above Reedy island. It is 11 
miles s. by w. of Wilmington, and 33 s.w. of 
Philadelphia;] 

[GEORGETOWN, the chief town of Sussex 
county, Delaware, is situated 16 miles w. s. w. of 
Lewistown, and 103 s. of Philadelphia. It con 
tains about 30 houses, and has lately been made 
the seat of the county courts.] 

[GEORGETOWN, a post-town in Maryland ; 
situated in Kent county, on the e. side of Chesa- 
peak bay, of about 30 houses. It is nine miles 



G E O 



133 



from the mouth of the river Sassafras, being seated 
on the s. side, opposite to Frederick, 13 n. e. of 
Chester, and 50 s. w. of Philadelphia.] 

[GEORGETOWN, a village of Fayette county, 
Pennsylvania ; situated on the s. e. side of Monon- 
gahela river, at the mouth of George s creek. 
Here a number of boats are annually built for the 
trade and emigration to the w. country. It lies 16 
miles s. w, of Union.] 

[GEORGETOWN, a post-town and port of entry 
in Montgomery county, Maryland, and in the ter 
ritory of Columbia. It is pleasantly situated on a 
number of small hills, upon the n, bank of Potow 
mack river ; bounded e. by Rock creek, which 
separates it from Washington city, and lies three 
miles from the capital, and seven n. of Alexandria. 
It contains about 230 houses, several of which are 
elegant and commodious. The Roman Catholics 
have established a college here, for the promotion 
of general literature, which is at present in a very 
flourishing state. The building being found in 
adequate to contain the number of students that 
applied, a large addition has been made to it. 
Georgetown carries on a small trade with Europe 
and the W. Indies. The exports in one year, 
ending Sept. 30, 1794, amounted to the value of 
128,924 dollars. It is 27 miles s. w. of Balti 
more, and 186 s. w. of Philadelphia.] 

[GEORGETOWN, in Lincoln county, district of 
Maine, is situated on both sides of Kennebeck 
river. It was incorporated in 1716, is the oldest 
town in the county, and contains 1333 inhabitants. 
It is bounded s. by the ocean, w. by the towns of 
Harpswell and Brunswick, n. w. by Bath, and e. 
by Woolwich ; being entirely surrounded by na 
vigable waters, excepting about two miles of land, 
which divides the waters of Winnagance creek, a 
part of the Kennebeck, from an arm. or influx of 
Casco bay, called Stephen s river. 

The entrance at the mouth of Kennebeck river is 
guided on the e. by Parker s island, belonging to 
this township. It contains about 28,000 acres of 
land and salt marsh, and is inhabited by more than 
one-third part of the people of the township. This 
was the spot on which the Europeans first attempted 
to colonize New England, in the year 1607. It is 
a part of what was called Sagadahock ; and the 
patentees of the Plymouth company began here to 
lay the foundation of a great state. They sent 
over a number of civil and military officers, and 
about 100 people. By various misfortunes they 
were forced to give up the settlement ; and in 1608, 
the whole number who survived the winter returned 
to England. 

There was a tradition among the Norridgcwalk 



G E O 



Indians, that these planters invited a number of 
the natives, who had come to trade with them, to 
draw a small cannon by a rope, and that when they 
were ranged in a line, the white people discharged 
the piece, and thereby killed and wounded seve 
ral of them. The resentment of the natives at this 
treacherous murder obliged the Europeans tore-em 
bark the next summer. Georgetown is 15 miles s. 
of Pown ilborough, and 170 n. by e. of Boston.] 

[GEORGETOWN, a post-town of Georgia, in the 
county of Oglethorpe, 53 miles s. w. of Augusta, 
surrounded by a poor country ; but, nevertheless, 
exhibits marks of growing prosperity.] 

[GEORGETOWN, a large maritime district in the 
lower country of S. Carolina ; situated in the s. e. 
part of the state ; bounded n. e. by the state of N. 
Carolina, s. e. by the ocean, s. w. by Santee river, 
which divides it from Charleston district, and w. w. 
by Caraden and Cheraw districts. It is about 112 
miles from n. to 5. and 63 from e. to w. and is di 
vided into the parishes of All Saints, Prince George, 
and Prince Frederick. It contains, according to 
the census of 1790, 22,129 inhabitants, of whom 
.13,131 are slaves. It sends to the state legislature 
JO representatives and three senators, and pays 
taxes to the amount of 3585/. 12s. 6d,~\ 

[GEORGETOWN, a post-town, port of entry, 
and capital of the above district, and is situated 
on a spot near which several streams unite their 
waters, and form a broad stream called Winyaw 
bay, 12 miles from the sea. See PEDEF. River. 
Its situation connects it with an extensive back 
country of both the Carolinas, and would be a 
place of vast importance, were it not for a bar at 
the entrance of Winyaw bay, which interrupts 
the entrance of vessels drawing above 11 feet 
water, and is in many respects a dangerous place. 
It contains above 300 houses, built chiefly of 
wood. The public buildings are a court-house, 
gaol, and academy ; three churches, of which 
the Episcopalians, Baptists, and Methodists, have 
one each. There is here a small trade to the W. 
Indies. The exports for one year, ending Sept. 
30, 1795, were to the value of 21,511 dollars. It 
is 60 miles n. e. by n. of Charleston, 68 s. w. of 
Wilmington, N. Carolina, and 68J from Philadel 
phia. Lat. 3327 &amp;gt;?. Long. 79 6 w. ] 

GEORGIA, a province and colony of the Eng 
lish, in N.America; it has Louisiana to the w. 
Tennessee to the n. Carolina to the n. c^the Atlantic 
ocean to the e. and Florida to the s. It is divided 
into the following counties, Savannah, Halifax, 
Augusta, and Southern. In the year 1732, cer 
tain English gentlemen, moved by a xeal for the 
public good, and through a compassion for the 



G E O 

misery of many poor people, proposed to King 
George II. the establishment of a colony in this 
country, which they considered not inferior to any 
of the settlements in America, either for situation 
or climate; since, although it was desert and full 
of forests, which served as shelter to some Indians 
and exiles, yet that it was capable of high culti 
vation, and of being made one of the best countries 
in the world ; as it would, moreover, be of con 
siderable advantage to Carolina, and serve as a 
good frontier against the Spaniards, the French, 
and the Indians. These reasons induced the Eng 
lish government to nominate a company for the 
establishment of the colony of Georgia, which 
would comprehend the whole country situate be 
tween the most n. course of the river Savannah, 
and the s. shore of the Atalamacha ; and to this in 
tent tiie patent was granted for 20 years, with au 
thority during this time to nominate the governor 
and other officers. The patent had upon its seal 
two figures of rivers issuing from two urns, and 
between these the genius of the colony seated, hav 
ing on her head the crown of liberty, in one hand 
a spear, and in the other a cornucopia, the whole 
being surrounded by the following motto, " Colony , 
Georgia, Augusta /" arid on the reverse part some 
silk worms, with this inscription, u Non sibi sed 
aliis." This colony, when it left England, con 
sisted of J16 poor persons, provided with instru 
ments for labour, as well as arms, ammunition, 
and 74 pieces of cannon ; the parliament having ad 
vanced by way of encouragement 10,000/. sterling, 
and having nominated for governor Mr. Oglethorp ; 
who giving testimony of the most active disposi 
tions, commanded the prohibition of the importa 
tion of Negroes and of spirits, being well aware of 
the inconveniences produced by both these articles 
in the other establishments. In a short time, how 
ever, experience proved to him his error ; for 
spirits were always reckoned necessary hen; to qua 
lify the water, which is bad and unwholesome, and 
the labour of the Negroes could not be dispensed 
with, owing to the heat of the climate : moreover, 
he soon discovered that a great part of the colonists 
were gradually deserting, offended, no doubt, at 
the law by which property could descend only in 
the male line ; and in short, disorders were getting 
to a great head, when the English government 
thought proper to revoke the concession, took 
charge of the province, and annulled all the rules 
that had been established. Even this, however, 
did not produce any great advantage ; for now the 
cultivation of vines, silk, and other things, began 
before there were sufficient hands to be employed. 
But immediately after followed the treaty of alii- 



GEORGIA. 



135 



ance with the Yammacrans Indians, and the nume 
rous nation of the Creeks, whose king, by name 
Tomochichi, came to England with his wife and 
son to ratify the same. Jn 1735 arrived a rein 
forcement of 160 Scotch Highlanders, who esta 
blished themselves in a territory, to which they 
gave the name of Darien, in memory of the esta 
blishment they had formed in the province of this 
nameattheend of the last century, (1700) ; and in 
1737 arrived a regiment of 600 men, who had con 
ceived a dislike to the Spanish governor of San 
Agustin of La Florida, who attacked this colony, 
when it was defended by the aforesaid Governor 
Oglethorp. 

The whole of the coast of Georgia is defended 
by a thread of islands, which runs along its whole 
extent ; and for more than 70 miles it is full of 
sand-banks. But the vessels have a good anchor 
age, and a secure port at the entrance of the river 
Savannah ; and to the s. of this river is a clear 
and quiet basin, called Teky-sound, where many 
ships may lay at anchor in 14 foot water, with a 
safe place for embarkation, since the tide on this 
coast rises seven feet. 

In this province are several cities, namely, the 
Savannah, Augusta, Ebenezer, which are situate 
on the shore of the river of the name of the first- 
mentioned ; and on the s. is that of Frederick, in 
the island of St. Simon, at the mouth of the river 
Alatamacha, with different forts for its own de 
fence and that of the country. 

This country produces abundance of wheat, 
maize, oats, and barley, and the two latter are of 
the very best quality. The wheat is sowed in 
May, and gathered in June. It also yields quan 
tities of potatoes, melons, water-melons, quinces, 
common English pease, which with some little 
care and cultivation might be produced the whole 
year round ; beans, sallad of all kinds and in re 
gular succession, also fragrant herbs, wild grapes 
in abundance, and cherries which are similar to 
those of England, and which ripen in May : these 
arc also found in some gardens and orchards, as 
are pears, apples, and apricots, mulberry trees 
which bear twice a year, as also white mulberries, 
the leaf of which is peculiarly good for silk 
worms. The olives and oranges here are very 
good, and most particularly in the s. part of the 
province, where one of the latter has been known to 
grow to the height of 15 feet in seven years. The 
principal of the trees used for building may be re 
duced to the pine, which is found in great abund 
ance, oaks of six or seven kinds, black walnuts, 
cedars, white and black cypress, laurels, and myr 
tles, with which are made torches ; and sassafras, 



which infused in water makes a wholesome drink. 
In the woods are a quantity of birds, and particu 
larly in the winter season, which begins in Novem 
ber and finishes in March : there are ducks, wild 
turkeys weighing from 20 to SOlbs. turtle-doves, 
curlews, woodcocks, and partridges smaller than 
those of Europe. The animals are hares, rabbits 
of good flavour ; and when the season is very cold, 
in the n. parts there are great flights of pigeons, 
which may be easily killed. Here are also some 
tigers, but they are small; bears, which, when they 
are sucklings, have the flavour of sucking pigs ; 
wolves, and many species of serpents, although 
these are not venomous, save that of the rattle 
snake, against the bite of which the Indians have a 
certain antidote, if the same be only immediately 
applied. In the rivers are found sea wolves, alli 
gators, and an infinite variety offish, which in the 
summer are extremely cheap ; the same also as are 
the various kind of shell-fish found here. Articles 
of food are in general reasonable, as is English 
beer, also rum from the other colonies. The 
brandy and wine commonly drank here comes from 
Madeira, though that which is in highest estima 
tion is from Lisbon. Oranges and lemons are plen 
tiful, and they will continue to be more so daily, 
since many have been planted. Soap here is also 
very cheap, but the most useful manufacture is 
that of silk, since the climate is very friendly to the 
breeding of silk-worms, and the territory for the 
cultivation of the mulberry. There are some 
hopes of making wine, notwithstanding the great 
difficulties that have hitherto obtained, the skin of 
the grape not being of sufficient consistency to con 
tain the juice, and consequently bursting as the 
grape gets ripe. The winters in the spring equi 
nox kill the stocks of the vines, and those which 
are brought from Europe are destroyed by the in 
sects of the country ; but it has been found by ex 
perience that the European vines being ingrafted 
with those of the country, the above objections are 
almost entirely obviated, since they thus sprout 
much later, and thus escape the influence of the 
frost ; the bark also is much stronger, and resists 
the insects. Some of the vines that were brought 
from Portugal have succeeded well enough, even 
in the most barren part of this province, which, in 
a word, only wants hands to cultivate it. The 
principal rivers by which it is irrigated are the 
Savannah, Altamaha or George, and St. Mary, the 
which divides it from Florida. Its principal ports 
are at the entrance of the two former rivers. The 
number of inhabitants is very uncertain, and that 
of the Negroes and slaves, we are assured, exceeds 
14,000. 

2 



136 



GEORGIA. 



The following list shews the exports of the pro 
ductions for 23 years, and the progress of com 
merce. The first column is the year, the second 
the number of the vessels, the third the value of 
their cargoes in pounds sterling. The capital of 
Georgia is Savannah. 

1750 - 8 *- * 2,004 

1751 - 11 - 3,810 

1752 - 17 - 4,841 

1753 - 23 - 6,403 

1754 - 42 - 9,507 

1755 - 52 - 15,744 

1756 42 - 17,766 

1757 44 - 15,649 

1758 - gr - 8,613 

1759 - 48 - 12,694 

1760 - 37 - 20,852 

1761 - 45 - 15,870 

1762 - 57 - 27,021 

1763 - 92 - 47,551 

1764 - 115 - 55,025 

1765 - 143 - 73,426 

1766 - 154 - 81,228 

1767 ;- ; 154 - 67.092 

1768 *1H* 186 - 92^284 
J769 "&amp;lt;L*J 181 - 86,480 

1770 - 186 - 99,383 

1771 - 185 - 106,387 

1772 -- 217 - 121,677 
[Georgia, now one of the United States of N. 

America, is situated between lat. 30 37 and 35 n. 
and between long. 80 58 and 91 30 zs. beinsr 
about 600 miles in length, and on an average 250 
in breadth. It was formerly divided into parishes, 
afterwards into three districts, but lately into two 
districts, viz. Upper and Lower, which are sub 
divided into 24 counties, as follow : in the Lower 
district are Camden, Glynn, Liberty, Chatham, 
Bryan, M Intosh, Effingham, Scriven, and Burke. 
The counties in the Upper district are Montgo 
mery, Washington, Hancock, Greene, Franklin, 
Oglethorpe, Elbert, Wilkes, Lincoln, Warren, 
Jefferson, Jackson, Bullock, Columbia, and Rich 
mond. The principal towns are Augusta, for 
merly the seat of government, Savannah, the for 
mer capital of the state, Sunbury, Brunswick, 
Frederica, Washington, and Louisville, which is 
the metropolis of the state ; and here are deposited 
the records of the state, such of them as a late 
legislature did riot order to be publicly burnt. 

The principal rivers which water Georgia are, 
Savannah, which separates itself from S. Carolina; 
Dgeechee river, which runs parallel with the for 
mer ; and Alatamaba, which runs parallel with the 
Others. Besides these and their numerous branches, 



there is Turtle river, Little Sitilla, Great Sitilla, 
Crooked river, and St. Mary s, which forms a 
part of the s. boundary of the United States. The 
rivers in the middle and w. parts will be noticed 
under the head of GF.ORGIA Western Territory. 
All these are stored with a great variety of fish, as 
rock, mullet, whiting, shad, trout, drum, bass, cat 
fish, white, brim, and sturgeon ; and the bays and 
In goons are supplied witli oysters, and other shell 
fish, crabs, shrimps, &amp;c. The clams, in particular, 
are large, their meat white, tender, and delicate. 
The shark and great black stingray are insatiable 
cannibals, and very troublesome to the fishermen. 
The chief lake or marsh is Ekanfanoka, by some 
called Ouaquaphenogaw, which is 300 miles in 
circumference. 

The e. part of the state, between the mountains 
and the ocean, and the rivers Savannah and St. 
Mary s, a tract of country more than 120 miles 
from n. to 5. and from 50 to 80 e. and w. is level, 
without a hill or stone. At the distance of about 
40 or 50 miles from the sea board, or salt marsh, 
the lands begin to be more or less uneven, until 
they gradually rise to mountains. The vast chain 
of the Alleghany or Appalachian mountains, which 
commence with the Kaats kill, near Hudson river, 
in the state of New York, terminate in Georgia, 
60 miles s. of its n. boundary. From the foot of 
this mountain spreads a wide extended plain, of 
the richest soil, and in a latitude and climate well 
adapted to the cultivation of most of the produc 
tions of the .?. of Europe, and of the E. Indies. In 
the low country, near the rice swamps, bilious 
complaints and fevers of various kinds are pretty 
universal, during the months of July, August, and 
September : but the fertility of the soil, and the 
ease with which it is improved, are a sufficient in 
ducement to settlers, and an unfailing source of 
wealth. Before the sickly season approaches, the 
rich planters, with their families, remove to the 
sea-islands, or some elevated, healthy situation, 
for the benefit of the fresh air. In the winter and 
spring, pleurisies, peripneumonies, and other in 
flammatory disorders, occasioned by violent and 
sudden colds, arc considerably common, and fre 
quently fatal. Consumptions, epilepsies, cancers, 
palsies, and apoplexies, are not so common among 
the inhabitants of the s. as n. climates. 

The winters in Georgia are very mild and plea 
sant. Snow is seldom or never seen ; nor is vege 
tal ion often prevented by severe frosts. Cattle 
subsist tolerably well during the winter, feeding in 
the woods and savannas, and are fatter in that: sea 
son than in any other. In the hilly country, which 
begins about 50, and in some places 100 milesj 



GEORGIA. 



13? 



[from (he sea, the air is pure and salubrious, and 
the water plenty and good. From June to Sep 
tember, the mercury in Fahrenheit s thermometer 
commonly fluctuates from 76 to 90 ; in winter, 
from 40 to 60. The most prevailing winds are 
s. w. and c. ; in winter n. &amp;lt;r. The e. wind is 
warmest in winter and coolest in summer. The s. 
wind, in summer and fall particularly, is damp, 
sultry, utK lastic, and of course unhealthy. In the 
s. e. parts of this state, which lie within a few de 
grees of the torrid zone, the atmosphere is kept in 
motion by impressions from the trade-winds. This 
purifies the air, so that it is found to have salutary 
effects on consumptive habits. 

In the low lands arc the rice fields ; in the in 
terior and hilly parts, wheat, Indian corn, and the 
other prod notions more common to the n. states. 
Rice is at present the staple commodity of the 
state; tobacco, wheat, and indigo are (lie other 
great articles of produce. Besides these the slate 
yields cotton, silk, corn, potatoes, oranges, tigs, 
olives, pomegranates, &amp;c. The forests consi-t of 
oak, hickory, mulberry, pine, cedar, &amp;c. The 
whole coast is bordered with islands; the principal 
of which are Skidavvay, \V assaw, Os^abaw, St. 
Catherine s, Sapelo. Frederica, Jekyl, Cumberland, 
&amp;c. These islands are surrounded by navigable 
creeks, between which and the mainland is a large 
extent of salt marsh, fronting the whole .state, not 
less, on an average, than four or five miles in 
breadth ; intersected with creeks in various direc 
tions, admitting, through (he whole, an inland 
navigation, between the islands and the mainland, 
from the n. e. to the s. e. corners of the state. The 
t. sides of these islands are, for the most part, clean, 
hard, sandy beaches, exposed to the wash of the 
ocean. Between these islands are the entrances of 
the rivers from the interior country, winding 
through the low salt marshes, and delivering their 
waters into the sounds, which form capacious har 
bours of from three to eight miles over, and which 
communicate with each other by parallel salt 
creeks. 

The soil and its fertility arc various, according 
to situation and different improvement. The 
islands in their natural state are covered with a 
plentiful growth of pine, oak, hickory, live oak, 
(an uncommonly hard and very valuable wood) and 
some red cedar. The soil is a mixture of sand and 
black mould, making what is commonly called a 
grey soil. A considerable part of it, particularly 
that whereon grow the oak, hickory, and live oak, 
is very rich, and yields on cultivation good crops 
of indigo, cotton, corn, and potatoes. *The soil of 
the mainland, adjoining the marshes and creeks, is 

VOL. II. 



nearly of the same quality wifh that of the islands; 
except that which borders on those rivers and 
creeks which stretch far back into the country. 
On these, immediately after you leave the salts, 
begin the valuable rice swamps, which, on culti 
vation, aiibrd the present chief staple of com 
merce. 

The soil between the river?, after you leave the 
sea and the edge of the swamps, at the dis 
tance of 20 or 30 miles, changes from a grey to a 
reel colour, on which grows plenty of oak and hie-* 
kory, with a considerable intermixture of pine. In 
some places it is gravelly, but fertile, and so con 
tinues for a number of miles, gradually deepening 
the reddish colour of the earth, till it changes into, 
what is called the Mulatto soil, consisting of a black 
and red earth. The Mulatto lands are generally 
strong, and yield large crops of wheat, tobacco, 
corn, &amp;c. To this kind of land succeeds by turns 
a soil nearly black and very rich, on which grow 
large quantities of black walnut, mulberry, &amp;c. 
This succession of different soils continues uniform 
and regular, though there are some lurge veins of 
all tlu&amp;gt; different soils intermixed : and what is more 
remarkable, this succession, in the order mentioned, 
stretches across this state nearly parallel with the 
sea-coast, and extends through the several states 
nearly in the same direction, to the banks of Hud 
son river. 

Cotton was formerly planted here only by the 
poorer class of people, and that only for family 
use. They planted two kinds, the annual and the 
W. Indian ; the former is low, and planted every 
year ; the balls are large, and the phlox long, 
strong, and perfectly white. The latter is a tall 
perennial plant, the stalk somewhat shrubby, se 
veral of which rise up from the root for several 
years successively, the stems of the former year 
being killed by the winter frosts. The balls of the 
W. India cotton arc not quite so large as the other, 
but the phlox or wool is long, extremely fine, 
silky, and white. A plantation of this kind will 
last several years, with moderate labour and care. 
The culture of cotton is now much more attended 
to ; several indigo planters have converted their 
plantations into cotton fields. A new species is 
about to be introduced into this state, the seed of 
which was lately brought by Captain Josiah Ro 
berts from \\aitahoo, one of the Marqueea islands 
in the S. Pacific ocean, and sent to a gentleman in 
Georgia by a member of the historical society in 
Boston. This cotton is of a very fine texture, 
and is expected will prove a considerable acquisi 
tion to the s. states. The cotton at present raised 
in Georgia is distinguished by some into twoj 
T 



138 



GEORGIA. 



f kinds, the green and black seed ; the former is 
planted in the Upper country, the latter on the 
sea-islands and adjacent lands, and was brought, 
about the year 1788, from the Bahamas ; and 
there is now a prospect, that in a few years the 
states of S. Carolina and Georgia may be able to 
raise more than 10,000,000 of pounds of cotton 
annually for exportation. Most of the tropical 
fruits would flourish in this state with proper at 
tention. The.?, w. part of this state, and the parts 
of E. and W. Florida, which lie adjoining, will 
probably, in some future time, become the vineyard 
of America. The chief articles of export are rice, 
tobacco, indigo, sago, lumber, naval stores, leather, 
deer-skins, snake-root, myrtle and bees wax, corn, 
and live stock. The planters and farmers raise 
large stocks of cattle, from 1000 to 1500 head, and 
some more. The value in sterling money, of the 
exports of Geonria in the year 1755, was 15,744/. ; 
in 1772, 121,6777. ; in 1791, value in dollars 
491,472 ; in 1792, 458,973 ; in 1794, 501,383 ; in 
1796, 676,154; and in 1798,950,158. In 1790, 
the tonnage employed in this state was 28,540 ; 
and the .number of American seamen 11,225. In 
return for her exports, Georgia receives W. India 
goods, teas, wines, clothing, and dry goods of 
all kinds. From the . states, cheese, fish, pota 
toes, apples, cider, and shoes. The imports and 
exports arc principally to and from Savannah, 
which has a fine harbour, and is the place where 
the principal commercial business of the state 
is transacted. According to the census of 1790, 
the number of inhabitants amounted to 82,548, of 
\vhorn 29,264 were slaves ; and by that of 1810, to 
252,433 souls. The different religious sects are 
Presbj terians, Episcopalians, Baptists, and Me 
thodists. They have but few regular ministers 
among them. The citizens of Georgia have lately 
revised and altered their constitution, and formed it 
upon a plan similar to the federal constitution of 
the United States. The literature of this state, 
which is yet in its infancy, is commencing on a 
plan which, if ever carried into effect, will be very 
advantageous to the state. A college, with ample 
and liberal endowments, is instituted in Louisville, 
n high and healthy part of the county, near the 
centre of the state. There is also provision made 
for the institution of an academy in each county of 
the state, to be supported from the same funds, 
and considered as parts and members of the same 
institution, under the general superintendence and 
direction of a president and board of trustees, se 
lected, for their literary accomplishments, from the 
different parts of the state, and invested with the 
customary powers of corporations. This institution 



is denominated the University of Georgia. The 
funds for the support of literary institutions are 
principally in lands, amounting in the whole to 
50,000 acres, a great part of which is of the best 
quality, and at present very valuable; together 
with nearly 6000/. sterling iu bonds, houses, and 
town lots in Augusta. Other public property, to 
the amount of 1000^. in each county, has been set 
apart for the purposes of building and furnishing 
their respective academies. The funds originally 
designed to support the literary orphan house, 
founded by the Rev. George Whitefield, are 
chiefly in rice plantations and" Negroes. On the 
death of the Countess of Huntingdon, to whom 
Mr. Whitefield bequeathed this property, as trus 
tee, the legislature, in the year 1792, passed a lavr 
vesting it in 13 commissioners, with powers to 
carry the original intention of Mr. Whitefield 
into execution ; and incomplimenttothe Countess, 
the seminary is styled Huntingdon college. 

This state, as Albedo has remarked, was first 
settled in the year J732, and it was the only 
colony settled at the expence of the crown.] 

[GEORGIA WESTERN TERRITORY. Under this 
name is included all that part of the state of 
Georgia which lies w. of the head waters of those 
rivers which fall into the Atlantic ocean. Tin s 
extensive tract of country embraces some of the 
finest land in the United States, is intersected with 
a great number of noble rivers, which may be 
seen by an inspection of the map, and is inhabited 
(except such parts wherein the Indian title has 
been extinguished) by three nations of Indians, 
viz. the Muskogulge or Creek, the Chactaws, and 
Chickasaws: the Cherokees also have a title to a 
small portion of the n. part of this territory, on 
the Tennessee river. These nations together can 
furnish between 8 and 9000 warriors. About 
2000 families of white people inhabit those parts 
of this territory where the Indian title has been 
extinguished, chiefly at the Natchez, and the 
Xaxoo river, on the banks of the Mississippi, and 
a considerable number on the Tombigbee river, 
and scattered among the Creek Indians. This terri 
tory, for reasons which will hereafter appear, has 
lately become an object of much public attention 
and inquiry, in Europe, as well as in the United 
States ; and on this account, the following de 
scription of it, and statement of facts relative to the 
sale of certain parts of it, and the claims of the United 
States, &amp;c. have been collected and arranged with 
great care from the most authentic sources that 
can be obtained, and given under this head 
for the information of the public. This territory, 
lying between lat. 31 and 35 n. is not subject to] 



GEORGIA. 



139 



[the extremes of heat or cold ; the climate is tem 
perate and delightful through the year, and ex 
cept in low grounds, and in the neighbourhood of 
stagnant waters, is very healthful. White frosts, 
and sometimes thin ice, have been seen as far s. as 
the 31 of latitude ; but snow is very uncommon 
in any part of this territory. A person residing 
at the Natchez writes to his friend in the e. part 
of Georgia, that " this country affords the best 
spring water ; every person almost is in bloom* 
ing health." Others who have visited it say, 
of that part of the territory which borders on 
the Mississippi, that u the water is good for 20 
miles back from the river, and the country 
healthy and pleasant, and of all others that they 
have seen the most desirable." Mr. Hutchins, 
speaking of the same tract, says, " the climate is 
healthy and temperate, the country delightful and 
well watered, and the prospect is beautiful and 
extensive ; variegated by many inequalities and 
fine meadows, separated by innumerable copses, 
the trees of which are of different kinds, but mostly 
of walnut and oak. The elevated, open, and airy 
situation of this country, renders it less liable to 
fevers and agues, (the only disorders ever known 
in its neighbourhood), than some other parts bor 
dering on the Mississippi, where the want of a 
sufficient descent to convey the waters off, occa 
sions numbers of stagnant ponds, whose exhalations 
infect the air." Another traveller describes the 
country between the Tovnbigbee and the Coosa and 
Alabama as being healthy, well watered with many 
pleasant rivulets, affording delightful situations 
for settlements, and the water pure and very good. 
To give a just view of the rivers, and to ascer 
tain the advantages derived from them to this 
territory, it is necessary to trace them from their 
mouths in the gulf of Mexico. The Mississippi 
bounds this territory on the w. : the free naviga 
tion of this noble river is now enjoyed by the in 
habitants of the United States : it empties, by 
several mouths of different depths, from nine to 16 
feet, into the gulf of Mexico, in about lat. 29 n. 
The bars at the mouth of this river frequently 
shift; after passing them into the river, there is 
from three to 10 fathoms of water, as far as the 
*. w. pass; and thence to the Missouri, a distance 
of 1142 computed miles, 12, 15, 20, and 30 
fathoms is the general depth. 

In ascending the Mississippi, there are extensive 
natural meadows, with a prospect of the gulf of 
Mexico on each side, the distance of 32 miles, to a 
place called Detour-aux-Plaquemines, in W. Flo 
rida : thence 20 miles to the settlements, the banks 



are low and marshy, generally overflowed and 
covered with thick wood, palmetto bushes, &amp;c. 
apparently impenetrable by man or beast : thence 
to Detour-des-Anglois, at the bend of the river, 
the banks are well inhabited ; as also from hence 
to New Orleans 18 miles, which distance there is a 
good road for carriages. Vessels pass from the 
mouth of this river to New Orleans 105 miles, in 
seven or eight days, commonly ; sometimes in 
three or four. 

From New Orleans, the capital of Louisiana, 
there is an easy communication with W. Florida 
by Hayouk creek, which is a water of lake Pon- 
chartrain, navigable for vessels drawing four feet 
water, six miles up from the lake, to a landing 
place two miles from New Orleans. For nearly 
50 miles, as you proceed up the river, both its 
banks are settled and highly cultivated, in part by 
emigrants from Germany, who furnish the market 
with indigo of a superior quality, cotton, rice, 
beans, myrtle, waXj and lumber. In 1762, some 
rich planters attempted the cultivation of canes 
and the making of sugar, and erected mills for the 
purpose: this sugar was of an excellent quality, 
arid some of the crops were large; but some win 
ters proving so severe as to kill the canes, no de 
pendence can be placed on the culture of that article. 
The settlements of the Acadians, which were 
begun in the year 1763, extend on both sides of 
the river, from Germans to the river Ibberville, 
which is 99 miles above New Orleans, and 270 
from Pensacola, by way of lakes Ponchartrain and 
Maurepas. 

At point Coupee, 35 miles above the Ibberville, 
are settlements extending 20 miles on the ay. side of 
the river, which 30 years ago had 2000 white 
inhabitants and 7000 slaves, who were employed 
in the cultivation of tobacco, indigo, Indian corn, 
&amp;c. for the New Orleans market, which they fur 
nished also with poultry, arid abundance of 
squared timber, staves, &amp;c. 

Mr. Hutchins, from his personal knowledge, 
describes the country on both sides of the Missis 
sippi, between the latitudes 30 and 31, border 
ing on Georgia, as follows : 

Although this country might produce all the 
valuable articles raised in other parts of the globe, 
situated in the same latitudes, yet the inhabitants 
principally cultivate indigo, rice, tobacco, In 
dian corn, and some wheat; and they raise large 
stocks of black cattle, horses, mules, hogs, sheep, 
and poultry. The sheep are said to make the 
sweetest mutton in the world. The black cattle, 
when fat enough for sale, which they commonly] 
T 2 



140 



GEORGIA. 



[are the year round, arc driven across the country 
to New Orleans, where there is always a good 
market. 

This country is principally timbered with all 
the different kinds of oak, but mostly with live 
oak, of the largest and best quality, uncommonly 
large cypress, black walnut, hickory, white ash, 
cherry, plum, poplar trees, and grape vines ; here is 
found also a great variety of shrubs and medicinal 
roots. The lands bordering the rivers and lakes 
are generally well wooded ; but at a small distance 
from them are very extensive natural meadows, 
or savannas, of the most luxuriant soil, composed 
of a black mould, about one and a half feet deep, 
very loose and rich, occasioned, in part, by the 
frequent burning of the savannas: below the black 
mould is a stiff clay of different colours. Jt is 
said, this clay, after being exposed some time to 
the sun, becomes so hard, that it is difficult either 
to break or bend ; but when wet by a light shower 
of rain, it slackens in the same manner as lime 
does when exposed to moisture, and becomes 
loose and moulders away, after which it is found 
excellent for vegetation. 

After passing the 31st degree of n. lat. from W. 
Florida into Georgia you enter what is called 
the Natchez Country, bordering on the Missis 
sippi. Fort Rosailic, in this country, is in lat. 
31 40 ; 243 miles above New Orleans. 

The soil of this country is superior to any of 
the lands on the borders of the river Mississippi, 
for the production of many articles : its situation 
being higher, affords a greater variety of soil, and 
is in a more favourable climate for the growth of 
wheat, rye, barley, oats, &amp;c. than the country 
lower down, and nearer to the sea. The soil also 
produces in equal abundance Indian corn, rice, 
hemp, flax, indigo, cotton, pot-herbs, pulse of 
every kind, and pasturage ; and the tobacco made 
here is esteemed preferable to any cultivated in 
other parts of America. Hops grow wild ; all 
kinds of European fruits arrive to great perfection, 
and no part of the known world is more favourable 
for the raising of every kind of stock. The rising 
grounds, which are clothed with grass and other 
herbs of the finest verdure, are well adapted to the 
culture of vines ; the mulberry trees arc very nu 
merous, and the winters sufficiently moderate for 
the breed of silk worms. Clay of different colours, 
fit for glass works and pottery, is found here in 
great abundance ; and also a variety of stately 
timber, fit for house and ship building, &amp;c. 

" The lands," it is "said, on the Mississippi, 
(extending e. about 20 miles, are hilly, without 



stones or sand, extremely rich, of a deep blaclc 
soil, covered thick with canes, white and black 
oak, walnut, hickory, ash, some sugar maple j 
beech, and dogwood ; that there are very few 
streams or springs of water ; that the water is not 
good, and tastes as if impregnated with sulphur; 
that the country is much infested with insects; 
that the land is high and bluff three fourths of the 
distance along the river Mississippi, and a part 
overflowed and drowned." But it is apprehended 
that this description is not perfectly just, so far as 
il applies to the scarcity and badness of the water, 
as a gentleman of respectable character, who re 
sided nine months at the Natchez, says, " The 
lands on the Mississippi are more level, and better 
watered, than is above represented ; and that the 
water is good, and the country healthy and re 
markably pleasant." 

This country was once famous for its inhabitants, 
the Natchez Indians, who, from their great num 
bers, and the improved state of society among 
them, were considered as the most, civilized In 
dians on the continent of America. Nothing now 
remains of this nation but their name, by which 
their country continues to be called. The dis 
trict of the Natchez, as well as all along the e. 
bank of the Mississippi to the river Ibberville, was 
settling very fast by emigrations from the n. states, 
till the capture of the British troops on the Mis 
sissippi, 1779, put an entire stop to it. 

From fort Rosnilie to the Petit Goufre is 31 1 
miles. There is a firm rock on the e. side of the 
Mississippi for near a mile, which seems to be of 
the nature of lime-stone : the land near the river 
is much broken and very high, with a good soil, 
and several plantations on it. From the Petit 
(roufre to Stoncy river, is four miles and a half: 
from the mouth to what is called the Fork of this 
river, is computed to be 21 miles. In this dis 
tance there are several quarries of stone, and the 
land has a clay soil, with gravel on the surface of 
the ground. On the n. side of this river, the land 
in general is low and rich ; that on the s. side is 
much higher, but broken into hills and vales ; but 
here the low lands are not often overflowed ; both 
sides are shaded with a variety of useful timber. 
At the fork, the river parts almost at right angles, 
and the lands between and on each side of them 
are said to be clay and marl soil, not so uneven 
ns the lands on this river lower down. From 
Sloney river to Lousa Chitto, or Big Black river, 
is 10 miles : this river, at the mouth, is about 30 
yards wide, but within, from 30 to 50 yards, and 
is said to be navigable for canoes 30 or 40 leagues :] 



GEORGIA. 



141 



[about a mile and a half up this river, the high lands 
arc close on the right, and arc much broken : a mile 
and u half further, the high lands appear again 
on the right, where there are several springs of 
water, but none as yet have been discovered on 
the left. At about eight miles further, the high 
lands are near the river, on the left, and appear 
to be the same range that comes from the Yazoo 
cliffs: at six .miles further, the high lands are 
jie.-ir the river, on both sides, and continue (or two 
or three miles, but broken and full of springs of 
water. This land on the left was chosen by Ge 
neral Putnam, Captain Enos, Mr. Lyman, and 
other New England adventurers, as a proper 
p ace for a town ; and by order of the governor 
arid council of West Florida, in 1773, it was re- 
herved lor. the capital. The country round is 
very fit lor settlements. For four or five miles 
above this place, on both sides of the river, the 
land is rich, and not so much drowned, not so 
uneven, as some parts lower down. About six 
miles and a half further, there is a rapid water, 
stones and gravel bottom, 160 yards in length ; 
and in one place a firm rock almost across the 
river, and as much of it bare, when the water is at 
a moderate height, as confines the stream to nearly 
20 feet ; and the channel is about four feet deep. 

From the Lousa Chitto to the Yazoo cliffs, is 
40 miles. From this cliff the high lands lie n. e. 
and s. s. e. bearing off from the river, full of cane 
and rich soil, even on the very highest ridges : 
just at the s. end of the cliffs, the bank is low, where 
the water of the Mississippi, when high, flows back 
and runs between the bank and high land, which 
ranges nearly n. and 5. s. e, to the Lousa Chitto, 
occasioning much wet ground, cypress swamp, 
and stagnant ponds. From the cliffs, is seven 
miles and a half to the river Yazoo ; the mouth of 
this river is upwards of 100 yards in width, and 
was found by Mr. Gaul to be in lat. 32 37 , and 
by Mr. Purcell in 32 28 n. The water of the 
Mississippi, when the river is high, runs up the 
Yazoo several miles, and empties itself again by" a 
number of channels, which direct their course 
across the country, and fall in above the Walnut 
hills. The Yazoo runs from the n. e. and glides 
through a healthy, fertile, and pleasant country, 
greatly resembling that about the Natchez, parti 
cularly in the luxuriancy and diversity of its soil, 
variety of timber, temperature of climate, and de 
lightful situation : it is remarkably well watered 
by springs and brooks ; many of the latter afford 
convenient seats for mills. Further up this river 
the canes are less frequent, and smaller in size, and 
at the distance of 20 miles there are scarcely any. 



Here the country is drar of .underwootli, &amp;lt;vnd well 
watered, and the soil very rich, which: continues 
to the Chactaw and Chickasaw towns, on the c. 
and n. w. branches of Yazoo m*er: these branches 
unite 50 miles from the Mississippi, following the 
course of the river; the navigation to their junc 
tion, commonly called the Fork, is practicable 
with very large boats in the spring season, and 
with smaller ones a considerable way further, with 
the interruption of but one fall, where they are 
obliged to make a short portage, 20 miles up the 
)/. w. branch, and 70 miles from the Mississippi. 
The country in which the Chactaw and Chicka 
saw towns are situated, is said to be as healthy as 
any part of the continent, the natives scarcely ever 
being sick : such of them as frequent the Missis 
sippi, leave its banks as the summer approaches, 
lest (hey might partake of the fevers that some 
times visit the low swampy lands bordering upon 
that river. Wheat, it is said, yields better at the 
Yazoo than at the Natchez, owing probably to its 
more n. situation. One very considerable advan 
tage will attend the settlers on the river Yazoo, 
which those at Natchez will be deprived of, with 
out going to a great expence; that is, the build 
ing with stone ; there being great plenty near the 
Yazoo, but none having yet been discovered nearer 
to the Natchez than the Petit Goufre, or Littkr 
Whirlpool, a distance of about 31 miles : between 
this place and the Balize, there is not a stone to be 
seen any where near the river. The quantity of 
good land on (he Mississippi and its branches, 
from the bay of Mexico to the river Ohio, a 
distance of nearly 1000 miles, is vastly great, and 
the conveniences attending it are equally so : we 
may likewise esteem that in the neighbourhood of 
the Natchez, and of the river Yazoo, the flower of 
it all. 

About a mile and a half up the Yazoo river, 
on the??, side, there is a large creek, which com 
municates with the Mississippi above the river St. 
Francis, about 100 leagues higher up, by the 
course of the river. It passes through several lakes 
by the way. At the distance of 12 miles from the 
mouth of the river Yazoo, on the s. side, are (he 
Yazoo hills. There is a cliff of solid rock at the 
landing place, on which are a variety of broken 
pieces of sea-shells, and some entire. Four miles 
further up, is the place called the Ball Ground, 
near which a church, fort St. Peter, and a French 
settlement, formerly stood : they were destroyed by 
the Yazoo Indians in 1729. That nation is now 
entirely extinct. Jlutchins. 

From about 20 miles e. of the Mississippi. f 
Half-way or Pearl river, the distance of about 60] 



142 



GEORGIA. 



[miles, (some say less), " is a fine level country, very 
fertile, and better watered than nearer the Missis 
sippi. There is some mixture of sand with loam, 
the timber the same, with the addition of black 
jack, and post-oak. This tract is interspersed 
with what the French call prairies or savannas, 
which are extensive intervals of 1000 and 2000 
acres of excellent land, of a deep black soil, free 
of all timber and trees: it is this kind of land 
which the Indians cultivate. From the Missis 
sippi to this river, there are no Indians. To a 
tract of this country, extending along the Misis- 
sippi from the 31st degree of latitude to the Ya- 
zoo river, at the s. end, 30 miles wide, and nar 
rowing as you proceed n. to the width of 15 miles, 
the Indian title has been extinguished. It was at 
first purchased by the English ; but they not hav 
ing completed the payment for it, before it fell into 
the hands of the Spaniards, they (the Spaniards) 
in the year 1792 paid the balance. At Walnut 
hills, the Spaniards have a fort, which, according 
to the treaty, is to be given up (if not already done) 
to the United States. To the country n. of the 
Yazoo, the Indian title is not yet extinguished. 
About one half of the s. part, a distance of about 
50 miles up the Yazoo, is owned by theChactaws, 
the n. half by the Chickasaws." The gentleman 
who gives the above information, and who was in 
this country in the year 1792, says, " that the 
Yazoo is about 90 yards wide, is boatable 100 
miles ; that he crossed the country by different 
routes, three or four times from the Mississippi to 
the Tombigbee ; passed over tiie Yazoo several 
times, went up and down the river on the shore ; 
and says that the lands to the c. of the Yazoo, 
(the distance of about 100 miles), are very excel 
lent," 

Pearl river is about 40 yards wide : a branch of 
it, passing e. of the Natchez and nearest, in Coxe s 
map, bears the name of Buffaloe river. On the e. 
side of Pearl river, commence the Chactaw settle 
ments, and extend thick to the Chickasaw Hay 
river ; thence about 40 miles e. the settlements 
are sparse, and extend near to the Tombigbee. This 
is a numerous nation, containing about 3000 
hunters, a peaceable and friendly people. The 
country inhabited by these Indians is noted in 
Coxe s map to be " poor and barren land, cover 
ed generally with long-leafed pine." Other ac 
counts represent it as much the same as that be 
tween the Mississippi and Pearl rivers, with the 
addition of some pine land, and better watered. 
The streams on which the Chactaws are settled, 
as laid down on Coxe s map, are, proceeding 
from w. to e. the Homachitta, (called by Purcell 



Hostaphatcha), Chactaw, and Souhnwtee, which 
Unite ; and the main stream retains the name of 
Homachitta till it empties into the gulf of Mexico. 
This is probably the same river that Hutchius calls 
PASCAGOULA, which see. The head branches of 
this river spread extensively through the n. part 
of this territory, chiefly w. of the Chactaw nation. 
White or Bluffrivcr, on Coxe s map, appears to 
rise in about iat. 33 n. takes a course to the e. of 
the Chactaws, and empties into the Tombigbee, 
some distance below the head of the tide water, 
and is laid down as about the size of Pearl river. 

From the compact settlements of the Chactaws 
e. to the w. branches of the Tombigbee, the land 
is tolerably good ; the timber generally oak and 
pine, with some hickory, well watered and level. 
Of this kind is the country a distance of about 40 
miles a\ of the w. branches of the Tombigbee ; 
thence to the Tombigbee, the land is more uneven, 
interspersed with large savannas, and the whole 
generally good land, and pretty well watered ; the 
water, however, has a limy taste : the natural 
growth much the same as on the Mississippi. The 
intervale, or, as they call it in this country, the 
Bottom Lands, are generally about a mile wide 
on the river, extremely rich, and thickly over 
grown with canes. This general description will 
apply to tli; whole tract belonging to the 
" Georgia Mississippi Company." Mr. Coxe, 
on his map, remarks, that " on the Tombigbee 
and Alabama rivers there are bodies of fine rich 
land, but low down, towards Mobile bay, un 
healthy." 

We have now arrived c. to the Mobile, the 
principal river in this territory. " On the bar at 
the entrance of the bny of Mobile, there is only 
about 15 or 16 feet water; two-thirds of the way 
through the bay, towards the town of Mobile, 
there is from two to throe fathoms ; and the deep 
est water to be depended on in the upper part of 
the bay is only 10 or 12 feet, and in many places 
not so much : large vessels cannot go within seven 
miles of the town." Hutching. " This bay is 
about 30 miles long, and from 10 to 12 wide; the 
tide flows 60 or 70 miles above this bay, and is so 
far navigable for sea vessels : thence 150 or 200 miles 
n. is good boat navigation, smooth water, generally 
100 to 150 yards wide, and eight to ten feet deep." 
MS. Minutes from Mr. Perry. The bay of 
Mobile terminates a little to the n. e. of the town, 
in a number of marshes and lagoons, which sub 
ject the people to fevers and agues in the hot 
season. The river Mobile, as you ascend it, di 
vides into two principal branches, about 40 miles 
above the town, one of which, called the Tansaw,] 



G E O R G I A. 



[falls into the e. part of the bay ; the other empties 
itself close by the town, where it has a bar of .seven 
feet ; but there is a branch a little to the e. of this, 
called Spanish river, where there is a channel of 
nine or ten feet, when the water is high ; but this 
joins Mobile river about two leagues above the 
town. Two or three leagues above the Tan saw 
branch, the Alabama river falls into Mobile river, 
after running from the rt. e. a course of about ISO 
miles ; that is, from Alabama fort, situated at the 
confluence of the Coosa and Talipoosee, both 
very considerable rivers ; on which and their 
branches are the chief settlements of the Upper 
Creek Indians. The French fort at Alabama was 
evacuated 1763, and has not since been garrisoned. 
Above the confluence of Alabama and Mobile, the 
latter is called the Tombigbee river, from the fort 
of Tombigbee, situated on the w. side of it, about 
96 leagues above the town of Mobile. The source 
of this river is reckoned to be about 40 leagues 
higher up, in the country of the Chickasaws. 
The fort ot Tombigbee was taken possession of by 
the English, but abandoned again in 1767, by 
order of the commandant of Pensacola. The river 
is navigable for sloops and schooners about 35 
leagues above the town of Mobile : the banks, 
where low, are partly overflowed in the rainy 
seasons, which adds greatly to the soil, and 
adapts it particularly to the cultivation of rice : 
the sides of the river are covered in many places 
with large canes, so thick that they are almost im 
penetrable ; there is also plenty of remarkable 
large red and white cedar, cypress, elm, ash, 
hickory, and various kindsofoak. Several people 
have settled on this river, who find the soil to 
answer beyond expectation. The lands near the 
mouth of the Mobile river are generally low : as 
you proceed upwards the land grows higher, and 
may with propriety be divided into three stages : 
First, low rice lands, on or near the banks of the 
river, of a most excellent quality ; secondly, what 
are called by the people of the country, second 
low lands, or level flat cane lands, about four or 
five feet higher than the low rice lands; arid, 
thirdly, the high upland or open country. The 
first, or low lands, extend about an half or three 
quarters of a mile from the river, and may almost 
every where be easily drained and turned into 
most excellent rice fields, and are capable of being 
laid underwater at almost all seasons of the year : 
they are a deep black mud or slime, which have in 
succession of time been accumulated or formed by 
the overflowing of the river. The second low 
grounds being in general formed by a regular 
rising of about four or five feet higher than the 



low lands, appear to have been originally the edge 
of the river. The second class or kind of land is 
in general extremely rich, and covered with large 
timber and thick strong canes, extending in width 
upon an average three quarters of a mile, and in 
general a perfect level. It is excellent for all kinds 
of grain, and well calculated for the culture of in 
digo, hemp, flax, or tobacco. At the extremity of 
these second grounds, you come to what is called 
the high or uplands, which is covered with pine, 
oak, and hickory, and other kinds of large timber. 
The soil is of a good quality, but much inferior to 
the second or low land. It answers well for raising 
Indian corn, potatoes, and every thing else that de 
lights in a dry soil. Further out, in the country 
again, on the w. side of this river, you come to -a 
pine barren, with extensive reed swamps and na 
tural meadows or savannas, which afford excellent 
ranges for innumerable herds of cattle. On the t. 
of the river Mobile, towards the river Alabama, is 
one entire extended rich cane country, not inferior, 
perhaps, to any in America. Whenever portages 
arc made between the Mobile and Tennessee river, 
or their branches, which are probably but a few 
miles apart, the Mobile will be the first river for 
commerce, the Mississippi exccpted, in this part 
of the world, as it affords the shortest and most di 
rect communication to the sea. Hutchins. 

In addition to, and in confirmation of, the above 
account of Captain Hutchins, several other gentle 
men of intelligence who have been in this country, 
say that the Tornbigbee is navigable for sea vessels 
60 miles into the state of Georgia ; others, that it is 
navigable in boats of 20 tons up to the junction of 
Ten and Twenty Mile creek. The Alabama and 
Coosa are navigable for boats of 40 tons, as high 
as the big shoals of Coosa river. The principal 
rivers which meander through this tract of country, 
are Seprey s and Cane Brake rivers, both which 
fall into the Tombigbee, and arc navigable for boats 
as high as the 33d deg. of latitude ; and the Caw- 
hawbon river, which falls into Alabama river be 
low the junction of Coosa and Oakfuskee, are boat- 
able as far n. as the rivers last mentioned. The 
soil on the e. $ide of Tombigbee is of a reddish 
cast, producing naturally oak, hickory, arid abun 
dance of very high grass. The country appears 
well calculated for the culture of wheat, corn, rye, 
oats, and barley. The bottoms or intervales on the 
rivers are not subject to inundations, and are ex 
ceedingly rich. The country is well watered with 
good wholesome water. Further n. the country 
becomes uneven and somewhat hilly, that part par 
ticularly which divides the waters of Tombigbee 
fromTennessee river ; but as you descend to a lower] 



J44 



GEORGIA. 



[latitude, the country is more level ; and down 
about the mouth of Cane Brake river, and thence 
across to the Alabama, is almost one entire cane 
brake. 

" The ridge which divides the Tombigbee and 
Alabama rivers is stony, and the soil inferior to 
that on the rivers; of this description also is the 
country lying between the Cawhawbon and Ala 
bama rivers; but the bottom lands on the water 
courses are exceedingly rich. The country is 
pleasant and healthy, being generally overgrown 
with high grass,, well calculated for farming, parti 
cularly for raising cattle. There are many exten 
sive and rich bottoms of cane land on the Alabama. 
The river which falls into the Tombigbee next 
above S- prey s river, has much rich land on its 
banks, and is boatable some distance in small boats, 
and spreads into many branches, through a plea 
sant, healthy, and well-watered country." Cove s 
MS. Letter. As you advance e. of the Alabama, 
in the territory we are describing, you come first 
to the Escambia river, and then to the Chatta 
Hatch a or Pea river, which Captain Hutch ins 
thus describes : * The river Escambia is the most 
considerable that falls into the bay of Pcnsacola. 
(See ESCAMBIA River.) The Chatta Ilatcha or Pea 
river, which also heads in the Georgia Western 
Territory, empties from the n.e. into Rose bay, 
which is 30 miles long and from four to six broad. 
The bar at the entrance into (he bay has only seven 
or eight feet water at deepest ; but after crossing 
the bar, has 16 or 17 feet. The mouths of the 
river (for almost all the s. rivers have several 
mouths) are so shoal, that only a small boat or 
canoe can pass them." Mr. Hutciiins ascended this 
river about 7.5 miles, and found that its banks very 
much resembled those of Escambia. Further e. 
are the Appalachicola, Flint, and Alabaha rivers, 
which are described under their respective heads. 

The n. parts of this territory are watered by the 
great bend of the Tennessee, and its tributary 
streams. This noble river bends s. as far as lat. 
34 15 , according to Captain Mutchins map, and 
divides, into nearly equal parts, the purchase of 
the Tennessee co up -y. JS orth of the Tennessee, 
in this purchase, there is not an Indian inhabitant. 
From the s. the Tennessee, in its course through 
Georgia, receives, besides smaller streams, the 
Hiwassee, Chiccamauga, and O&amp;lt; cochappo or Bear 
Creek, which .ire described under their respective 
heads. Travellers speak of the lands on the bend 
of the Tennessee in terms of the highest commen 
dation. 

Of the territory described above, the state of 
Georgia, by act of their legislature, passed Janu 



ary 7, 1795, sold about 22,000,000 of acres to four 
different companies, whose names, and the limits 
of their respective purchases, as defined by the 
act, follow : 

1. " All that tract or parcel of land, including 
islands, beginning on Mobile bay, where the lat. 
3l /&amp;gt;. of the equator intersects the same, running 
thence up the said bay to the mouth of the lake 
Tensaw ; thence up the said lake Tensaw to the 
Alabama river, including Cnrreys and all other 
islands therein; thence up the said river Alabama 
to the junction of the Coosa and Oakfuskee rivers : 
thence up the Coosa river, above the Big shoals, 
to where it intersects the lat. of 34 n. of the equa 
tor ; thence a due x\ course to the Mississippi 
river; thence down the middle of the said 
river to the latitude of 32 40 ; thence a due c. 
course to the Dan or Tombigbee river ; thence 
down the middle of the said river to its junction 
with the Alabama river ; thence down the middle 
of the said river to Mobile bay ; thence down the 
said Mobile bay to the place of beginning, shall be 
.sold unto i lames Gunn, Matthew M Aliister, and 
George Walker, and their associates, called the 
Georgia Company." 

2. " AH that tract of country, including islands, 
within the following boundaries, viz. beginning on 
the river Mississippi, at 31 18 . lat. ; thence a 
due e. course to the middle of Dan or Tombigbee 
river; thence up the middle of the said river (o 
n. hit. 32 40 ; thence a due zv. course along the 
Georgia Company line to the river Mississippi; 
thence down the middle of the same to the place 
of beginning; shall be sold to Nicholas Long-, 
Thomas Glasscock, Ambrose Gordon, and Tho 
mas Cu minings, and their associates, called the 
Georgia Mississippi Company. 1 

3. " All that tract of country, including 1 islands, 
within the following boundaries, viz. beginning nt 
the Mississippi river, where the . boundary line 
of the state strikes the same ; thence along Che Said 
n. boundary line, due e. to the Tennessee river; 
thence along the said Tennessee river -to the mouth 
of Bear creek ; thence up Bear creek to where the 
parall-. I of latitude 25 British statute miles s. of the 
n. boundary line of the state intersects the same ; 
thence along the lust-mentioned parallel of latitude, 
across Tombigbee or Twenty Mils creek, due a?. 
to the Mississippi river; thence up the rniddje of 
the said river to the beginning, shall be sold to 
John B. Scott, John C /Nightingale, and Wade 
Hampton, called the Upper Mississippi Company." 

4. " All that tract of land, including islands, 
within the follow ing boundaries, viz. beginning at 
the mouth of Bear creek, on the s. side of Ten-J 



G E O 

[nessce river ; thence up the said creek to the most 
s. source thereof; thence due s. to lat. 34 10 n. ; 
thence due e. 120 miles ; thence a due n. course, 
to the Great Tennessee river; thence up the middle 
of the said river to the n. boundary line of the 
state ; thence a due w. course along the said line 
to where it intersects the Great Tennessee river, 
below the Muscle shoals ; thence up the said river 
to the place of beginning, shall be sold to Zacha- 
riah Cox, Mathias Maher, and their associates, 
called the Tennessee Company." 

The same law enacts also, " That all lands 
lying w. and s. of the e. boundary of the several 
companies purchases, and not included therein, 
estimated at one-fourth of the whole lands lying 
w. and s. of the e. boundary of the said purchases, 
and supposed to contain 7,250,000 acres, shall be, 
and the same is hereby, declared to be reserved and 
set apart to, and for the use and benefit of this 
state, to be granted out, or otherwise disposed of, 
as future legislatures may direct." Act of Georgia 
Legislature, of Jan. 7th, 1795. 

The purchase-money, amounting to 500,000 
dollars, was duly paid by the respective compa 
nies into the state treasury of Georgia, agreeably 
to the terms of the act. This land was soon after 
sold by the original companies to various gentle 
men, principally in the middle and e. states. 
The sale of this territory excited a warm and vio 
lent opposition in Georgia. The act authorising 
this sale was, by certain leading men in the state, 
declared to be " an usurped act, repugnant to the 
principles of the federal constitution, and of the 
constitution of Georgia ; opposed to the good of 
the state, and obtained by fraud, atrocious specu 
lation, corruption, and collusion." In conse 
quence of these representations, a determination 
was formed by a powerful party, to set aside and 
annul at the succeeding session of the legislature 
this offensive, " usurped act." Efforts were ac 
cordingly made, and with success, to obtain a le 
gislature suited to the accomplishment of their de 
signs. Accordingly, on the 13th of February 
1796, an act was passed declaring the above- 
mentioned " usurped act" null and void : and all 
the grants, rights, and claims arising therefrom, of 
no validity or effect; and that the said territory 
was the sole property of the state." To complete 
the utter annihilation of this odious act, as far as 
possible, the legislature ordered, that, in their pre 
sence, and that of the public officers of the state, 
the several records, documents, and deeds, in the 
several public offices, should be " expunged from 
the faces and indexes of the books of record of the 
state ; and the enrolled law, or usurped act, pub- 

VOL. II. 



G E R 



145 



licly burnt." AH this was accomplished three 
days after the passing of the act. These unpre 
cedented proceedings were attended and followed 
with most disagreeable and tumultuary effects. 
The original purchasers of these lands, the then 
holders, and all those who had been intermediately 
concerned, who had by this time become a nume 
rous and respectable body, scattered through the 
United States, were, for the moment, thrown into 
an unpleasant dilemma, and for a time this busi 
ness was the general topic of conversation. The 
title to the lands purchased by the above-named 
companies, has been still further embarrassed by a 
claim brought forward in behalf of the United 
States.] 

[GEORGIA, a township in Franklin county, Ver 
mont, contains 340 inhabitants. It is situated on 
lake Champlain, opposite to the n. end of South 
Hero island, and joins Milton on the s. and St. 
Alban s on the n. La Moille river crosses the ex 
tremity of the s. e. corner of this township.] 

[GEORGIA, SOUTHERN, a cluster of barren 
islands, in the S. sea, and e. of the coast of Tierra 
del Fuego; about lat. 54 35 s. and long. 36 
30 ze. One of them is between 50 and 60 leagues 
in length.] 

[GJEORGIANA, the name originally given hi 
the charter to a tract of country in the province 
of Maine.] 

GEORGIAS, or GEORCEAV, some islands of 
the former province and colony. They are nume 
rous, and situate near the coast for near i&amp;lt;s whole 
extent, to the n. of the bay of St. Augustin of 
Florida. 

[GERARDSTOWN, a neat little town, situ 
ated in Berkley county, Virginia, containing about 
30 or 40 houses. Ten miles from Martinsburg, and 
254 from Philadelphia.] 

GERARQUIA, a river of the province and go 
vernment of Darien in the kingdom of Tierra 
Firme. It rises in the mountains on the e. part, 
runs n, e. and enters the pool of Tarena. 

GEREQUARO, S. MIGUEL T&amp;gt;E, a settlement 
and head settlement of the alcaldia mayor of Ze- 
laya, in the province and bishopric of Mechoacan, 
and kingdom of Nueva Espana. It contains 60 
families of Indians, and 42 of Spaniards, Musteea, 
and Mulattoes, in some neighbouring ranches, 
where they cultivate seeds, and breed caitle of the 
larger kind. Here is also a convent of monks of 
the order of St. Augustin. It is three leagues to 
the s. of its capital. 

GER11SGA, Point of the, an extremity of the 
n. coast and w. head of the island of St. Domingo, 
in the territory and part possessed by the French. 



146 



It is between the cape of Dona Maria and the Trou 
de I Enfrr. 

G KIIINOMAS. See GITARIMIMAS. 
GERMAN, S. a town of the island of S. Juan 
of Puertorico ; situate near the za. coast, on the 
shore of the river Guanagive. It is also called 
Guadianilla ; and in its district is a cordillera of 
mountains, or some sierras, which run through the 
middle of the island from e. to w. ; and in these is 
found the tree called Tabernacle, which produces 
a white resin, used instead of pitch for careening 
vessels, and for burning instead of oil ; as also for 
curing sores. It is 33 leagues to the s. zo. of the 
capital. 

G BUM A N 7 , S. a settlement of the island of Guada- 
Inpe ; situate in the isthmus which divides the two 
bavs of the Cul de Sac Grand and the Cul de Sac 
Petit. 

[GERMAN, a township in Fayette county, Penn 
sylvania.] 

[GERMAN FLATS, the chief township of Herke- 
mer county, taken from that of Montgomery, in 
New York. By the census of 1790, it contained 
1307 inhabitants, including 20 slaves; by the state 
census of J796, 4194 inhabitants, of whom 684 are 
electors. It lies on the s. side of Mohawk river, 
opposite Herkemer. It is 24 miles e. of Whites- 
town, and 60 w. of Scheneclady.] 

[GERMANTOWN, New York, in Columbia 
county, containing 516 inhabitants. In 1796, it 
had 75 qualified voters.] 

[GERMANTOWN, in Philadelphia county, Penn 
sylvania, is situated seven miles n. of Philadelphia 
city, and was esteemed the second town in the 
county, until several inland towns eclipsed it, by 
superior establishments and number of inhabitants. 
It is a corporation, consisting chiefly of high and 
low Dutch, and contains about 250 houses, chiefly 
of stone, some of which are large, elegant, and com 
modious ; built chiefly on one street, about two 
miles in length. The public buildings are a Ger 
man, Calvinist, arid Lutheran church, a Friends 
meeting-house, and an academy. Knit stockings, 
of cotton, thread, and worsted, are manufactured 
here by individuals to a considerable extent, and of 
an excellent quality. It is an ancient town, plea 
santly situated, and by its vicinity to the metro 
polis, well adapted for manufactures. Here is the 
principal congregation of the Mennonists, and the 
mother of that sect in America. They derive their 
name from Mcnno Simon, a learned man of Wit- 
mars, in Germany, one of the reformers, born in 
1505. Some of his followers came into Pennsyl 
vania from New York in 1692. There are about 
4000 of them in the state. They do not, like the 



G E R 

Tunkers, believe in general salvation ; yet, like 
them, they will neither swear nor fight, nor bear 
any civil office, nor go to law, nor take interest for 
money, though many break that rule. They use 
great plainness in their dress, &amp;c. and practise 
many of the rites of the primitive Christian church. 
This town is also rendered famous by the battle 
fought in it on the 4th of October 1777.] 

[GERMANTOWN, a post-town, and the capital 
of Stokes county, N. Carolina. It is situated near 
the Town fork of Dan river, and contains a court 
house, gaol, and about 30 houses. It is 90 miles 
n. w. from Fayetteville, 85 . by w. from Raleigh, 
and 109 n. from Charlestown.] 

[GERMAKTOWN, the chief town of Hyde county, 
in Newbern district, N. Carolina.] 

[GERMANY, a township in York county, 
Pennsylvanin.] 

GERONIMO, S. a settlement of the province 
and con egim/ento of Andahnailas in Peru, in the 
vicinity of which is a lake of JO leagues in circum 
ference, running out at a small creek, by which 
the settlement is supplied with water. 

GERON!MO,S. another settlement of the alcaldia 
mayor of Octupan in Nueva Espafia. 

GERONIMO, S. another, of the head settlement 
and akaJdia mayor of Tezcoco in the same king, 
dom, united to that of NuesfraSenora de la Purifi- 
cacion. It contains 75 families of Indians. 

GERONIMO, S. another, of the head settlement 
and alcaldia mayor ofToluca. It contains 61 fa 
milies of Indians, and is at a small distance to the 
w. of its capital. 

GERONIMO, S. another, of the head settlement 
of Nopaluca, and alcaldia mayor of Tepeaca. It 
contains 18 families of Indians, who live by pre 
paring coal, cutting wood for fuel, beams, and 
broad planks, in the sierra, and in cultivating 18 
estates, which are in the district. It is three 
quarters of a league from its head settlement. 

GE RON i MO, S. another, of the head settlement 
ofTeutalpan, and alcaldia mayor of Zacatlan, in 
Nueva Espana. It is one league distant from 
Huehuctlan, to the curacy of which it belongs. 

GERONIMO, S. another, of the head settlement 
and alcaldia mayor of Tecali. It contains 22 fa 
milies of Indians. 

GERONIMO, S. another, of the head settlement 
and alcaldia mayor of Cholula. It contains 42 fa 
milies of Indians, and is a league and an half to 
the e. of its capital. 

GERONIMO, S. another, of the head settlement 
and alcaldia mayor of Cuiceo; situate on the shore 
of the lake of this name. It contains 60 families 
of Indians, and 42 of Spaniards, Mustccs, and 



GET 

Mulattoes, who dwell in some neighbouring ran 
ches, where there are some seed-lands, and breeds 
of large cattle ; also a convent of the religious 
order of St. Augustin. It is three leagues to the 
s. of its capital. 

GERONIMO, S. another, of the head settlement 
of Cirandiro, and alcaJdia mayor of Guimeo. It 
contains 29 families of Indians. 

GEUONIMO, S. another, of the head settlement 
of Iluehudlan, and alcaldia mayor of Cuicatlan ; 
annexed to the curacy of the former. It is of a 
cold and moist temperature, contains 82 families 
of Indians, and lies three leagues to the 5. of its 
head settlement. 

GERO.VIMO, S. another, a small settlement of 
the head settlement of the district and alcaldia 
mm/or of Tonala. 

GERONIMO, S. another, of the province and 
corregimiento of Xauja in Peru. 

GEIIONIMO, S. another, of the missions that are 
held by the religious order of S. Francisco, in the 
province of Taraumara, and kingdom of Nueva 
Vizcaya. It is 17 leagues from the town of S. Fe 
lipe dc Chiguagua. 

GERONIMO, S. another of the province and go 
vernment of Buenos Ayres ; situate on the w. bank 
of the river Parana, to the s. of the city of Santa 
Fe. It is about six miles n. w. of San Lucia, in 
lat. 29 10 20" s. and long. 59 23 46" w. 

GERONIMO, S. another, with the surname of 
Cotondo, in the same province and government as 
the former; situate on the shore of the river La 
Plata, opposite the town of Santa Lucia. 

GERONIMO, S. a fort which serves as a garrison, 
in the province and government of Paraguay. 

GERONIMO, S. a bay on the n. coast of the 
straits of Magellan, between the cape Quade and 
the bay of San Joseph. 

GERONIMO, S. a cape or point of land on the 
same coast as the former bay ; and it is one of 
those which form the same, and from whence the 
said bay takes its name. 

[GERRISH Island, a small isle near cape Ned- 
dock, close to the mainland of the district of 
Maine.] 

[GERRY, a township in Worcester county, 
Massachusetts. It was incorporated in 1786, and 
contains 14,000 acres of land, on which are 740 
inhabitants. It is 30 miles n.w. of Worcester, 
and 65 n. rc&amp;gt;. by w. of Boston.] 

[GETTYSBUHGII, n small town in York 
county, Pennsylvania ; situated at the head of 
Hock creek, one of the head waters of the Mono- 
:oey, and contains about SO houses. It is seven 



G I G 



147 



miles n. of the Maryland line, eight miles from 
Millerstown, 12 from Abbotstown, 33 from Wil- 
liamsport in Maryland, and 93 w. by s. of Phila 
delphia.] 

[GIBBAWAYS, an Indian tribe residing in 
Upper Canada, on the e. side of Detroit river, op 
posite to fort Gibraltar.] 

GIBBS, a settlement of the island of Barbadoes, 
in the district of the parish of San Joseph ; situate 
on the c. coast. There are other settlements of 
the same name in this island ; one is of the afore 
said parish, on the w. coast, and another is in the *. 
part. 

GIB1TAS, a river of the province and cnrre- 
gimiento of Pataz in Peru. It runs e. forming a 
curve, and enters the Guallaga. 

GIBRALTAR, S. ANTONIO DE, a city of the 
government of Merida, in the province of Vene 
zuela, and Nnevo Reynode Granada; founded bj 
Gonzalo de Pina Liduena, in 1552 ; when, hav 
ing been depopulated, it was shortly after rebuilt 
by Juan de Chazarreta. It stands upon the shore 
of the lake Maracaibo, is of a very hot tempera 
ture ; but its territory is fertile, and abounds in 
cacao and other fruits. It has a convent of the re 
ligious order of S. Augustin ; and was formerly 
notorious and rich, from its great commerce in 
cacao, this article being in high request by the mer 
chants of Maracaibo, Merida, Coro, and other 
parts: but the continual invasions of the infidel 
Motilones Indians, and who destroyed it in 1600, 
have reduced it to a paltry and mean hamlet. The 
French pirate Lolonois sacked and destroyed it in 
1666, and John Morgan for the third time, in 
1669. It is in lat. 9 1 1 w. Long. 70 37 w. 

G1DORE, a small river of Nova Scotia or Aca- 
dia, which runs s. and enters the sea in the port of 
its name. 

GIDORE. This port is in the s. coast, and gives 
its name to 

GIDORE, a cape of the same coast, and one of 
those which form the same. 

G1GANTES, Bay of the, in the coast of the 
Patagones, the straits of Magellan. It was disco 
vered by Pedro Sarmiento in J5SO, who gave it 
this name from having seen there, for the first time, 
the Patagonian giants; the existence of whom, 
however, has been a subject of much controversy 
by those who doubted the relation ot this admiral, 
notwithstanding it was Confirmed by the subse 
quent report of the English admiral Byron, in 
1764, whose journal was translated by the illus 
trious Don Casimiro de Ortega, director of the 
royal botanical garden. At the back of this bay 

- 



148 



GIL 



dwell some Indians, -who are well formed, and who 
traverse the strait in canoes made of the bark of 
trees. 

GIL, S. a town of the corregimiento of Tunja 
in the Nuevo Key no de Granada, called also Santa 
Cruz ; founded in 1690; is of a mild and healthy 
temperature, abounding in canes, plantains, yucas^ 
tobacco, cotton, and many fruits. Its natives, 
who amount to 400 housekeepers, bear a fair cha 
racter throughout the kingdom, are laborious and 
docile, and consequently much esteemed. They 
maintain a great commerce in cotton manufactures, 
bed-quilts, and tobacco. It is 140 miles n. by e. 
of Santa Fe, between the settlement of Socorro 
and the city of Giron, from which it is eight 
leagues distant. 

GIL, S. a small river of the province and go 
vernment of Buenos Ayres. It runs w. and enters 
the Negro before this enters the Paraguay. 

Gn&amp;gt;, S. a port of the province and government 
of Honduras in the kingdom of Guatemala, e. of 
the bay of Truxillo. 

GIL, S. a small isle of the N. sea, near the island 
Tobago, n. of the same. 

G1LA, a large and abundant river of the pro 
vince and government of Sonora in the kingdom 
of Nuevo Mexico. It runs e. and unites itself 
with the grand river of the N. or Colorado, to en 
ter the gulf of California, or Mar Roxo de 
Cortes. 

[GILL, a new township in Hampshire county, 
Massachusetts, on the w. bank of Connecticut 
river, a little below the mouth of Miller s river, 
on the opposite side, and named after his Honour 
Moses Gill, lieutenant-governor of Massachusetts.] 

GJLLES, Islands of the S. in lake Superior, 
near the e. coast, in New France or Canada. 

GILLES, S. a point of land in the e. coast of 
the island of Newfoundland, between the capes of 
Bona vista and Lorian. 

[GIL LORI, an island on the coast of \V. Flo- 
riua, is divided from Dauphin island by a narrow 
channel, through which a boat may pass with some 
difficulty ; and between Gillori and the mainland, 
on the w. side of Mobile bay, thrre is a chain of 
small islands and oyster shells, through which is a 
passage of four feet, called Passe au Heron.] 

[G1LMANTOWN, a township in Stafford 
county, New Hampshire, s. w. of lake Winni* 
piseogee, and 37 miles n. w. of Portsmouth. It 
was incorporated in J727, and contained 775 in 
habitants in 1775; and in 1790, 2613.] 

[GILSON, a township in Cheshire county, 
New Hampshire, containing 298 inhabitants. It 



G L A 

is situated on the e. side of Ashuelot river, and 
joins Keene on the s.] 

GINGER, an island of the N. sea, one of the 
Small Virgin isles ; situate between the rtound 
rock on the n. and Copper island on the s, the 
which form the channel called Del Rey. In 
long. f)l 30 30" w. Lat. 18 24 30" n. 

GIPARANA, a large river of the province and 
country of Las Amazonas. It runs n. and turn 
ing its course n. w. enters the Madera, between 
those of Jacore and Maxis. 

GIRAHARAS, a nation of barbarous Indians, 
of the province and government of Venezuela in 
the Nuevo Reyno de Granada; discovered by 
Diego Martinez, in 1536, who had a battle with 
them, in which he was victorious. They are at 
present much reduced. 

GIRANTUNGA, a settlement of the province 
and captainship of Para in Brazil ; situate on the 
sea-coast, not far from the city of Carete. 

GIRAUMONT, Sound of, a bayofthew.ro. 
coast of the island Martinique, between the bay of 
Sound Capot and cape Enrage. 

GIRICAN, a settlement of the missions that 
were held by the regulars of the company of Je 
suits, in the province of Los Llanos of the Nuevo 
Reyno de Granada ; being at present under 
the charge of the religious order of San Fran 
cisco. 

GIRON, SAN JUAN, a city, the capital of the 
government and district of its name, in the pro 
vince of Venezuela, and Nuevo Reyno de Granada, 
founded by Pedro Mantilla de los Rios, in 1552, 
on the e. shore of a small stream, from whence it 
takes its name. It is very poor, and at the pre 
sent day reduced to a miserable settlement. Lat. 
7 13 n. Long. 73 11 w. 

[GIRTY S Town, an Indian village in the N.W. 
territory, near the head of the navigable water or 
landing on St. Mary s river, where the Indians 
ceded, at the treaty of Greenville, a tract of two 
miles square to the United States.] 

GIST, a city of the province and colony of Vir 
ginia in N. America. 

[GLADE Road, at Bonnet s Tavern, four miles 
from Bedford, on the road from Philadelphia to 
Pittsburgh forks : the southernmost is called the 
Glade road ; the northernmost the Old or Forbe s 
road, and goes by Ligonier. These roads unite 
28 miles from Pittsburgh. In the Glades, a tract 
of country at the entrance of the Allegheny moun 
tains, they cannot raise corn, as the earth is sub 
jected to frost from September to June.] 

[GLADY Creek, u small stream which flows 



G L O 

through the e. bank of Little Miami river, in the 
N. W. territory.] 

[GLAIZE, Ac, a 5. s. w. branch of the Miami 
of the Lake, which interlocks with St. Mary s 
river. By the treaty at Greenville, the Indians 
have ceded to the United States a tract of land six 
miles square at the head of its navigable waters, 
and six miles square at its confluence with the Mi 
ami, where fort Defiance now stands.] 

GLAN Cove, or Cave, on the s. coast of the 
island Newfoundland, and near Race point or 
cape, which looks e. 

[GLASGOW, a new county in Newbern dis 
trict, N.Carolina, taken from Dobbs county. It 
is bounded n. by Edgecomb, s. by Lenoir, e. by 
Pitt, and w. by Wayne.] 

GLASSEMBURYj a city of the English, in 
the county of Hertford, of the province of Con 
necticut, one of those of New England ; situate a 
mile to the e. of the river Connecticut, lour s. e. 
of Wetherfield, and 14 n. by w. of Hadharn. 

[GLASTONBURY, a township in Ben n ing- 
ton county, Vermont, having only b 4 inhabitants. 
Jt has good intervale lands, and lies n. e. of Ben- 
ningtori, adjoining.] 

[GLASTONBURY, a handsome little tov/n in 
Hartford county, Connecticut; situated on the e. 
side of Connecticut river, opposite to Weathers- 
field, and of which it formed a part until 1690. 
In the township are two meeting- houses ; and on 
Roaring brook, and other small streams, are 17 
mills of different kinds, and one forge.] 

[GLOUCESTER House, belonging to the 
Hudson s bay company, is situated in New South 
Wales, on the n. side of the waters which form a 
communication through a chain of small lakes, 
between Winnipeg lake and Albany river. Hen 
ley house lies n. e. of this, nearer the mouth of 
Albany river, in James bay. Lat. 51 25 . 
Long. 87 10 w.] 

[GLOUCESTER, or CAPE AVN, a township in 
Essex county, Massachusetts, whose e. point forms 
the n. side of the bay of Massachusetts. Jt con 
tains 5317 inhabitants, and is divided into five pa 
rishes, and has besides a society of Universal Lsts. 
This is a post-town and port of entry. The har 
bour is very open, and accessible to large ships; 
and is one of the most considerable fishing towns 
in the commonwealth. At the harbour, properly 
so called, are fitted out annually from 60 to 70 
bankers ; and from Squam and Sandy bay, two 
small out-ports, the bay fishery is carried on with 
great spirit, and to a large amount. The exports 
for one year, ending Sept. 30, 1794, amounted in 
value to 229,613 dollars. Thatcher s island, on 



G L O 



149 



which are two lights of equal height, lies close to 
the s. e. side of the township, which is itself joined 
to the continent by a beach of sand which is very 
rarely overflowed by the water. There is a very 
fine white sand here fit for making glass. The 
harbour is defended by a battery and citadel 
erected in 1795. It is 10 miles n. e. of Salern, 
and 23 n. e. of Boston.] 

[Gi,ouci STER, the w. westernmost township, 
and the largest, in Providence county, Rhode 
Island, having Connecticut on the w. and Massa 
chusetts on the n. and contains 4025 inhabitants.] 

[GLOUCESTER County, in New Jersey, is 
bounded n. by Burlington county, s. by Salem, 
Cumberland, and Cape May counties, e. by the 
Atlantic ocean, and w. by Delaware river. Its 
length on the Delaware is about 30 miles, and on 
the sea line is about 22 miles. Great and Little 
Egg Harbour rivers are both navigable for vessels 
of 200 tons about 20 miles from their mouths. 
See EGG HARBOUR. The streams which fall into 
Delaware river are navigable for small vessels a 
few miles up from their mouths, and a (lord some 
shad, rock, herrings, and perch. The adjacent 
islands are Red Bank, Pett, and Old Man s Creek 
islands ; the first of which is famous in the his 
tory of the American war for fhe desperate defence 
the garrison upon it made, to prevent the British 
fleet from passing up to Philadelphia. The soil 
of this county is a mixture of sand and loam, and 
the tract bordering on the Delaware is in a high 
state of cultivation. The chief productions are 
beef, pork, fish, hay, corn, lumber, butter, cheese, 
&amp;c. It is divided into 10 townships, viz. W r ood- 
bury, Waterford, Newtown, Gloucester township, 
Gloucester town, Deptford, Greenwich, Wool 
wich, Egg Harbour, and Galloway. The first 
eight lie along the Delaware, and the other two 
on the ocean. Mulicus river divides this county 
from Burlington, and is navigable 20 miles for 
vessels of 60 tons. Maurice river rises here, runs 
ft. about 40 miles through Cumberland county into 
Delaware bay, is navigable for vessels of 100 tons 
15 miles, and for shallops 10 miles farther. It con 
tains 13,172 free inhabitants, and 191 slaves. 
There are found in this county quantities of bog; 
iron ore, which is manufactured into pig and bar 
iron, and hollow ware. Here is also a glass-house. 
Chief town, Wood bury, nine miles s. of Phila 
delphia.] 

[GLOUCESTER, a post-town in the above county, 
on the e. side of Delaware river, five miles below 
Philadelphia. It was formerly the county town, 
but has now scarcely the appearance of a village. 1 

[GLOUCESTER, a post-town in Virginia; situ* 



150 



G N A 



in the county of its own name, on a point of 
land on the w. side of York river, partly opposite 
York town, 13 miles distant.] 

[GLOUCESTER County, in Virginia, is fertile 
and well cultivated ; bounded n. by Piankitank 
river, which separates it from Middlesex, e. by 
Matthews county and Chesapeak bay, ti.w. by 
King and Queen, s. and s. w. by York river, which 
divides it from York county. It is about 55 miles 
in length, and 30 in breadth, and contains 13,498 
inhabitants, including 7063 slaves. The low lands 
here produce excellent barley and Indian corn, 
the staple produce of the county. Tobacco is 
little attended to.] 

[GLOUCKSTKII House, in the territory of the 
Hudson s 13 ay company, is on the n. side of Mus- 
jquacobaslon lake, 120 miles w. of Osnaburgh 
house. Lat. 51 24 n. Long. 86 59 w.~] 

GLOHC ESTER, some islands discovered by Cap 
tain NVallis, an Englishman, in 1767. 

[GLOVER, a township in Vermont, in Or 
leans county, 11. c. of Craflsborough, adjoin 
ing.] 

[GLYNN County, in the lower district of 
Georgia, bounded e. by the ocean, n. by Alata- 
maha river, which separates it from Liberty county, 
and s. by Camden county. It contains 413 in 
habitants, including 1 215 slaves. Chief town, 
Brunswick.] 

[GNADENHUETTEN, or GNADENHUTTEN, 
a settlement of the Moravians, or United Brethren, 
on Muskingum river, opposite to Salem, in the 
lands which belonged to the Mahikan Indians. 
In 1746, it was a pleasant town, inhabited by 
Christian Indians, where were a chapel, mission 
ary s house, and many Indian houses. This to 
gether with Schoenbrun and Salem were reserved 
by congresss, by an ordinance, May 20, 1785, 
for the Christian Indians formerly settled there. 
Sept. 3, 1788, it was resolved that the plat of 
cacli town should make up 4000 acres, and the 
grant was made to the United Brethren for propa 
gating the gospel among the- heathen. Also the 
name of a Moravian settlement on the s. w. bank 
of Lehigh river, in Pennsylvania, about 29 miles 
91. w. of Bethlehem.] 

[GNADENUUETTKN, NKW, a Moravian settle 
ment, on Huron river, which runs s. e. into lake 
St, Glair, in the N. W. territory. It is about 15 
miles from lake St. Cluir, arid 18 n. w, of De 
troit.] 

GNAGENDI, a small river of the province 
and captainship of Sau Vicente in Brazil. It 
runs into the sea, opposite the island of Ge 
brooders. 



G O A 

GNOPIQUE, a settlement of the province and 
government of Sonora in Nueva Espaiia ; situate 
on the shore of the river of its name, between the 
settlements of Arispe and Bonaichi. 

GOACA, a large and beautiful llanura, well 
peopled by Indians, to the s. of the city of San 
Sebastian of Buenavista, in the ancient province 
of Uraba ; where a complete victory was gained 
by Francisco Cesar over the natives, in 15.36. 

GOANAVA, Island of the, in the N. sea, and 
great bay of the island of St. Domingo, in the 
part possessed by the French, opposite the bay of 
the Petite Goave. Near it is another lesser island, 
distinguished by the name of Petite Goanava or 
Guanava. 

GOANAVAS, Bay of the, on the w. coast of 
the same island, and part possessed by the French, 
between port Pimiento and the point of Grand 
Pierre. 

GOASTEPEC, a settlement of the head settle 
ment and district of Tepoxtlan, and alcaldiamayor 
of Cuernavaca, in Nueva Espana. It contains 47 
families of Indians, who maintain themselves by 
cultivating maize and fruits, the productions of the 
place. It has a convent of the order of St. Do 
mingo, and formerly it had an hospital of the or 
der of La Caridad ; in which there were 32 cham 
bers, a church, and other offices corresponding; 
the whole being arched. It was for some years 
the mansion of the venerable servant of God, 
Gregorio Lopez, with two others, his companions, 
men of the most renowned virtue, and who were 
buried in the larger chapel of the temple : here 
their bodies remain uncorrupt. The hospital, at 
the present day, is not used as such, since the reli 
gious community deserted it from its having no fixed 
allowances for its support, The settlement is two 
leagues to the e. of its capital. 

[GOAT Island, in the state of Rhode Island, a 
small isle opposite to the town of Newport, and 
on which is fort Washington. The fort has been 
lately repaired, and a citadel erected. in it. The 
fort has been ceded to the United States."! 

GOATLANZ1NGO, a settlement of "the juris 
diction and alcaldia mayor of Otumba in Nueva 
Espafta, It contains 69 families of Indians, and 
is half a league to the .9. of its capital. 

GOAVE, a settlement of the French, in the part 
which they possess in the island of St. Domingo; 
founded in 1665, when the Bucaniers and Flibus- 
tiers, flying from the persecution of the Spaniards, 
fixed upon this spot ns being highly convenient 
for its beautiful port, which is also very large, and 
capable of containing many ships. Indeed, it is 
owing to its port, that at the present day the in- 



G O F 

habitants may be said to subsist, the settlement 
being 1 of itself very small. 

GOAVE, a town, called Petite Goave, to distin 
guish it from the former settlement. It is the head 
of the district, with a good port, defended by a 
castle. It has the same origin as the former settle 
ment, from whence it is one league s distance on 
the n. coast, between the settlement of Tapion and 
the point Percee. 

GOAYABES, a settlement of the island of 
Guadalupe, one of the Antilles ; situate on .the 
sea-shore, on the w. coast, near the river of its name. 
It has a good parish church, and in its vicinity is 
a fountain of water, which spouts out boiling, 
and is a remedy against many infirmities. 

GOAVABUS River runs w. and enters the sea. 

GOAYABES, a small isle near the coast of the 
island of Guadalupe, on the a&amp;gt;. part. 

GOBERNARDOR, Point of the, on the coast 
of the province and correginnenlo of Quillota, 
in the kingdom of Chile, between the port of Lon- 
gororuo and the island of its name. 

GOBERNAHDOR, a mountain of the same pro 
vince and corregimientoas is the former point, and 
close to the same. 

GOB K RX ARDOR, a river of Florida, which runs 
s* W. and enters the sea in the bay of Panzacola. 

GOBERNADORA, Island of the, in the S. 
3ea r and coast of the province and government of 
Tierra Firme. It lies in the bay of La Soledad, 
three leagues from the coast. 

[GOAYRE. See GUAIRA.] 

GOBOSO, a port of the w. coast, in the island 
of Newfoundland, close to cape De Argent or 
Silver. 

GOCAMON, a small river of the province and 
colony of Surinam, in the part of Guayana pos 
sessed by the Dutch ; one of those which enter the 
Cuyani, on the s. side. 

GOCHLAND, a county of the province and 
colony of Virginia. 

GODFRO1, a settlement of New France or 
Canada ; situate on the shore of the river St. 
Lawrence, near the lake of S. Pierre or St. Peter. 

GODORAS, a small river of the province and 
colony of Maryland, and of the county of Balti 
more. It runs e. and enters the Susquehanna. 

[GOELANS, POINT AU, a promontory on the 
7?. side of lake Ontario, about 33 miles s. w. of 
fort Frontinac.j 

[GOEYTACAZES, Indians of Brazil. See 
additional matter respecting the history, &amp;c. of 
this kingdom.] 

[GOFFSTOWN, in Hillborough county, New 
Hampshire, on the w. bank of Merrimack river, 



G O N 



151 



throe miles from Amuskeag falls, and 60 miles w. 
of Portsmouth. It was incorporated in 1761, and 
contains 1^75 inhabitants. Some pieces of baked 
earthen ware have been found in this township, 
from which it is supposed that the Indians had 
learned the potter s art ; but of what antiquity 
these remnants are, is uncertain.] 

[GOLDEN Island lies at the mouth of the 
river or gulf of Darien, in the province of Tierra 
Firme, in S. America. Lat. 9 n. Long. 77 
10 *.] 

[GULDSBOROUGH, a post-town in Han 
cock county, district of Maine, containing 267 
inhabitants. It was incorporated in 1789, is the 
s. easternmost town in the county. On the waters 
of its harbour is the town of Washington. It is 30 
miles e. of Penobscot, 113 n. by e. from Portland, 
and 185 . e. from Boston. Lat. 44 26 n. Long. 
67 54 .] 

GOLD River. See Rio DEL ORO. 

GOLFETE, a small gulf of the province and 
government of Honduras. It is formed in the 
midway of the channel of the entrance of the gulf 
of Honduras. 

GOLFOS, or GULFS, 

Darien, Puna, 

Guayaquil, Triste, 

Panama, Venezuela, 

Paria, Uraba, 

Parita, Honduras. 

The which see under their proper articles. 

[GOLPHINGTON, the chief town of Wash- 
ington county, Georgia, is situated near the head 
of Ogeechee river, about 26 miles e. s. e. of Oconee 
town, 64 s. to. of Augusta, and 50 n. w. of Louis 
ville.] 

GOLQUI, S. a settlement of the kingdom of 
Quito, in the corregimienio of the district of the 
Cinco Leguas de la Capital. 

GOMEZ, a small settlement of the province 
and government of Popayan in the Nuevo Reyno 
de Granada. 

GOMEZ, a small river of the province and go 
vernment of Buenos Ayres in Peru. It runs e. and 
enters the river La Plata, between the rivers Al- 
caraz and Rubio. 

[GONAVE, an island in the bay of Leogane, 
in the w. part of the island of St. Domingo. It is 
14| leagues long, and uniformly about three broad, 
except a very small part at each extremity. Petite 
Gomive, an isle about two miles each way, is se 
parated from the s. e. corner of the former, by a 
channel three miles wide. Gonave is \3{ leagues 
w. by n. w. of Port au Prince ; and its w. point is 
S3 1 leagues e. by n. of cape Dame Marie.] 



152 



GOO 



[GONAIVES, a sea-port in the same island, at 
the head of a bay of its own name, on the n. side of 
the bay of Lcoganc. The town is situated on the 
great road from Port de Paix.to St. Mark, 16 
leagues a. e. of the former, and 15 n. by c. of the 
latter. Lat. 19 27 n. Long. 75 2 30" w. from 
Paris.] 

[GONAIVES, a bay in the island of Hispa- 
niola, s. e. of cape St. Nicholas, in about lat. 19 
33 .] 

GONCHA, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Chachapoyas in Peru; annexed 
to the curacy of Chiliquin. 

GONZALO, S. a settlement of the province 
and captainship of Scrgipe in Brazil ; situate on 
the shore of the river Del Real, near the sea-coast. 

GONZALO, S. another settlement of this name, 
in the province and captainship of Paraiba of the 
same kingdom; situate also upon the coast, be 
tween the rivers Cong and Camaratuba. 

GONZALO, S.a mountain called the Morro, on the 
coast of the kingdom of Chile. It is one of the 
extremities or points of land which from the en 
trance or mouth of the river Valdivia. 

GONZALO, S. a cape or point of land on the w. 
coast of the straits of Maire, close to those of Buen 
Suceso or Good Success. 

GONZ AN AM A , a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Loxa in the kingdom of Quito. 

[GOOCHLAND, a county in Virginia, sur 
rounded by Louisa, Fluvanna, Henrico, Hanover, 
and Powhatan counties. It is about 40 miles long 
and 14 broad, and contains 9053 inhabitants, in 
cluding 4656 slaves.] 

[GOOD HOPE, a Danish colony in W. Green 
land, in lat. 64 n.] 

GOOSE, a small river of the province and co 
lony of Virginia. It runs e. and enters the Potow- 
mac, at the spot where it forms the Little falls. 

GOOSE, another, a small river in the county of 
Monmouth, of the province and colony of Jersey. 
It runs e. and enters the sea. 

[GOOSE BERRY Mountain, in New York 
state, lies on the w. bunk of Hudson s river, about 
four miles 5. effort George.] 

[GOOSEBERRY Islands and Rocks, on the coast 
of Essex county, Massachusetts, have been the oc 
casion of the loss of many valuable vessels. To 
prevent such accidents in future, seamen may at 
tend to the following particular information, which 
is here inserted for their benefit. The n. part of 
Gooseberry great rock with the n. of Cat island, 
bears .?. 54 w. from the beacon on Baker s island ; 
the W. Gooseberry s. 41 w. the distance nearly 
three-fourths of a mile. The n. part of the W. 



G O R 

Gooseberry is viewed from the beacon over the 
point of land running out from it. The E. Goose 
berry bears s. 26 K&amp;gt;. and it is shoal as far as the w. 
breaker. The e. breaker lies s. 35 e. and the w. 
breaker s. 29 e. The e. breaker is about the same 
distance from the beacon as the W. Gooseberry, but 
the E. Gooseberry falls within that distance. Satan 
appears s. 32 w. and Halfway rock s. 3 w. at the 
distance of 2- miles. The inner part of Cat island 
is. above two miles from the beacon, and with the 
beacon to the s. the Gooseberry rock bears only 
12 . The a), dry breaker extends from 28 to 32 ; 
and the e. from 31 to 32. Halfway rock, with 
the beacon from Cat island, is 65 to the s.] 

GORDA, VIRGEN, one of the Larger Virgin 
islands. See article VIRGINKS. 

GORDA, VIRGEN, a point of land on the coast 
of the kingdom of Tierra Firme, and jurisdiction of 
the government of Portobelo. 

GORDA, VIHGEN, another, of the coast of the 
province and captainship of Ilheos in Brazil, be 
tween the rivers Doce or Dulce and Puertoseguro. 

GORDA, VIRGEN, another, of the coast of the 
same kingdom, in the province and captainship of 
Maraiian, between El Arecife and the river 
Otatay. 

GORDA, VIRGEN, another point, of the coast of 
Nueva Espaiia, in the government of Vera Cruz, 
between this city arid the settlement where it before 
stood . 

GOIIDA, VIRGEN, another point, of the s. coast 
of the island of Cuba, opposite the Cayos de 
Diego Perez. 

GORDA, VIRGEN, a sierra or Cordillera of moun 
tains in the island of St. Domingo, and part pos 
sessed by the French. It runs from s. to n. on the 
const lying in this point or rhumb, between the 
port Margot and the river Borgne. 

GORDA, VIRGEN, a mountain on the w. coast of 
the strait of Maire, which serves as a mark or indi 
cation of the same strait, standing out in a very 
conspicuous way at its entrance. 

[GORE Island, discovered by Captain Cook in 
his last voyage. Lat. 64 n. Long. 169 w.~] 

GOREE, an island of the coast of the province 
and captainship of Puertoseguro in Brazil. It lies 
between the river Doce or Dulce and the Quero- 
rupa. It has in it a good port of the same name. 

GORGON, a small river of the province and 
government of Choco, in the district of Raposo, 
which runs into the S. sea. 

GORGONA, an island of the N. sea, near the 

coast of the province and government of Barba- 

coas, very dangerous for navigators, from currents 

setting in very strongly to the land ; which toge- 

2 



G O S 

ther with the calms which prevail here, render the 
passage very tedious, and which is accustomed to 
be expressed by the terra of engorgonarse, or to 
be engulfed ; the which happened to Francisco 
Pizarro when he left Panama for the discovery of 
Peru. Indeed the greater part of his people de 
serted him on this occasion ; thirteen only of them 
being left with him to share the honour of his en 
terprise. This island is two leagues long and one 
wide, and is desert and uncultivated. In lat. 3 2 n. 

GORGON A, with the dedicatory title of Santa 
Catalina, a settlement of the province and king 
dom of Tierra Firme ; situate near the river 
Chagre. It lies in the direct road which leads 
from the city of Portobelo to that of Panama, from 
whence it is five leagues distant. 

GORGON1LLA, an island of the S. sea, be 
longing to the government of Esrneraldas, of the 
kingdom of Quito ; also called Tumaco : in it is 
a small settlement of Mnlattoes and Mustees, with a 
good port on the e. side. It is opposite the cape 
Agnaclara, where an arm of the river Mira empties 
itself. Around it are other small isles. Lat. 1 
47 . Long. 78 36 w. 

GORGOR, a settlement of the province and 
corregimienlo of Caxatambo in Peru. 

GORGOR1LLO, a settlement of the same pro 
vince and corregimiento as the former; annexed to 
the curacy of Ufaangas. 

GORHAM, a settlement of the province of 
Hampshire in New England; situate near the river 
Penny cook. 

[GORHAM, a township in Cumberland county, 
Maine, on the n. e. side of Saco river, eight miles 
from Portland, at the mouth of the river, and 84 
miles n. by e. of Boston. It was incorporated in 
1764, and contains 2244 inhabitants.} 

GOROSASU, a river of the province and cap 
tainship of Seara in Brazil; which runs into the 
sea between the rivers Manetuba and Port Daniel. 

[GOR f A, ST. MARIA LA, a small island in 
the Pacific ocean. Lat. 26 35 n. Long. 135 zo. 

[GOSCHGOSCHUENCK, atown of theDela- 
wares, consisting of three villages, situated on the 
banks of the Ohio. Its name signifies the Habita 
tion of Owls, from the number of these birds who 
resort here.] 

[OOSfflBN, a township in Hampshire county, 
Massachusetts, between Cnmmington and Conway, 
14 miles n. of Northampton, and 85 w. by n. of 
Boston. It was incorporated in 1781, and con 
tains 681 inhabitants.] 

[GosinsN, a township in Addison county, V r er- 
inont, adjoining to Salisbury on the zo. and 21 
miles n. e. by e. of mount Independence.] 

\01,. 11. 



G O Y 



153 



[GosHEN, a township in Chester county, Penn 
sylvania.] 

[GosiiEJv, a town in Litchfield county, Connec 
ticut, famous for the production of excellent cheese. 
It is seven miles n. by n. w. of Litchiield, and 50 
n. of New Haven.} 

[GosnEN, the most considerable town in Orange 
county, New York, about 45 miles n. of New 
York city, 18 w. by s. of New Windsor, and 25 
w. by s. of Fish-kill. This town is pleasantly 
situated, containing about 60 or 70 houses, an 
academy, court-house, gaol, and Presbyterian 
church. The township contains 2448 inhabitants ; 
of whom 316 are electors.] 

[GosiiEN, a township of the district of Mairu% 

eight miles from Buckstown, on Penobscot river. I 

tGOSHGOSHJNK, a Moravian settlement in 

Pennsylvania ; situated on Alleghany river, about 

15 miles above Venango, or fort Franklin.] 

GOS1ER, GRAND, a settlement and parish of 
the island of Guadalupe; situate on the s. e. coast 
of La Gran Tierra, at the entrance of the port and 
bay of the Cul de Sac Petit, opposite the two isles 
of the Two Diamonds. 

GOSIUII, GRAND, a port of the island of St. Do 
mingo, on the n. coast, between the bay of this 
rhumb and the cape of Samana. 

[GOSPORT, formerly called A ppledore, a fish, 
ing town on Star island, one of the isles of Shoals, 
belonging to Rockingham county, New Hamp 
shire, containing 93 inhabitants. It lies about 
12 miles e. s. e. of Piscataqua harbour. See 
SHOALS.] 

[GOTHAM, a small village in Maryland, about 
four or five miles n. of Baltimore city. I 

GOTTEMBURG, a city of the province and 
colony of New England. 

GOYABES,HAVHE Di:s,orBayofLAsGoAYA- 
BAS, on the e. coast of the island of Guadalupe. It 
is large and capacious, and has opposite it some 
extended sand-banks. It is between the island 
Mobile and the Grande Riviere. 

GOYANA, a ciiy of the province and captain 
ship of Itamaraca in Brazil ; situate on the shore 
of the river of its name, three leagues above its 
mouth. It is the residence of the tribunal of jus 
tice of the province. Its territory abounds in 
sugar-canes, for the manufactory of which article 
are many engines, also in Brazil wood. To the w. 
towards the mountains, are some barbarian Indians 
of the Petihuares nation, who dwell in small settle 
ments, and extend as far as the cape Blanco Lat 
7 39 s. Long. 35 16 w. 

GOYANA. The aforesaid river is small, rises in 
the province and captainship of the Rio Grande,. 



154 



G O Y 



runs e. and enters the sea between the Cong and 
the San Juan. 

GOYAZ, a town of the Portuguese, in the king 
dom of Brazil ; situate on the shore and at the 
source of the grand river S. Francisco. 

GOYOGU1N, third canton of Acadia, bounded 
w. by New York, and from thence by the cantons 
of Onney-youth, Onontangue, and Tsonnouthonam, 
which are called the Upper Cantons. This of 
Goyoguin surpasses the others in the kindness of 
its soil and pleasantness of its climate ; its inhabi 
tants being also amongst the best of the Iroquees. 
In the whole extent of the five cantons, Europeans 
may cultivate fruit? to advantage, some of these 
being peculiar to the country, and but little known. 
The woods and forests abound in chesnuts and wal 
nuts ; the former are very sweet, and the latter 
bitter ; and from them is extracted an oil of an ex 
cellent quality by means of a mill, and afterwards 
the co-operation of fire and water, in the same 
manner as it is customary in Europe to do with 
flax-seed. In various parts are found cherries 
without stones, which are well flavoured ; also a 
tree resembling a white lily, the fruit of which is 
of the size and colour of a small peach. Here is 
found a very small wild cedar, Avhich produces 
fruit similar to the China orange, very fresh and 
grateful to (he palate : it grows in the middle of 
two heart-shaped leaves : the roots of the tree are 
venomous. Here is also found a sort of apple of 
the shape of a goose s egg, the seed resembling a 
bean ; the same has a fine smell and flavour, and 
the tree is very small, requiring a greasy and moist 
soil. It was brought by the Iroquees from the 
country of Erie, nearly about the same time with 
the other plant called by the French missionaries 
la plante um verselle, since its leaves, being of the 
size of one s hand, and of the figure of a lily, cure 
all kinds of wounds ; its root smells like the laurel. 
These savages have also other roots, which they 
use for dyes of the most beautiful colour. See 
article IROQUESES. 

GOYOGUIN, a bay of New France, which 
is 10 leagues from the river Onnontague. The 
whole of its coast is lined with the most beautiful 
trees, and particularly oaks, which seem to have 
been planted by design. The Father Charle- 
voix, who found himself under the necessity of 
running into this bay, in shelter from a hurricane, 
says that it is one of the nicest places that can be 
seen. From its centre projects a peninsula full of 
woods, which forms a kind of theatre, and on the 
right hand of the entrance, in a corner, lies an 
island which covers the mouth ofariver, up which 
is the navigation to the lake Goyoquins. 



G R A 

GRACE, a settlement of the island of Barba- 
does, on the zi\ coast and district of the parish of 
St. Thomas. 

GRACE, with the addition of Havre, another 
settlement, of the island of Newfoundland ; situate 
on the e. coast, on the shore of the bay of La 
Concepcion. 

GRACIA, S. JOSEPH DE, a settlement of the 
head settlement of the district and alcaldia mayor 
of Aguas Calientes in Nueva Espana, annexed to 
the curacy of its capital; from whence it lies 
eight leagues to the n. zo. 

GRACIA, NUESTRA SENORA DE, a point on 
the n. coast of the straits of Magellan, close to the 
harbour of Paxaros. 

GHACIAN, a small river of the province and 
government of Buenos Ayres. It runs w. and 
enters the river La Plata, or mouth of the 
Uruguay, between the livers S. Salvador and the 
Sauce. 

GRACIAS A Dios, a city of the province and 
government of Honduras in the kingdom of Gua 
temala, founded by the Captain Gabriel de Roxas 
in 1530, afterwards much enlarged by Gonzalo de 
Alvarado, in 1536. Its population is very small ; 
it has two convents, one of the religious order of S. 
Francisco, and another of La Merced. Thirty 
leagues from the city of Valladolid or Comaya- 
gua. 

GRACIAS A Dios, a cape or point of land of the 
province arid government of Costarrica, in the 
same kingdom of Guatemala, and coast of the N. 
sea. 

[GRAFTON County, in New Hampshire, is 
bounded n. by Canada, s. by the counties of 
Strafford, Hillsborough, and Cheshire, w. by the 
state of Vermont, and e. by the district of Maine. 
It comprehends nearly as much territory as all the 
other four counties, but is by no means so thickly 
settled : itisdivided into 50 townships and 17 loca 
tions, and contains 13,472 inhabitants, of whom 21 
are slaves. The increase of population since the 
enumeration of 1790 has been great.] 

[GRAFTON, a township in the county of its 
name in New Hampshire, 13 miles s. e. of Dart 
mouth college and 19 s. w. of Ply mouth. It was 
incorporated in J 778, and contains -103 inhabitants. 
Lapis specuIariS) commonly called ising-glass, of 
the best quality, is fount! in this town, in a 
mountain about 20 miles e. of Dartmouth college. 
It is found adhering to the rocks of white or yel 
low quartz, and lying in lamina?, like sheets of 
paper: it is found in other places in the state in 
smaller pieces.] 

N, the Ha$$anamisco of the Indians, 



G R A 

a township in Worcester county, Massachusetts, 
containing 900 inhabitants. Thirty-four miles 
s.w. of Boston, eights, e. of Worcester, and 26 
;/. &amp;. of Providence.] 

[GRAINGER, Fort, stands on the n. side of 
the mouth of Holstein river, in Tennessee.] 

[GnAiNGER, the name given to a new county, 
in the district of Hamilton, state of Tennessee, 
formed of parts of the counties of Knox, Jef 
ferson, and Hawkins, and called after the maiden 
name of the lady of Governor William Blount.] 

[GRAISO, L ANCE LA, a settlement in Loui 
siana.] 

GRAMA, a smalt river of the province and 
captainship of Paraiba in Brazil. It rises near 
the coast, runs e. and enters the sea between the 
settlement of Rovero and the port of Los Fran 
ceses . 

GRAMADAL, Point of, on the coast of Peru 
and Pacific or S. sea, of the province and corre- 
gimiento of Truxillo. 

GRANADA, NUEVO REYNO DE, in S. Ame 
rica ; bounded e. towards the s. by the extensive 
llanos or plains of San Juan, w. by some moun 
tains and woods which are very thick and of great 
extent, and n. by some extremely craggy moun 
tains extending as far the sea-coast. It is 80 
leagues long n. s. and somewhat less wide e. w. : 
it was called in the time of the Indians Cundina- 
marca; was discovered and conquered by Gon- 
zalo Ximenez de Quesada, who named it in me 
mory of the kingdom so called in Andalucia, of 
which he was a native. It contains the pro 
vinces of 

Bogota, Neiba, 

Velez, Marquetones, 

Pamplona, Sutagaos, 

La Grita, Ubaque, 

Merida, Tenza, 

Muzo, Lengupa, 

Ebate, Sogamoso, 

Panches, Chita. 

These are divided, as to the chief government, 
into 51 corregimientos, in which are 301 settle 
ments, and in these 18,359 Indians; also into 
five military governments, which are Panama, 
Portobelo, Cartagena, Santa Maria, and Mara- 
caibo, although the two former are of the king 
dom of Tierra Firme ; and into seven civil go 
vernments, viz. Antioquia, Choco, Mariquita, 
Giron, Neiba, Llanos de San Juan, and Vera- 
#ua : formerly under the same jurisdiction was 
the commandancy-gcneral of La Guayana and the 
government of Caracas. This kingdom enjoys 
different climates according to its extent ; for in it 



G R A 



155 



are found parts where the cold is very great, and in 
which breed stags, bears, rabbits, dantas, and 
mountain cats ; llanos , of which the soil is mild 
and temperate, and fertile in all kinds of seeds and 
fruits, and other plains where cattle breed in such 
abundance as at times to be troublesome from their 
numbers. The woods are many and delightful, 
from the variety of the trees and birds; amongst 
which are some justly celebrated for their song, 
of which is the lochc of a black plumage, the siote 
of a deep black with golden spots, and the uzulejo 
of a sky-blue, and the babaguy of a yellow and 
black, the which surpass in the sweetness of their 
note the goldfinch, canary, and nightingale. 
Those parts that are subject to the cold climate are 
Santa Fe, Tunja, Pamplona, and Merida; and 
those of the warm climate are Cartagena, Santa 
Marta, Antioquia, Muzo, Mariquita, Neiba, .and 
S. Juan de los Llanos, where the temperature is 
the whole year round nearly like the summer in 
Spain. The cold in the other parts is general 
throughout the year, though not very severe ; the 
change of the four seasons not being known there, 
and it being called summer then only when it doe* 
not rain, notwithstanding that it should freeze, and 
the cold be considerable. No calculation can be 
formed respecting the setting in of the rains, or is 
it possible to have any security against them ; 
they, for the most part, begin in October and 
February : it may be said of them generally, that, 
they by no means observe, in regard to their 
periods, the same nature peculiar to other parts. 
The kingdom of Nueva Granada being so imme 
diately under the line, is fanned by very salutary 
breezes, the same rendering it one of the most 
healthy countries. It is extremely rich, in mines, 
and those of gold, which are found in many parts, 
exceed all the other discoveries in America; and 
in the cities of Antioquia, Zuragoza, Cacen s, 
Remedios, Anserrna, and Hio del Oro, no other 
coin than gold is current : the same is the case in 
the city ot Guamoco, as al&amp;gt;o in the settlements 
about the celebrated veins of Pamplona and San 
Juan de los Llanos. Here is also Ibiind silver so 
fine that it is esteemed the best in all the indies; 
and the mines of Marquetones, denominated High 
and Low, (Aha y ftcm;), and which are in the 
province ol Pamplona, are so rich, that were it 
not for the scarcity of hands to work them, they 
would even surpass the celebrated mountain of 
Potosi, since they in general render t\vo marks of 
silver I oreachquintid, and sometimes eight. Copper 
and lead are metals that bear no value here ; and 
although each of them abound in various parts, 
the nunes are n"t worked. The emeralds hcxo 
x 2 



156 



GRANADA. 



much exceed those of the c. in value, and through 
them the province of Muzo, where the best are 
obtained, has been rendered celebrated. Indeed, 
those of the mines of Somondoco in the province 
of Tenza, although very fine, are by no means 
equal to those of the first mentioned province; 
and the greatest peculiarity of them is, that in the 
same mines from "whence they are extracted, are 
found pantauras of various colours, with grains of 
gold inside of them. In the mines of Antioquia 
and Guamoco, are found diamonds amongst the 
points of gold, although the same are small; also 
cross-stones, (piedras de crwz), of singular virtues 
against fevers and colds ; also fine granates, the 
abundance of which renders them less estimable. 
The river Ilacha has always deserved particular 
memory for its celebrated pearls, and Timana for 
its amethysts and pantauras, in the same manner 
that Pamplona, Sussa, and Anserma, have been 
celebrated for their precious stones, called there 
lurquesas or Turkey stones, giresoles, gallinazas, 
and mapolas. The mountains of this kingdom 
are the repository of wild beasts and fine animals ; 
and, in the hot parts more particularly, there are 
found tigers of uncommon fierceness, lions, though 
of a small size, chunzos, eritos, zaynos^ faras, 
ardittas resembling voracious ferrets, and by no 
means of a milder nature, weasels, coyas, scor 
pions, vipers, snakes of different species and sizes, 
amongst the which the most dreaded is the taj/a t 
both for its courage and agility : this is of a brown 
colour with spots rather dark : it has, moreover, 
this great distinction from all other snakes, in as 
much as they, when pursued by man, invariably 
fly, whereas this will attack any body, even with 
out provocation. In the waters of some of the 
rivers, such as the Magdalena and the Fusaga- 
suga, are alligators measuring from 14 to 16 feet 
in length, similar to crocodiles, the which are 
found as well in the above as in other rivers ; also 
in the marshes and lakes are found marine wolves, 
otters, thornbacks, and snakes of such a size that 
we are assured by the Sr. Piedrahita, that in the 
province of San Juan de los Llanos, they are 
capable of swallowing a man . 

This province is watered by very many rivers, 
and some of them are very large ; of such, in the 
province of Cartagena, is the Grande of La Mag 
dalena, in the province of Bogota, the Eunzha, 
which has changed its name, being called by the 
same title as the province itself; in the province 
of Tinija the Sogamosa, in that of Tensa the Ga- 
ragoa : all these three rise from the paramos and 
cordillera of Gachaneque, opposite Tumerque ; are 
distant a little more than one league from each 



other, and all take their course through the lof 
tiest part of the kingdom. In the province of 
Velez the most notable is the Sarabita, which is at 
the present day called Suarez ; in Pamplona, the 
Rio del Oro and the Sulia, which is a very abun 
dant stream, emptying itself into the lake of Ma- 
racaibo; in Los Marquetones, is the Guali and 
the Guarino ; in the province of Neiba, the afore 
said river of La Magdalena, those of Cuello la 
Sabandija, Cabrera, and others ; in Los Sotagaos, 
the Fusagasuga ; in Los Panches, the Rio Negro 
and the Bogota ; and in the province of Ubaque 
another Rio Negro, distinct from the former ; not to 
mention an infinite variety of others of less note : 
in all of which are found abundance of fish of an 
excellent quality, and amongst the most esteemed 
is the bagre, which in some parts is called chimbe, 
and most commonly capitan: also in the river 
Bogota has been observed by some curious persons 
a fish of a very peculiar nature, the bones of the 
head of which, upon being separated, represent 
each of them the different insignias of the passion 
of our Saviour, so that you may here perceive a 
perfect lance, a cross, the nails, &amp;c. 

This country abounds no less in excellent woods, 
the which deserve particular note ; such are the 
cedar, walnut, biomatas, ebony, and pomegranate ; 
the celebrated wood of muzo, red and black, the 
wood of Guayana, of a brown and black colour, 
the tamarisk in great request for making glasses, 
the Brazil wood for dyes, the sassafras for medi 
cines, the cochineal which grows in Sogamoso, 
the cacao in Merida, Maracaibo, Caracas, and 
Santa Marta, the red balsam, that of Tolu, of 
Maria, the Benjamin-tree, incense, storax, and 
baynilla. With regard to flowers and fruits, there 
is scarce any one but what is found in this king 
dom ; for as it enjoys an eternal spring, the trees 
are always covered with green and blossoms, since 
even when the fruit is ripe, fresh buds are still 
sprouting : amongst these trees the most worthy 
of note is a species of palm, found in the provinces 
of Muzos and of Los Marquetones, so lofty that 
it would appear impossible to gather the fruit from 
the top ; and, indeed, it consequently only affords 
a food for the birds, who let the fruit fall upon the 
ground, which is naturally stony and rough ; and 
when broken, is found to contain a kernel much 
esteemed for its delicate flavour. In short, if we 
were to take upon us to relate minutely all that 
could be said in favour of this country, it would 
oblige us to exceed the limits of our article, and to 
write a long history : those, therefore, who wish 
to be further informed, we refer to what has been 
written by the most illustrious Don Lucas de 



GRANADA. 



157 



Piedrahita, bishop of Santa Marta and Panama, 
by the Fr. Antonio Zamora, Don Francisco An 
tonio Moreno, fiscal of the audience of Santa Fe, 
by Don Basilio de Oviedo, by the chronicler An 
tonio de Herrera, and various other historians. 
When the Spaniards entered this kingdom, it 
overned by two princes, elected in Bogota 



was 



and Tunja, the former of whom was called Zipa : 
these princes ruled over other various chieftains, 
and the whole country was so covered with In 
dians that the conquerors denominated them mos- 
cas, (flies), to signify their immense numbers. 
Down to the present day, however, great changes 
have taken place. Its population is far from 
equal to its resources, and it cannot, therefore, 
with propriety be reckoned one of the most opu 
lent kingdoms in the world, although we take into 
account its native riches, fertility, climate, pro 
ductions, and other qualifications. It is governed 
by a viceroy, established in 1718, whose govern 
ment was afterwards abolished, and again esta 
blished in 1739, having been theretofore, from 
the time of its conquest, governed by a presi 
dent. 

[The annual produce of the mines of Nueva 
Granada, as calculated from the amount of the 
royal duties, and therefore considerably under the 
truth, amounts to 18,000 Spanish marks of pure 
gold, and very few of silver; the value in dollars 
is 2,624,760, the gold being estimated at 145yoV 
dollars, and the silver at 9^ dollars the Spanish 
mark. Besides this we must add for contraband 
1,735,240 dollars, and the total produce will then 
be 4,360,000. 

According to Humboldt, the dollars imported 
into Nueva Granada, in 1803, amounted to 
5,700,000, and the exports consisted of produce 
to the value of 2,000,000 dollars, besides 3,000,000 
dollars in specie. He also states the population, in 
1808, at 1,800,000.] 

Catalogue of the barbarous Nations and principal 
Places of the Nuevo Key no de Granada. 



Cities. 
Agreda, 
Altagracia, 
Angeles, 
Barcelona, 
Buga, 
Buenavista, 
Caguan, 
Cali, 

Cartagena, 
Curtngo, 
Choconta, 



Giron, 

Grita, 

Honda, 

Ibague, 

Malaga, 

Mariquita, 

Mompox, 

Muzo, 

Neiba, 

Ocana, 

Palma, 

Pamplona, 

Plasencia, 



Plata, 


Guaxiros, 


Salazar, 


Guaibas, 


Santiago de las Atala- 


Guaiquiries, 


yas, 


Guazquias, 


Santa Fe de Bogota, 


Iraruros, 


Segovia, 


Itotos, 


Tamalameque, 


Jeribocas, 


Tocaima, 


Jiraras, 


Toro, 


Laches, 


Tudela, 


Lolucos, 


Tunja, 


Macos, 


Velez, 


Malambos, 


Victoria, 


Malifilitos, 


Zaragoza. 


Mapoyes, 


Nations. 


Marquetones, 


Abanes, 


Mazques, 


Achaguas, 


Malpures, 


Adoles, 


Moscas or Muiscas, 


Agnalos, 


Muzos, 


Amucas, 


Natagaimas, 


Andaquies, 


Nauras, 


Airicos, 


Orotomecas, 


Barbures, 


Otornacos, 


Betoyes, 


Paeces, 


Bodiguas, 


Palamos, 


Bondas, 


Paos, 


Caber res, 


Parriparries, 


Calandaimas, 


Pastagoros, 


Cay os, 


Pazcas, 


Cayvanis, 


Pijaos, 


Chimicas, 


Quecas, 


Chunilas, 


Quilla-chingas, 


Chinatos, 


Quinchias, 


Chiricoas, 


Salivas, 


Chiscas, 


Supius, 


Chitanos, 


Sutagaos, 


Cheques, 


Tamanacas, 


Chyayzaques, 


Tapuyes, 


Colimas, 


Teguas, 


Corumenes, 


Tunebos, 


Doas, 


Urriabaes, 


Doimas, 


Zunubas. 


Fusnngaes, 


Rivers. 


Geruras, 


Albarregas, 


Gorrones, 


Amariguara, 


Guachicos, 


Anuituri, 


Guamos, 


Anari, 


Guaneros, 


Apure, 


Guapis, 


Aquiri, 


Guaraepoanos, 


Arauca, 


Guaranos, 


Aritagua, 


Guaraunas, 


Aroi, 


Guarinoes, 


Atanari, 


Guatabitas, 


Auyama, 


Guaticas, 


Babillo, 



6 HA N AD A. 



Benhtiari, 

Bogota, 

Burari, 

Cabiari, 

Caboto, 

Carare, 

Canoni, 

Casiarucuti, 

Cauca, 

Cnzanare, 

Cesar or Pompatao, 

Chum a, 

Cravo, 

Cuehignero, 

Cuiloto, 

Danney, 

Dubarro, 

Duma, 

Duya, 

Fclava/ 

Elc, 

Funzha, 

Fusagasuga, 

G.iiia, 

Guali, 

Guarauctt, 

Gnanapalo, 

Gnaricii, 

Gnarino, 

Guatapori, 

Inirricha, 

Mnromite, 

Magdalena, 

Maino, 

Manacasia, 

Masparro, 

Mcta, 

Moco, 



Orinoco, 

Papamene, 

Parvasi, 

Pan, 

Sun Carlos, 

Tame. 

Lakes. 
Fuquenp, 
friianaca &amp;lt; 5, 
Guatavita, 
TesOBj 
Tota. 

Mountains. 
Abides, 
Abipi, 

Bocaneme, silver mine, 
Burituca, gold mine, 
Fosca , 

Gachaneque, 
Itoco, emerald mine. 

Ports. 
Carari, 
Cartagena, 
Tola. 

Promontories. 
Cano;i, 
Caribana, 
Corrientes, 
Do las Arenas. 



Barn, 
Faxardo, 
San Bernardo, 
Verde. 

Fortresses. 
San Fernando, 
San Joseph, 
San Lazaro. 



Presidents, Viceroys, and Captains-general, 
have presided in the Nuevo Reyno de Granada. 

1. Don Alonso Luis de Lugo, first governor of 
the Ntievo Reyno, elected through his father Don 
Pedro Fernandez de.Lugo, at its capitulation and 
conquest ; he died before its conquest was con 
cluded. 

2. The Licentiate Miguel Dicz de Armendariz, 
native of Navarra, collegiate-major of Salamanca ; 
nominated visitor in 1547 ; lie was separated from 
the government, and taken bound to Spain by the 
Licentiate Montano, visitor in 1551. 

3. The Licentiate Juan de Montaiio, whose 
proper name was Lavado, native of Ayamontc, 
reLitor of the chancery of Valladolid, nominated as 
residentiary to the Licentiate Armendariz and the 
cidors of Santa Fe, where he committed such atro 



cities, that in 155&amp; he was sent back a prisoner to 
Spain, where being fully criminated, his head was 
cut off at Valladolid. 

4. The Doctor Andres Diaz, Venero de Leiba, 
first president : when the audience was founded in 
1364, he was promoted from the situation of ac 
countant of the principal exchequer of Castilla to 
be fiscal of the same ; he reduced the Indians to 
.settlements, built more than 400 churches, made 
ordinances for the government, and for the 
gold and the emerald mines, opened roads, built 
bridges, introduced relays of mules to alleviate the 
labour of the Indians, established missionaries for 
the conversion to the faith, disposed the regirnen 
of the audience and of the royal estate, and in 
short founded the whole of the civil government ; 
he was wise and prudent in every thing he under 
took, and obtained universally the name of Father; 
lie returned to Spain, destined to a place in the 
council of the Indies, in 1574. 

5. The Licentiate Francisco Briceno, who left 
the presidency of Guatemala to take that of Santa 
Fe in 1575 ; he followed the well chosen steps of 
his predecessor, but held his government a short 
time, as he died in the same year. 

6. Don Lopez Diez de Armendariz, fourth Lord 
olCadeirita, third president, governor, and captain- 
general, promoted from the presidency of Cliarcas 
in 1578, and suspended from his otlice by a judge 
and visitor in 1685 ; in which year he died. 

7. The Doctor Don Antonio Gonzalez, of the 
council of the Indies, fourth president, governor, 
and captain-general ; he entered with different 
commissions in 1590, governed seven years, and 
resigning his authority returned to Spain. 

8. Don Francisco dc Sande, a knight of the 
order of Santiago ; he entered Santa Fe in 1597, 
having been promoted from the presidency of Gua 
temala ; he was a native of Caceres, and so severe 
an arbiter, that he was called Doctor Sangre, 
(Blood), instead of Sande ; he had many disputes 
with the archbishop Don Bartolome Lobo Guer 
rero, which were the cause of Doctor Salierna 
being sent out as residentiary judge. 

9. The Licentiate Don Nuno Nunez de Villa- 
visencio, one of the presidency of Cliarcas, and 
visitor of the audience of Santa Fe, with a royal 
schedule entitling him to the presidency of the 
same; he took possession in 1605, arid met his 
death by an accident in 1607. 

10. Don Juan de Borja, native of Valencia, 
knight of the order of Santiago, a natural son of Fer 
nando de Borja, who was blind with one eye, comen- 
dr/rforofCastellarintheorderof Alcantara and legiti 
mate son of San Francisco de Borja, Dukeot Gran- 



GRANADA. 



J59 



clia ; he was the first president of Capa and Espada 
(cloak and sword), entered Santa Fe in 1605, go 
verned 22 years with great credit, and having been 
of great public service, died in 1628. 

11. Don Sancho Giron, Marquis of Sofraga, 
comendddor of La Peraleda in the order of Alcan 
tara, native of Talavera ; he was corregidor of 
Burgos when he was nominated as eighth president 
of Santa Fe, to which office he entered in 1630, 
and died in 1635. 

12. Don Martin de Saavedra y Guzman, knight 
of the order of Calatrava, native of Cordoba, 
baron of Prado, lord of the towns of Corosino and 
Lacosta, who had been president of Vari and Trany 
in Italy, and manifested peculiar talents in his 
military career ; he entered Santa Fe in 1637, and 
after a long and troublesome residence he returned 
to Madrid. 

13. Don Juan Fernandez de Cordoba y Coalla, 
knight of the order of Santiago, Marquis de Mi 
randa de Auta, Lord of Colmena, a gentleman and 
taster to his Majesty, major-domo of the Prince 
Don Baltasar Carlos de Austria ; he was native of 
Malaga, commandant-general of Ceuta, and pro 
moted to the presidency of Santa Fe in 1645; 
where he governed nearly eight years with so great 
credit and applause for his mildness, piety, and 
good faith, that having petitioned the king for a 
licence to return to Spain, his prayer was refused 
in consideration of his merits, and the government 
of that kingdom pressed upon him, although with 
out effect, since he died in 1662. 

14. Don Diego de Egnes and Beaumont, knight 
of the order of Santiago, born in Seville ; he was 
page to the king, corregidor of Cochabamba in 
Peru, captain of infantry, high-admiral of the fleet 
of Nueva Esparia, provisional governor-general of 
the armada, counsellor of state aud of the royal 
revenues ; whilst holding this situation he was de- 
tined to the presidency of Santa Fe, where he en 
tered in the aforesaid year, 1662 ; he died in 1664. 

15. The Doctor Don Diego del Corro Carrascal, 
president, governor, and captain-general, through 
the nomination of the president of the Indies; 
Count of Peiiaranda, one of those who formed the 
council of the government in the minority of 
Charles 11. ; he was native of Fuente de Cantos in 
Estremadura, collegiate of the college of Maese 
Rodrigo in Sevilla, inquisitor of Cartagena of the 
Indies, afterwards of Mexico, with a commission 
of visitor of this tribunal, and lastly president of 
Santa Fe in 1666, and promoted to be that of 
Quito in 1667. 

16. Don Diego de Villalva y Toledo, knight of 
the order of Santiago, lord of the town of Santa 



Cruz de Pinares, a gentleman of the chamber of 
the Lord Don Juan de Austria, also his major- 
domo ; he had served his king for upwards of 
years, through all the gradations of common sol- 
dier, captain, colonel, serjeant-general, general of 
the artillery, governor of the Havana, and lastly 
president, governor, and captain-general of the 
Nuevo Reyno de Granada, where he entered in 
1667, but governed a short time ; for various com 
plaints being lodged against his proceedings, and 
those of the two oidors and the fiscal, a commission 
was given to the bishop of Popayan to suspend 
him in 1671. 

17. The Doctor Don Melchor de Linan y Cis- 
neros, native of the town of Tordelaguna ; he 
studied at Alcala, was collegiate doctor in theo 
logy, poser to the candidates for fellowships and 
curacies, when he gained by opposition the curacy 
of Santa Maria tie Biiitrago, that of Tordelaguna, 
and that of the parish of San Salvador of Madrid, 
calificador of the holy office, presented to the bi 
shopric of Santa Marta, promoted to that of Popay 
an, nominated as visitor, president, and captain- 
general of the Nuevo Reyno in 1671, until 1674, 
when he passed over to the archbishopric of 
Charcas. 

18. Don Gil de Cabrera y Davalos, of the order 
of Calatrava, native of Lima. 

19. The Doctor Don Alvarode Ibarra, native of 
Lima, collegiate of the college of San Martin of this 
city, fiscal of the audience of Chile, inquisitor 
apostolic of Lima, oidor deacon of the audience of 
Quito, intermediate president of the same, visitor 
of the audience of the city of Los Reyes ; and 
elected bishop of Truxillo, being president of the 
Nuevo Reyno de Granada. 

20. The Doctor Don Nicolas de las Infantas 
and Venegas, of the order of Santiago, native of 
Lima, fiscal, inquisitor, and visitor, in its tribunal 
and royal audience of Mexico, president of that of 
Quito, and before he took possession, promoted to 
the Nuevo Reyno de Granada ; he died at the 
early age of 34, his loss being universally lamented, 
on account of his great literature and talents. 

21. Don Francisco Cossio, who found himself 
at that time archbishop of that kingdom ; he was 
nominated intermediate president, through the 
death of his predecessor. 

22. Don Fray Francisco del Rincon, a monk of 
the order of the minims of San Francisco de Paula; 
being archbishop, he was nominated to be presi 
dent, governor, and captain-general of the kingdom 
at the same time, until the year 1718. 

23. Don Jorge dc Villalonga, Count of La 
Cueva, knight of the order of San Juan, lieute- 



160 



GRANADA. 



nant-general of the royal armies ; he was actually 
serving in &amp;lt;he capacity of general of the armies of 
Peru in Callao, and he was first viceroy of the 
Nuevo Reyno de Granada when the viceroyalty 
was established ; this being changed again in the 
year 1721 for a presidency, the government was 
filled up by, 

24. Don Diego de Cordoba Laso de la Vega, 
who entered and took possession in 1722, and go 
verned until 1730, when he returned to Spain, 
being succeeded by, 

25. Don Rafael de Esclava, colonel of infantry, 
knight of the order of Santiago, gentleman of the 
chamber of his Majesty ; he took possession of the 
presidency in 1737, and exercised it for a short 
time, as he returned to Spain to establish the vice- 
royalty, nominating in the interim, 

26. Don Sebastian de Esclava, Seiior of Eguillor, 
knight of the order of Santiago, comendador of Fu- 
ente of the Emperor, in the order of Calatrava, 
lieutenant-general of the royal armies, preceptor of 
the infant Don Felipe, a man of very great credit 
and esteem, who had worked himself up to the 
rank of captain in the regiment of Spanish guards, 
and afterwards colonel in those of Asturias and 
Castilla ; he arrived at Cartagena in 1739, and on 
account of the English having declared war, rested 
in that place without passing to Santa Fe ; he also 
defended it whilst attacked by the above, in 1740 : 
he returned to Spain, adorned with the title of cap 
tain-general of the army, in 1749. 

27. Fray Don Joseph Alfonzo Pizarro, Marquis 
ofVillar, knight of San Juan, lieutenant-general 
of the royal armada, gentleman of the chamber to 
his Majesty ; he entered Santa Fe in 1750, and 
exercised the viceroyalty until 1753, when he re 
signed it and returned to Spain. 

28. Don Joseph de Sol is Folch of Card on a, 
knight of the order of Montcsa, brigadier of the 
royal armies, ensign of the Spanish company of 
the royal body-guard ; he entered Santa Fe, and 
took possession of the viceroyalty in the aforesaid 
j^ear of 1753, exercising it about eight years, until 
1761, when his successor arrived ; and he entered 
immediately a convent of the barefooted order of 
San Francisco as a lay-brother. 

29. Fray Don Pedro Mesia de la Cerda, Mar 
quis of La Vega de Armijo, of the order of San 
Juan, lieutenant-general of the royal armada, 
gentleman of the chamber to his Majesty ; he en 
tered Santa Fe in 1761, and governed with great 
address until 1771, when he returned to Spain. 

30. Don Manuel Guirior, knight of the order of 
San Juan, lieutenant-general of the royal armada, 
gentleman of the chamber to his Majesty ; he go 



verned with great address, and with the applause 
of the whole kingdom, and was looked upon as a 
father both for his goodness and equal administra 
tion, from the aforesaid year, until 1775, when he 
passed over to the viceroyalty of Peru. 

31. Don Manuel Antonio de Flores, comendador 
of Lopera, in the order of Santiago, lieutenant- 
general of the royal armada, and gentleman of the 
chamber to his Majesty ; he exercised the vice- 
royalty from the time of the secession of the former, 
until 1783, when he obtained a licence to return to 
Spain, delivering the government to, 

32. Don Antonio Caballcro and Gongora, arch 
bishop of that holy metropolitan church, whose ac 
credited qualities in the army belonging to this dig 
nity, rendered him an object worthy the double 
function of civil and ecclesiastical governor, both 
of which offices he held at the same time. 

GRANADA, a city of the province and govern 
ment of .Nicaragua in the kingdom of Guatemala, 
founded on the shore of the lake, by Francisco 
Hernandez, in 1523. It has two convents of the 
monks of St. Francis and of La Merced. This city 
is 16 leagues from that of Leon, 24 from Realejo, 
and 90 from Guatemala. The pirate Edward 
David sacked it in 1687. 

GRANADA, an island of the N. sea, one of the 
Less Antilles or Caribes. It is 17 miles long from 
n. to s. in form of an half-moon, and 10 wide at 
its broadest part. The Father du Tertre makes it 
twice as large as the island St. Christopher ; and the 
Father Labat affirms, that through the observation 
of those whp have gone over it, it does not exceed 
22 leagues in circumference. The Caribes In 
dians, its pristine inhabitants, had settled here in 
larger tribes than in any other of the islands, in 
vited by the advantages it offered both for fishing 
and the chase, and its natural fertility. The 
French, under the command of M. de Poincy, at 
tempted to establish themselves here in 1638, and 
the. same has been the wish ofvariousothers,who have 
failed in their enterprise, owing to the then formi 
dable power of the Caribes, and the circumstance of 
St. Christopher s island being too fur distant to 
lend any assistance. The honour of this establish 
ment was, however, reserved for Mr. Parquet, go 
vernor of Martinique, who undertook the expedi 
tion at his own cost, carrying with him 200 
picked men, provided with presents designed for 
the savages, but not without arms, in case opposi 
tion should be offered to his designs. Accord 
ingly, having arrived here after four days sail, 
he was received with great pomp and testimonies 
of gladness by the commander of the Indians. 
Mr. Parquet in less than a week s time had built a 



GRANADA. 



fort, and by dint of civilities to the Indians, and 
making them presents of linen, knives, brandy, 
and other articles, had obtained from them the 
grant of the proprietorship of the whole island, 
with the exception of their own dwellings. 

Scarcely had the French gathered their first 
crop of tobacco, the quality of which was so su 
perior, as that one pound of it was worth more 
than three pounds of any gathered in the other 
islands, than the Caribes began to repent of their 
bargain ; and accordingly, without any formal 
declaration of war, committed the most outrageous 
hostilities, killing the French wherever they could 
find them, whether engaged in the woods, in the 
chase, or employed in catch ing turtle on the coasts. 
The French, however, being reinforced by a de 
tachment from Martinique, attacked the savages ; 
and these, although they defended themselves with 
great valour, found themselves under the necessity 
of retiring to a mountain, from the top of which 
they rolled down stones and trunks of trees upon 
their enemies ; and being afterwards joined by 
some other Caribes from St. Vincent and Domi 
nica, made a sally against the Frencli : but here 
again they had to repent their conduct; for the 
greater part of them were put to the sword, and 
40 that escaped took a boat and committed them 
selves to the sea. 

The conquerors burnt their cabins, destroyed 
their gardens, broke up their plantations of yuca, 
and did all the mischief they could : notwith 
standing this, different bodies of Indians contrived 
still to be very troublesome to their invaders, and 
succeeded in putting many to death. Yet still 
the French were victorious, and one morning be 
fore day-break, taking the Indians by surprise, 
they put all they could meet to the sword, without 
respect to sex or age, burning and destroying all 
the possessions that they had left, and even their 
canoes, thereby cutting of} all possibility of es 
cape. Afrer all this, however, the Indians rose 
again three several times. 

Some French planters mutinied against the pro 
prietor, Mr. Parguet ; and he having consumed 
the whole of his fortune, sold the island, in 1657, 
to the Count of Cerillac, of Paris, for 90,000 
francs. This person sent to the government here 
a man of a tyrannical and brutish disposition, who 
was first deserted by the greater part of the inha 
bitants, and afterwards put to death. In lu 6 4, the 
island was again sold to the W. India Company 
of France for 100,000 francs; although at that 
time it had no more than 150 colonists remaining 
of those who were in it at the time that the pur 
chase was made by the count. In IGTi, the com- 

VOL. II. 



pany found it requisite to resign it to the king ; 
and this change of masters tended only to its ruin ; 
for, till within very late years, this island has pro 
duced no emolument whatever, notwithstanding 
that the Fathers Tertre and Labat speak so highly 
of it, affirming that it enjoys such a salutary air 
and so fertile a territory. The trees, as well those 
bearing fruit as those used for building, are more 
lofty, straight, and thick than those found in the 
other islands, save the coco tree, which here is 
not so large : the tree in greatest esteem is that call 
ed latino, which is very lofty, and has, instead of 
branches, large leaves similar to fans, and which 
serve for covering the houses. 

This island abounds greatly in saline earths and 
in armadillos, the flesh of which is as good as that 
of the sheep, and affords the principal aliment of 
the natives, who are also particularly fond of 
turtle and lobsters. On the coast are some beauti 
ful valleys, watered by various rivers, the which, 
for the most part, have their origin from a lake 
situate in the lofty part of a mountain in the centre 
of the island ; and one of these rivers enters the 
sea in the e. part, where the coast is shoal, but of 
a sound bottom, the current, however, rapid. In 
various parls of the island are good bays and ports, 
where ships may ride safe at anchor or unlade; 
and some of these are fortified. The whole of the 
e. coast is clear and safe, and has the advantage of 
never being troubled with hurricanes ; but what is 
most in its favour is, that its territory is capable of 
producing all the fruits peculiar to its climate. 
The principal of its productions are cattle in 
abundance, birds, grass-hoppers, sugar, ginger, 
indigo, tobacco, and millet. That part near the 
coast is chiefly inhabited ; and here the country is 
mountainous; the whole of the other part of the 
island being a beautiful country, over which one 
may travel with equal convenience, either in a car 
riage or on horseback. 

The port, which is called Louis, is in the 
middle of a beautiful bay on the HJ. side of the island, 
having a sandy bottom, and capable of receiving 
1000 vessels, from 3 to 100 tons each, in perfect 
security against all weathers. Near to this port is 
another large cove divided from the port by a 
sand-batik, which, if the said bank could be re 
moved, would contain more than 100 vessels. By 
reason of this bank, the large vessels have to pass 
at 80 yards distance from one of the two small 
mountains, which are at the entrance of the port, 
and half a mile from the other, there being on one 
of them a fort, which was built by a French engi 
neer, having a half-moon and other regular stone 
fortifications : here is also another tolerable fort, 



162 



GRANADA. 



consisting of a wooden square, and being 25 feet in 
front, surrounded by a strong estacade of trees, and 
having at its two angles, that look to the sea, two 
small wooden pavilions, in one of which lives the 
commander. The first possessor, Mr. Parquet, 
lived in u very large forest which girts the moun 
tain, near the port; and on the skirt of which 
are placed the storehouses for provisions and wood. 
The church, which is at a small distance from the 
fort, is poor, and built of canes fastened together. 
Originally all the barracas or cabins were of two 
stories, and thither the people who Irved in the 
country used to retire in the night-time, by way of 
protection against the Caribes. 

The natives of the island of Dominica have an 
establishment in this island of more than a mile 
long, four leagues to the n. of the fort, close upon 
a noble river, abounding in eels, trout, and other 
fish : in the thickets are quantities of partridges, 
pigeons, thrushes, parrots, &amp;c. The people 
here are subject to obstinate fevers, which regularly 
terminate in dropsy. A third part of the island is 
uncultivated ; and although the greater part of it 
consists in mountains almost incapable of receiving 
cultivation, yet industry and perseverance have 
already given, even to these parts, a very pleasing 
appearance. 

The whole of this island is divided into six 
parishes, which are, Ue Saltadores, Del Po- 
bre Grande, De la Playa de las Goyabas, Del 
Gran Marques, DC la Tierra Baxa, and De Mai- 
grin. [These ix parishes are now known by dif 
ferent names, as follows: St. George, St. David, 
St. Andrew, St. Patrick, St. Mark, and St. John ; 
and its chief dependency, Cariacou island, form 
ing a seventh. Besides St. George s, the capital, 
the other towns arc inconsiderable villages, generally 
situated at the bays or shipping places. Besides 
GrenvUle or La Bay, is a port of entry, with dis 
tinct revenue officers, independent of St. George s.] 
Its produce, in 1770, amounted to 506,0007. ster 



ling. Jt was neutral until 1763, and the English 
became its possessors by the peace of Paris, lu 
the year 1771, it experienced a considerable loss 
by a fire which dcstroj^ed the capital, called St. 
George s ; and this was scarcely rebuilt when 
another fire happened in 1775, destroying it altoge 
ther; &amp;lt;he loss being estimated at 500,000/. sterling. 

[Granada was discovered by Columbus in his 
&amp;lt;hird voyage, in 1498. It remained in obscurity, 
under its native possessors, as we have seen, till 
1638, when the French first established them 
selves in it. Since its cession to Great Britain in 
1763, it was taken by the French in the American 
war ; and at the peace of 1783, it was restored to 
Great Britain. 

The hurricanes in 1780, the insurrection in 
1795, and perhaps other circumstances, have 
operated as an impediment to the progressive cul 
tivation and produce, which a view of this rich 
country seems to promise. It annually sends home 
with its Grenadines 2,000,000 Ibs. of cotton, be 
sides coffee, &amp;c. 

In the report of the privy council on the slave 
trade, in 1788, the British property vested here is 
estimated at 89,000 taxed acres of patented estates, 
and tiw Negroes are computed at 20,000, at 50/, 
each negro. 

Granada produced, of sugar, 
In 1763, ll,000hogsh. 

1776, 16,000 

1787, 13,500 

By return to house of commons, 1SOG, the 
number of hogsheads of sugar, of 13cwt. exported, 
was in the undermentioned years as follows: 
In 1789, 15,000 

1799, 12,000 

1805, 14,000 

The official value of the imports and exports of 
Granada were, 

In 1809, imports ,439,453, exports .189,800 
1810, 388,936, 173,366 



And the quantities of the principal articles imported into Great Britain were, in 



Cofiee. 


Sugar. 


Rum. 


Cotton Wool. 


Brit. Plant. 


For. Plant. 


Urit. Plant. 


For. Plant. 


Cwt. 

1 809, iCDvi 
1310, H9.5 


Cwt. 


Cwt. 

210,057 


Cwt. 

12 


Galls. 
642,310 


Lb. 

588, 352 



G R A 



G R A 



[By report of the privy council in 1788, and by a subsequent estimate, the population of Granada 

amounted to, 

,-, 
J&amp;. 



Years. 


Whites. 


People of 
Colour. 


Slaves. 










In 1787 


996 


1125 


23,926 


1805 


1100 


800 


20,000 









By return to house of commons, March 18, 1790, the following was the slave trade from Africa to 

this island in the under-mentioned years : 



lfiO 

,dt 

-iifC 


......... . . i_ia 


Arrivals from Africa. 


Negroes Exported. 


\ej*roes re 
tained for 
Cultivation. 


Years. 


Number of 
Vessels. 


Tonnagr , 


Total Number of 
Negroes imported, 


To fort-inn W. In 
dies in for. Bot. 


To foreign W. In 
dies in Jirit. Bot. 


Total 
exported. 


1787 
1788 


13 

30 


1913 
4484 


3713 
7436 


237 

945 


279 

1598 


536 
2543 


3177 

4893 






And the import of slaves into Granada, by 
report of privy council, 1788, at a medium of 
four years, and by a return to house of commons 
in 1805, at a medium of two years to 1803, was, 



Average of 

Four years to 1787 
Two years to 1803 


Imports. 


Re-exports. 


Retained. 


2583 
1097 


170 
2 


2413 
1095 



Granada is 71 miles to the n. w. of Tobago, 77 
to the w. of the continent of Nueva Andalucia, 
123 s. z. of Barbadoes, and 140 of Martinica. In 
lat. 12 21 w. Long. 61 43 o&amp;gt;.] 

GRANADILLAS, or GRINADINES, a number 
of islands and dangerous rocks amidst the Caribee 
isles, where the largest channel is not more than 
three or four leagues wide. They are situate be 
tween lat. 12 14 and 13 5 H. and between long. 
61 V and 6140 cL\ and in reality are nothing 
more than a string of isles dependent on Granada. 
It is an archipelago, the long, of which is 14 
leagues, and consists of 23 islands, producing cot 
ton, coffee, indigo, and sugar. The air is healthy, 
but there is no water in any of them. That of the 
most consideration is to the n. less than two 
leagues from St. V in rent, and is called Becoya 
or Bequia, although the French give it the name 
of Little Martinique: besides these, are some 
islands, called Mosquitoes, Canaovan, Fragata, 
and Union, lying between the islands Becouyaond 
Caricuacou. Those of Diamante or Redonda 
are the two principal of the islands which lie in 



the space between Carivacou and Granada. [See 
GRANADA.] 

GRAN ALA, Point of, on the coast of the pro 
vince and government of Santa Marta, between 
this city and the point of Aguja : in it is a small 
fort, called San Antonio. 

[GRANBY, a township in Essex county, Ver 
mont.] 

[GRANBY, a township in Hampshire county, 
Massachusetts, c. of S. Hadley, about 90 miles w. 
of Boston ; was incorporated in 1768, and con 
tains 596 inhabitants.] 

[GRANIJY, a township in Hartford county &amp;gt; 
Connecticut, on the line which separates Connec 
ticut from Massachusetts. It was formerly a part 
of Symsbuf y, and is 18 miles n. of Hartford.] 

[GRANBY, a small town on the Congaree, ? in S. 
Carolina, about two miles below the junction of 
Broad and Saluda rivers. Here a curious bridge 
has been built, whose arches are supported by , 
wooden pillars, strongly secured in iron work, 
fixed in the solid rock : its height is 40 feet above 
the level of the water. The centre arch is upwards 
of 100 feet in the clear, to give a passage to large 
trees which are always brought down by the floods. 
The ingenious architect has the toll secured to him 
by the legislature for 100 years.] 

[GRAND Bay, on the s. w. coast of Newfound 
land island, 19 leagues n. c. of N. Cape, in the 
island of Cape Breton.] 

[(IRAN D FATHERS, several large detached moun 
tains in the s. e. corner of Tennessee, in which are 
the head waters of French Broad and Cataba 
rivers. "1 



164 



G R A 



[GRAND Isles are two large islands in lake 
Charaplain ; each about eight or 10 miles long, 
and each forms a township belonging to Vermont. 
See SOUTH HERO, and NORTH HERO.] 

[GRAND Island, at the mouth of lake Ontario, is 
within the British territories, having Roebuck and 
Forest islands on the s. w. and the Thousand isles 
on the n. e. It is 20 miles in length, and its 
greatest breadth is four miles.] 

[GRAND Island, in lake Superior, lies on the n. 
side of the lake.] 

[GRAND Island, in Niagara river, is about six 
miles long and three broad. The s. end is four 
miles n. of fort Erie; and its n. extremity three 
miles s. of fort Slusher, and nearly 14 s. of Nia 
gara fort.] 

[GRAND Lake, in the province of New Bruns 
wick, near the river St. John s, is said to be 30 
miles in length, eight or 10 in breadth, and in some 
places 40 fathoms deep.] 

[GRAND MANAN Island lies six miles ,&amp;lt;?. by s. e. 
of Cumpo-bello island, in the Atlantic Ocean, op 
posite to Passamaquoddy bay, on the e. border 
of the United States. Lat. 44 48 n. Long. 
66 45 a&amp;gt;.] 

[Gu AND, a river which runs a n. w. course 
into lake Erie, 20 miles below the Forks, SO miles 
s . n). of Presque isle.] 

[GRANDE SEAUX, an Indian nation, who 
inhabit s. of the Missouri, and can furnish 800 
warriors.] 

GIIANDE, a river of the province and corrregi- 
miento of lea in Peru. It rises from the cordillcra 
of the province of Castro Virreyna. It runs w. 
making rminy windings, and incorporates itself 
with the Guapiri a little before this runs into 
the sea. 

GRANDE, another river, of the island of St. Do 
mingo, in the part possessed by the French. It 
runs n. n. w. in a serpentine course, and enters the 
sea in the n. coast, near Leogan. 

GRANDE, another, of the same island of St. 
Domingo. It runs n. and enters the sea in the 
coast of this rhumb, between port Caracol and the 
shoal of Coque-vielle. 

GRANDE, another, in the island and govern 
ment of Trinidad. It runs into the sea on the n. 
coast and e. extremity, opposite the island To 
bago. 

GRANDE, another, of the island of Jamaica. 
It rises in the e. head, runs n. n. w. then turns n. 
and enters the sea between the river Suist and port 
Antonio. 

GRANDE, another, in the kingdom of Brazil ; 
which rises in the mountains of the interior, runs 



G R A 

s. s. e. and enters the river San Francisco to the 
n. n. e. of the town of Goyaz. 

GRANDE, another, of the provinceand captain 
ship of Los llheos in Brazil. It rises near the 
coast, in the country of the Meribuces Indians, 
runs e. and enters the sea between the rivers Patiba 
and Santa Cruz. 

GRANDE, another, of the captainship of its 
name in the same kingdom as the former, giving 
its name to the said captainship. It rises in the 
mountains of the Mariquitas Indians, runs n. n. e. 
for many leagues, and enters the sea between the 
cape Negro and the river Genibabu. 

GRANDE, another, of the province and captain 
ship of S. Vicente in the same kingdom. It runs 
s. and enters the sea in the channel formed by the 
coast and the island of Nucstra Senora. 

GRAN DC, another, of the province and captain 
ship of Rey in the same kingdom, on the confines 
of Paraguay. It runs e. and forms the great lake 
of Los Patos : on its banks are several Spanish 
and Portuguese forts. 

GRANDE, another, in the province and go- 
vernrnent of Louisiana. It rises in some exten 
sive meadows lying between the rivers Missouri 
and Mississippi, runs A-. and enters the former. 

GiiAxnr, another, of New France or Canada, 
which runs .9. za. between those of Malicon and 
Raisin, and enters the lake Michigasi. 

GRAN BE, another, with the addition of Meri, 
in the province and captainship of Rey, and king 
dom of Brazil, which runs w. then turns n. and 
enters the Curitaba. 

GRANDE, a sierra or cordillcra of very lofty 
mountains, covered with snow, in the province 
and government ofSonora, and kingdom of Nuevo 
Mexico. They run from e. to w. from the river 
Salado to the Azul. 

GRANDE, another cor dill era of mountains, of the 
kingdom of Brazil, which run from s. tow. on the 
shore of the river Araguaya ; bounded s. by the 
sierra Venneja, and n. by the river Tocantines. 

GRANDE, a bay on the coast which lies be 
tween the river La Plata and the straits of Magel 
lan. It is in lat. 51 s. between port Santa Cruz 
and the bay of San Pedro. 

GRANDE, another, on the n. coast, and at the 
a&amp;gt;. head of the island of St. Domingo, and in the 
part possessed by the French; situate between 
that of Los Caiinitos and the port of Jeremias. 

GRANDE, a gulf in the coast of the country of 
the Patagonian gianis, between the bay of San 
Pedro and the cape of Buen Tiempo ; having in 
its front many islands. 

GRANDE, an island of the river Mississippi, in 



G R A 

I s ? ew France or Canada ; situate in the space be 
tween the conflux of the river Ohio and the port 
and fort of Kaskakies. 

GRANDE, another, near the s. coast of lake 
Superior, in New France or Canada, at the mouth 
of the river Hicamepeque. 

GRANDE, another, in the S. sea, oft* the coast 
of Peru, and near the coast, in the province and 
corregimierito of Chancay. 

GUANDE, another, near the coast of Brazil, 
in the province and captainship of San Vicente, 
close to that of Los In^enios. 

GRANDE, another, of the N. sea, near the 
coast of the province and government of Carta 



gena, 



and of the island Baru. 



GRANDE, another, near the coast of Brazil, in 
the province and captainship of the Rio Janeiro; 
situate between the islands Marambaya and San 
Sebastian. 

GRANDE, an isle near the coast of the province 
and government of Santa Marta, called the Morro 
Grande, opposite the city. 

GRANDI:, a French settlement and parish, called 
Quartel Grande, in the island of St. Domingo, si 
tuate near the w.coast ; on the shore of the river of its 
name. 

GIIANDE. See GREAT. 

GRANEROS, Country of Los, a portion of 
the coast of the territory of the Patagones, at the 
straits of Magellan, between cape Monmouth and 
Giant s bay. 

[GRANGE, Cape LA, or Cape MONTE CHRIST i, 
on thew. side of the island of St. Domingo. It is 
a high hill in the form of a tent, and may be seen 
by the naked eye at cape Francois, from which it 
is 14 leagues e . by n. : a strip of land joins it to 
the territory of Monte Christi, so that at a distance 
it seems to be an island. The cruisers from Ja 
maica often lie off here. This cape lies in lat. 19 
54 SO V n. and long. 74 9 y 30" w. from Paris, and 
with point De Dunes forms the mouth of the bay of 
MONTE CHRISTI,] which see. 

GRANHAYA, a river of the province and 
captainship of Pernambuco in Brazil. Jt rises 
near the coast, runs e. and enters the sea opposite 
the island of San Alexo. 

[GRANVILLE, a fine township in Annapolis 
county, Nova Scotia. It lies on the n. side of 
Annapolis river, on the bay of Fundy, and is 30 
miles in length ; first settled from New England.] 
[GRANVILLE, a township in Hampshire county, 
Massachusetts, about 14 miles w. of Springfield. 
It was incorporated in 1754, and contains 1979 
inhabitants.] 

[GRANVILLE, a township in Washington 
4 



G R A 



county, New York, containing 2240 inhabitants, 
of whom 422 are electors. J 

[GRANVILLE Counly, in Hillsborough district 
in N. Carolina, has the state of Virginia ;/. and 
contains 10,982 inhabitants, of whom 41&amp;lt;&amp;gt;3 aire 
slaves. Chief town, Williamsburg.] 

[GRANVILLE, a flourishing town in Ken 
tucky.] 

GRANXA, a port of the island of St. Domingo, 
on the n. coast, between the island of Monte 
Christi and the point of Manglar.; 

GRAPO, a small river of the province and 
colony of Surinam, or part Of Guayana possessed 
by the Dutch; one of those which enter the 
Cuyuni. 

GRASAMORIN, a settlement of the :French, 
in the part which they possess in the island of St. 
Domingo. It was burnt by the Spaniards in 
1691, and destroyed after a victory gained over 
the former. 

[GRASS, a river in New South Wales.] 
GRATES, Cape of, on the e. coast of the 
island of Newfoundland, one of those -which form 
the mouth or entrance of the strait of Bcllcisle. 
GRAVE. SeeSEDGER. 
[GRAVE Creek, on the Ohio, 12 miles down 
the river from Wheeling. Here is a mound of 
earth, plainly the work of art, called an Indian 
grave : it is of a conical form, in height about 80 
feet : it ascends in an angle of about 80 : the 
diameter at the top is about 60 feet, the margin 
enclosing a regular concave, sunk about four feet 
in the centre : near the top stands an oak, about 
three feet in diameter. It is said the Indians hnve 
no tradition what nation ever buried their dead in 
this manner. On examination, these mounds have 
been found to contain a chalky substance, suppos 
ed to be bones of the human kind.] 

[GRAVESEND, Port of, is situated on the 
s. w. side of the island of Jamaica, in a large bay. 
It has two channels, the Leeward and the Main 
channel, and affords good anchorage lor large 
vessels.] 

[GRAVESEND, a small village in King s county, 
Long island, New York, seven miles n. by e;-t)f 
the city. The township of its name contains 42(&amp;gt; 
inhabitants.] 

GRAVO1S, Guos, a bay of the s. coast, and 
in the part possessed by the French, in the island 
of St. Domingo, between the river Salado and the 
point of Feste. 

[GRAY, a post-town in the district of Maine, 
in Cumberland county, 15 miles n. by w. of Port 
land. The township \\as incorporated in 1778, 
and contains 577 inhabitants.] 



166 



G R E 



GKA.V, a settlement of (lie English, in the 
island of Barbadoes ; situate in the s. part. 

[GREAT Bank of N EWFOUNDL AND. This 
noted fishing bank extends from ;?. to $. and is 
almost of a triangular shajv. Between it and the 
island on the v. is a broad channel of deep water. 
It lies between lat. 41 and 50 24 n. and between 
loner. 49 45 and 54 45 a\J 

| GREAT BEAR Lake, a water which runs a 1 , 
and flows into M Kenzie s river, in the n. w. part 
ofN. America, not far from the arctic circle. Its 
mouth is 250 yards wide.] 

] GIIEAT ALLIGATOR Dismal. See DISMAL.] 

[GREAT BARRINGTON, a township in the ,v. w. 
part of the state of Massachusetts, in Berkshire 




rises in the mountains near the source of Oneida 
river, and flows n. &amp;&amp;amp;gt; by w. to lake Ontario. Its 
mouth is 10 miles s. w. from the mouth of Black 
river.] 

[GREAT EGG HARBOUR, &amp;c. See EGG HAR 
BOUR. 

[GREAT Island, in Piscataqua harbour, New 
Hampshire.] 

[GUEAT KANIIAWAY, a large river which 
flows through the e. bank of the Ohio, in lat. 59 
5 n. nearly~500 yards wide at its mouth. The 
current is gentle for about 10 or 12 miles, when it 
becomes considerably rapid for upwards of 60 
miles farther, where you meet with the first falls, 
when it becomes impossible to navigate it from the 
great number of its cataracts.] 

[GUEAT WORKS or CHADBOURNES River, in 
the district of Maine, rises from Bonnebcag pond, 
about 30 miles from its mouth. There are several 
valuable mills on it, within and above the town of 
Berwick.] 

r G R r, A T M r. c A T i N A , an isla nd on the Labrador 
coast. Its s. extremity lies in lat. 50 43 n.] 

THREAT PELICAN Island. See PELICAN.] 

"GREAT Sonus. See SODTJS.] 
(TREAT Swamp, between Northampton and 
Lucern counties in Pennsylvania. This swamp, 
on examination and survey, is; found to be good 
farm land, thickly covered with beach and sugar- 
maple. J 

GREAT Ridge, one of the ridges of the Allc- 
ghany mountains, AV Inch .separates the waters of 
the Savannah and Alatamaha. 

At the s. e. promontory of the Great rid,ge is 
rhat extraordinary place called BufTaloe Lick, dis 
tant about 80 miles from A tigusta. It occupies 
several acres of ground. A large cane swamp and 



G R E 

meadows, forming an immense plain, lies. e. from 
it ; in this swamp Mr. Bartram thinks the branches 
of the Great Ogeechee take their rise. The lick 
is nearly level, and lies between the head of the 
cane swamp and the ascent of the ridge; The 
earth, from the superficies to an unknown depth, 
is an almost white or cinereous coloured, tenacious, 
fattish clay, which all kinds of cattle lick into 
great caves, pursuing the delicious vein. Mr. 
Bartram could not discover any thing saline in its 
taste, but an insipid sweetness: horned cattle, 
horses, and deer, are immoderately fond of it, in 
somuch that their excrement, which almost totally 
covers the earth to some distance round this place, 
appears to be perfect clay, which, when dried by 
the sun and air, is almost as hard as brick.] 

[GREAT STRINGS is an amazing fountain of 
transparent, cool water, situated near the road, 
about mid-way between Augusta and Savannah. 
It breaks suddenly out of the earth at the basis of 
a moderately elevated hill or bank, forming at 
once a basin near yards over, ascending through 
a horizontal bed of soft rocks, chiefly a testaceous 
concretion of broken, entire, and pulverized sea- 
shells, sand, &amp;c. constituting a coarse kind of 
lime-stone. The ebullition is copious, active, and 
continual, over the ragged apertures in the rocks, 
which lie seven or eight feet below, swelling the 
surface considerably, immediately above it: the 
waters descend swiftly from the fountain, forming 
at once a large brook, six or eight yards over,- 
and five or six feet deep. There are multitudes of- 
fish in the fountain, of various tribes, chiefly, the 
several species of bream, trout, cat-fish, and gar^ 
which are beheld continually ascending and -de 
scending through the rocky apertures. Bartram, 
from whose travels the above is taken, obser^ve^ 
that he crossed no stream or brook of water-within 
12 or 15 miles of this fountain, but had in view 
vast savannahs, swamps, and cane meadows, which, 
he thinks are the reservoirs which feed this grotto.] 

GREAT. See GRANDE. 

[GREEN, a county in Washington district, 
state of Tennessee.] 

[GREEN, a township in Franklin county, 
Pennsylvania. Also a township in Washington 
county in the same state.] 

[GREEN, a post-town in Lincoln county in the 
district of Maine ; situated on the-e&amp;gt; side of An* 
droscoggin river, 14 miles w. of, Pittstown, ; 34 n. 
of Portland, and 120 n. bye. of Boston, containing 
639 inhabitants.] 

[GRLF.N, a navigable river of Kentucky, which 
rises in Mercer county, has a gentle current* , 
and is navigable nearly 150 miles. Its course-is.;- 



G R E 

generally w. and at its confluence with the Ohio is 
upwards of 200 yards wide. Between the month 
of Green river and Salt river, a distance of nearly 
200 miles, the lands upon the banks of the Ohio 
are generally fertile and rich ; but leaving its banks, 
you fall into the plain country, which is consider 
ed as little better than barren land. On this river 
are a number of Salt springs or licks. There are 
three springs or ponds of bitumen near this river, 
which do not form a stream, but empty themselves 
into a common reservoir, and when used in lamps, 
answer all the purposes of the best oil. Vast 
quantities of nitre arc found in the caves on its 
banks, and many of the settlers manufacture their 
own gunpowder.] 

[GREEN Bay, orPuAN Bay, a s. w. branch of 
lake Michigan. See MICHIGAN, PUAN, and 

WlN NEBAGO.] 

[GREEN, a small river which rises in the town 
of Marlborough in Vermont, and falls into Con 
necticut river above Deerfield, in Massachu 
setts.] 

[GREEK BRIAR, a large and fertile county of 
Virginia, surrounded by Bath, Randolph, Har 
rison, Kanhaway, Botetourt, and Montgomery 
counties. It is about 100 miles long and 45 broad, 
and together with Kanhaway county, which was 
formerly a part of it, contains 6015 inhabitants, 
including 319 slaves. There is a large cave on 
Rich creek in this county, the earth at the bottom 
of which is strongly impregnated with sulphur : 
many such are to be found on Green Briar river. 
The chief town is Lewisburg. At Green Briar 
court-house is a post-office, 30 miles w. by s. of 
Sweet springs, and ]03zo. of Staunton.] 

[GREEN KRIAU River, in Virginia, runs a s. w. 
course, and falls into the t. side of New river, 74 
miles before that river enters the river Ohio. 
Green Briar river has its mouth in lat. 37 37 . 
and long. 81 12 a?.] 

[GREEN Island, or SERPENT Island, one of 
the Lesser Virgin islands, which is claimed by the 
Spaniards, and situated near the e. end ofPofto- 
rico.j 

[GRREN ISLAND Harbour lies on the a?, end of 
the island of .Jamaica. It furnishes good an 
chorage, having Davis s cove on the n. e. and 
Half-moon and Orange bays on the.v. a?.] 

[GREENBURGH, a township and post-town 
in West Chester county, New York, containing 
1400 inhabitants, of whom 122 are slaves, and 
16i are electors.] 

[GREENBUSH, a township in Renssalaer 
county, New York ; 164 of its inhabitants are 
electors. 1 



G R E 



167 



[GREENCASTLE, a town in Franklin county, 
Pennsylvania; situated near the Cohegocheague 
creek. Here are about 80 houses, two German 
churches, and a Presbyterian church. It is 11 
miles s. by w . of Chambcisburg, and 117 K&amp;gt;. by sV 
of Philadelphia.] 

[GREENE, a county in Kentucky, extending 
from Ohio river on the ? . to Tennessee state on the 
s. and bordering w. on the Mississippi river, and 
e. upon Hardinand Jefferson counties.] 

[GREENE, a county in Washington disf riot in 
the state of Tennessee, having 7741 inhabitants, 
of whom 454 are slaves. Greenville college has 
been established by law in this county. It is 
situated between two small n. branches of Nolu- 
chucky river, about 15 miles n. n\ by n\ of. ones- 
borough, and 54 e. of the mouth of French Broad 
river t 

[GREENE, a township in Tioga com.tr, New 
York, on the c. side of Chenengo river. "i 

[GREENE, a county in the Upper district o&amp;lt; 
Georgia, bounded w. by the upper part of Oconec 
river, e. by Wilkes county, and s. by that of 
Washington. It contains 5405 inhabitants, in 
cluding 1377 slaves. Chief town, Greensbo- 
rough.] 

[GREENFIELD, a handsome flourishing 
town in Hampshire county, Massachusetts, aboiit 
four miles n. of Ucerficld, and 75 ?:&amp;gt;. by 11. of 
Boston. The township lies on the zo. bank of 
Connecticut river, was incorporated in 1753, and 
contains 1498 inhabitants. A company was in 
corporated in 1796 to build a bridge over Con 
necticut river, to connect this town with Mon 
tague.] 

[GKEENFIELD, a township in Saratoga coun 
ty, New York; 380 of the inhabitants are 
electors.") 

[GREENLAND, a town in Rookingharn 
county, New Hampshire, in the vicinity of the 
ocean, live miles s. from Portsmouth. . It was 
incorporated in 1713, and contains 634 inhabi 
tants.] 

[GREENLAND. This extensive country pro 
perly belongs to neither of the two continents, 
unless, as seems probable, it be united to America 
to the n. of Davis s straits. It is bounded J)y 
Davis s straits on the rc\ to the n. by some un 
known ocean, or by the H. pole, e. by the Icy 
sea, and a strait which separates it from Iceland, 
s. e. by the Atlantic ocean, s. it terminates in ;i 
point called Farewell, in lat. 59 n. The w. coast, 
which is washed by Davis s straits, is high, rocky, 
bad land, which rears its head, close to the sea, 
in lofty mountains covered with snow and inae-J 



168 



GREENLAND. 



[cessible cliffs, and meets the mariner s eye 40 
leagues at sea. The Green landers, reckoned to 
amount to about 7000, live to the s. of the 62 of 
n. lat. or, as the inhabitants are wont to say, in the 
5. ; but no Europeans live there, so that those parts 
are but little known. The European colonies 
have fixed themselves to the M. of lat. G2 3 . 

The astonishing mountains of ice in this coun 
try may well be recorded among its greatest cu 
riosities. Nothing can exhibit a more dreadful, 
and at the same time a more dazzling appearance, 
than those prodigious masses of ice that surround 
the whole coast in various forms, reflecting a 
multitude of colours from the sun-beams, and call 
ing to mind the enchanting scenes of romance. 
Such prospects they yield in calm weather ; but 
when the wind begins to blow, and the waves to 
rise in vast billows, the violent shocks of those 
pieces of ice, dashing one against another, fill the 
mind with horror. 

As this country is covered, in most places, with 
everlasting ice and snow, it is easy to imagine that 
it must, be extremely cold. Among the vege 
tables of this cold country, are sorrel of various 
sorts, angelica, wild tansy, scurvy-grass in 
great quantities, wild rosemary, daadalions in 
plenty, and various sorts of grass ; wortlcberries 
and cranberries grow here. Europeans have sown 
barley and oats, which grow as high and as thrifty 
as in warmer climates, but seldom advance so far 
as to car, and never, even in the warmest places, 
to maturity, because the frosty nights begin too 
soon. Unfruitful as this country is, it affords food 
for some,- though but few kinds of beasts, which 
furnish the natives with food and raiment. Of the 
wild game are white hares, rein-deer, foxes, and 
white bears, who arc fierce and mischievous, seals, 
&amp;c. The Grcenlanders have no tame animals, but 
a species of dogs who resemble wolves. The Grcen- 
landers believe in the doctrine of the transmigra 
tion of souls, and have very singular and romantic 
notions concerning a future state. 

West Greenland was first peopled by Europeans 
in the eighth century. At that time a company of 
Icelanders, headed by one Ericke llande, were, 
by accident, driven on ihe coast ; on his return he 
represented the country in such a favourable light, 
that some families again followed him thither, 
v here they soon became a thriving colony, and 
bestowed on their new habitation (lie name of 
Graenland or Greenland., on account of its verdant 
appearance. This colony was converted to Chris 
tian ity by a missionary from Norway, sent thither 
by the celebrated Olaf, the first Norwegian mo 
narch who embraced the true religion. Tli-? 



Greenland settlement continued to increase and 
thrive under his protection, and in a little time the 
country was provided with many towns, churches, 
convents, bishops, &amp;c. under the jurisdiction of 
the archbishop of Drontheim. A considerable 
commerce was carried on between Greenland and 
Norway, and a regular intercourse maintained be 
tween the two countries till the year 1406, when 
the last bishop was sent over : from that time all 
correspondence was cut off, and all knowledge of 
Greenland has been buried in oblivion. 

The colony, from its first settlement, had been 
harrassed by the natives, a savage people, agree 
ing in customs, garb, and appearance, with the 
Equimaux. (See NEW BRITAIN.) This nation, 
called SchrcllingSySkrcBlingues, ordwarfish people, 
from their small stature, at length prevailed over 
the Iceland settlers, who inhabited the w. district, 
and exterminated them in the llth century ; in 
somuch that when their brethren of the e. district 
came to their assistance, they found nothing alive 
but some cattle and flocks &amp;lt;;f sheep running wild 
about the country. The Schrellings have a tradi 
tion that these were likewise exterminated, arid 
aflinu that the ruins of their houses and villages 
still appear. There are reasons, however, for be 
lieving thai there may be still some descendants of 
the ancient Iceland colony remaining in the c. 
district, though they cannot be visited by land, 
on account of the stupendous mountains, perpetu 
ally covered with snow, which divide the two 
parts of Greenland ; whilst they have been ren 
dered inaccessible by sea, by the vast quantity of 
ice driven from Spitzbergen, or East Greenland. 
One would imagine that there must have been some 
considerable alteration in the n. parts of the world 
since the 15th century, so that the coast of Green 
land is now become almost totally inaccessible, 
though formerly visited with very little difficulty. 
Numerous attempts have been made in the last anil 
present century to discover the e. district, but 
they have all proved abortive. In .these attempts 
ore has been found, every hundred Ibs. of which 
yielded 2fi ounces of silver ; and sand, from which 
an eminent chemist extracted pure gold. 

It is thought the only practicable method of 
reaching that part of the country will be to coast 
n. about in small vessels, between the great flakes 
of ice and the shore ; as the Greenlanders have 
declared, that, the currents continually issuing from 
the bays and inlct.s, and running s. w. along the 
shore, hinder the ice from adhering to the land ; 
so that then* is always a channel open, through 
which vessels of small burden might pass, espe 
cially if lodges wi-re built at suitable distances on] 



G R E 

the shore, for the convenience and direction of the 
adventurers. 

The Greenland fishery is productive, and chiefly 
engrossed by the British and Dutch nations. In 
1785, the former employed 153 ships in the whale 
fishery, and the Dutch 65.] 

[GREEN Mountains, a range of mountains 
extending n. n. e. to s. s. w. and dividing the 
waters which flowe. into Connecticut river, from 
those which fall w. into lake Champlain, lake 
George, and Hudson s river. The ascent from the 
e. to the top of the Green mountain in Vermont 
is much easier than from the w. till you get to 
Onion river, where the mountain terminates. The 
height of land is generally from 20 to 30 miles 
from the river, and about the same distance from 
the New York line. The natural growth upon 
this mountain is hemlock, pine, spruce, and other 
evergreens ; hence it has always a green appear 
ance, and on this account has obtained the de 
scriptive name of Ver Mow?, Green mountain. 
On some parts of this mountain snow lies till May, 
and sometimes till June. The chain extends 
through Massachusetts and Connecticut, and ter 
minates in New Haven. Kellington peak, the 
highest of thtse mountains, is about 3454 feet above 
the level of the ocean.] 

[GREENSBOROUGH, a very flourishing 
village or town in Georgia, in Green county, one 
of the most fertile in the state, and is 80 miles w. 
of Augusta, 43 from Washington, and seven from 
the Oconee river, the boundary line between the 
Creek Indians and white people. This town is 
very near to a large quantity of lands which the 
state has laid off and appropriated for the use of 
her public university, and which are now in such 
a state of cultivation as to afford a handsome 
revenue for that institution.] 

[GRECNSBOROUGH, a thriving village in Caro 
line county, Maryland, on the zo. side of Chop- 
tank creek, about seven miles n. of Danton, and 
22 miles s. e. by s. of Chester.] 

[GREENSBOROUGH, a new township in Orleans 
county in Vermont. It adjoins to Minden on the 
//. w. and Wheelock on the s. e. and contains 
only 19 inhabitants.] 

[GREENSBURGH, a post-town, and the ca 
pital of Westmoreland county, Pennsylvania. It 
is a neat pretty town, situated on a branch of Se- 
wickly creek, which empties into Youghiogany 
river. Here are 100 dwelling-houses, a German 
Calvinist church, a brick court-house, and a stone 
gaol. It is 23 miles s. e. by e. of Pittsburgh, and 
200 w. by n. of Philadelphia.] 

[GREENSV1LLE, a county of Virginia, en 
voi/, ii. 



G R E 



169 



compassed by Brunswick, Southampton, and Sus 
sex counties, on the w. n. and e. and by the state 
of N. Carolina on the s. It is about 24 miles long 
and 20 broad, and contains 6362 inhabitants, of 
whom 3620 are slaves.] 

[GREENVILLE Court-House, in Virginia, 
stands on Hick s ford, 28 miles from Southampton, 
and 64 from Norfolk.] 

GREENVILLE, a county in Washington district, 
S. Carolina. It is situate near the river Savannah, 
and is reputed to be the most useful and fruitful 
part of this province. Here a colony of Scotch 
established themselves under the direction of Lord 
Cardros ; but afterwards abandoned their post 
through fear of the Spaniards in Florida. This 
county remained peopled by Europeans until J732, 
when Mr. Purry, a Swiss, native of Newchatel, 
encouraged by the English government and by 
Carolina, undertook to establish a Swissr:ompany ; 
and in the same year transported hither 172 per 
sons, who were afterwards followed by many 
others ; so that in a very short -time there was a 
population of upwards of 300. These established 
themselves on the n. shore of the river Savannah, 
where they founded a city called Purrisburg, 36 
miles from the river s mouth. The portion of ter 
ritory taken by Mr. Purry belonged to a country 
which was called Great Yamassee Bluff. The 
colony still continued to increase ; and in 1734, its 
founder introduced 270 fresh Swiss people ; so 
that in less than two years its whole population 
exceeded 600 souls. The engagement or proposal 
made by the founder to the assembly, namely, tiiat 
he would settle the most s. part of the frontier 
with these brave and valorous Swiss, was thus in a 
great measure fulfilled ; and the approbation of the 
undertaking was signified by an act passed in the 
year 1721, in which a gratuity of 400/. sterling 
was offered for each man who might settle here ; 
provisions and instruments for 300 persons being 
forthwith provided by the assembly, and the ex- 
pences being borne upon the duties arising from 
the imports on Negroes. 

Purrisburg is one of the 11 divisions of which S. 
Carolina should be formed, agreeably with the 43d 
article of the instruction given by the king of Eng 
land to the governor; in the which the former de 
clares, that each of these districts should be formed 
of 20,000 acres or portions of territory, divided into 
squares of about 50 to each colonist. The terri 
tory of Greenville is watered by the river Mayo, 
which being united to the Carnbage, forms witli 
the sea the island of Edelano. 

The territory on the banks of this river was for* 
merly inhabited by a nation of Indians called V r es&amp;lt; 
z 



170 



G R E 



toes. Here is a very beautiful lake and an agree 
able valley. The river of Port Royal runs 15 
miles to the w. of the Mayo, with a good entrance, 
having 17 feet of water. The port is large, con 
venient, and secure for vessels, and runs up into a 
tract of country extremely pleasant and fertile, and 
certainly preferable to the other parts of Carolina. 
The river is divided into various branches : the 
port is 180 miles from the city of the Spaniards, 
San Agustin. 

[Greenville is situated in thew. re, 1 , corner of the 
state ; bounded e. by Spartanburg county, in 
Pinckney district; 5. by Pendleton; w. by the 
state of Georgia, and that tract of country which 
the state of S. Carolina ceded to the United States ; 
and n. by the state of N. Carolina. It contains 
6503 inhabitants, of whom 606 are slaves. Taxes, 
192/. 6s. Sd. The lands are mountainous and 
hilly, andfwcll watered, and the climate healthy 
and agreeable.] 

[GREENVILLE, a post-town of S. Carolina, and 
chief town of Cheraws district ; situated on the w. 
side of Great Pedee river, in Darlington county. 
It contains about 30 houses, a court-house, goal, 
and academy. It is 55 miles e. w. t. of Camden, 
78 n. e. by e. of Columbia, 107 w. by e . of Charles- 
town.] 

GREENVILLE, another county of the above pro 
vince, in the n. part ; divided in some degree from 
Virginia by the river Roanoke : by this river there 
is a communication with the sea. 

[GREENVILLE, a post-town, and the chief town 
of Pitt county, N. Carolina ; situated on the v. 
bank of Tar river, distant from Ocrccock inlet 1 10 
niiles. Jt contains about 50 houses, a court-house 
and goal ; also a seminary of learning, called the 
Pitt Academy. It is 17 miles from Washington, 
22 miles from Tarborough, and 65 e. by s. of 
Raleigh.] 

[GREENVILLE, a small post-town in Greene 
county, in the state of Tennessee ; situated on the 
w. side of the n. easternmost branch of Nolachucky 
river, about six miles w. by e. of Greenville col 
lege, 26 miles n. w. of Jonesborough, 66 e. by n. 
of Knoxville.] 

[GREENVILLE, a fort and settlement in the N. 
W. territory, on the s. side of a n. w. branch of the 
Great Miami, six miles n. w. of fort Jefferson on 
the same branch, and about 23 miles s. e. of fort 
Recovery. It is a picketed fort, with bastions at 
each angle, and capacious enough to accommodate 
20CO men. Here the American legion had their 
head-quarters in the late war with the Indians. It 
was established by the late Major-general A.Wayne 
in 1793, arid here he concluded a treaty of peace 



G R E 

with the Indian nations, on the 3d of August 
1795.] 

[GREENVILLE BAY, or LA BAY, a town and 
port of entry on the e. or windward side of the 
island of Granada. It has about 60 dwelling- 
houses, a church, and several rich stores of Indian 
and European goods, and plantation utensils. The 
situation is low, and rather unhealthy.] 

[GREENWICH, a township in Hampshire 
county, Massachusetts, incorporated in 1754, con 
tains 1045 inhabitants. It is 20 miles e, of North 
ampton, and 75 w. of Boston.] 

[GREENWICH, a township, the second in rank, 
in Gloucester county, New Jersey ; situated on 
the e. bank of Delaware river, opposite to fort 
Mifflin, three miles n. by e. of Woodbury, and six 
s. e. of Philadelphia.] 

[GREENWICH, a township in Sussex county, 
New Jersey, on the e. side of Delaware river, in a 
mountainous country, about five miles n. e. of 
Easton, in Pennsylvania, and 31- s. w. of Newton, 
the shire town. It contains 2035 inhabitants, of 
whom 64 are slaves.] 

[GREENWICH, a town in Cumberland county, 
New Jersey, on the n. a), bank of Cohanzy creek, 
about three miles from its mouth in Delaware bay. 
Here arc about 80 houses, and a Friends meeting 
house. It is 15 miles s. e. of Salem, and 30 s. by 
zi). of Philadelphia.] 

[GREENWICH, a maritime township in Fairfield 
county, Connecticut, and the s. westernmost of the 
state, lies about 50 miles w. of New Haven, and 40 
e. of New York city. Its sea-coast on Long Island 
sound, and that of the township of Stamford on 
the e. has a number of isles and rocks bordering the 
inlets of the sea and mouths of the creeks. Byram 
river passes through this town, the largest of the 
small streams which water it, and only noticeable 
as forming part of the line between Connecticut 
and New York. This tract was purchased of the 
native Indians in 1640, and settled under the go 
vernment of the New Netherlands, (now New York) 
and was incorporated by Peter Stuyvesant in 1665, 
who was then governor of the New Netherlands. 
This town falling within the bounds of Connecticut, 
was afterwards granted to eight persons by that 
colony.] 

[GREENWICH, in Rhode Island. See EAST 
GREENWICH.] 

[GREENWOOD, a township in Cumberland 
county, Pennsylvania. Also, a township in Mifflin 
county in the same state.] 

[GREEN- WOODS, a vast forest of stately pines 
in Litchfield county, Connecticut, which cover the 
face of a part of that county. These are clothed 



ORE 

in green bearded moss, which being pendant from 
the boughs, screens many of the trees from the 
eyes, and gives to the whole a gloomy, wild, and 
whimsical appearance.] 

GREGORIA, CAPILLA DEL DOVA, a settle 
ment of the province and government of Tucuman, 
in the district and jurisdiction of the city of Cor 
doba, on the shore of the river Segundo. 

GREGOR1O, S. a settlement of the head settle 
ment of Uruapan, and alcaldia mayor of Vallado- 
lid, in the province and bishopric of Mechoacan. 
It abounds particularly in pastures for large cattle, 
its territory being fertilized by an abundant stream, 
in which are caught many fish ; although the in 
habitants are tew, owing to an epidemic disorder 
which carried off the greater part. This settle 
ment is 18 leagues to the s. of its head settlement. 

GREGORIO, S. another settlement, that was held 
by the missions of the -company of the Jesuits in 
the province of Topia, and kingdom of Nueva 
Vizcaya. 

GREGORIO, S. a bay on the n. coast of the 
straits of Magellan, between the point of Nuestra 
Sefiora deGracia and the bay of the Eleven Thou 
sand Virgins. It was taken possession of by Pedro 
SarrnientOjforthe 13th time, for the king of Spain. 

GKKGORIO, S. a cape or point oi land on the 
coast of the same straits of Magellan, one of those 
which form the above bay. 

[GREGSTOWN, a village in Somerset county, 
New Jersey, on the e. side of Millstone river, six 
miles n. e. of Princeton, and about nine s. w. of 
New Brunswick.] 

[GRENADA. SeeGnANADA.] 

[GRES, CAPE ATI, a promontory on the e. side 
of the Mississippi in the N.W. territory, eight 
leagues above the Illinois river; and the tract of 
country so called extends five leagues on that river. 
There is a gradual descent back to the delight 
ful meadows, and to beautiful and fertile uplands, 
watered by several rivulets, which fall into the 
Illinois river, between 30 and 40 miles from its en 
trance into the Mississippi, and into the latter at 
Cape au Gres. The distance from the Missisippi 
to the Illinois, across the country, is lessened or in 
creased according to the windings of the former 
river ; the smallest distance is at Cape au Gres, 
and there it is between four and five miles. The 
lands in this intermediate space between the above 
two rivers are rich, almost beyond parallel, covered 
with large oaks, walnut, &amp;c. and not a stone to be 
seen, except upon the sides of the river. If settle 
ments were begun here, the French inhabitants ac 
knowledge that the Spanish settlements on the 
other side of the Missisippi would be abandoned ; 



G R O 



171 



as the former would excite a constant succession of 
settlers, and intercept all the trade of the Upper 
Mississippi.] 

GRIEGO, J u AN, a port of the island Margarita, 
on the n. coast. 

GRIFFIN, a settlement of the island of Barba- 
does ; situate on the e. coast, on the s. side. 

GRIFFIN, a bay on the coast of the river St. 
Lawrence, of the province of Nova Scotia or 
Acadia, between cape Des Rosiers and the river 
Renard. 

GRIND, a rocky shoal or isle near the coast of 
Nova Scotia, within the great bay of Fundy, and 
in its most interior part. 

GR1SIN, a settlement of the island of Barba- 
does ; situate on the s. coast. 

GRISON, a small island of the N. sea, one of 
theGranadillas. It lies between that of Diamante 
and that of Carivacou, and is desert through 
drought. 

GRIT A, a city of the government of Maracaibo 
in the kingdom of Tierra Firme, founded by 
Francisco de Cacereg in 1576, with the dedicatory 
title of Espiritu Santo and the name of Grita, this 
having been given to it by the natives in their bat 
tles. It was at first the head of the government; is 
of a very mild and healthy temperature. It used 
to produce abundance of cacao, which was the 
most prized oi any in the kingdom for its fine fla 
vour ; but the greater part of the estates are at the 
present day destroyed, through the continual in 
vasions of the Motilones Indians. Some cacao is, 
nevertheless, still found here, with great quantities 
of sugar, this being the principal branch of com 
merce. It also abounds in tobacco, maize, pota 
toes, gawanzos, figs, apples, vegetables, and an in 
finite variety of fruits. Here are large breeds of 
cattle of every kind, particularly in those places 
called the Prcgonero and La Lobatera. It lias a 
convent of monks of the order of San, Francisco ; 
and in its district are mines of copper, which are 
not worked, and of a blue stone in high request by 
painters. It lies between Pamplona and Merida, in 
the royal road, 67 miles from the former, and 46 
from the latter. Lat. 7 53 n. Long. 71 39/^. 

GIILTA, a river of the former province and go 
vernment. It rises opposite the city, and ruus .a&amp;gt;. 
in a serpentine course until it enters the Suiia. 
It has a wharf, named San Faustina, for merchan 
dize. 

GRIXALVA, a large river of the province and 
government of Tabasco in Nueva Kspafia, thus 
called from having been first discovered by Juan 
de Grixalva. 

GHOiS, an island near the e. coast of the island 



173 



G R Y 



of Newfoundland, between tbe islands of Fichot and 
Belleisle. 

GRONDEN, an island of the N. sea, near the 
coast of Guayana, opposite the island of Maraca, 
close to the cape Del Norte. 

[GROS MORN rc stands in the middle of the n. 
peninsula of the island of St. Domingo, between 
the mountain and the head waters of a river which 
falls into the sea four leagues to the n. and a league 
and a half a , of Port de Paix. It is equally dis 
tant, 11 leagues, n. e. of point Paradise, and n. w. 
of Les Gonaives. Lat. 19 46 n. Long. 75 13 w. 
from Paris.] 

GROTES, SAN JUAN DE, a settlement of the 
head settlement of Amuzgos, andalcaldia mayor of 
Xicayan, in Nueva Espana. It contains 28 fami 
lies of Indians, who employ themselves in the cul 
ture and commerce of cotton, vaimlla, and tobacco. 
It is 22 leagues to. by n. of its head settlement. 

[GROTON, a township in Caledonia county, in 
Vermont, is situated w. of, and adjoining to Ryegatc 
township on Connecticut river, and nine miles n.w. 
of Stephen s fort on that river. It contains 45 in 
habitants.] 

[GROTON, a township in Middlesex county, 
Massachusetts, 25 miles n. w. of Boston, and con 
tains 1840 inhabitants.] 

[GROTON, a township in New London county, 
Connecticut, having Fisher s Island sound on the 
*. and Thames river on the w. which separates it 
from New London, to which it formerly belonged. 
Jt was incorporated in 1705, and consists of two 
parishes, containing 3946 inhabitants. In 1770, 
there were 140 Indians here ; 44 of whom could 
read, and 17 were church members. On a height, 
on the bank of the Thames, opposite New London 
city, stood fort Griswold, memorable for being 
stormed on the 6th of September 1781, by Bene 
dict Arnold, a native of Connecticut, after he had 
become a traitor to his country. Here 70 men, 
the flower of the town, were put to the sword, 
after they had surrendered themselves prisoners. 
The compact part of the town was burnt at the 
same time, and sustained losses to the amount of 
23,21 11. Fort Griswold defends the harbour of 
New London.] 

[GROVE Point forms the n. side of the mouth 
of Sassafras river, in Chesapeak bay, five miles 
s. s. w. of Turkey point.] 

[GROVET s Creek, in the state of Tennessee, 
lies seven miles from King s spring, and two from 
the foot of Cumberland mountain.] 

[GRYALVA, a river in the province of 
Chiapa in New Spain, which is said to breed cer 
tain amphibious beasts not to be found in any other 



G U A 

place. They resemble monkeys, and are spotted 
like tigers ; they hide themselves generally under 
water, and if they see any man or beast swim by, 
they twist their tails about a leg or arm to draw 
them to the bottom ; and yet it has never been ob 
served that they eat them.] 

[GRYSON, a new county of Virginia, taken 
from Montgomery, which bounds it on the n. It 
has the state of N. Carolina s. ; Henry and Wythe 
counties on the e. ando&amp;gt;.] 

GUABA, a settlement of Hispaniola or St. Do 
mingo ; situate in a valley which gives it its name : 
bounded w. by the settlement of Inojuelo, and 
watered by the river Bayala, which passes through 
it. 

GUABA, a river of the same island and valley, on 
the n. coast. It runs w. and enters the Guaternu. 

Go ABA, another, a small river in the same 
island, distinct from the former, but of the same 
name. It rises very near the n. coast, runs n. 
and enters the Jaques or Santiago, a little before 
this runs into the sea, near the mountain Christi. 

GUABATA, a small settlement of the corregi- 
miento of the city of Velez in the Nuevo Reyno de 
Granada ; annexed to the curacy of Popaba. Its 
population is very small, comprising about 40 In 
dians. Its temperature is hot, and its productions 
few. 

GUABIARE, a large and navigable river of the 
Nuevo Reyno de Granada. It rises in the para 
mos or mountains of Santa Fe, runs through the 
llanos of San Juan, collecting in its course the 
waters of the Tellas, Anari, Ariari, Ichucha, 
Guamuca, Guarisuveni, and various other smaller 
streams, and then enters in a large body into the 
Orinoco, first forming an island called Amanabeni. 
On its borders dwell some barbarous nations of In 
dians. Its mouth into the Orinoco is in lat. 4 IS 
n. Long. 68 12 w. 

GUAB1S, a river of the province and govern 
ment of Paraguay. It rises near the settlement of 
Santa Ana in the country of the Chiquitos Indians, 
runs e. and spreads itself into some pools, which 
are equally replenished by the river Paraguay : 
from these rivers and the continual inundations, is 
also formed the great lake of Los Xareyes ; on the 
shore of which are to be seen the ruins of a settle 
ment or ancient establishment, and towards the n. 
is the reduction of S. Rafael, being a conversion of 
the Guaranies Indians, transported thither by the 
regulars of the company of Jesuits, in 1701. 

GUACA, a settlement of the jurisdiction and 
government of Pamplona in the Nuevo Rej r no de 
Granada. It is of a cold temperature ; but in its 
district are found hot climates, and it is not with- 



G U A 

out the productions peculiar to one and the other 
temperature; such as wheat, maize, papas^ beans, 
tares, onions, plantains, and sugar-cane. It con 
tains 100 Indians, and more than 200 white inha 
bitants. It is 24 leagues s. e. of Pamplona. 

GUACA, an ancient province in the kingdom of 
Quito, between the settlements of Ipiales and of 
Chiles to the n. and of Angel to the s. the mountain 
of Chitalson to the w. and an unknown country to 
the e. At the present day it forms part of the cor- 
regimiento of the town of Ibarra. Its climate is 
somewhat cold, and the roads are rough and 
craggy. Here grows a plant called fraylejones^ 
which burns the soles of the feet. Some vestiges 
are still remaining of an open passage made through 
the middle of the mountains by the Inca Huaina 
Capac, who conquered the province, and fixed in 
it the n. limits of the monarchy of Peru. Mr. de la 
Martiniere speaks of a natural bridge found upon 
the river Guaitara, and which he affirms the In 
dians call in their language Lumichaca : it ought, 
however, to be Rumi-chaca^uiCQ rumi and not lumi 
signifies stone. 

GUACA, another, a small province n. of Antio 
quia, from whence it is distant 35 leagues, in the 
Nuevo Reyno de Granada. It was discovered 
and subjected by the Mariscal George Robledo in 
1542. It is of a healthy climate, and full of moun 
tains and woods ; in the which are many gold 
mines not worked for want of hands, the province 
being depopulated and uncultivated. 

GUACA, an artificial mountain made by hand, 
of a conical figure, by the Indians in the time of 
their gentilism, and used by them as a burying 
place, where they had a custom of depositing with 
the corpse all the jewels and riches that belonged 
to the person whilst living. This account excited 
the avarice of the Spaniards, who set about open 
ing the mountain in various parts, when some 
had the good luck, indeed, to find considerable 
wealth, whilst others only spent their fortunes in 
fruitless attempts : for the Indians noting the 
greediness of the Spaniards, hewed out several 
parts of the mountain, so as to resemble these re 
ceptacles of wealth ; and so diligent were they in 
this practice, that a Spaniard might be at the 
trouble of opening thirty different parts before he 
found one to reward him for his labour. These 
places are called guacas, and the part where they 
are found in the greatest numbers is in the terri 
tory of Cayambe in the kingdom of Quito. 

GUACA, a valley of the province and government 
of Antioquia in the Nuevo Reyno de Granada. It 
is at the foot of the mountains of Abide. 



G U A 



173 



GUACABA, a small isle of the N. sea, near the 
coast of this rhumb of the island of Cuba. 

GUACAI, a small river of the province and go- 
vernment of Paraguay, which enters the Parana, 
between those of Capivari and Pirapopa. 

GUACAIGAZU, a river of the same province 
and government as the former. It runs n. n. e. 
and enters the river Grande, of the province and 
captainship of Rey in Brasil. 

GUACAI-MINI, a river of the same province 
and government as the former, and running to the 
same rhumb. It also enters the Rio Grande. 

GUACALCO, a settlement of the head settle 
ment of Yautepec, and alcaldia mayor ofCuerna- 
vaca, in Nueva Espafia. 

GUACALERA, a settlement of the province 
and government of Tucuman, in the district of the 
city of Xuxuy ; situate on the shore of the river 
Laquiaca. 

GUACAMAYAS, a settlement of the province 
and corregimienlo of Tunja in the Nuevo Reyno 
de Granada. It is of a mild temperature, and 
produces all kinds of fruits ; contains 100 house 
keepers and 50 Indians; and is 32 leagues n.e. of 
its capital. 

. GUACAMAYO, a settlement of the province 
and government of Antioquia in the Nuevo Reyno 
de Granada ; situate in the serranias of Guarnoco, 
on the shore of a river. 

GUACAMAYOS, Port of the, in the bay of 
Tolu, of the province and government of Carta 
gena. It is large, convenient, and secure, and one 
of the constant places of resort for vessels of con 
traband traders. 

GUACANA, a settlement of the head settlement, 
and alcaldia mayor of Cinagua, in Nueva Espafia. 
It contains 22 families of Indians, who employ 
themselves in breeding of large cattle and sowing 
maize. It is 10 leagues to the n. of its capital. 

GLJACAPA, a settlement of the province and 
alcaldia mayor of Suchitepec in the kingdom of 
Guatemala ; situate on the coast of the S. sea, c. 
of the port of Acazutla. 

[GUACARAS, a settlement of Indians, of the 
province and government of Buenos Ayres ; situate 
on a branch of the Parana, about 10 miles e. of 
Corrierites. Lat. 27 27 31" s. Long. 58 35 
12" a;.] 

GUACARES, a barbarous nation of Indians, in 
habiting the woods at the source of the river Cu- 
nuris. They are but little known ; bounded by 
the country of the Amazonas : and it is said of 
them, that once a year they pay these women a 
visit; and leaving them pregnant, return back 



174 



G U A 



again to their own country, when, should the pro 
geny in the next year prove to be males, they take 
them with them, leaving the females to their mo 
thers. With regard to this practice, which we 
account fabulous, see wliat is further said in ar 
ticle MAR ANON. 

GUACARI, a settlement of the province and 
government of Popayan in the JNuevo llcyno dc 
Granada. 

GUACARUGAI, a settlement of the province 
and government of Buenos Ayres ; situate on the 
shore of the river Qtiaquacuyuti. 

GUACASM A, a large and beautiful bay of the 
const of the N. sea, in the province and govern 
ment of Atacames or Esmeraldas, in the kingdom 
of Quito. - ^ 

[GUACASMA, a cape or point of land in the 
province of Raposo, in the kingdom of Quito. 
Lat. 2 29 n. Long. 78 21 a?.] 

GUACAYA, a mine of silver, very abundant in 
former times, and at present abandoned, in the dis 
trict of the settlement of Sicchos, of the jurisdiction 
of Tacunga in the kingdom of Quito. 

GUACHANAMA, a settlement of the province 
and corregimiento of Loxa in the kingdom of 

o o 

Quito. "V 

G IJACHAVES, a settlement of the province 
and government of Popayan in the Nuevo Reyno 
de Granada. 

GUACHE, a river of the province and govern 
ment of Maracaibo in the Nuevo Reyno de Gra 
nada. It rises s. of the city of Tucuyo, at the 
foot of the paramo of La Rosa, and running s. 
with an inclination to s. e. enters the river of La 
Portuguesa. 

GUACL1ETA, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Tunja in the Nuevo Reyno de 
Granada ; situate on a level, of a cold temperature, 
arid near the settlement of Chiquinra. It produces 
much wheat, maize, papas, and other fruits of this 
climate ; contains upwards of 300 housekeepers 
and 180 Indians. Very near it are some exceed 
ingly lofty rocks, from whence it was a custom to 
throw down the children that were sacrificed to the 
sun, and to this luminary a temple was dedicated. 
When the Spaniards entered this place with Gon- 
zalo Ximinez de Queseda, they named it, it being 
then very populous, San Giegorio el Magno, from 
their having arrived at it on (he day of this saint, 
after having endured much from hunger and fa 
tigue. It is 13 miles s.zo. of Tunja, and 47 n. by 
c\ from S:inta Fe. 

GU AC-HI, or GUARO, a small river of the pro 
vince and government of Muracaibo in the Nuevo 



G U A 

Reyno de Granada. It rises n. of the city of Me- 
rida, between the city and the Great lake, runs n. 
and empties itself into the lake, opposite the en 
trance of the same. 

GUACHI, a fertile and delightful spot of the 
province and corregimiento of Ainbato in the king 
dom of Quito, between its capital and the settle 
ment of Mocha. It produces in abundance French 
beans of the best quality, the same being much 
esteemed at Quito. 

GUACHINANGO, a settlement and head set 
tlement of the district of the alcaldia mayor of Te- 
guantepeque in Nueva Espaiia. 

GUACHINERA, a settlement of the missions 
that were held by the company of Jesuits, in the 
province and government of La Sonora. 

GUACHIPA, a valley of the kingdom of Peru, 
in the corregimicnto of Cercado, three leagues n. e. 
of Lima. It is large, fertile, and beautiful, and in 
it are the ruins of an ancient and large town of the 
I ness. 

GUACHIPAI, a small and poor settlement of 
the jurisdiction of the city of Palma, and corregi- 
miento of Tunja, in the Nuevo Reyno de Gra 
nada ; of a hot temperature, and producing the 
fruits of the same, as also cotton, maize, plantains, 
and yiicas. 

GUACHIPE, a river of the province and go 
vernment of Tucuman ; it rises in the mountains 
of the valley of Calchaqui, runs s. e, and enters the 
Grande del Salado, between those of Quebradaand 
De las Piedras. 

GUACIII-YACU, a large and abundant stream 
of the province and government of Mainas in the 
kingdom of Quito. It rises in the valley of Paute, 
runs e. s. e . irrigating the country and territory of 
the Xibaros Indians, and enters by the a 1 , shore 
into the river Morona, in hit. 337 s. and long. 
76 57 w. 

GUACHO, or HUACHO, a port of the S. sea, on 
the coast of Peru, between the island of SanMartiu 
to the n. and that of Callaoto the s. It is small, an(l 
of little depth, and to be entered only by small 
vessels, in lat. 11 14 s. 

GUACTIUCAL, a settlement of the province 
and government of Popayan in the Nuevo Reyno 
de Granada. 

GUACll UNELA, a settlement of the missions 
that are held by the religious order of San Fran 
cisco, in the province of Taranmara and kingdom 
of Nueva Vizcaya. It is 27 leagues w. s. w. of the 
real of the mines and town of Sun Felipe de Chi- 
g- 1 lag i ; a. 

GUACICOS, a barbarous nation of Indians, 



G U A 

dwell in the mountains e. of Bogota, in the 
Nuevo Reyno de Granada, at the entrance of the 
l/amtras ot Cazanare and Meta. These barbarians 
aro tow, and tlieir customs are not well known. 

GUACIMAL, Arm of the, is a large branch of 
the river A pure, by which it communicates with 
the river of La Portuguesa. 

[GlIACOOKINGO, a town in New Spain, 30 
miles .9. e. of Mexico.] 

GUACO MAN, a settlement and head settlement 
of the nlcnldin mayor of jVlotines in Nucva 
Espaiia. It contains 52 families of Indians. 

GUACOTETEC, a settlement of the province 
and alcaldia mayor of San Salvador in the king 
dom of Guatemala. 

GUACURAI, a river of the kingdom of Brazil, 
in the territory of the Cayapos Indians. It rises 
in the mountains, runs s. s. e. and enters by the n. 
side into the Grande of Parana, between the Cu- 
ruray and the Verde. 

GUADA, a settlement of the Nuevo Reyno de 
Leon ; situate to the n. n. w. of the capital of 
Monclova. 

GUADALABQUEN, a district and territory of 
the Indians, of the kingdom of Chile, compre 
hended in the province and corregimienlo of 
Valdivia. It had this name in the time of the 
Indians. 

GUADALAXARA, one of the three districts or 
audiences of Nueva Espaiia in N.America; si 
tuate upon the s. coast. It extends from lat. 18 
50 to 24 50 n. ; towards the n. e. it is bounded 
by San Luis, and 5. e. by Valladolid ; towards the 
n. it has Durango, and to the w. it is washed by 
the sea ami gulf of California, extending itself 
along the coast upwards of 200 leagues, from n. w. 
to s. ii\ The interior of the country is very irre 
gular, and particularly towards the n. and the 
widest part. It comprehends seven provinces, 
which are, that of its own name, which is the 
principal, Xalisco, Chiametlan, Zacatccas, Nueva 
Vizcaya, Culiacan,and Cinaloa. It enjoys different 
climates, according to the variety of its situation ; 
some part of it being in the torrid zone, and others 
in the temperate. It is, however, for the most 
part milder than the rest of Nueva Espana, and 
reputed healthy; for, indeed, it is not uncom 
mon to see persons whose age exceeds JOO years : 
nevertheless it is much infested with musquitoes, 
bugs, and other insects. The territory is for the 
most part mountainous and full of woods, having 
the appearance of a desert, and it is said that the 
Spaniards have taken the precaution of leaving it 
in this abandoned state, in order that strangers who 
visit it may not be encouraged to settle. It has 



G U A 



17.5 



mnny silver mines, and some of gold of immense 
value have lately been discovered; this precious 
metal being carried to Mexico on mules over the 
most craggy roads, in .order to avoid the risk of 
any interception by strangers from sea. The rest 
of the country is most fertile, and produces wheat 
and maize in such abundance that the former yields 
100, and the second 200 fold, although the crops 
are sometimes destroyed by the locust, as arc (ho 
olives by the ants. The abundance of the finer 
sorts of European fruits, herbs, and roots, i.s incre 
dible, and particularly of the sugar-cane and cochi 
neal : the honey also, made by bees, said to 
have no sting, is remarkably fine. The meadows 
abound in all kinds of cattle, and the woods in ani 
mals of the chase, in pines and oaks ; but they 
are, at the same time, full of wolves, snakes, and 
scorpions. Here grows a kind of medicinal 
pepper, which cures wounds, also a green stone, 
which we are assured is a specific remedy against 
the disease of the stone. Here arc flowers of ex 
quisite fragrance, fine drugs, and rich mines of 
silver, copper, and lead, and on the coast a pearl 
fishery. The Indians are cunning, treacherous, 
and weak : they use for arms bows and arrows, 
and their manner of attacking the Spaniards is by 
ambuscade, save when they are regularly headed 
by one of their caciques. The Spaniards of dis 
tinction live by commerce, and are masters of the 
mines ; and the inferior sort give themselves up to 
the pursuits of agriculture and breeding cattle. 
In each settlement are two Spaniards and one 
cacique, whose business it is to regulate the go 
vernment, and maintain good order amongst 7hc 
natives : these are very indignant at affronts, and 
pride themselves on their valour : they are indo 
lent and lazy, and never labour but for great 
wages. Their clothing consists of a shirt and a 
square cotton mantle made fast in front by two 
buttons, and their small-clothes are of the same. 
They sleep upon mats made of reeds, and they 
adorn their necks, legs, and arms, with beads of 
green stones. Their principal diversion is dancing 
to the sound of a hollow piece of wood. Horse 
flesh and broth of maize are esteemed by them as 
delicious aliments, and chocolate and a chicha of 
maize their favourite drinks. 

GUADALAXARA. The province which gives its 
name to the abovementioncd district, and which is, 
as we have before said, a part of the same, is 
bounded e. and s. by the province of Mechoacan, 
n. by that of Xalisco, a corner of which is washed 
by the S. sea. Notwithstanding its situation, being 
under the torrid zone, it is healthy, temperate, 
and fertile ; producing not only excellent woods for 



176 



G U A 



building vessels, but much wheat and maize, as 
also other fruits of America and Europe, besides 
the rich treasures that are extracted from its mines. 
It is 50 leagues long, and nearly the same wide. 

[GtJADALAXARA, Intciidancy of. This in- 
tendancy, a part of the kingdom of Nueva 
Gallicia, is almost twice the extent of Portugal, 
with a population five times smaller. Its greatest 
breadth is 100 leagues, from the port of San Bias 
to the town of Lagos ; and its greatest length is 
from s. to n. from the Volcan de Colima to San 
Andres Teul, 118 leagues. 

Guadalaxara is crossed from e. to w. by the 
Rio de Santiago, a considerable river which com 
municates with the lake of Chapala, and which 
one day (when civilization shall have augmented 
in these countries) will become interesting for in 
terior navigation from Salamanca and Zelaya to 
the port of Sun Bias. 

All the e. part of this province is the table-land 
and w. declivity of the cordilleras of Anahuac. 
The maritime regions, especially those which 
stretch towards the great bay of Bayonne, are 
covered with forests, and abound in superb wood 
for ship-building. But the inhabitants are ex 
posed to an unhealthy and excessively heated air. 
The interior of the country enjoys a temperate cli 
mate, favourable to health. 

The Volcan de Colima, of which the position 
Las never yet been determined by astronomical 
observations, is the most w. of the volcanoes of 
New Spain, which are placed on the same line in 
the direction of one parallel. It frequently throws 
up ashes and smoke. An enlightened ecclesiastic, 
who has made several very exact barometrical 
measurements, Don Manuel A bad, great vicar of the 
bishopric of Mechoacan, estimated the elevation of 
the Volcan de Colima above the level of the sea at 
2800 metres (or 9185 feet). This insulated moun 
tain, as is stated by M. Abad, appears only of a 
moderate height when its summit is compared with 
the ground of Zapotilti and Zapotlan, two villages 
of 2000 varas (or 5505 feet) of elevation above the 
level of the coast. It is from the small town of 
Colima that the volcano appears in all its gran 
deur. It is never covered with snow, but when this 
falls in the chain of the neighbouring mountains 
from the effects of the n. wind. On the 8th De 
cember 1788, the volcano was covered with snow 
for almost two-thirds of its height ; and from the 
best meteorological considerations, we are induced 
to assign nearly 3200 metres (10,498 feet) for the 
total height of the Volcan de Colima. In the be 
ginning of 1791, the above gentleman made the 
tour of the volcano by Sayula, Tuspan, and Co- 



G U A 

lima, without seeing the smallest trace of snow on 
its summits. 

According to a manuscript memoir communi 
cated to the tribunal of the Consulado of Vera 
Cruz, by the intendant of Guadalaxara, the value 
of the agricultural produce of this intendancy 
amounted, in 1802, to 2,599,000 piastres, equal to 
13,644,750 francs, or 568,531 /. sterling, in which 
there were computed 1,657,000 fanegas of maize, 
43,000 cargas of wheat, 17,000 tercios of cotton, 
(at five piastres the tercio), and 20,000 pounds of 
cochineal of Autlan, (at three francs the pound). 
The value of the manufacturing industry was esti 
mated at 3,302,200 piastres, (17,336,550 francs, 
or 722,351 /. sterling). 

The province of Guadalaxara contains, accord 
ing to* the latest accounts, two cities, six towns, 
and 322 villages. The most celebrated mines are 
those of Bolanos, Asientos de Ibarra, Hostiotipa- 
quillo, Copala, and Guichichila near Tepic. 

The most remarkable towns are, Guadalaxara, 
Cornpostella. Aguas Calientcs, Villa de la Purifi- 
cacion, Lagos, and Colima. 

The population, in 1803, amounted to 630,500, 
and the extent of surface in square leagues was 
9612, the number of inhabitants to the square 
league being 66.] 

GUADALAXARA, the capital of the former pro 
vince, and of the kingdom of Nueva Galicia ; 
founded in 1531 by Nufio de Guzman. It is of 
a somewhat hot temperature, great, populous, and 
handsome, through the symmetry of its buildings, 
squares, and streets, which are all straight, long, and 
wide, some being as much as 12 or 14 yards across. 
The houses are, for the most part, only one story 
high, so that they cover proportionably more 
ground. It has eight plazas, (public places), 
which are La Mayor, that of Santa Maria de 
Gracia, Santo Domingo, Del Carmen, the small 
place of San Francisco, where the custom-house 
is, that of La Palma, and that of the parish of 
Sagrario, besides another of Nuestra Senora del 
Pilar. The temples are as follows : Oratorio de 
San Felipe Neri, convents of monks of St. Do 
mingo, of the observers of San Francisco, of La 
Orden Tercera, of San Antonio, of San Agustin, 
of Nuestra Senora de la Merced, a house of en 
tertainment of the barefooted Carmelites, a college 
which belonged to the regulars of the company, 
and hospitals of San Juan de Dios and of Bethle- 
mitcs, monasteries of the nuns of Santa Maria de 
Gracia and of Jesus Maria, both Dominicans, of 
Santa Monica, of the barefooted Carmelites, and 
the Beaterio de San Diego, which is a receptacle 
for female children. Besides these it has two col- 

2 



GUADALAXARA. 



177 



leges, the one of San Joseph, which is the semi 
nary of the cathedral, and another of San Juan 
Baptista, which was a house for studies belonging 
to the regulars of the company, where there were 
professors of writing and of the Mexican language. 
The population of this city is greatly increasing, 
and consists of from 8 to 9000 families of Spa 
niards, Mustecs, and Mulattoes, without those of 
the Indians who inhabit the wards and settlements 
of its precinct. It is the head of a bishopric, suf 
fragan to Mexico, and erected in 1548 ; and in it 
resides thetribunal of the royal audience, established 
in the same year. It is situate on the shore of the 
river Barnaja or Esquitlan, which rises from the 
lake of Mechoacan, running with great rapidity 
to the s. w. ; and at the distance of four leagues it 
has a very lurge fall, after which it enters the S. 
sea between Xalisco and Chiametlan. The cathe 
dral is magnificent; and the extensive plain on 
which it is situate is watered by various streams 
and fountains besides the aforesaid river : and all 
these tend to render the territory fertile in grain, 
herbs, and pastures. Five leagues distant from 
the city is a mountain of an extraordinary height, 
and so steep that its ascent is impracticable for 
loaded horses; the other mountains surrounding 
this are covered with pines and oaks. The natives 
of this city are excellent mechanics, and excel 
particularly in making articles of tortoise-shell. It 
enjoys delightful and salutary waters, which enter 
it on the w. through some aqueducts of good 
workmanship, and in which no expence was 
spared ; the same having been under the superin- 
tendency of Don Juan Rodriguez de Alboerne, 
Marquis of Altamira, o:dor of the audience, then 
taken up by the Marquis del Castillo de Aiza, the 
president, and finished by Don Martin Blancas, 
who was also oidor. Streams also fertilize the en 
virons of the town, and many cultivated estates, 
gardens, and orchards. The natives are for the 
most part of a peaceable disposition, handsome, 
and industrious. [The population, according to 
the latest accounts, and as estimated by Humboldt, 
amounts to 19,500 souls.] The city is 150 leagues 
w. with some inclination to n. w. of Mexico. Lat. 
21 8 n. Long. 103 5 w. 

Bishops who have presided in Guadalaxara. 

1. Don Fr Antonio of Ciudad Kodrigo, of the 
order of San Francisco, native of the city of his 
title in Estremadura, one of the 12 who founded 
the province of Mexico, and its second provincial ; 
he returned to Spain on business touching religion, 
and was presented to be first bishop of Guada 
laxara, but. refused the dignity. 

2 Don Juan de Barrios, native of Sevilla; he 
VOL. n. 



passed over to Nueva Espaiia ; elected to be pro 
tector of the Indians ; and promoted, in reward for 
the zeal he manifested, to the bishopric of Guada 
laxara ; but he did not take possession, from his 
death having taken place before he was conse 
crated. 

3. Don Pedro Gomez Maraver, native of Gra 
nada, a man of apostolical character, having been 
continually engaged in the visitation of his bishop 
ric, and converting, in great numbers, the Indians 
to the faith ; he also converted the Indian chief or 
cacique of the settlement of Tlajatnulco, and gave 
him his own Christian and surname; and from 
him are descended the Maraveres Indians, heard 
of at the present day ; he died in 1552. 

4. Don Fr. Pedro de Ayala, of the order of San 
Francisco, native of Guadalaxara in Castilla; 
elected bishop in 1535 ; he assisted at the second 
council of Nneva Espana, as prelate of Xalisco, 
in !565 ; laid the first stone of its cathedral, and 
died in 1569. 

5. Don Francisco de Mendiola, native of Val- 
laclolid, oidor of the royal audience of Guadalax 
ara; and elected bishop of its holy church in 1571 ; 
he was most pious and charitable to the poor, di 
viding amongst them what he possessed, not even 
excepting his own bed, which he carried himself 
to a sick Indian; he died in 1576, and his body, 
even to this day, remaining uncorrupt, is a 
reasonable proof of his just claims to beatification. 

6. Don. Fr. Domingo de Arzola, of the order 
of preachers, vicar-general and visitor in his reli 
gion, of the provinces of Peru and Nueva Kspaiia, 
native of Mondragon, presented to this bihopric 
in 1579 ; he founded the convent of St. Domingo 
and the college of Jesuits, assisted at the third Mex 
ican council of 158% and died whilst at the visi 
tation of the settlement of Atoyan, in 1590. 

7. Don Fr. Juan de Truxillo, of the order of 
San Geronimo ; elected bishop in 1591; but he 
did not take possession. 

8. Don Fr. Pedro Suarez de Escobar, native of 
Medellin in Estretnadura, of the order of San 
Agustin, of the province of the name of Jesus de 
Mexico; elected in the same year ; a man of sin 
gular literature, as his works attest ; he died be 
fore he was consecrated. 

9. Don Alonso Fernandez de Bonilla, native of 
Cordoba, fiscal of the inquisition of Mexico, and 
dean of that holy metropolitan church ; elected 
bishop of the same, and sent from thence to be vi 
sitor of the royal hacienda of Lim i in Pom, and 
from thence presented to the bishopric of Mexico, 
in 1.^92. 

10. Don Francisco Santos Garcia, native of Ma- 

A A 



178 



GUADALAXARA. 



drigal, inquisitor of Mexico, and chanter of its 
holy church ; elected bishop of this, which he took 
the charge of, in 1597; he lived till he was very 
infirm, and having passed over to Mexico, in or 
der to be reinstated in health, died in that city. 

11. Don Alonso de la Mota, native of Mexico, 
curate of the parish of Chiapa; he passed over to 
Spain, and returned, having been made dean of 
Mechoacan ; arid from thence he was promoted to 
be deacon of La Puebla, and afterwards that of 
Mexico, where he formed amost intimate friendship 
with the venerable Gregory Lopez ; he did not ac 
cept the bishopric of Nicaragua, and was elected 
to this church in 1601; he visited the whole bi 
shopric, pacified the barbarous Indians of the sierra 
of Topia, and was promoted to the bishopric of 
La Puebla de los Angeles in 1607. 

12. Don Fr. Juan del Valle, native of San Mi 
guel de Aragon, of the order of San Basilic, ab 
bot of its monastery of Valladolid ; presented to the 
bishopric of this church in 1607. He made a 
general visitation, and returned to Spain, where 
he renounced the dignity, and died at Madrid 
in 1620. 

13. Don Fr. Francisco de Rivero, native of 
Alcala de Henares, theological doctor and profes 
sor of that university, provincial of the province 
of Castilla ; the 38th general of his religion ; 
elected bishop of Guadalaxara through the renu- 
ciation of his predecessor, in 1618; he founded 
the convent of his order. In his time the bishopric 
was divided, and that of Durango erected, and he 
was removed to Mechoacan in 1630. 

14. Don Leonel de Cervantes Carvajal, native 
of Mexico, archdeacon of Santa Fe, provisor 
and vicar-general of its bishopric, commissary of 
the holy office, and of the holy crusade ; he was 
presented to the bishopric of Santa Marta, pro 
moted to that of Cuba, afterwards to this of Gna- 
dalaxara in 1631, and from thence to that of Oax- 
aca in 1635. 

15. Don Juan Sanchez, Duke of Estrada, native 
of Santa Cruz, near to Talavera de la Reyna, col 
legiate of the Mayor of Cuenca, curate of Fuen- 
carral, canon of the church, collegiate of San 
Justo, and pastor of Alcala, professor of theology 
in its university ; presented to this bishopric in 
1636; he died in 1641. 

16. Don Juan Ruiz Colmonero, native of the 
town of Budia, of the bishopric of Sigiienza, col 
legiate-major of San llilefonso de Alcala, professor 
of arts in its university, magisterial canon of 
Ciudad Rodrigo ; he renounced the bishopric of 
Nochera in Napoles, to which he was presented, 
and afterwards preferred to that of the church of 



Guadalaxara in 1647 ; he reduced many Indians 
to the faith, was much persecuted from being the 
defender of the ecclesiastical immunity, and died 
in 1663. 

17. Don Francisco Berdin y Molina, peniten 
tiary canon, provisor, and vicar-general of Mur- 
cia ; he took possession of this bishopric in 1666, 
and was promoted to that of Mcchoacan in 1674. 

18. Don Manuel Fernandez de Santa Cruz, na 
tive of Palencia, collegiate of the Mayor of 
Cuenca in Salamanca, magisterial canon of Se 
govia ; elected bishop of Chiapa, and before he 
embarked, promoted to Gnadalaxara, where he 
entered in 1675; promoted to the bishopric of La 
Pnebla in the following year, 1676. 

19. Don Juan de Santiago Garabito, native of 
the town of La Palma in Andalucia, collegiate-ma 
jor of Cuenca, in the city of Salamanca, profes 
sor of philosophy in that university, magisterial 
canon of Badajoz ; elected bishop of Puertorico, 
and promoted to this holy church in 1677 ; he vi 
sited the whole of his bishopric, suffered much 
through the defence of the ecclesiastical immunity, 
and died in 1694. 

20. Don Fr. Felipe Galindo y Chaves, native 
of the port of Vcra Cruz; he took a monk s habit 
in the convent of Santo Domingo of Mexico, 
where he was prior, provincial of its province, 
apostolical missionary in the sierra Gorda, where 
he founded eight missions ; nominated bishop of 
Guadalaxara, of which he took possessio.i in 
1696 ; he built the sacristy, the treasury, and 
the portico of the cathedral, twice visited the 
bishopric, and died in 1702. 

21. Don Diego Camacho y Avila, native of 
Badajoz, collegiate-major of Cuenca, theological 
doctor and professor of philosophy in the univer 
sity of Salamanca, magisterial canon in his coun 
try, preacher to the king, bishop of Manila ; pro 
moted to this bishopric in 1707 ; he died in 1712. 

22. Don Fr. Manuel de Mimbela, of the order 
of San Francisco, native of Fraga in Aragon ; 
he passed over to the province of Zacateeas as 
missionary apostolic, \, here he was lecturer of 
theology, and twice guardian of its convent ; he re 
turned to Spain as general, and was elected 
bishop of the churches of Panama and Oaxaca, 
and promoted to that of Guadalaxara in 1714 ; 
he died in 1721. 

23. Don Pedro Tapis, native of the town of An- 
dosilla in Navarra, abbot of the parish church 
of Santa Maria del Burgo, of the city of Alfaro, 
vicar-general of the said city and district of 
Agreda, bishop of Durango, and promoted to 
Guadalaxara, when he had already died 3 in 1722. 



G U A 



G U A 



179 



24. Don Fr. Juan Baptisfa Alvarez de Toledo, 
of the order of Snn Francisco, native of the city 
of San Salvador, in the kingdom of (juatemala ; 
presented to the bishopric of Chiapa, promoted 
to that of Guatemala, and from thence to that of 
Guadalaxara, in 1723 ; and this he afterwards re 
nounced, through a weight of years and infirmi 
ties, in 1726. 

25. Don Nicolas Carlos Gomez de Cervantes, 
native of Mexico, collegiate of the chief college 
of Santos, doctor of sacred canons, professor of 
Clementine constitutions, retired legal dignitary in 
that university, curate of Sagrario, rtiedio-rado- 
nero and canon, inspector of the accountant and 
notary offices of that capital, bishop of Guate 
mala, promoted to this in 1725; visited the whole 
of the same, made the greater part of the convent 
of monks of Jesus Maria, and gave immense sums 
to that of Santa Monica; he died in 1734. 

26. Don Juan Gomez de Parada, native of 
Compostela in the diocese of Guadalaxara, colle 
giate of the Mayor of Los Santos of Mexico, 
theological doctor and professor of philosophy in 
the university of Salamanca, canon of the metro 
politan church of Mexico, the cabildo of which 
sent him to Spain on business of great weight; 
he was elected, in 1716, bishop of Yucatan, pass 
ed from thence to the bishopric of Guatemala, 
and promoted to the church of Guadalaxara in 
1735 ; he visited the greater part of the bishopric, 
and died in 1751. 

27. Don Fr. Francisco de Buenaventura Marti 
nez de Texada Diez de Velasco, native of Sevilla, 
and religious recolete of San Francisco, lecturer 
of philosophy and theology, guardian of the con 
vent of Nuestra Senora de Loreto of that city, 
auxiliary bishop of Cuba, with the title of Tri- 
coli ; he was promoted to the bishopric of Yuca 
tan, and from thence to this, in 1752 ; he was 
humble and sparing intheexpenccs of his establish 
ment, supporting himself by alms ; he twice visited 
the bishopric as far as the most distant province of 
Texas, where he contracted the illness of which 
he died, in 1760. 

28. Don Diego Rodriguez Rivas de Velasco, 
native of Riobamba in the kingdom of Quito, 
doctor in both laws of the university of Alcala, 
collegiate of the renowned college of Los Ver- 
des, titular archdeacon of the holy church of 
Guatemala, sent by its cabildo to the court of 
Mndrid on business of importance; elected bishop 
of Cornayagua, and promoted to Guadalaxara in 
176 2; he died in 1772. 

29. Don Fr. Antonio de Alcalde, a monk of the 
order of San Francisco ; elected in 1773. 



GUADALCANAL. See SALAMON. 

GUADALCAZAR, a province and alcaldia 
mat/or and real of the mines of the kingdom of 
Nueva Espaiia, and bishopric of Mechoaca ; 
bounded by the windward coasts, the Nuevo Reyno 
de Leon, San Luis de Potosi, and the jurisdiction 
of the town of Valles, with which it joins between 
an e. and s. direction. It is more than 100 
leagues long and 30 wide; very fertile and plea 
sant, on account of its being irrigated by many 
rivers. The greater part of it is uncultivated ; in 
habited by infidel Indians; for the reduction of 
whom to the faith have been established many 
missions by the religious order of San Francisco. 
In its district are three mines of gold and silver, 
so abundant that they might, at a comparatively 
small expence, be made useful; but that the want 
of means in the inhabitants renders the advantages 
offered unattainable ; these mines are in conse 
quence abandoned and left unworkcd. The ca 
pital is the town of its name, founded by the order 
of the viceroy the Marquis of Guadalcazar, in 
1614. It is small, of a cold and moist tempera 
ture, inhabited by 100 families of Spaniards, 
Mustces, and Mulattoes, whose only commerce is 
derived from the short crops of maize, and in 
breeding some large and small cattle and horses. 
It is 210 miles n. by vs. of Mexico, in lat. 2246 w. 
long. 100 13 w. The other settlements of this 
jurisdiction are, 

San Antonio de Tula, Santa Maria, 
Santa Cecilia de las Pal- Santa Ana de Naola, 

mas, San Joseph de la Laxa, 

San Juan Baptista de Los Palmillas, 

Jaumave, Santa Kosa, 

Santa Rosa de Monte Santa Clara, 

Alvcrne, El Valle del Maiz. 

GUADALCAZAR, with the dedicatory title of 
Santiago, a city of the province and government 
of Tucuman, founded by Captain Martin de 
Ledesma in 1628, with a good castle for its defence 
against the infidel Indians: these, nevertheless, 
destroyed it entirely at the end of the last cen 
tury. 

GUADALUPE, an island of the N^ea, one of 
the Larger Caribes or Antilles, called the Leeward : 
thus called by Christoval Colon, who was the first 
that discovered it, from the resemblance its moun 
tains bore to some in Spain of the same name. The 
Caribes called it Curquera and Carriceura. Its 
discoverer with his Spanish followers were saluted 
upon their landing on this island with a shower of 
arrows shot by women, who immediately fled back 
with terror at hearing the fire-arms of the Spa 
niards. These immediately sacked and burnt the 

A A2 



180 



GUADALUPE. 



cabins of the Indians, finding a great quantity of 
hont;y, wax, iron, bows and arrows, cotton, spun 
and nnspun, hammocks, looms for weaving, a 
great quantity of fruit resembling ananas, incense, 
aloes, sandal wood, ginger, a kind of cinnamon 
tree, and various fruits and herbs distinct from 
those of Europe ; also large parrots, partridges, tor 
toises, nightingales, and falcons. The houses 
were better and more furnished than those dis 
covered in the other islands. 

This island is 30 miles long, and nearly the 
same wide. It is 13 miles n. w. of that of Mariga- 
lante, and 73 n. of Martinique. The Spaniards 
kept it till 1635, when they ceded it to the French. 
The English took and sacked it in 1691 : they 
again became masters of it in 1703, commanded by 
Admiral Walker, and in 1759 under General Bar- 
rington. It is one of the largest and most useful 
that the French possess in America. It is divided 
into two parts by a canal of a league and an half 
long, and near 30 yards wide, the which is called 
the river Salado, navigable for vessels of 50 tons 
burthen. It runs from n. to s. and communicates 
with the sea at both extremities, and at each of 
these is a good bay. The e. part of this island is 
called La Gran Tierra; the other, which is pro 
perly Guadalupe, is divided by a chain of moun 
tains into Cabestcrre on the w. and Basseterre on 
the &amp;lt;?. It is 13 leagues and an half from n. to s. 
seven and an half at its greatest width, and 35 in 
circumference towards the s. point. In the moun 
tains there is one which rises to an exceeding 
height, its top being out of sight : the same is called 
Del Azufre. It is a volcano, and vomits from a 
mouth of 100 feet wide a thick and black smoke, 
mixed with flakes of fire discernible at night. 

The whole island is divided into 22 parishes, 14 
in Guadalupe and eight in La Gran Tierra : in 
this latter there is no water. The river Salado is 
50 toiscs, or 300 feet, wide at its entrance by the 
Grand bay of the N. and then by degrees becomes 
so narrow, as to be in some parts only 90 feet across. 
Its depth also varies in the same manner ; for in 
many parts it is navigable for vessels of 500 tons, 
and in others will scarcely admit of those of 50. It 
has a smooth and clear current from one bay to the 
other, which is shadowed at intervals by the man 
grove trees, which are upon its shores. The air 
here is temperate and healthy, and the water is 
equally good as the soil is rich, well cultivated, 
and by no means inferior to that of Martinique. 
This island is well fortified, and its productions are 
almost the same as those of the island last men 
tioned. Its commerce in sugar is very great, not 
to mention that of indigo, cotton, and other vege 



table productions with which it also abounds ; such 
as casava, tobacco, bananas, rice, and papas : 
some of the mountains are covered with trees, and 
at their feet extend spacious llanuras, irrigated by 
many streams and various springs of warm water. 
In the two bays quantities offish are caught. 

The forts in this island are Louis, in La Gran 
Tierra, to the e. of the smaller bay, to defend the 
vessels which lie at anchor there ; near it a redoubt 
of six cannons, which has been built to command 
the shore. From this fort may be discovered not 
only the greater part of La Cabesterre, the large 
bay and many islands of the small one, but also, on 
a clear day, the mountains of Dominica. This 
fort belongs to the parish of Gosier in La Gran 
Tierra, where there are certain abysses, as Father 
Labat describes them, of which we have treated in 
that article. 

When the French established themselves here 
in 1635, as we have already observed, they began 
to attack the Caribes, who then possessed the island ; 
and to this war, which lasted three years, succeeded 
a terrible famine, in which the greater part of the 
colonists perished : then followed the invasions of 
its enemies, the disputes between the principal 
planters, and other disasters, which threatened the 
entire ruin of the colony ; until that, after 60 years, 
the French court began to form a just idea of its 
importance. Its prosperity, however, cannot be 
dated till after the peace of Utrecht. At the end of 
the year 1755, it contained 9624 white colonists 
and 41,000 slaves, 334 sugar presses, 15 planta 
tions of indigo, 46,840 cacao trees, 1 1 ,700 tobacco 
plants, 2,257,725 of coffee, and 12,748,447 of 
cotton; 4940 horses, 2924 mules, 125 asses, 13,716 
bulls and cows, 11,162 sheep and goats, and 2455 
pigs : again, in the year 1767, all the above articles 
are acknowledged to have been greatly increased; 
so that the product of this island is now computed 
at 46 millions of Ibs. of sugar, 21 of coffee, 320,000 
of cotton, and 8000 of cacao annually. 

[An attack was made on this island by the troops 
under the command of Lieutenant-colonel Beck- 
with on the 3d February 1810, at midnight ; which 
led to its capture, and subsequently to that of the 
whole of the French possessions in the W. Indies. 

The official value of the imports and exports of 
Guadalupe in 1810 were, imports 526,274/. ; 
exports 100,850/. And the quantities of the 
principal articles imported into Great Britain in 
the same year were, of coffee of British plantation, 
376 cwt. ; of foreign plantation, 21,712 cwt. ; of 
sugar of foreign plantation, 279,071 cwt. ; of rum, 
764 gallons ; and of cotton wool, 42,570 Ibs.] 

GDADALUPE, a settlement of Nueva Espana, in 
2 



G U A 

the corregimierito of Mexico ; situate on a moun 
tain of a dry and barren soil, celebrated for the 
magnificent temple and sanctuary of Nuestra Se- 
fiora cle Guadalupe, who appeared in the year 
1531 to Juan Diego, a Mexican Indian. It is of 
most beautiful architecture, and endowed with 
great riches, owing to the singular devotion in 
which it is held by the whole kingdom. The po 
pulation of this settlement is composed of 60 fa 
milies of Spaniards and Mustees, and 1 10 of In 
dians. It is one league from Mexico, to which 
place there is a causeway of a yard high, having 
at certain distances pyramids of marble, on which 
are engraved the mysteries of the rosary, adorned 
with the effigies of various saints ; also in three 
arches stand the statues of the kings Philip IV. and 
Charles II. in whose time the same pyramids were 
constructed. At the egress towards Mexico is a 
bridge of the same name as the settlement. 

GUADALUPG, another settlement, of the province 
and corregimiento of Sana in Peru, and of the bi 
shopric of Truxillo. It is situate in the valley of 
Pascamayo, and is annexed to the curacy of Che- 
pen. In its church is venerated a miraculous 
image of the Virgin, to whom the settlement is 
dedicated ; which image is a copy of that which 
was in Estremadura, and was placed here and 
richly endowed by the Captain Don Francisco 
Perez Lezcano, who gave for the building of the 
church and the convent all his fortune and pro 
perty, the same being very considerable, on ac 
count of his having been liberated, by devoutly 
entreating the Virgin to pray in his behalf, from a 
shameful and ignominious death. Her festival is 
celebrated on the 8th of December ; and formerly 
no less than 8000 persons in the district used to 
assemble here, though of late the numbers have 
greatly diminished. 

GUADALUPE, another settlement, of the pro 
vince and corregimiento of Tunja in the Nuevo 
Reyno de Granada. 

GUADALUPE, another, of the missions which 
were held by the regulars of the company of Je 
suits, in the province and government of Mainas, 
of the kingdom of Quito. It stood on the shore of 
the Maraiion, between the rivers Yavari and Casi- 
quin, close to a lake, but it is at the present day no 
more, having been destroyed. 

GUADALUPE, another, of the missions which 
were held by the same regulars of the company in 
California ; situate near the coast, opposite the 
island of La Asuncion. 

GUADALUPE, another, of the province and go 
vernment of Cinaloa in Nueva Espaila j situate on 



G U A 



the shore of the river Mayo, between the settlements 
of Ccdros and Canamoa. 

GUADALUPE, another, of the province and cap 
tainship of Pernambuco in Brazil ; situate on the 
coast, at the mouth of the river Fermoso. 

GUADALUPE, another, of the province of Ta- 
rauaiara, and kingdom of Nueva Vizcaya, dis 
tinct from the other of its name. It lies on the 
shore of the river Conchos. 

GUADALUPF, another, of the alcaldia mayor of 
San Luis de Potosi, and bishopric of Mechoacan, 
in Nueva Espaiia. It contains 28 families of In- 
dians, and a magnificent temple dedicated to the 
Virgin. It is one of the most ancient settlements in 
the kingdom, 43 miles s. e. of Zacatecas. 

GUADALUPE, another settlement, of the missions 
that are held by the religious order of San Fran 
cisco, in the province of Taraumara, and kingdom 
of Nueva Vizcaya; situate at the distance of 10 
leagues, between the s. and s. e. of the real of the 
mines &amp;lt;Jhiguagua. 

GUADALUPE, another, of the head settlement of 
Tlapacoya, and alcaldia mayor of Quatro Villas, 
(Four Towns), in Nueva Espana. It contains 26 
families of Indians, who occupy themselves in the 
cultivation of cochineal, seeds, fruits, and cutting 
wood, all of which form branches of their com 
merce. It is two leagues w. by n. of its head set 
tlement. 

GUADALUPE, another, of the island of this name, 
where the French have a good castle ; situate at 
the s. head. 

GUADALUPE, another, of the missions that were 
held by the Jesuits, in the province and govern 
ment of Cinaloa. 

GUADALUPE, another, of the missions that were 
held by the regulars of St. Francisco of Nueva 
Espana, in Nuevo Mexico, called also with the 
additional title of Paso. 

GUADALUPE, another settlement, of the same 
missions ; situate on the shore of the river of Las 
Juntas, in the same kingdom as the former. 

GUADALUPE, a river of Nueva Espana, which 
rises in the mountains or serranias to the w. of 
Mexico. It runs e. and enters the lake of that 
capital, and at the entrance of this lake is a bridge 
of the same name. 

GUADALUPE, another, of the province and go 
vernment of Texas in Nueva Espana, which runs 
into the bay of Mexico, and bay or lake of St. 
Joseph. 

[GUADALUPE, a small island on the coast of 
California, in lat. 90 5 n. Long. 118 w.~\ 

GUADIANA. See DUKANGO. 



182 



G U A 



GUADIANILLA,orSAN GERMAN ELNUEVO, 
a town of the island and government of San Juan 
de Puertorico. It has a convent of the religious 
order of St. Domingo, and is 33 leagues from its 
capital. 

GUADUAS, a settlement of the jurisdiction of 
the town of Honda, in the Nuevo Key no de Gre 
nada. It was at its origin a convent of the religi 
ous Franciscans, of the Recoletan order of San 
Pedro de Alcantara. It is situate in the road lying 
between Honda and Santa Fe, being a place of 
such traffic, that people came eagerly to settle 
here ; and the present number of inhabitants ac 
cordingly exceeds 300. It is one of the most be 
nign temperatures in the whole kingdom : its ter 
ritory is fertile, and abounding in many vegetable 
productions. It is 41 miles to the n. w. of Santa 
Fe, and 14 to the s. e. of Honda. 

GUAHIUAS, a river of the province and go 
vernment of Los Llanos in the Nuevo Reyno de 
Granada. It rises in the country of the Indians of 
of this name, runs . and enters the Meta. 

GUAIBA1, a river of the province of Gaira in 
the government of Paraguay. It runs nearly due 
n. and enters the I bay. 

GUA1BARE, a large river of the kingdom of 
Peru, which enters the Maraiion. 

GUAIBAS, a barbarous nation of Indians, of the 
Nuevo Reyno de Granada, to the e. of Santa Fe, 
at the entrance of the llanos of Cazanare y Meta. 
They are a vagabond race, and much given to 
theft, although they are naturally docile and pa 
cific. They are allies of the Chiricoas, with whom 
they were routed, in 1669, in the battle of Guaya- 
pege, by the Achaguas. They were first reduced, 
in part, to the faith in the year 1650, and in 1664 
many of them settled together in a town. In 1668, 
however, they again fled to the woods, and a short 
time after arrived the missionaries, who formed 
them into a settlement, which is seven leagues dis 
tant from that of Pauto. 

GUAICAMA, a settlement of the province and 
government of Tucuman in Peru ; situate in the 
valley of Catamarca. 

GUAICARES, orGuASCUREs, a barbarous na 
tion of Indians, of the province and government of 
Paraguay, to the e. of Concepcion. They are fero 
cious, inconstant, treacherous, and irreconcilable 
enemies to Europeans ; and notwithstanding the 
missionaries of the company of the Jesuits reduced 
some to the faith and to a civilized life, by causing 
them to live in a town, they have invariably 
done immense mischief by their incursions, and 
have destroyed whole towns, taking them by sur 



prise, and most particularly in the vicinity of 
Santa Fe. 

GUA1CAVAR, a settlement of the government 
of Maracaibo, and province of Venezuela ; situate 
on the coast, at a small distance from the city of 
Coro. 

GUAIGUASCOCHE, a lake of the province 
and corregimiento of Guamachuco in Peru, out of 
\vhich rises the river Moche. 

GUAIGUAZA, a settlement of the province 
and government of Venezuela ; situate on the sea- 
coast, to the e. of port Cabello. 

GUAIHACOA, a settlement of the same pro 
vince and government as the former; situate near 
the e. coast, one-fourth to the n. of the city of 
Coro. 

GUA1LAS, a province and corregimiento of 
Peru, bounded n.n.e. and e. by the province of 
Conchucos, s. e. and s. by that of Caxatambo, and 
w. by that of Santa. It is 45 leagues long from 
n. to s. and 16 at its widest part. The tempera 
ture of the middle of the province is for the most 
part benign, and at either side cold, especially to 
wards the e. part, which is that where runs the 
Cordillera. It is watered by streamlets, which, 
being connected, form a river of some note, and 
which running towards the n. and receiving at the 
end of the province some waters from the province 
of Conchucos, turns w. and enters the sea with the 
name of Santa Fe. This province is sufficiently 
fertile, and affords wheat and other grain. Much 
sugar is made here, and from this many conserves, 
which are carried to Guanuco and Tarma, and to 
Lima. As the temperatures here are various, so 
the productions are those both of the sierras and 
of the valleys ; but what is most remarkable is, 
that the whole year round there are crops of wheat, 
so that the grain is putting into the ground in one 
place, whilst in another it is ripe and ready to cut. 
It is the same with the fruits, which are very many 
and various. It abounds in cattle, of the wool of 
which is made the cloth of the country in the dif 
ferent manufactories. This province has always 
been rich in mines, as is proved by the remains of 
30 mills, \vhich were used to grind the metals of 
gold and silver, some of which are still extracted. 
Here is one mountain of load-stone, and some of 
alum and copper, in a place which is called Yura- 
marca. Its repartimicnto was 140,000 dollars, and 
its alcavala used to amount to 1 120 per annum. 
The population consists of 30 settlements, and the 
capital is Huaraz. The others are, 
Roquais, Marca, 

Olleros, Ichoca, 



Colaparazo, 

Tanacochas, 

Cocbapeti, 

Malvas, 

Hallancahuambo, 

Pararin, 

Pampas, 

Pira, 

Llacllin, 

Caxanuirquilla, 

HiiaHuii, 

Htianc jay. 



G U A 

Pampai, 

Huambo, 

Carhuaz, 

Yungai, 

Caraz, 

Huailas, 

Macate, 

Lacrarnarca, 

Aija, 

Ilicayan, 

Sudcha, 

Coris, 

Huaccilan, 

GUA1MAMA, a river of the province and go 
vernment of Guayana or Nueva Andalucia. It 
rises in the country of the Parecas Indians, runs in 
a serpentine course, and enters the Itari. 

GLJA1MI, an ancient province and nation of the 
Indians, of the kingdom of Tierra Firme, forming 
at the present day part of that of Veragua. It lies 
in the Cordillera^ is of a most uneven territory, and 
of a moist temperature, owing to the constant rains 
\vhich prevail here. It produces fruit and vege 
tables without cultivation, some which resemble 
i/ucas, also potatoes, uuyamas, otoes, and names^ 
some maize, and grain in very small quantities, but 
abundance of pixibaes^ which were the common 
aliment of the natives ; the juice of the tree served 
them for wine, and the wood, which was very 
solid, for darts and arrows. In the mountains are 
lions, tigers, foxes, deer, little Peters (pericos 
ligeros), monkeys of three kinds, white, red, and 
black, zaynos, squirrels, pea-hens, partridges of 
two kinds, parrots, and many other birds, and also 
many venomous snakes. The Indians of this pro 
vince used to adore a mountain, which is here 
called Nubu. They all, men and women, went en 
tirely naked, and were reduced to the faith in 1624, 
by Father Fray Andrian de Ufeldre, of the order 
of Santo Domingo. They are at the present day 
all extinguished, and nothing but a small village 
remains. 

GUA1MOCO, a settlement of the province and 
alcaldia mayor of San Miguel in the kingdom of 
Guatemala; situate on the shore of the S. sea, to 
the e. of the settlement of Sorisonate. 

GUAIMOftETO, a settlement of the coast of 
the province and government of Honduras, be 
tween the cape of this name and the port of 
Caslilla. 

GUAIMOUETO, a settlement of the province and 
government of Cumana ; situate on the coast, close 
to the cape Godera. 

GUA1NAMOTA, a settlement and head settle- 



G IT A 



183 



ment of the alcaldia mayor of Tepic in Nueva 
Espana. It contains 90 families of Indians, who 
cultivate in the farms of the district many fruit 
trees. It is 10 leagues to the n. of its capital. 

GUAINAPUT1NA, a volcano of the kingdom 
of Peru ; situate on the top of a very lofty moun 
tain, near the city of Arequipa. It has burst seve 
ral times, and, particularly, once in 1600, when it 
did infinite mischief. 

GUAINARIMA, a large territory of the king 
dom of Peru, 12 leagues to the w. of Cuzco ; cele 
brated on account of the division and repartition, 
of the tributary Indians having been made here 
by the Licentiate Pedro de la Gasca, and Don 
Fray Geronimo de Louisa, archbishop of Lima ; 
which event was published in the city of Cuzco 
on the 24th of August 1548. 

GUAIN1, a river of the province and govern 
ment of Cumana. It rises in the sierra of Imataca, 
runs n. and enters the sea on the e. coast, on the 
side of the point and river of IJarirna. 

GUAIPANACUAR, a settlement of the pro 
vince and government of Cumana in the kingdom 
of Tierra Firme. 

GUA1QUE, a river of the province and go 
vernment of Venezuela . It rises n. of the valley 
of Tucuyo, runs n. and enters the sea to the w. of 
the point of Hicacos. 

GUAIQUIRARO, a river of the province and 
government of Buenos Ayres, which runs w. and 
enters the river La Plata. 

GUAIQU1RIES, a barbarous nation of Indians, 
in the vicinity of the shores of the river Orinoco, to 
the s. and near the source of the Caura. It is 
very numerous, and dwells amongst the Mediter 
ranean Caribes. These Indians began to be re 
duced to the faith by the Jesuits in 1732. 

GLJA1RA, [or, as some French writers impro 
perly spell it, Go AY RE], a settlement of the pro 
vince and government of Venezuela, founded by 
the governor of the same, Don Diego Osorio, in 
1588. It has a celebrated port, defended by a 
castle, and much frequented by every kind of 
vessel, so that it carries on all the traffic and com 
merce of that province. It was attacked in 1739 
by three English men of war, who were obliged to 
sheer off, owing to the great damage they received, 
and the very vigorous defence made against them. 
They left behind them an anchor, which is still 
preserved here as a trophy. Also, in 1743, it 
was besieged by 17 vessels, under the English Ad 
miral Charles Knowles, who however, after expe 
riencing great mischief, was obliged to desist from 
his enterprise. 



184 



G U A I R A. 



[If the port of Caravallada had not been aban 
doned by its inhabitants, Guaira would never have 
been but a small fishing town. The difficulty of 
restoring to Caravallada its population, obliged 
them to choose another place to serve as a port to 
Caracas ; and the ground on which Guaira now 
stands was selected for the purpose. This change 
was not advantageous ; for the sea is here rougher 
than it is in any other place. 

The city or (according to the Spaniards, who 
do not give the name of city, but where there is a 
cabildo), the town of Guaira is so surrounded with 
mountains, that the stories which fall from them 
often occasion the most serious injuries. There is 
no visible horizon but that formed by the sea to 
the n. This accounts for the great heat experi 
enced here for nine months in the year. The ther 
mometer of Reaumur constantly rises to between 
25 and 28. Every year the months of .July, 
August, and September, are marked by putrid and 
malignant fevers, which generally terminate fatally 
when they attack the new-corners from Europe. 

The streets of Guaira are narrow, badly paved, 
and out of a straight line; and the houses are meanly 
built. Nothing but the batteries that defend the 
town can be considered curious or regular ; it 
being the only object of government to make of this 
place a military post and an out-port to the capi 
tal. There are very few merchants resident here ; 
all the business being transacted at Caracas. The 
trader sometimes comes to Guaira to receive a 
cargo, purchased or shipped for him from Europe; 
but the goods are sent for sale to Caracas. No 
thing is suffered to remain at Guaira but what may 
be for the consumption of the inhabitants. All 
goods exported are also brought and warehoused 
at Caracas, and are only sent to Guaira to be 
shipped. 

The road between the two places is steep, but 
good in dry weather. It becomes very bad in the 
rainy season. The distance is five leagues, which 
is performed by the loaded mules in five hours. 
The saddle-mule performs it without altering his 
usual pace in three hours and a half. In leaving 
Guaira one ascends, according to the measurement 
made by Humboldt, about 6S4 fathoms, and de 
scends 234 in arriving at Caracas. It is seldom 
that a traveller crosses the mountain in one jour 
ney. At the elevation of 576 fathoms there is an 
inn, called by the Spaniards Vtnla, where the tra 
veller and his beast generally stop to rest. 

The water drunk at Guaira is from a small river, 
or rather rivulet; the source of which is on the 
mountain, at two leagues from the sea. This 



water, not very agreeable to drink, because it is 
always tepid, contracts, in passing over the strata 
of sarsaparilla, an antivenereal virtue, which is not 
altogether useless. 

The town of Guaira is governed by a com 
mandant, who is also a civil judge ; that is to say, 
he is invested with the right of judging in the first 
instance all civil matters, subject to appeal to the 
royal audience. His principal duty is to render 
an account every day to the captain-general of the 
occurrences in the roadstead. He cannot permit a 
stranger to go to Caracas without having first the 
order of the captain-general, which however is 
easily obtained, provided the alleged motives of the 
newly arrived person appear legitimate. 

The usual garrison of the place consists of a 
company detached from the regiment of Caracas. 
In time of war it is reinforced by other troops of 
the line and the militia of Caracas. 

The population of Guaira is 6000 souls, of 
which 1 30 are em ployed on board the gun- vessels, 
and 711 form the garrison, and man the guarda- 
costas, or coast-guarding vessels. The almoner per 
forms all the clerical functions ; and the town has 
only one parish church, in which a curate offi 
ciates. 

Since this article was prepared for press, we 
have to insert some particulars respecting the 
dreadful calamity with which the unfortunate city 
of Guaira has been visited. On the 26th March 
1812, a most dreadful shock of an earthquake was 
felt here : it lasted about two minutes. The city 
was laid in ruins, and numbers of the inhabitants 
were killed and buried in them. The city of Ca 
racas, we understand, has experienced a still 
worse fate, and has been totally abandoned by the 
unfortunate inhabitants. The rocks and moun 
tains were rent asunder ; and it is impossible for 
pen to describe the devastation occasioned by this 
horrible explosion. Hundreds of the inhabitants 
of Guaira were seen mixed with heaps of ruins, and 
many of them still yet alive with their heads out, 
imploring assistance from their fellow-citizens, 
who, instead of affording them aid, were throwing 
themselves prostrate before images, beating their 
breasts, and imploring for themselves the protec 
tion of their saints. When the alarm had in some 
degree subsided, the bodies of the dead were sought 
for ; but we have not been able to ascertain the 
extent of the loss which this hapless city has sus 
tained. 

Guaira is seven miles n. of Caracas. Lat. 10 
48 n. Long. 67 2 &amp;lt;&amp;gt;.] 

GUAIRA, a province of the government of Para- 



G U A 

guny, discovered in 1550 ; bounded n. by the un 
known lands of Brazil, e. by the captaincy of St. 
Vicente, of the same kingdom, and s. and w. by 
Paraguay, the river Parana, running between them. 
It is 147 leagues long from e. to w. and 132 wide 
ti. y. The territory is moist, the climate unequal, 
and the air unhealthy ; but it is fertile in all kinds 
of pulse, roots, maize, and other plants, which re 
quire little cultivation. It abounds greatly in ti 
gers, vipers, snakes, and crocodiles, and in all 
lands of animals. It produces many pomegra 
nates and bitter dates, cedars, pines, and sabines, 
and in the hollows of these trees is found a great 
quantity of honey and wax. This country is irri 
gated by many rivers, and the most considerable 
are the Parapane, which collects many small tribu 
tary streams, the Tibajira, Itahua, Guatay, and 
Parana, the shores and woods of which are inha 
bited by birds of every description. At a tolerable 
depth from the surface of the ground are found 
certain stones, enveloped in a kind of very hard 
crust, of an oval figure : it is said that when they 
come to their perfection the crust breaks with an 
explosion similar to that of a bomb, and discovers 
a stone, which is transparent and of great brilliancy, 
being most commonly of a red colour, although 
not unfrequently green and even violet. Their 
figure is by nature so curious and so various that 
it is almost impossible to believe them not to be 
the work of art : suffice to say, they appear pre 
cisely the same as the French stones : the Spa 
niards first thought that they were emeralds, ame 
thysts, and carbuncles, but were shortly unde 
ceived. There are in this country many trees 
which distil balsamic gums. The couriers esta 
blished by the Mamelucos and the Panlistas of 
Brazil obliged the Spaniards to abandon it, when 
they destroyed the Villa Rica and the Ciudad Real, 
which had been founded by the latter. Here grows 
a kind of fruit called quetnbc^ which is of an ob 
long figure, pointed at the extremities, full of some 
small yellow grains, which are very sweet when 
sucked, but which when masticated fill the mouth 
with an insupportable acrid juice. The plant 
which produces this fruit is a kind of reed, which 
attaches itself to trees, and grows to a great height : 
it is also asserted, that if any of the seed should fall 
upon any rotten bark, it immediately throws down 
wards roots which fix themselves in the earth, and 
produce plants of the same species. Of the dates 
of which we have just spoken is made wine, and a 
drink which is very nutritive. The palms on 
which these dates grow, and which are found in 
all parts, afford a very acceptable repast to travel 
lers when short of victuals, since their pith is very 

VOL. II. 



G U A 



185 



nutritious and wholesome. The wild boars here 
have their navels on their loins, and it has been 
found necessary on killing the animal to cut away 
the same, since if this be not attended to the whole 
body would become corrupt. The honey is of 
excellent quality, but the wax could never be 
whitened. The Fathers Miguel de Ortega, and 
Tomas Filds, of the extinguished company of the 
Jesuits, entered in 1588 to preach to these Indians, 
and succeeded in establish ing some flourishing and 
well governed missions, but which were delivered 
over to the clergy in 1767. The capital is the 
settlement of Nuestra Seiiora de Loreto. 

GUAIRA, a settlement of the province and go 
vernment of Tucuman in Peru, of the jurisdiction 
of Xuxuy; situate on the shore of the river La- 
quiaza. 

GUAIRAICAC, a small river of the province 
and colony of Surinam, in the part of Guay ana pos 
sessed by the Dutch. It rises in the extremity of 
the sierra of Rinocote, runs w. and enters the 
source of the Caroni. 

GUAIRE, a small river of the government of 
Maracaibo, and province of Venezuela. It rises in 
the sierra, and runs n. until it enters the sea oppo 
site the city of Coro. Some geographers call it 
Guairi, and fix its course to the e. making it to 
empty into the cape Codera. 

GUAIRIA. See GUY in A. 

GUAITACASIOS, a barbarous nation of In 
dians of Brazil, in the province and captainship of 
Los llheos ; they dwell in the woods and in 
the mountains towards the zv. ; they are cruel 
and ferocious ; but all that : &amp;lt;t known of them is, 
that they are implacable enemies- of the Portu 
guese, and that these have never been able to enter 
their country. 

GUA1TEGA. a desert island of the S. sea, 
near the coast of Chiloe, to the s. It is full of 
wild trees, and on its coast is found most exqui 
site shell-fish and many sea-wolves. 

.GUA1TO, a small river of the province and 
government of Paraguay, which runs n. and enters 
the Mbotctei. 

GUAJARA, a volcano of air, of the province 
and government of Tucuman, of the kingdom of 
Peru, in the district of Xuxuy. It is constantly 
vomiting air with such impetuosity as to be a 
cause of great terror to travellers, and particularly 
to their horses. 

GUAJIARA, a small river of the province and 
captains/tip of Peru in Brazil. It runs n. and 
enters the Maranon. 

GUAJ1CO, a settlement of the head settlement 
of Coxcatlun,. and alcaldia mayor of Valles, in 



u is 



186 



G U A 



Nueva Espana. It is annexed to the curacy of 
Tampolon, and is much reduced, since it contains 
no more than 15 families of Mexican Indians, 
\vho dwell by the pass of the river of the Desagne 
or waste-water of Mexico, being four leagues dis 
tant from thence : they call this spot the Paso dc 
la Canoa, and they sow here some grain and seeds 
for their subsistence. It is 19 leagues s. of its 
capital. 

GUAJIROS, a barbarous nation of Indians, of 
the province and government of Santa Marta, in 
the Nuevo Reyno de Granada, in the vicinity of 
Pamplona and Merida. They dwell in the settle 
ment of Bozonata, and are dependent on the ca 
cique, who, since their insurrection, has been 
uniformly nominated by the king. They are 
warlike and valiant, and proved themselves of those 
who gave most trouble to their conquerors. This 
nation was originally so numerous that they 
amounted to above 70,000, and now they do not 
exceed 20,000 : they employ themselves in taking 
pearls from the river Hacha, and in making fine 
woven cotton stuffs : they journey on horseback, 
and have many of these animals, which from their 
Telocity they call agmlillias. They have a great 
commerce with the English and Dutch, and by 
these they are supplied with different articles of 
merchandise, slaves, fire-arms, and ammunition, 
with which they are very dexterous. They dif 
fered from the other Indians, in as much as they 
were laborious, and carried on merchandise, this 
permitting them to be sumptuously clothed, and to 
live in great wealth: the women wear a cloak 
sewed in the form of a large upper petticoat; and 
the men a short shirt and a cloak, with the ends 
thrown over the shoulders, also some breeches 
reaching down to the middle of the leg. They are 
continually eating the herb hayo, in Peru called 
coc, which gives them vigour and force, and 
they always carry with them a wallet. They 
proceed slowly in their journeys, having before 
them the wife loaded with her children, the fuel, 
and the different articles that they are carrying 
for sale. When they declare war with another 
nation, they all proceed on horseback ; and having 
come in front of the enemy, they cut the legs of 
the animals, lest any of their party should have 
the means of flying from the attack. The Sr. 
Monroy, bishop of Santa Marta, made noble but 
ineffectual exertions to reduce these barbarians to 
the Catholic faith ; his zeal was followed up with 
unabating ardour by Don Juan Nieto del Aguila 
and Don Joseph Xavier Arauz, but Avith as liltle 
success. In 1749, the king ordered four monks of 
the order of the Jesuits to undertake their couver- 



G U A 

sion, and they were about to proceed to the calling, 
when they were countermanded by his Majesty, 
and in their stead were sent some monks of the 
order of the Capuchins, who were at that time 
occupied in the reduction of the Chimilas Indians, 
and who, in fact, have the charge of the same at 
the present day, though even their labours are but 
uselessly bestowed. It is not many years since 
that the cacique Don Cecilio, assisted by a gen 
tleman of the name of Andaluz, proposed to this 
court (of Spain) the conquest of the Guajiros, and 
the project having been laid before the viceroy 
of Santa Fe, was approved, but never put into 
effect; from all which it should seem that some 
superior cause stood in the way of bringing about 
any reduction of this nation to the faith. 

GUAJOMULCO, SAN BUENAVENTURA DE, 
a settlement of the head settlement and alcaldia 
mayor of Cuernavaca in Nueva Espana; situate 
on the eminence of a mountain, three leagues 
from its capital. It contains 80 families of In 
dians. 

GUAJOYA, SAN PABLO DE, a settlement of 
the missions that were held by the regulars of the 
company of Jesuits, in the province and govern 
ment of Mainas, of the kingdom of Quito ; situate 
on the shore of the river Napo. 

GUAJUAPA, the alculdia mayor and jurisdic 
tion of Nueva Espana, in the bishopric ofLaPuebla 
de los Angeles ; it is also called Misteca Baxa, and 
is divided into partidos or districts, which are this, 
and that of Tonala. It is of a warm and moist 
temperature, abounding in cattle of the goat kind, 
of the hides and tallow of which consists the prin 
cipal branch of commerce, not to mention some 
proportion of seeds and cochineal, and the manu 
facture of some mats of reed put together with 
much ingenuity, and held in great estimation in the 
other jurisdictions. This jurisdiction contains 
many estates and ranches^ where is grown a suffi 
cient quantity of wheat, maize, and other vege 
tables and fruits, and where also there are some 
breeds of large cattle. The district consists of 12 
principal settlements, and that of Tonola, which 
is joined to it; of 15 others, situated at propor 
tionate distances, and all consisting of Mexican 
and Mistecos Indians. They are, 
San Pedro de Tequisis- Tuctla, 

tepee, Xuzistlahuaca, 

Chametla, Xuchitepec, 

Mistepec, Tezuatlan, 

Guanapa, Tonala, 

Zuchitlapilco, Tlapanala, 

Xuchitepec, Atoyaque, 

Guejolotitlan, Tlapalzingo, 



G U A 

Zalacayoapan, Zacatepec, 

Aeiquaya, Incuyachi, 

Caleguala , II uelotitla n , 

San Geronimo, Tlachichilco, 

Guastepec, Igualtepec. 

Aguatlan, 

The capital is the settlement of its name, enjoys 
a mild temperature, and its population consists of 300 
families of Indians, and as many others of Spaniards, 
Mustecs, and Mulattoes. It has a convent of the 
religious order of St. Domingo, and to this order 
the curacy formerly belonged. It is 50 leagues 
s. e. of Mexico. 

GUAJUCO, VALLE DE SANTIAGO DE, a 
settlement and head settlement of the district of 
the province and government of the Nuevo Reyno 
de Leon in Nueva Espaiia; situate between two 
mountains, which form a valley spacious and plea 
sant, and diversified by a variety of fine trees. 
The district is very abundant in seeds, and there 
is sufficient of these not only for this jurisdiction, 
but for others also : it likewise produces much 
sugar-cane, and of this are made sugar and honey. 
It is nine leagues to the s. one quarter to the s. w. 
of its en pita! . 

GUALACEO, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Cuenca in the kingdom of Quito ; 
situate on the shore of a small river of the same 
name. It is 15 miles n. by e. of Cuenca, in lat. 
2 53 s. and long 78 34 30" w. 

GUALBERTO, SIERRAS DE SAN JUAN, a 
cprdillera of very lofty mountains of Nuevo 
Mexico, which run from e. in 33 of latitude, 
until they reach the shore of the Rio Grande, 
Colorado, or Del Norte, near where it enters the 
sea in the gulf of California, or Mar Roxo de 
Cortes. 

GUALCAS, a small river of the province and 
corregimiento of Piura in Peru, which runs w. 
parallel to that of Saura, and enters the Piura. 

GUALEA, a settlement of the province and 
government of Esmeraldas in the kingdom of 
Quito. It is of a warm and moist climate, situate 
between two rivers, and in the middle of a thick 
wood, near the old road which led from Quito to 
the port called Del Embarcadero, in the river of 
Esmeraldas. The plantains which grow in its 
district pass for those of the most delicate flavour 
in all America. It is 23 miles n.w. of Quito, in 
lat. 5 n. and long. 78 34 w. 

[GUALEGAICHU, a town of the province 
and government of Buenos Ayres; situate on a 
river of the same name, about 90 miles n. of Bue 
nos Ayres, in lat. 32 59 15" s. Long. 58 27 



G U A 



187 



GUALEGUAS, SAN NICOLAS DE LAS, a 
settlement of the missions that are held by the re 
ligious order of St. Francis, in the Nuevo Reyno 
de Leon of N. America, five leagues n. of th&amp;lt;? 
town of Cerralvo. 

GUALEGUAY, a river of the province and 
government of Buenos Ayres, which rises between 
those of Parana and Uruguay, runs s. many 
leagues, then turns its course e. and enters the last 
river by two mouths, forming an island. 

[GUALEGUAY, a town of the province and go 
vernment of Buenos Ayres ; situate on a river of 
the same name, about 95 miles n. w. of Buenos 
Ayres. Lat. 33 8 19". Long. 59 28 10". J 

GLJALI, or GUEDI, a rapid river of the pro 
vince of Los Marquetones in the Nuevo Reyno de 
Granada. It rises in the mountains of the city of 
Mariquita, runs c. passing through the town of 
Honda, and then enters the grand river of La 
Magdalena. On all the settlements situate on its 
shores, the inhabitants are subject to the epidemic 
disorder of cotos or tumors on the throat, and this 
is attributed to the waters, which contain certain 
minerals, and in as much as those who abstain 
from drinking them are not afflicted with this ma 
lady. Its mouth is in lat. 5 15 n. Lon&amp;lt;r. 74? 
53 w. 

GUALT, a settlement of the province and go 
vernment of Mariquita in tiie same kingdom ; 
situate near the source of the former river, ami 
from which it takes its name. 

[GUALI, some sierras in the same province and 
government as the former.] 

GUALLAGA, a large and copious river of the 
province and corregimienlo of Guanuco in Peru, 
formed from that of the Pilgomayu, which rises 
from the lake of Bombon in the province of 
Tarma, and from that of Visacaca, which has its 
origin in the mountains of the province ofGua- 
malies. These two rivers united pass near the 
ci&amp;lt;y of Leon de Guanuco, bending their course to 
the n. and form the Guallaga, which afterwards 
collects the waters of those of Paloyacu, Santa 
Maria, Tacumi, Arapi, Aguanos, Apena, and of 
the lake Turatini. At the mouth of this river, 
and on one of its shores, dwell the two numerous 
nations of the Aguanos and the Barbadoes Indians, 
the latter thus named from their wearing beards 
a feature which distinguishes them from all the 
other Indians of America : they are of a very dark 
colour, owing to their always going exposed to 
the inclemency of the weather ; the women, who 
assist in the rancherias, are fair and ruddy. They 
formerly occupied upwards of 150 leagues of 
territory. This river, which was the sanie alono- 

BBS 



188 



G U A 



which the tyrant Lope de Aguirre proceeded, 
enters the Maranon on the 5. side ; its mouth is SO 
leagues from the Pongo, or narrow pass so called, 
in lat. 7 16 s. 

GUALMATA, a settlement of the province 
and government of Pastos, in the district and 
jurisdiction of the presidency of the kingdom of 
Quito. 

GUALPI, a small river of the province and 
government of Atacamos or Esmeraldas in the 
kingdom of Quito. It enters the Mira a little be 
fore this runs into the sea. 

GUAM A, a rapid river of the kingdom of 
Peru, to the n. of Lima, in the province and cor- 
regimiento of Cercado. It waters and fertilizes an 
extensive llanura^ to which it gives its name ; is 
dangerous to be forded, and as it enters the sea, 
forms a small bay. 

GUAMA, a settlement of the province and go 
vernment of Venezuela ; situate on the shore of 
the river Yaraqui, at its source, to the e. of the 
city of Barquisimeto, between this city and the 
town of San Felipe. 

GUAMA, another settlement, in the island of 
Cuba, on the s. coast. 

GUAMA, another river, of the province and 
captainship of Para in Brazil. It runs e. and 
enters the arm of Los Amazonas, which forms the 
island of Marajo, just at its entrance into the sea. 

GUAMACHUCO, a province and corregi- 
miento of Peru, bounded e. by the province of Caxa- 
marquilla, n. c. by that of Chachapoyas, the river 
Maranon running between, n. by Caxamarca, n.w. 
and to. by that of Truxillo,and s. by that of Conchu 
cos. It is 30 leagues long e. w. and 10 wide ; it was 
separated from that of Caxamarca, and was made 
a corregimiento in 1759, the Count de Superunda 
being viceroy. It is not wanting in vegetable pro 
ductions, such as maize, wheat, barley, papas, 
and fruits of the sierra and the valleys, in as much 
as it enjoys some good temperatures, though it is 
for the most part cold ; and in this view only does 
it differ from the province of Caxamarca, its pro 
ductions as well as commerce, in all other respects, 
corresponding with those of that province. Here 
are breeds of all sorts of cattle, particularly sheep, 
of the wool of Which much country cloth is made 
in the great manufactories that are found here. 
Here are mines of gold and silver, and some of the 
silver ones are worked, together with those of the 
mountain of Algumarca, of San Joseph dc Acho- 
comas,and of the real De Carangas ; others of gold 
are worked also, though but few of them. In the 
mountain of Aupill&amp;n is a good vein of iron, and 
in other p;irts are found sulphur and load-stone. 



G U A 

This province is watered by certain rivers, the 
most considerable of which is the Tablachaca, 
which rises in the vicinity of a lofty snowy moun 
tain to the s. e. at the end of the province, &amp;c. 
called Pallagatos : this river receives those of Ari- 
gasraarca and Guachaca, and, running, through 
the confines of the province of Conchucos, en 
riches the stream of the Santa, flowing with its 
whole waters into the same. The other river of 
note is that which is called Guamachuco, and 
rises from a lake close to the settlement, and which, 
following a n. course, receives other smaller 
streams, and then incorporates itself with the river 
of Las Criznejas, of the province of Caxamarca, 
which river enters the Maraiion by an e. course, 
as do those of Chusgon, Santisbamba, Iracapampa, 
and others. Here are few settlements, but many 
estates well peopled, and having for the most part 
workshops and buildings, and even churches. The 
inhabitants amount to 11,000: its repartimiento 
was small. The capital is the settlement of the 
same name, situate on a very cold spot ; the other 
settlements are, 

Sinsicapa, Malin, 

Otusco, Huancai, 

Estancias, Santiago de Chuco, 

Usquil, Haxabamba. 

Lucrna, 

It contains 28 churches, divided amongst the 
different districts of Mollepata, Jurubamba, Mar- 
cabal, and Chuquisongo. 

GUAMAL, a settlement of the province and 
government of Cartagena, in the district of the 
town of Mompox ; situate on the shore of the 
grand river Magdalena. 

GIT AM AT,, a point of land on the s. coast of 
the island of Cuba, opposite the island of Pinos. 

G UAMAL1ES, a province and corrcgimiento of 
Peru, bounded n. by the province of Pataz, e. by 
the mountains of the infidel Indians, s.c. by the 
province of Guanuco, s. by that of Tarma, s. &amp;. 
by that of Caxatambo, and n. w. and w. by that of 
Conchucos. Its length is 82 leagues w. s. and its 
width 30 c. w. being in other parts no more than 
12. This province is nothing more than an exten 
sive valley, through which runs the Maraiion, 
which river rises six leagues beyond the s. boun 
dary of the province, from the lake Lauricocha, 
of the province of Tarma : its waters are in 
creased by various other rivers and streams, which 
enter it on cither side ; and some of these are very 
considerable. The temperature is cold towards 
the s. aid elsewhere it is for the most part benign. 
To the n. however, in the curacy of Huacai- 
batnba, are found some estancias of such intense 



G U A 

heat the whole year round, that it is to this cause 
that the dark colour, which renders the inhabi 
tants here distinct from those of the other pro 
vinces, is attributed, and that they are called 
Zambos. Here is grown an abundance of seeds 
and fruits : there are large breeds of cattle, from 
the wool of which is made a considerable portion 
of country cloth, the same being the principal ar 
ticle of commerce. This province produces some 
coca; and some few years back were discovered 
some silver mines, which promise well, as also 
another of quicksilver, in the mountain called 
Chonta. Near the settlements of Aguamira and 
Banos are fountains of hot water ; and in the vici 
nity of the latter settlement are seen the vestiges 
of a stone road made by art, some similar to which 
are found in other provinces, as in those contiguous 
with Conch ucos, Tarma, and others, the direction 
of the same being s. of Caxacarca, and the route 
by which the Incas used to travel. Some say that 
this road led as far as Quito : be that as it may, 
it gives proofs of a very sumptuous work ; and 
not far from it arc discovered some monuments of 
antiquity, such as a palace for bathing, in the 
building of which the stones are so neatly knit to 
gether that the union is scarcely visible ; also the 
ruins of a temple and a fortress on the top of a 
mountain, towards the side which is laved by the 
river Maranon ; there is likewise a castle at some 
distance from the fort. In this province is found 
the stone called ./Elites, or of the eagles ; also 
there are several kinds of wood peculiarly adapted 
for building, amongst which the cedar particu 
larly abounds, the same being cut on the moun 
tains towards the e. The settlements of its juris 
diction are, 

Banos,. Llacta, 

Bondos, Punos, 

Cosma r Miraflores, 

Chupan, Zinga, 

Quipai, Punchao, 

Chuquis, Pariarca, 

Jesus, Tantamayo. 

Xivin, Hacas, 

Hnanerin, Xipan, 

Choras, Chipao, 

Pachas, Monzon, 

Sillapata, Huaicabamba, 

Llamas,. Rundabamba, 

Aguamira, Huariganche, 

Coascahuac, Llanos, 

Chavinillas, Querin. 

GUAMAN, SANTIAGO DE, a settlement of the 
province and corrc^imicnlo of Truxillo in Peru ; 
situate in the valley of Chimo. It was formerly 



G U A 



well peopled, but at present reduced to a very 
scanty number of Indians, who live by cultivating 
some sorts ef grain and garden herbs, which they 
carry tor sale to the city, from whence this settle 
ment is distant half a league to the s. e. It has a 
beautiful grove of poplars, and a good church, 
which was almost entirely destroyed by an earth 
quake in 1759, and which has not since been re 
paired. In this church is an image of the humi 
lity and patience of Jesus Christ, which is held 
in particular veneration by the inhabitants. 

GUAMANGA, or HUAMANGA, a province and 
eorregirniento of the kingdom of Peru ; bounded n. 
and n. e. by the province of Guanta, s. by that of 
Vilcas Iluaman, and w.by that of Castro Virreyna. 
Its jurisdiction is so limited that it has no more 
than two settlements, though some others have 
been separated from it. Its territory lies high, and 
its temperature is cold. It abounds in excellent 
pastures, in which breed many herds of cattle, the 
wool of which is esteemed the finest of any in 
Peru. Much wheat grows here, and the best in 
the low lands. This province was conquered and 
united to the empire by the Inca Viracocha, eighth 
emperor. 

The capital is the city of the same name, founded 
by Francisco Pizarro, in 1539, in an extensive and 
beautiful plain, which is watered and fertilized by 
a river rising in the mountains. It has also the 
names of San Juan de la Victoria, in memory of 
the retreat of Manco Inca, after that he had well 
nigh conquered the Spaniards in a bloody battle ; 
and also of San Juan de la Frontera, although no 
one calls it by any other name than that of Gua- 
mariga. Its temperature is so benign that it is never 
incotumoded either by heat or cold, and enjoys a 
constant spring. There is no town in Peru that 
can compare with it in buildings: these arc all of 
stone, very handsome and convenient, and having 
gardens and orchards annexed, both for recreation 
and use. The public places and squares are grand, 
and the entrances to the city adorned with rows of 
trees. It has two parishes, with four curacies, a 
college, which is a royal seminary, with the title 
of San Christoval, and enjoying the privileges of 
an university ; some convents of the religious orders 
of Santo Domingo, San Francisco, San Agustin, 
La Merced, San Juan de Dios ; and a college 
which belonged to the regulars of the company of 
Jesuits ; also two monasteries for nuns, one of 
Santa Clara, and another of Carmelites; three 
religious houses of entertainment, called San Fran 
cisco, De Paula, De San Agustin, and De Agoni- 
zantes, called De la Buena Muerte; and a curacy 
entitled Santa Maria Magdalena, composed of In- 




^.- 

~ TFP 3&amp;gt; 



190 



GUAMANGA, 



dians, who live in different wards of the city. It 
abounds in grain, fruit, and cattle, and from the 
skins of the latter are made soles for shoes, belts 
and other sorts of leather, by which a great trade 
is carried on. In its territory is a fountain, the 
water of which, when congealed, is converted 
into a. white and transparent stone, of which arc 
made glass for M indows, figures, and articles of 
ornament. It has also mines of silver, gold, and 
load-stone, but fc\v of them are worked. It is the 
head of a bishopric erected by Paul V. in the year 
1609, and suffragan to Lima. It comprehends 
eight provinces, which are, Guanta, Vilcas Hua- 
man, Andraguailas, Guancabelica, Angaraes, 
Castro Virreyna, Parinacocha, and Lucanas. The 
natives are courteous, affable, liberal, and conver 
sant as well in the sciences as in matters of busi 
ness. This city contains many noble and rich 
families, and not a few descended from the first 
conquerors. It is the native place of the most il 
lustrious Seilor Don Manuel Geronimo de Ro- 
mani, canon of this holy church &amp;gt; bishop of Pa 
nama and Ctizco ; also of the Marquis of Valde- 
lirios, actual counsellor, chamberlain of the royal 
and supreme council of the Indies, and of Dona 
Maria Teresa Cruzategui y Munivi, Marchioness 
of Feria, a lady of singular talent and education, 
possessing a knowledge of Latin and philosophy, 
the belles lettres, and different languages. This 
city is 188 miles 5. e. of Lima, 176 n. w. from 
Cuzco, and 134 n. e. from Pisco. Lat. 12 56 s. 
Long. 73 57 w. 

Bishops who have presided in Guamanga. 

1. Don Fr. Agustin de Carvajal, of the order 
of San Agustin, native of Caceres in Estrema- 
dura, prior of the convent in Valladolid, assist 
ant general of the order; promoted from the church 
of Panama to this, in 1611; he governed until 
1620, when he died. 

2. Don Francisco Verdugo, native of Carmona 
in Andalucia, collegiate in the college of Maese 
Rodrigo de Sevilla, professor of canons and laws, 
advocate of the inquisition of Sevilla, and fiscal 
of that of Murcia, afterwards inquisitor of Lima; 
elected bishop of Guamanga in 1622; lie was a 
model for charitable and just prelates, five times 
visited his bishopric, and died in 1636, having 
been promoted to the archbishopric of Santa Fe. 

3. Don Fr. Gabriel de Zarate, of the order of 
Santo Domingo, native of Lima ; he was prior 
in four convents of his religion, twice provincial, 
cafificador of the holy office, and presented to 
this bishopric in the same year of 1636 ; he died 
the following year. 

4. Don Fr. Antonio Conderina, of the order of 



San Agustin, native of Bilbao ; promoted from 
the bishopric of Santa Marta to this, in 1645 ; on 
his arrival, however, he became mad, and in his 
stead was nominated, 

5. Don Antonio de Castro del Castillo, who did 
not accept the dignity. 

6. Don Andres Garcia de Zurita, native of Se 
villa, collegiate and rector in the royal college of 
San Felipe and San Marcos of the university of 
Lima, curate in the bishopric of Quito, canon 
and afterwards dean of the holy church of Lima, 
coadjutor to the bishopric of Guamanga, and then 
bishop, and from thence promoted to the bishopric 
of Truxillo, in 1650. 

7. Don Francisco Godoy, canon of the churches 
of Buenos Ayres and Arequipa, and dean of this 
church, professor of arts ; elected bishop of Gua 
manga in the same year, 1650. 

8. Don Fr. Cipriano de Medina, of the order 
of Santo Domingo, native of Lima, professor of 
arts, difixidor and procurator-general ; elected 
bishop of Guamanga, the cathedral of which he 
finished, and who died the same day that he was 
preceeding to make the visitation. 

9. Don Vasco de Contreras, native of Lima, 
collegiate of the college of San Martin, and of 
his university, treasurer of that holy church, 
bishop of Popayan, from whence he was removed 
to this bishopric. 

10. Don Sancho Pardode Andradey Figueroa, 
who was promoted to the bishopric of Quito, 
in 1688. 

11. Don Diego Ladron de Guevara ; he passed 
from the church of Panama, in 1699 ; was pro 
moted to that of Guamanga, and from thence to 
that of Quito, in 1703. 

12. Don Diego Deza y Ulloa, native of Mexico, 
who died in 1719. 

13. Don Fr. Alonzo Roldan, of the order of 
San Basilio, native of Villaroblcdo in La Mancha, 
master in sacred theology, synodical examiner of 
the archbishopric of Toledo, calificador of the 
holy tribunal of the inquisition, abbot of his 
church ofAlcala and of the monastery of Ma 
drid, difinidor, provincial, and vicar-general of the 
provinces of Castilla and Andalucia ; presented to 
the bishopric of Guamanga in 1723 ; he governed 
with singular integrity his church for 17 years ; 
and although oppressed with years and persecu 
tions, he endeavoured to renounce the mitre, yet 
was not this permitted him. 

14. Don Fr. Francisco Galeano, of the order of 
La Merced, native of Lima, first professor of 
writing in the university of San Marcos, auxiliary 
bishop of that capital, with the title of Rosalicnse, 



G U A 



191 



nnd promoted lo that of Guamanga in 1741 ; he 
died in 1743. 

15. Don Miguel Bernardo de la Fuente Roja, 
native of Lima, promoted from the church of 
Santa Cruz de hi Sierra in 1714; but he died before 
he could take possession. 

1C. Don Francisco Gutierrez; elected in 1715; 
he died in 1749. 

17. Don Felipe Manrique tie Lara, native of 
Limn, of the illustrious family of the Marquises 
of this title, dean of that holy metropolitan church ; 
elected bishop of Panama, which dignity he re 
nounced, and then of Guamanga, in 1750; he 
died in 1765. 

18. Don FT. Joseph Luis de Lila, of the order 
of San Agustin, native of Panama; elected in 
1766 ; he died in 1769. 

19. Don Miguel Moreno y Olio, native of Pa 
nama, dean of its holy church, and bishop ; from 
whence he was promoted to the bishopric of Gua 
manga in 1771 ; he died in 1782. 

20. Don Francisco Lopez, abbot of Motril ; 
elected bishop of Guamanga in 1782. 

GUAMAN1, a cordillera of mountains, very 
lofty and covered with snow, which is united to 
the grand cordillera of the Andes, in the kingdom 
of Quito. 

GUAMANTANGA, a settlement of the pro 
vince and corregimieitto of Canta in Pern. It is 
small, but celebrated for the continual pilgrimages 
which are made hither from different parts, by 
people who come to visit the effigy of Christ, 
which is highly venerated in one of the churches; 
and upon the celebration of the festival, which is 
on the* day of Pentecost, the concourse of visitors 
from the other provinces is immense. 

GUAMANTLA, or HUAMANTLA, a settlement 
of the province and afcaldia mayor of Tlaxcala 
in Nueva Espafla. It contains more than 100 fa 
milies of Spaniards, Mulattoes, and Mustees^ who 
occupy themselves in making bits for bridles, stir 
rups, and many other nice works in iron, with 
such neatness, that these articles are in high esti 
mation throughout the kingdom, and form the 
principal branch of commerce. It has a convent 
of the religious order of San Francisco ; situate 
15 miles e. of Tlaxcala, 27 n.e. of Puebla, and 
48 zo. by s. of Xalapa. 

GUAMANZANA, a settlement of the province 
and corregimiento of Truxillo in Peru ; situate 
near the river Morin, and the mountain of Pela- 
gatos. 

GUAMARA, an abundant river of the pro- 
Yince and captainship of Seara in Brazil. It runs 



many leagues to the w. n. e. and enters the sea close 
to the point of Colta. 

GUAMARO, a settlement of the province and 
government of Cartagena; situate on the shore of 
the river of La Magdalena. 

GUAMARU, a settlement of the missions that 
were held by the Carmelite fathers of Portugal, in 
the country of Las Amazonas ; situate on the shore 
of the Rio Negro. 

GUAMAS, a settlement of the province and go 
vernment of Antioquia in the Nuevo Reyno de 
Granada. 

GUAMAS, another settlement, in the province 
and government of Sonora in Nueva Espafia ; si 
tuate on the coast of the gulf of California. 

GUAMAZAN, a settlement of the province 
and corregimiento of Cuenca in the kingdom of 
Quito. 

GUAMBA, an ancient and very fertile province 
in the territory of the province of Popayan, of the 
ISuevo Reyno dc Grenada, discovered by Sebastian 
de Benalcazar in 1536. Its natives were ferocious 
and cannibals. 

GUAMBACHO, a port of the S.sea, on the 
coast of the province and corregimiento of Santa in 
Peru. 

GUAMBIA, a settlement of the province and 
government of Popayan in the Nuevo Reyno de 
Granada. 

GUAMBOS, a river of the province and corre 
gimiento of Chachapoyas in Peru. It rises in the 
valley of Tlayabamba, runs inclining to s. s. e. and 
enters the Moyobarnba. 

GUAMES, SAN DIEGO DE, a settlement of the 
province and corregimiento of Pastes in the king 
dom of Quito ; situate on the shore of the river of 
the Lake. 

GUAMES, a river of the same province and cor- 
reghniento, which runs e. for many leagues, col 
lecting the waters of many other rivers, and of the 
lake Mocoa, when it enters with a very abundant 
stream into the Putu-mayu. It h#s a very hand- 
some bridge of willow twigs. 

GUAMES, another river, in the province and cor 
regimiento of Tacunga, and of the same kingdom. 
It rises near the settlement of Pillaro, runs e.y and 
united with others, enters the Curaray in the country 
of the Canelos. 

GUAMINI, a mountain of the province and go 
vernment of Buenos Ayres, near the coast of the 
Patagones. 

GUAMO, a settlement of the jurisdiction of 
Ibague in the government of Mariquita, of the 
Nuevo Reyno d Granada ; annexed to the curacy 
5 



192 



G U A 



of the settlement of Cuello. It is of a hot tempera 
ture, fertile, and abundant in the vegetable produc 
tions of its climate, and contains 400 housekeepers. 

GUAMO, a small river of the province and go 
vernment of Maracaibo, which rises n. of the city 
of Merida, between this city and the Great lake. 
It runs n. and empties itself into the said lake. 

GUAMGCO, a city ofthe province and govern 
ment of Antioquia in the Nuevo Reyno de Gra- 
jiada. It is rich, and abounds in mines of silver of 
the purest kind ; is situate on the shore ofthe river 
Alara, in the midst of some extensive sierras, from 
which it has taken its name, the same abounding in 
wash ing places of gold, found amongst the quebradas 
or broken and uneven grounds which abound here : 
these washing places are called San Francisco, 
Bijagua, Plalanar, Ariza, Trinidad, San Pedro, 
La Cruz, Tupe, Espolon de Babalo, Ambulama, 
Saltillo, Encarnacion, Santa Margarita, Santa 
Isabel, San Lorenzo, Cultura, Caceri Grande, 
Caccrito; and there arc many others, which have 
produced an infinite quantity of gold, causing the 
city to increase in fame, commerce, and popula 
tion. Since, however, the decay of the mines, it 
Las been reduced to a miserable state, and is merely 
the ruins of what it formerly was. [It is 32 miles 
v. e. of Antioquia. Lat, 7 9 n. Long. 74 
57 w. 

GUAMOS, a barbarous nation of Indians, of the 
Ikmuras of the Orinoco, to the n. and to the e. of 
the river Apure, near which they dwell amongst 
the woods : bounded s. by the nation ofthe Paes, 
and e. by that of the Palenques. They are very 
numerous and valorous. 

GUAMOTE, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Riobamba in the kingdom of 
Quito. 

GUANABACOA, a town ofthe island of Cuba. 

GUANA BO, a small river of the island of Santo 
Domingo, near the coast of the e. head. It runs 
into the sea at the month of the great bay of Sa- 
mana, close to ihe cape of San Rafael. 

GUANACAS, a settlement of the province and 
government of Popayau in the Nuevo Reyno de 
Granada; founded on the confines of that of Quito, 
by the regulars ofthe company, in 1620, when they 
entered the kingdom to reduce to the faith the 
Paeces Indians. 

GTANACAS, ^.paramo or desert mountain, which 
is very lofty and covered with eternal snow, in the 
same province and kingdom as the former settle 
ment, on the skirts of which it is situate. It lies 
in the direct road in going down from the kingdom 
jof Quito., and many travellers have been frozen in 



G U A 

their journey, through the intense cold which pre 
vails here. 

GUANACAT1, a river of the province and go-* 
vernmcnt of Panama in the kingdom of Tierra 
Firme, e. of the settlement of Chepo. Its shores 
are very fertile, and adorned with numerous culti 
vated estates and gardens. It runs into the S sea, 
on the w. of the river called Chemina, in lat. 8* 
53 n. 

GUANACEVI, a settlement and real of the 
silver mines of the province of Tepeguana, and 
kingdom of Nueva Vizcaya ; situate on the shore 
of the river of Las Nasas, 15 leagues to the n. n. w. 
of the capital Guadiana. 

[GUANACHES, several lakes of the kingdom of 
La Plata ; situate about 55 miles to the n. e. of 
Mendoza in the kingdom of Chile. Into these lakes 
run the rivers De Mendoza, O Tamiya, and Blanco, 
and several others : the largest of these lakes is 
called Lag. Grande, which is about 54 miles long, 
out of which lake runs the river Desaguadero or 
Colorado, and empties itself into the sea between 
the river Plata arid the peninsula De San Josef.] 

GUANACOCHA, a settlement of the province 
and corregimiento of Cuyo in the kingdom of 
Chile ; situate on the shore of the river Mendoza. 

GUANAGUANA, a settlement of the province 
and government of Cumana in the kingdom of 
Tierra Firme ; situate in the interior of the scr- 
rania. It is one of the missions that belong in 
that province to the Aragonose Capuchin fathers. 

GUANAilANl, or SAN SALVADOR, or by the 
English called Cat Island, one of the Bahamas ; in 
the ocean, and the first land of America discovered 
by Admiral D. Christopher Columbus in 1492. 
He gave it the name of St. Salvador, since he had 
already considered himself as lost, and since his 
people had threatened to kill him, unless, as he had 
promised them, they might find land. Lat. 24 
15 . I ,orig. 7.9 40 . [See S r . S A L v A no R . ] 

GUANAHUCA, a volcano of the kingdom of 
Chile, in the mountains of the cordilicrn, near that 
of Osorno. Lat, 40 50 s. Long. 7 1 45 w. 

GUANAJA, a settlement of the island of Cuba, 
on the n. coa.^t, 62 leagues from the point of 
Ilicacos. 

GUANA.T1VE, a river ofthe island of San Juan 
de Puertorico, which rises n. of the town of San 
German, runs . and enters the sea between port 
Frances and the river Mayagues. 

GUANAJUATO, an alcald ia mat/or of Nueva 
Espana, in the province and bishopric of Mcchoa- 
can, I* is for the most part of a cold temperature, 
since its situation occupies the sierra Madre. Its 



G U A 

productions arc gold, silver, and copper, of which 
inetnls there are very abundant mines, the which 
at the present day are dug to a great depth, and 
are much troubled with water, so that their expence 
of working is very great. VVithin its district also 
are other mines, called the Real de San Nicolas, 
three leagues to the ??. that of Pcregrino, San Lo 
renzo, La Trinidad, El Realejo, four leagues to the 
w. with those called La Puerta, La Ovejara, La 
Mora, San Bernabe, El Rosario, and La Medalla, 
all of gold and silver; but all yielding sparingly, 
through the scanty means of working them pos 
sessed by the natives. Besides these there are in 
the sierras those of Pcregrina, La Sirena, Las 
Bayas, Santa Ana, and La Atalaya, each forming 
a moderate village, having its church and chaplain 
for the administration of the sacraments. The 
same is the case in 43 estates in which the silver 
is manufactured. These estates lie in certain 
glens, in which reside hordes of labourers, who 
consume annually more than 100,000 load of 
maize, 18,000 sheep, 50CO oxen, and 18,000 load 
of meal, the same being used in the aforesaid 16 
villages, and in the settlement and head settlement 
of Irapuato, which is united to this jurisdiction. 
The capital is Santa Fe. 

GUANAMBI, a settlement of the province and 
government of Cartagena ; situate between the sea- 
coast and the Dique, which communicates with the 
Rio Grande de la Magdalena. 

GUANAMBU, or JUANAMBU, a large and ra 
pid river of the province and corregimiento of 
Pasto in the kingdom of Quito. It funs from e. 
to a\ and after having collected the waters of the 
Mayo, unites itself with the Guaitara ; when these, 
united, join the Patia with such rapidity, as neither 
to admit of vessels to pass, or any bridge to be 
built upon it. It is consequently passed en tarn- 
vita, by a sling, which consists of a strong cable 
attached on either shore to some stout trees. On 
the cable is hung, by large iron rings, a large bas 
ket ; and this, in which are placed the persons and 
burthens that are to be brought over, is drawn 
backwards and forwards by horses on either shore, 
by cords attached to the basket. This river 
empties itself into the Patia, in about lat. 1 26 n. 
Lono-. 77 25 w. 

GUANANAS, a barbarous nation of Indians of 
Paraguay, who inhabit the vicinities of the river 
Parana. They are being reduced by degrees to 
the faith, and are forming themselves into settle 
ments. They are of a docile nature, laborious, and 
fond of agriculture. 

GUANANDO, a settlement of the province and 
VOL. n. 



G U A 



J93 



corregimiento of Riobamba in the kingdom of 
Quito. 

GUANA PA, a settlement of the alcaldia mayor 
of Guajuapa in Nueva Espafia, containing 100 fa 
milies of Indians. 

GUANAPA, a river of the province and govern 
ment of Guayana or Nueva Andalucia. It runs 
n. inclining to the e, and enters the Amy, near the 
city of Heal Corona. 

GUANAPALO, a river of the Nuevo Reyno 
de Granada, which rises in the mountains of Bo 
gota. It abounds in delicious fish, and innavigable 
by canoes; runs from n. to s. and enters by the 
n. inlo the Meia, near the settlement of San Fran 
cisco Regis. 

GUANAPALO, another river, of the province and 
government of Maracaibo. It rises to the e. of the 
town of St. Domingo, runs inclining to the e. ; and 
forming a curve of very great extent, enters the 
river of La Portuguesa. 

GUANAPATO, a river of the province and 
government of La Guayana, which enters the Meta 
according to Mr. LJellin. No doubt, he meant the 
former river, and has mistaken the name. 

GUANAPAY, a river of the province and go 
vernment of Paraguay. It runs e. and enters the 
Parana, between those of lluci and Yagui. 

GUANAPE, a port in the S. sea, in the province 
and corregimiento of Truxillo in Peru ; little fre 
quented, from its insecurity and exposure. It is 
10 leagues to the s. e. of its capital, which is the 
nearest of any population or town. It has been 
rendered very desolate, from want of water, and 
the whole of its inhabitants are comprehended in 
about a dozen nmchos of Indians, who live by fish 
ing, and by helping vessels to unload which come 
here and are pressed for time. 

GUANAPE, FARALLONES DE, four small isles; 
one larger than the rest, opposite the former port. 
They are desert and barren. 

GUANAPO, a river of the province of Barce 
lona, and government of Cumana. it rises in the 
mountains not far from the coast, runs e. and enters 
the Unare. 

GUANAPU, a river of the province and cap- 
tainship of Para in Brazil. It rises in the moun 
tains, and empties itself by the s. into the mouth of 
Las Amazonas. 

GUANARE, a settlement of the missions that 
are held by the Capuchin fathers, in the province 
and government of Guayana ; situate on the shore 
of the river of its name. [Guanare received from 
its founders, in 1593, the civil and religious institu 
tions given at that period to every Village then 



c c 



194 



G U A N A R E. 



[established ; that is, a cabildo and a curate. Those 
who selected the situation deserve praise for the 
wisdom of their choice. In the first place, a river, 
which has given its name to the town, furnishes 
the inhabitants with good water, for drinking as 
well as for the purposes of culture, and for the use 
of their flocks. In the next, there is nothing to 
prevent the winds circulating well through the 
town, and refreshing the atmosphere. 

If one considers the situation of Guanare with 
respect to rural works, it will be seen that the lands 
in the e. part are fertile, and fit for every des 
cription of produce; and that to the s. and e. the 
pasture of the immense plains are evidently des 
tined by nature for the propagation of cattle. It is 
in this speculation that the inhabitants are chiefly 
engaged. Their greatest wealth is in cattle, the 
number of which is infinite. They sell a number 
of oxen for the consumption of the province, and 
also a number of mules for its use. The surplus 
is exported from Coro, Porto Cavello, or Guayana. 
Formerly very good tobacco was cultivated in the 
valleys of Tucupio and Liporora, as well as on the 
banks of the river Porluguesa ; but since the go 
vernment monopoly, these plantations have suf 
fered the fate of all those that unfortunately were 
not within the jurisdiction designed by the minis 
ters for the cultivation of tobacco on the king s ac 
count. The population of Guanare amounts to 
12,300 persons. The streets are in a line, broad, 
and formed by houses, if not magnificent, of a very 
passable construction. There is an hospital with a 
very pitiful revenue ; but the parish church is 
large, handsome, and ornamented in a superior 
manner. Jt owes a part of its splendour to the pos 
session of Our Lady of Comoroto, whose virtues 
and miracles oblige us to give an account of her 
apparition, and of the causes of the great concourse 
of people which she attracts from the neighbouring 
provinces. It was ascertained by an investigation 
made by D. Carlos de Herrera, rector (cure-rector) 
of the cathedral of Caracas, that in 1651, an in 
habitant of the name of John Sanchez made a 
journey from the town of Espiritu Santo to Tucuyo, 
by a road which led over some dry savannas. A 
Cacique stopped him to acquaint him that a woman 
exceedingly beautiful had appeared to him in a 
ravine which he pointed out to him, and that she 
bad told him to go with his people, and find the 
whites, who would make him throw water on his 
heau,as the only means of securing his way to hea 
ven. Sanchez, being in a hurry, deferred the ex 
amination of the matter until his return, which was 
in eight days. The Cacique was punctual in re 



pairing to the same spot at this period, continuing 
as much affected witli what the woman had said to 
him as he was on the first day. The alcaldes were 
informed that the whole Cacique nation would re 
pair to the church to receive baptism. This was 
punctually executed, and in less than one hour 
more than 7000 souls were put into the way of sal 
vation. * 

After this solemnity, all the daughters and chil 
dren of the baptized Indians beheld the woman in 
the ravine where she had made her first appearance. 
As it was the place where they went to fetch water, 
they always stopped longer than their errand re 
quired, and were often scolded and beaten by their 
parents. The same fault and the same chastise 
ment were repeated every day, until at last the 
children declared that a woman appeared to them, 
under so beautiful a form that they could not weary 
themselves with admiring her. 

No adult could see her; but on the report of the 
children, prodigious virtues were attributed to the 
waters in this ravine. W hat carried their belief to 
its height was the bishop Uiego de Baiios having 
sent some of this water to Madrid in 1699 ; as it ar 
rived there, after a voyage often months, as fresh 
as if it had been just taken from the ravine. The 
governor D. Nicholas Eugenio de Ponce sent some 
to his wife, at the Canary islands. It arrived 
equally fresh. 

People who are in want, repair with a lighted 
lamp to bathe in the ravine. Every where they 
send for this water. Even the flint stones have 
become relics, and are worn about the neck. What 
is very singular, is that every body had an entire 
faith in these miracles, excepting the very Cacique 
who had given the information to Sanchez. He 
persisted in an invincible unbelief. 

On the 8th of Sept. 1652, they wished to force 
him to assist at the divine ceremonies ; he refused, 
and retired to his dwelling, which was two leagues 
off. He was no sooner arrived there than the Vir 
gin appeared to him arrayed in a splendour which 
shone as bright at midnight as the meridian sun. 
Immediately the Cacique saw her, he said to her, 
" O madam! dostthou come here also, thou mayest 
as well return, 1 am not more disposed to obey 
thee ; owing to thee, I find myself in trouble; i 
wish to retire to the woods, which I have to repent 
having ever left." The Indian s wife said to her 
husband, " Do not insult the woman, be not of a bad 
heart." He then took his bow and arrow to shoot 
the Virgin ; but she approached near enough to 
him to prevent it. He wished to seize her, she 
vanished, and the room was again in darkness. In] 



G U A 

[the same time the Cacique felt something in his 
hand. They lighted a fire, and discovered it to be 
a figure of the V irgin, which he had concealed in 
the thatch of his cottage : he fled into the woods, 
and died of a bite of a serpent. 

A child of 12 years old found this little figure ; 
he attached it to the relic which he wore about his 
neck. But this event was no sooner known than 
the people went to find it in a procession. They 
carried it to the church, and soon raised a tem 
ple more worthy of her, where all the faithful con 
tinually present her the homage of the most pro 
found veneration. To vie with Our Lady of Lo- 
reto, she only wants the wealth of the Italian 
Virgin, for she is quite as much venerated, and 
quite as powerful. 

Guanare is in lat. 8 12 n. and long. 69 15 
w. It lies 193 miles s.s.w. of Caracas, 64 s. e. 
of Truxillo, and 70 n. e. of Varinas.] 

GUANAIIE, a town of the province and govern 
ment of Venezuela, founded by Captain Juan Fer 
nandez de Leon in 1593, by order of the governor 
D. Diego de Osorio, near the river from whence it 
takes its name, and also near another which sur 
rounds it ; each of these rivers abounding in fish. 
It is of a healthy temperature, though extremely 
hot. Here are large breeds of cattle, owing to the 
fine pastures of its extensive llanuras and sabanas. 
Here also are produced great quantities of cacao, 
tobacco, fruits, .and garden herbs. In its church 
is venerated a miraculous image, with the dedica 
tory title of Nuestra Senora de Comoroto, which 
appeared here in 1652 ; and very numerous are 
the pilgrimages made to this shrine from all the 
immediate provinces. This town is 20 leagues to 
the s. e. of the city of Tucuyo. The aforesaid 
river rises from the aforesaid town, and enters the 
Portuguesa. 

GUANARITO, a river of the province and go 
vernment of Venezuela, which rises in the paramo 
of La Rosa, to the n. of the city of Truxillo, 
and runs e. forming an extensive cwrve, until it 
unites itself with the Tucupio to enter the Portu 
guesa. 

GUANAS, CERROS DE, some mountains of the 
province and government of Chaco in Peru, run 
ning along the shore of the river Paraguay. 

GUANA VAL, a river of the province and go 
vernment of Nueva Vizcaya in N. America. 

GUANAXA, an island of the N.sea; situate 
near the coast of the province and government of 
Honduras, opposite the bay of Truxillo. 

[GUANAXUATO, a province, wholly situated 
on the ridge of the cordillera of Anahuac, and the 
most populous in New Spain. The population is 



G U A 



195 



also more equally distributed here than in any of 
the other provinces. Its length, from the lake of 
Chapala to the n. e. of San Felipe, is 52 leagues; 
and its breadth from the Villa de Leon to Celaya, 
31 leagues. Its territoral extent is nearly the same 
as that of the kingdom of Murcia ; and in relative 
population it exceeds the kingdom of the Asturias. 
Its relative population is even greater than that of 
the departments of thellautes-Alpes, Basses-Alpes, 
Pyrenees Orientales, and the Landes. The most 
elevated point of this mountainous country seems 
to be the mountain DC los Llanitos, in the sierra 
de Santa Rosa. Its height above the level of the 
sea is 2815 metres, or 9235 feet. 

The cultivation of this fine province, part of the 
old kingdom of Mcchoacan, is almost wholly to be 
ascribed to the Europeans, who arrived there in the 
16th century, and introduced the first germ of 
civilization. It was in these n. regions, on the 
banks of the Rio de Lerma, formerly called Tolo- 
lotlan, that the engagements took place between the 
tribes of hunters and shepherds, called in the his 
torians by the vague denominations of Chichimecs, 
who belonged to the tribes of the Pames, Capuccs, 
Samues, Mayolias, Guamanes, and Guachichiles 
Indians. In proportion as the country was aban 
doned by these wandering and warlike nations, the 
Spanish conquerors transplanted to it colonies of 
Mexican or Aztec Indians. For a long time agri 
culture made more considerable progress than 
mining. The mines, which were of small cele 
brity at the beginning of the conquest, were almost 
wholly abandoned during the 17th and 18th cen 
turies ; and it is not more than 30 or 40 years 
since they became richer than the mines of Pa- 
chuca, Zacatecas, and Bolaiios. They are also 
infinitely richer than those of Potosi ever were, and 
afforded, from 1796 to 1803, near 40,000,000 of 
dollars in gold and silver, or very near 5,000,000 
of dollars annually ; that is, somewhat less than 
one-fourth of the whole quantity of the gold and 
silver from New Spain ; yet these mines, produc 
tive as they were, did not employ more than 5000 
workmen of every description. 

There are in the intendancy of Guanaxuato 
three cities, viz. Guanaxuato, Celayo, and Salva- 
tierra; four towns, viz. San Miguel el Grande. 
Leon, San Felipe, and Salamanca; 37 settlements, 
33 parishes, 448 farms (or haciendas), 225 indivi 
duals of the secular clergy, 170 monks, and SO 
nuns; and in a population of more than 180,000 
Indians, 52,000 subject to tribute. 

The hot wells of San Jose de Comangillas arc in 
this province. They issue from a basaltic open 
ing. The temperature of the water, according to] 
c c 2 



196 



G U A 



[experiments made by Humboldt and M. Roxas, is 
96. 3 of the centigrade thermometer, or 205. 3 of 
Fahrenheit. 

The population of this intendancy, in 1803, was 
517,300; the extent of surface in square leagues 
911, and the number of inhabitants to the square 
league 586. 

The most remarkable towns of this intendancy are 
the following: Guanaxuatothe capital, Salamanca, 
Celaya, Villa de Leon, San Miguel el Grande.] 

[CrU vNAX(TATO,OrSANTA F J)E Gu AN.iJ U ATO, 

the capital of the above province. The building 
of this city was begun by the Spaniards in 
1554. It received the royal privilege of town 
in 1619, and that of city the 8th December 
1741. Its present population is, within the 
city - - - 41,000 

In the mines surrounding the city, to 
which the buildings are contiguous, at 
Mar/il, Santa Ana, Santa Rosa, Valen- 



ciana, Rayas, and Mellado 



- 29,600 



70,600 

Among whom there are 4500 Indians. Height 
of the citj at the plaza mayor 2084 metres, or 
68S6 feet. Height of Valenciana at the mouth of 
the new pit, 2313 metres, or 7586 feet. Height of 
Rayas at the mouth of the gallery, 2157 metres, or 
7075 feet. More properly GUANAJUATO, which 
see; also Fr, SANTA.] 

GUANCABAMBA, a river of the province and 
government of Jaen de Bracamoros in the king 
dom of Quito. It rises in the serrania to the w. of 
the city of Loyola, runs s. and then turning ils 
course toe. enters, united with the Sinanchi, into 
the Mara iion. 

GUANCABELICA, a town and capital of the 
province of Angaraes in Peru, the head of the go 
vernment; founded in 1572 by the viceroy of that 
kingdom, Don Francisco de Toledo, second son of 
the Count of Oropesa, in whose memory he gave 
it the. title of Villa Rica de Oropcsa. It is situate 
in a broken and uneven glen, formed by tbctordil* 
lera ; is one of the grandest and richest cities in 
that kingdom; it is also populous, and (he tem 
perature is extremely cold, and the weather con 
stantly changing, as it is not uncommon to expe- 
perience in the s.me dny rain, frost, hail, and 
tempests of thunder and lightning. The build 
ings are of stories, more or less porous, which are 
indurated by certain streams of warm water fo Mid 
in that neighbourhood. This settlement is watered 
by a stream, vhich in the rainy season swells to a 
considerable size, from being joined by several 
others flowing down from the neighbouring mouu- 



G U A 

tain : it is crossed in various parfs by bridges, and 
one of these is of stone, and has three arches ; and 
another of two stones put together in their rough 
or undressed state. This town is the residence of 
the governor, who originally was always an oidor 
of the audience of Lima, by commission, and with 
him two royal officers, an alguazil mayor, and the 
procurator of the town. It has been much noted 
for its great mine of quicksilver, discovered in 
1563 by Enrique Garces, a Portuguese ; and this 
is the only one which is worked throughout all 
America; not that there are wanting many other 
fine mines of this metal, but that the quantity pro 
duced from this is found sufficient for working the 
metal of all the silver mines of Peru. The mode 
of using this metal was discovered by Pedro Fer 
nandez de Velasco, in 1571. The aforesaid mine 
is farmed and worked by a company of 40 miners, 
which number is not always complete ; and with 
these the king fixes upon a price that he shall pay 
for each quintal of quicksilver; when the whole ex 
tracted from the mines is regularly poured into the 
royal coffers. In the working of these mines, a 
vast number of the inhabitants of the settlement as 
sist, as do also the Indians. The appointment to 
this labour is called mita, and very many are those 
that perish in the employ. This mine does not 
produce so much metal at the present day as it for 
merly did, owing to the great depth it has ac 
quired, as also from a fire which happened in 
1760, and which threatened to render it useless: 
however, this only led to the discovery of other 
mines ; and the fire has been by great labour ex 
tinguished. The town has in its vicinity 12i 
kilns for doing the business of the mine ; and the 
mouth of the mine is one league distant from the 
town. In 1735, the king took away the govern 
ment from the oidors of the audience of Lima, and 
ordered that in their place should be elected men 
intelligent in affairs of mineralogy. [It is 53 miles 
w. from Guamanga or Huamanga, 140 s. c. from 
Lama, 86 s. by e. from Tarma, and 87 e. from the 
nearest pirt of the coast. In lat. 12 56 s. Lono-. 
74 51 aJ.] 

G LIANG AY, a silver mine of the province 
and corregimiento of Guamachuco in Peru. It 
is on the shore of the river Chicama, which di 
vides on this part its jurisdiction from that of 
Caxamarca. 

GUANCAYO, a large, rich, and commercial 
settlement of the province and co reginriento of 
Xauxa in Peru ; situate in an extensive and fer 
tile llanura, near the river of its name : this river 
has at its entrance a beautiful stone bridge. The 
settlement contains two parishes, and abounds 
5 



G U A 

in exquisite fruits. It is eight leagues from its 
capital. 

GUANCHACO, a settlement and port of the 
province and corregimiento of Truxillo in Peru. 
It is poor and scanty, and the natives maintain 
themselves by catching fish and carrying their 
spoil to a market at the capital, or other place in 
the vicinity, also by assisting vessels or by direct 
ing the boats making the port. This, although it 
is but little sheltered from the winds, is much fre 
quented by vessels coming from Lima and Pa 
nama ; and these would suffer imminent hazard of 
being wrecked upon the bar of sand and rocks 
which lies at the entrance of the port, but for the 
practice and cunning of the natives. The church 
is large and beautiful, and being built on a lofty 
eminence, serves as a direction and land-mark to 
vessels. In it is venerated an image of Nuestra 
Scnora del Socorro, held in great devotion. M. 
de la Martiniere says, that this port of the S. sea is 
in Brazil, forgetting that the coasts of Peru and 
Chile are exactly on the opposite side of America 
to those of Brazil. This settlement is in lat. 8 5 s. 
Long. 7858 o?. 

GUANCHACO, a point of land on the coast of the 
same province and corregimiento as the former 
settlement. 

GUANCHANAMA, a settlement of the pro 
vince and corregimiento of Loxa in the kingdom 
of Quito. 

GUANCHES, a river of the province and king 
dom of Tierra Firme ; it runs into the N. sea, to 
the w. of the city of Portobelo. 

GUANDARO, a settlement of the province 
and government of Carita in Peru ; annexed to the 
curacy of Huamantanga. 

GUANDES, a river of the province and go 
vernment of Moxos in the kingdom of Quito. It 
rises between those of Ubay and Guapaire, runs 
nearly due n. and enters the Baures. 

GUANE, a large settlement of the province of 
Velez in the Nuevo Key no dc Granada. It is of 
an hot and disagreeable temperature, and Ihe little 
water that there is, is bad : it contains 150 Indians, 
whose habits are most perverse, and who are great 
drunkards and idlers, also 30 white inhabitants, 
In its vicinity is found a flat stone two yards and 
an half long, and as many wide, encased in the 
earth, and having engraved upon it in bass-relief 
three human figures, with garments carved in the 
same manner ; the middle figure has sandals and a 
beard, and at the foot of the whole are five lines, 
written in letters that no one who has looked at 
them can make out. Close to the same stone runs 



G U A 



19? 



a quebrada, or broken and uneven territory, called 
De los Santos. 

GUANEROS, a barbarous nation of Indians, 
of the Nuevo Reyno de Granada, to the n. e. at 
the foot of the mountains of Bogota, and to the n. 
of the river Apure. They are of a docile and 
pacific nature, and many of them have been re 
duced to live in a settlement. 

GUANEROS, a river of the province and govern 
ment of Maracaibo. It rises in the sierra Nevada, 
runs s. and inclining to the s. e enters the Apure. 

GUANGO, a settlement and head settlement of 
the district of the alcaldia mayor of VaUadolid in 
Nueva Espana, and of the province and bishopric 
of Mechoacan ; situate in the bottom of a hollow. 
It is of a cold temperature, inhabited by 12 fami 
lies of Spaniards and Mulattoes, and 82 of Indians. 
It has a convent of monks of the order of San. 
Agustin ; and in its district are various cultivated 
estates, in which reside 33 families of Spaniards, 
20 of Mustces, and 66 of Mulattoes, all of whom 
are employed in agriculture. It is 14 leagues s. 
of the capital, Pasquaro. 

GUANICA, a port of the island San Juan de 
Puertorico, on the s. coast. 

GUAN1CO, SIERRAS DE, some very lofty 
and long-extended mountains of the province and 
government of Santiago de V r eragua, in the king 
dom of Tierra Firme. They run from e. to w. in 
the extremity washed by the S. sea, being eight 
leagues distant from the same. 

GUAN1MORO, a settlement of the head settle 
ment of Tuxpan, and alcaldia mayor of Mara- 
vatio, in Nueva Espana, and of the bishopric of 
Mechoacan. It contains J 8 families of Indians, 
and lies half a league to the n. of its head settle 
ment. 

GUANIPA, MESA DE, a lofty promontory of 
land, in the province and government of Curnana. 
Its skirts consist of a long stretch of hilly country, 
and of broken, uneven, clayish grounds. It is from 
35 to 40 leagues across, and in some parts 50. Its 
top is all level, forming a continued flat plain ; the 
soil is sandy, parched, and lacking water. On 
the sides of the Mesa are, however, large open 
ings or chasms, and in the centre of these are 
woods of palms resembling those of dates, called 
here moriche. From these chasms issue out water, 
in such quantities as to form some considerable 
rivers. 

GUANIPA, a river of the province of Barcelona, 
and government of Curhana. It rises in the 
former table-land, and enters into the Guara- 
piche. 



198 



G U A 



GUANO, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Riobamba in the kingdom of 
Quito ; situate on a delightful spot, abounding in 
the most exquisite of the European fruits, besides 
those pecidiar to the region. It is of a benign and 
healthy climate, celebrated for its good manufac 
tures and woollen stockings made by the Indians, 
and with which article a great trade is maintained 
with the provinces of Popayan, Choco, and Bar- 
bacoas. In its district is a rich country estate 
called Elen. The settlement is seven miles n. e. 
of Riobamba, on the shore of the river of its name ; 
in lat. 1 34 s. and long. 78 28 w. 

GUANO, a small island of the S. sea, near the 
coast of the province and corregimiento of Arica 
in Peru, to the s. of this town, and n. of the settle 
ment of Atacarna ; in lat. 20 J9 s. 

GUANOAS, a barbarous nation of Indians, on 
the confines of the province and government of 
Paraguay, to the n. ; amongst whom dwell many 
refugee Spaniards. Of these Indians we know 
nothing more than that they are very idle, and lead 
a loitering life through the woods, and on the 
shores of the rivers, maintaining themselves by 
fish ing and the chase. This nation is above 100 
leagues distant from the settlements of the missions 
of Paraguay. 

GUANOZAN, a settlement of the province 
and corregimiento of Loxa in the kingdom of 
Quito; situate on the bank of a stream which 
enters the river Giron. 

GUANTA, a province and corregimiento of 
Peru, bounded n. and n. w. by the province of 
Xauxa, n. e. and e. by the mountains of the Andes, 
and s. and s. w. by the province of Angaraes, 
and partly by the jurisdiction of Guamanga and 
that of Castro Virreyna, ; on the s. e. it touches 
upon the provinces of Andahuailas and Vilcas- 
huaman : it extends in length, from the province 
of Xauxa to that of Andahuailas, 60 leagues in a 
direction from n. w. to s. e. being 40 leagues 
wide. Its situation is, for the most part, on 
heights or mid-lands, where the cold is consider 
able ; the rest consists of quebradas or broken glens, 
of a good -and even warm temperature, although 
it is altogether scarce of Hanuras. In this pro 
vince are cultivated all kinds of fruits and seeds, 
nor is it without sugar-cane grounds. Towards 
the part bounded by the mountains, arc gathered 
tolerable crops of coca and other fruits. Here are 
breeds of all kinds of cattle, although not in the 
greatest abundance ; also various estates belonging 
to the settlements of San Pedro de Guanta and San 
Juande Tarnbos, where the quantity of coca is 



G U A 

the greatest, the crops being gathered three times 
a year, and regularly exceeding 88,000 arrobas, 
of 32lbs. each, and the same being carried to 
Guancabelica, and other parts where there are 
mines, and sold at eight dollars the arroba: this, 
indeed, forms the greater part of the commerce of 
this province. In the woods are found many 
curious things, such as dragon s blood, cinnamon, 
bees honey, which is found in the trunks of trees; 
and some of these are so large that eight men, with 
their arms extended, cannot encompass them. 
Here are likewise bees which breed under ground, 
tigers of more beautiful skin than those of Africa, 
mountain-cats, hedge-hogs, bears, wild boars, 
cows, and wild horses, turkeys, doves, partridges, 
also a tree called pilco, the shade of which causes 
an universal itching over the whole body to those 
who come near its influence, and lastly, many 
rare herbs, which would afford much occupation 
and amusement to the botanist. There is scarcely 
any silver mine here worth mentioning ; but there 
are mines of lead and of salt so abundant, that of 
this latter article large quantities arc taken to the 
immediate provinces for working the silver. 
Amongst the rivers of the province, the largest is 
that which flows down through the province of 
Xauxa, and which rises in the province of Tarma 
from the lake called Cinchaicocha, the same pre 
serving the name of the Maranon, which was 
given it by the Spaniards, although amongst the 
Indians it still preserves the name of Angoyaco. 
This river divides this province from that of An 
garaes ; and making an inflexion from s. w. to e. 
forms a peninsula called the island of Tayacaxa: 
it abounds in many delicate sorts offish, and has, 
for a pass into the aforesaid province, a strong 
bridge, the same being the route by which lays the 
royal road leading from Cuzco, and called the 
Bridge of Iscucacha. There is also another bridge, 
called Criznejas, on the other side of the island, in 
the settlement of Mayoc. The inhabitants amount 
to 10,000, of all sexes and ages. The principal 
settlement is San Pedro de Guanta, six leagues 
from the city of Guamanga. Its corrcgidor used 
to have a ? -epartimiento of 119,200 dollars, and it 
paid an alcavala of 953 dollars yearly. The po 
pulation consists of the following settlements, divid 
ed into 12 curacies : 

S. Pedro de Guanta, S. Juan de Chilcas, 

San Juan de Tambo, S. Miguel, 
S. Juan de Guaman- San Salvador de Osno, 

guilla, . S. Marcos dc Chilua, 

Soquc, Pasayata, 

Huaillay, Macachacre, 



G U A 



G U A 



199 



Huaichao, 

Vinchos, 

Quinoa, 

Tambillo, 

Ticllas, 

Churcampa, 

Corai, 

Colcabamba, 

Ocoro, 

Huallisa, 

Roccha, 

Surcobaruba, 

Nequeh uaicondor, 

Vinchos de la Sal, 

Acocra, 

Ayari, 

Puucarbambilla, 

Santiago de Tucuma, 

Anchae, 

S. Pedro de Pampas, 



Tongos, 

Huachicolpa, 

Socos, 

Paccha, 

Piccha, 

Locroja, 

ITunchor, 

Anco, 

Acostamba, 

Salcabamba, 

Ila, 

Santiago, 

San Pedro de la Sal, 

Mayoc, 

Paucarbamba, 

Santa Clara de Cosme, 

Tocllacuri, 

Iluaribarnba, 

Santiago de Piechos, 

Ayacacha. 



GUANTANAMO. See CUMBERLAND. 

GUANTAR, a river of the province and go 
vernment of Cumana. 

GUANUCO, or HUANUCO, a province and 
corregimiento of Peru, bounded n. and e. by the 
province of the infidel Indians, s. e. and s. by the 
province of Tarma, and w. by the 5. part of the 
province of Guamalies. Its temperature is be 
nign and healthy, its territory fertile and abound 
ing in fruit and seeds. In it is gathered a tolerable 
quantity of pepper and cotton, and here are good 
breeds of cattle ; also at the entrance of the moun 
tainous part much coca, which is usually carried 
to Tarma. The district is, as it were, situate in a 
valley, which begins at Tarma, and ends in the 
mountains. This province is watered by two 
rivers, the one called Pilcomayo, which flows 
from Tarma, the other Visacaca, in the limits of 
the province of Guamalies : these rivers unite at a 
small distance from the city of Guanuco, and run 
n. through the mountains. Contiguous to this 
province are the Panataguas Indians, amongst 
whom there were formerly good reducciones ; but 
these have been lost through the natives having 
retired to (he mountains, after having killed their 
pastors of the religious order of S. Francisco. At 
present, however, there are existing other missions, 
which are kept up by the monks of the college of 
Ocopa; such is the settlement of Nuestra Seiiora 
de la Rosa, and such are many others which have 
not yet acquired any very great perfection. La 
Martiniere, following the errors in the descriptions 
of Juan Laet, says that this province is watered by 
the river Marailon, although the same is 22 leagues 
to the w. in the province of Tarma. It has only 

2 



three settlements with curacies, and 14 others an 
nexed : the which are, 
S. Miguel de Huacar, Cairan, 
Santa Marta del Valle, Pillao, 
Churubamba, Conchamarca, 

Pachabamba, Cani, 

Pachacoto, Acomayo, 

Pumacucho, Churubamba, 

Chinchac, Llacon, 

Nayota, Panao. 

Chaulan, 

Its repartimiento was 50,000 dollars, and it used 
to pay an afcavala of 400 yearly. 

Of the same name is the capital of this province, 
founded by Gomez de Alvarado, in 1539, with 
the title of Leon de Guanuco de los CaballerOs. 
It was afterwards re-established by Pedro Barroso, 
in 1540, and then finally perfected by Pedro dc 
Puelles in 1542. Its first inhabitants were prin 
cipally those who followed the royal standard in 
the wars of Pizarro and Almagros. Shortly after 
its first establishment in the spot called Guanuco 
el Viejo, it was removed to where it now stands, 
by order of the Licentiate Vaca de Castro, go 
vernor of Peru. In the time of the viceroy the 
Marquis of Canete, there was given to it the title of 
Most Noble and Most Loyal, and a shield for its 
arms. It was a very populous and large city, of 
an handsome plant and beautiful edifices; its 
cabildo, which consisted of officers and correspond 
ing employments, was much distinguished, and 
the corregidor s jurisdiction extended to the pro 
vinces of Conchucos, Guamalies, Caxatamba, 
Chinchaicocha, Tarma, and Guailas ; and even 
after that there were made separate corregimientos, 
there was reserved to this the authority of chief 
judge of appeals in the first instance. At present it 
is reduced to a miserable village. It stands in the 
royal road of the Incas ; and every here and there 
are to be seen the ruins of some of their superb 
edifices, and most conspicuous amongst the rest 
the royal palace and temple of the sun. It is near 
the river Pilcomayo, which passes by, united with 
the Visacaca. Its territory is pleasant and fertile 
in all kinds of fruit of excellent quality, and of 
which are made conserves much esteemed at 
Lima and in the other provinces. The parochial 
church, as well as its three con vents, are extremely 
poor ; so also are its inhabitants, although they arc 
composed of some of the most noble families; in 
deed, the only mark of grandeur remaining to it is 
the privilege of receiving in its cabildo the corregi- 
dors and ministers of the five provinces aforesaid, 
which were formerly subject to its jurisdiction. It 
is in lat. 10 6 s. and long. 75 36 w. 



200 



G U A 



GUANUCO, a settlement of the province of Gua- 
rnalies, called Guanuco el Vicjo, which was for 
merly the capital of the former province ; founded 
by Juan Gomez de Alvarado, in 1539. 

GUANUJO, a settlement of the province and 

correvimiento of Tunia in the Nuevo Ilcyno de 

r* i 

Granada. 

GUAPACHOS, a barbarous nation of Indians, 
of the province and government of Tucuman, 
upon the confines of Paraguay. They dwell be 
tween the rivers Bermejo and Salado, amongst the 
woods, just like wild beasts, and beyond this their 
customs are but little known. 

GUAPAIG, an abundant river of the province 
of Charcasin Peru. If runs 12 leagues oil from 
the capital, and enters the river Plata. 

GUAPAIRE, a river of the province and go 
vernment of Moxos in the kingdom of Quito. It 
rises between the rivers Ubay and Baures, runs n. 
inclining to n. n. w. and enters the last of the 
two rivers aforesaid. 

GUAPAN, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Cuenca in the kingdom of 
Quito. 

GUAPANOYA, SAN JUAN DE, a settlement 
and head settlement of the district of the akaldia 
mayor of Metepec in Nueva Espana. It contains 
20 families of Indians. 

GUAPAHATI, a river of the province and 
captainship of Sergipe in Brazil. It rises near the 
coast, runs s. s. e. and enters the sea between the 
grand river of San Francisco and that of Siru- 
gipa. 

GUAPAY. See MADERA. 

GUAPE, an abundant and noted stream of the 
Nuevo Reyno dc Granada, which rises in the cor- 
dillera of Peru, runs for niciny leagues, collecting 
the waters of other rivers, traverses the province 
of San Juan de los Llanos, and enters the Ori 
noco. 

GUAPETUBA, a small river of the province 
and captainship of Seara in Brazil. It runs n.n.e. 
and enters the sea between the point of Daniel and 
the river Gororasu. 

GUAPI, a settlement of the province and cor 
regimiento of Pacages in Peru. 

GUAP1RI, a river of the province and corre- 
g-imiento of lea in Peru. It rises in the Cordillera, 
runs ZB. and enters the sea opposite the rocks of 
Nasca. 

GUAPIS, or GUAIPIES, a barbarous nation 
of Indians, divided into different tribes, who dwell 
in the woods and mountains of Fosca, in the 
Nuevo Reyno de Granada. The greater part of 
them have their habitations on the shores of the 



G U A 

river Papamene, and they are bounded on the e.n.e. 
by the nation of the Macos. Hernan Perez de 
Quesada discovered the Guapis in 1542., The 
climate of their country is extremely cold. 

GUAPO, a small river of the province and go 
vernment of Guayana, one of the four which enter 
the Cuyuni by the n. side. 

GUAPO, another river, of the province and 
government of Venezuela. It rises in the sierra 
which divides this province from that of Cumana, 
runs n. and enters the Tuy, a little before this enters 
the sea. 

GUAPORE, a river of the country and pro 
vince of Las Amazonas, in the territory of Mato- 
groso, belonging to the Portuguese. See ITENES. 

GUAPULO, a settlement of the province and 
jurisdiction of Quito, in the district of Las Cinco 
Leguas de la Capital, lying two leagues distant 
from Quito. It is small, and situate on a narrow 
llanura, lying between the mountains, and watered 
by the river Machangara. It is celebrated for a 
miraculous image of Nuestra Senora de Guada- 
lupe, which, bearing also the name of the settle 
ment, is venerated in the church here, and held 
in particular reverence by the inhabitants of Quito, 
who look upon it as their protectress ; and conse 
quently, in times of epidemic disorders, bad sea 
sons, earthquakes, or explosions of volcanoes, 
cause it to be carried to the city in a long proces 
sion by the two cabildos, and to be placed in the 
cathedral there. The temple of this settlement is 
magnificent and of beautiful architecture, hav 
ing a superb cupola, and being richly adorned 
with many valuable jeAvels, which have been de 
posited there by many of the faithful. It is also 
used as a place of holy retreat by some devout 
priests. In lat. 10 17" s. 

GUAQUECIIULA, a settlement and head 
settlement of the district of the akaldia mayor of 
Atrisco in Nueva Espana. It contains a convent 
of the religions order of St. Francis, and 1030 
families of Indians, and 60 of Spaniards, Mus- 
tecs, and Mulattoes, including those of the wards 
of its district. 

GUAQUILPA, SAN MARCOS DE, a settlement 
of the akaldia mayor of Tezcoco in Nueva Es 
pana ; annexed to the curacy of Capulalpa. 

GlJ ARA, a settlement of the province and go 
vernment of Venezuela ; situate nearly e. of the 
city of Barquisirneto, half-way between this and 
the city of San Felipe. 

GUARABE, a settlement of the missions that 
were held by the regulars of the company of 
Jesuits, in the province and government of Ci 
naloa. 



G U A 

GUARAB1, a river of the island of St. Do- 
mingo, rising near the n. coast, it runs n. and 
enters the Jaques or James. 

GUARACAPONOS, a barbarous nation of 
Indians, of the Nuevo Reyno de Granada, n. of 
the river Apure, bounded by the Agnalos and Gua- 
neros. They are quiet, pacific, and docile. 

GUARACAYO, a narrow pass of the river 
Maraikm or Amazonas, in the province and go 
vernment of Jaen de Bracarnoros in the kingdom 
of Quito. It is before you come to La Grande del 
Pongo. 

GUARACHI, an island of the river of Las 
Amazonas, at the mouth of the Tocantines. 

GUARACHITA, a settlement of the head 
settlement of Zanguio, and alcaldia mayor of 
Zamora, in Nueva Espaiia; situate on a swampy 
plain. It is of a mild temperature, and contains 
Jl families of Indians. It is five leagues w. of its 
head settlement. 

GUARAGUEY, a large and abundant river of 
the island of St. Domingo. It rises in the valley 
of Guaba, near the n. coast, runs n. n. w. and 
enters the sea opposite the shoal of the Coque 
Vielle. 

GUARAHU, a river of the province and cap 
tainship of Seara in Brazil, between the river Per- 
pura and the rock of Porcelados. 

GUARAICUS, a barbarous nation of Indians, 
who dwell in the woods to the w. of the river Putu- 
mayu They live a wandering life, without any 
fixed habitation, and are divided into various tribes 
of different names. 

GUARAIGUAZU, a river of the province and 
captainship of Pernambuco in Brazil, also called 
Rio Roxo, and Rio de San Antonio el Grande, 
to distinguish it from another called De San An 
tonio el Chico. It runs e. and enters the Atlantic, 
forming a bay, called Port Calvo, in lat. 9 
28 s. 

GUARAMAS, a small river of the province 
and government of Venezuela, which rises near 
the town of San Sebastian, runs w. and enters the 
Guarico. 

GUARAMBARE, a settlement of the province 
and government of Paraguay ; situate on the shore 
of the river Itapucaguazu. [It consists of Indians, 
and lies a little from the c. bank of the Paraguay, 
about 15 miles s. e. from Asuncion, in lat. 25 
29 48* s. and long. 57 30 16* o&amp;gt;.] 

GuAiiAMBARE, a river of the province and 
government of Buenos Ayres, which runs parallel 
with the Xexuy, and enters the Paraguay, between 
the Xexuy and the Mboeri. 

GUARANA, a port of the coast of the province 

VOL. II. 



G U A 



201 



and government of Venezuela, in the peninsula 
of Paraguana, opposite the w. 

GUARANACACOS, a barbarous nation of 
Indians, but little known, who inhabit the moun 
tains on the borders of the river Maranon, above 
the mouth of the river Cayari. 

GUARANDA, a large settlement of the pro 
vince and corregimiento of Chinibo in the king* 
dom of Quito. Its population consists almost 
entirely of Indians and Mustees, there being very 
few Spaniards. It is of an extremely cold tempe 
rature, and a place of great traffic and commerce, 
from its being situate at the entrance of the pro 
vince of Guayaquil, and lying in the direct road 
to Quito. In the winter, however, all communi 
cation by this route ceases, since the roads are then 
impassable. In its vicinity is the paramo of 
Chimborazo, and many estates for breeding of 
horses, where also mules are kept, the greater 
part of the inhabitants of this settlement following 
the occupation of carriers. It is the residence of 
the corrcgidor, and although the capital of the 
province is of the same name as the province itself, 
yet in realty is this the capital, as well from its 
natural advantages as from its population. In 
lat. 1 37 s. 

GUARANIS, or GUARANIES, a nation of In 
dians, of the province and government of Para 
guay, towards the e. in the territory irrigated by 
the river Uruguay. It reaches on the n. w. as far 
as the river Parana, and on the s. e. as the II- 
bicuy, n. as far as the Iguazii, and s. as far as the 
Negro. These Indians are very valorous, agile, 
and robust. The Jesuits in their missions formed 
of them a flourishing Christian republic, the his 
tory of which has been written in Italian by the 
celebrated Muratory. See articles Uarcu AY and 
PARANA, [also additional matter respecting the 
history and state of Brazil.] 

GUARAPICHE, a river of the province and 
government ofCumanain Nueva Andalucia. It 
rises in the most lofty part of the serrania, in the 
place called Cocoyar; and running .v. according to 
Don Joseph Diguja, and e. according to the Ex- 
jesuit Colcti, with many windings through the 
mountains and unknown countries inhabited by 
barbarian nations, receives the waters of the Colo*- 
rado, Guatatar, Guayuta, Puriceres, and Caripe, 
incorporates itself with the Areo and others of less 
note, and flows down to the llano by the missions 
of San Felix and Caicara ; and here it begins to 
flow round the mountain in so formidable a stream, 
from the number of streams it has collected, that it 
is navigable for Inlanders and other small craft, un 
til where it enters through the Arco into the Cano 
J&amp;gt; D 



202 



G U A 



de Teresen ; and to this spot are brought the cattle 
\vliich arc conveyed through the back of this pro 
vince from the provinces of Caracas and Barce 
lona. It should be observed, that some vessels 
have been known to have arrived from the above- 
mentioned spot as far as the lake of Areo. 
From the mouths of the Areo, it was usual 
to navigate as far as the mission of Caicara or 
Guayuta ; but this practice has been put a stop to, 
through the excessive thickness of the trees and 
shrubs on cither bank of the river. It is thought, 
however, that these, as well as all other rubbish 
that might have collected, would have been cleared 
away by the contraband traders in cattle, but for 
some further difficulties arising in the number of 
shoal places, such as to oblige them to cause the 
cattle to pass by means of fording or swimming ; 
and this more especially near the aforesaid mission 
of Caicara : from thence they proceed to the set 
tlement of Punceres, and in the place which is 
called the Gailo or channel, they form certain 
rafts, for which the number of trunks of trees 
found here afford every facility. All the valleys 
on the shores of this river are most fertile in cacao ; 
but they are peopled only by the missions of the 
religious Capuchins of Aragon. It enters the sea 
in the gulf of Paria, between the point of Paria and 
the mouths of the Orinoco, in lat. 10 S n. 

GUARAPINANGA, a settlement of the pro- 
vince and captainship of Espiritu Santo in Bra 
zil ; situate on the shore of a small river of the 
same name. 

GUARAPINANGA, another settlement, of the pro 
vince and captainship of the Rio Janeiro in the 
same kingdom ; situate on the shore of the river 
Espiritu Santo. 

GUARAPO, a large arm of the river Apure, 
by which this communicates with the Portuguesa. 

GUARAQUE, a settlement of the jurisdic 
tion of La Grita, in the province and government 
of Maracaibo. It is very scanty and poor, al 
though of a good temperature and fertile soil. 

GUARARE, a settlement of the jurisdiction 
and alcaldia mayor of Nata, in the government of 
Panama and kingdom of Tierra Firme; situate on 
the shore of a river of the coast of the S. sea, on a 
strip of land near the town of Los Santos. 

GUARAIU:, a small isle of the S. sea, near the 
coast of the former alcaldia mayor; two leagues 
from the coast and the former settlement. 

GUARAUNO, CANOS DE, the arms or chan 
nels iormed by the river Orinoco and some islands ; 
the one and the other taking their names from the 
Indians. 

GUARAUNOS, a barbarous nation of Indians, 

2 



inhabiting the isles formed by the Orinoco at its 
mouth or entrance. At the time of the highest 
rising of the river the islands are completely over 
flown ; and then the barbarian inhabitants betake 
themselves to the tops of trees, where they make 
themselves huts capable of containing a family of 
six or seven persons, and maintain themselves by 
fish and roots dried until they are reduced to a flour. 

GUAliAYOS, a barbarous nation of Indians, 
descended from the Moxos, inhabiting the spacious 
llanuras n. of the Paraguay, between the rivers 
Iraibayand Ubay. These barbarians extend their 
hostile incursions as far as the river Guabis and the 
lake of Los Xaraycs. To them belong the tribes 
of the Araaybaybas and the Carabares. They are 
ferocious and warlike, and cannibals ; lead a con 
tinually wandering life, and give as a reason for 
their often quitting their place of abode, that they 
hear the cries of those they have eaten. 

GUARCO, a port of the S. sea, on the coast of 
Pern, and of the jurisdiction of the province and 
corrcgimiento of Canete, from whence it lies two 
leagues to the w. It is convenient only for small 
vessels, and but little screened from the w inds. In 
lat. 13 s. 

GUARCO, a delightful and fertile llanura of the 
province in which is the former port. Its climate 
is excellent, and it was formerly well peopled with 
Indians, although at present very thinly inhabited. 
In it are still to be seen the remains of a fortress 
which belonged to the Incas, standing on an emi 
nent situation on the sea-coast, and from it were 
stairs cut in the solid rock, leading down into the 
sea. In this castle were kept many treasures, 
which, it is said, were, upon the arrival of the 
Spaniards, thrown into the sea, that they might 
not fall into their hands. 

GUARENAS, a settlement of the province and 
government of Venezuela ; situate near the sea- 
coast, to the e. of Guaira. 

GUAREY, a small river of the province and 
government of Buenos Ayres. It runs w. and 
enters the Uruguay, between the rivers Covoyama 
and Guatuy. 

GUARIA, a lake of the province and country 
of Las Amazonas, formed by a desague or waste- 
water of the Madera, upon the shore of this river, 
and between the rivers Pirajauguara and Aricoria. 

GUAR1CH1CO, a river of the province and 
government of San Juan de los Llanos in the 
Nucvo Reyno de Granada. It rises s. of the 
Apure, and running n. enters the same, opposite 
the Hiouth of the Santa Lucia. 

GUARICO, a city of the w. part of the island of 
St. Domingo, one of the Antilles, in the French ter- 



G U A 

ritory. It is nearly half a league in length, and 
contains from 14 to 15,000 inhabitants, who are 
Europeans, Creoles, Negroes, Mnlattoes, and 
other casts. It has a very good parish church, a 
beautiful plaza, a college which belonged to the 
Jesuits, a convent of monks of the religious order 
of San Francisco, another of nuns, and an hos 
pital. The city lies open, without other defence 
than a simple rampart, but within it is well gar- 
risoned. Its territory is in the highest state of 
cultivation. The whole of the drudgery is done 
by the Negroes, and many are the French families 
who have realized large fortunes here by merchan 
dise. Here are numerous plantations of sugar 
cane, tobacco, indigo, and coffee; and of these 
the product is so large that there is an annual ex 
portation to France of 30,000 tons. It is a colony 
much prized, not so much from what has been 
just stated, as from the circumstance, that not less 
than 160 vessels, of from J50 to 500 tons each, ar 
rive here annually, loaded with rich merchandise 
and provisions, by each of which is returned in 
favour of France a sum of more than 40,000 dol 
lars in specie ; so that it produces, for the mother 
country, more than a million of dollars, besides its 
natural productions. This city not being able to 
consume even a fourth part of the effects which 
enter it, carries on a very great trade with the 
other Spanish ports of the Havana, Santa Marta, 
Cartagena, Tierra Finne, Nicaragua, and Hon 
duras. The Spaniards, under the command of 
the president of St. Domingo, Don Francisco Se- 
gura y Sanddval, took possession of it in 1691, 
after having gained a complete victory against the 
French. Lat. 19 48 n. Long. 72 13 w. 

GUARICO, a large and abundant river of the 
province and government of Venezuela, which 
rises in the mountains s. of the lake Tacarigua, 
and making a grand bend, with many inflexions, 
enters the Orinoco, and forms at its mouth an 
isthmus, which, but for the small and narrow 
strip by which it is united to the mainland, might 
well be considered an island. Before its entrance 
into this river, it receives the waters of several 
others. 

GUARICOS, a settlement of the province and 
government of Maracaibo ; situate to the s. at a 
small distance from the city of Tucuyo, on the 
shore of the river of this name. 

GUARICURA, an island of the river of Las 
Amazonas, near its entrance into the sea ; formed 
by an arm of the Yarauca. Mr. Bellin, in his de 
scription, calls it Guajtara. 

GUAR1MINA, a settlement of the province 



G U A 



203 



of Guayana, and government of Cumana ; one of 
the missions held there by the Capuchin Catalo- 
nian fathers ; and in the district of which these hold, 
for their subsistence, an estate of neat cattle of 
about 160 head ; the which continue to multiply 
in an extraordinary manner, through the goodness 
of the water, pastures, and temperature. 

GUARINA, a spacious, extensive, and fertile 
llanura of the kingdom of Peru, near the lake Ti- 
ticaca ; celebrated for the famous battle which 
was fought here, in 1547, between Gorizalo Pi- 
zarro and Diego Centeno, the latter having com 
manded the king s troops, and experienced a rout. 

GUARINO, a river of the province of Los 
Marquetones in theNuevo Reyno de Granada. It 
runs e. and enters the Magdalena above the city 
of Mariquita. 

GUAR1NUMAS, a barbarous nation of Indians, 
who inhabit the woods in the vicinity of the river 
Cayari, to the s. of the Maranon, in the country 
of the Amazonas. It is a warlike nation, and 
maintains itself by fishing and the chase. Some 
call them the Garinomas. 

GUAR1PO, a river of the province and go 
vernment of San Juan dc los Llanos in the Nuevo 
Reyno de Granada. It is small, runs e. and en 
ters the Orinoco by the w. side. 

[GUAR1SAMEY, some very old mines on the 
road from Durango to Copola in Nueva Espana. 
Population, 3,800.] 

GUAR1S1PA, a large island of the river Ori 
noco, near its entrance into the sea, opposite the 
city of Santo Tome de la Guayana. 

GUAR1STEMBA, a settlement of the head 
settlement of the district of Xaltocan, and alcaldia 
mat/or of Tepic, in Nueva Espana. It is of a hot 
temperature, contains 50 families of Indians, whose 
commerce is in cotton, maize, and fruit; and in 
its district are many ranch erias, or temporary 
habitations, for the use of labourers. It is ten 
leagues s. e. of its head settlement. 

GUARIT1CA, a lake of the province and go 
vernment of Cumana. It lies on the shore of the 
river Orinoco, from the waters of which it is 
formed when this river throws out its arms to enter 
the sea. 

GLJAR1VE, SAN JUAN DE, a settlement of the 
province of Piritu in the government of Venezuela. 
It has ceased to exist since its destruction by the 
Caribes, in 1680. 

GUARMEY, or GUAUMAY, as some will have 

it, and is called by the Indians HUALMI, a large 

settlement of the province and corregimiento of 

Santa in Peru ; situate on a spacious plain, which 

D D 2 



204 



G U A 



gives it its name, on the coast of the S. sea, with 
a port, which, although small, is much frequented 
by vessels, owing to the place being the residence 
of the corrcgidor, who used to reside at Santa. 
It had a fort for its defence, the ruins of which 
still remain, from the time of its destruction by the 
Dutch pirate, George Spilberg, in J615. Lat. 
10 6 s. Long. 78 6 w. 

GUARMICOCHA. Sec HUARMICOCHA. 
GUAROCHIRI, a province and c&amp;rreghniento 
of Peru ; commencing w. five leagues from Lima, 
where the corregimicnto of Cercado terminates. 
It is bounded n. by the province of Canta, n. w. by 
that of Tarma, and e. by that of Xauja. It is 30 
leagues long from n. w. to s. e. and 14 wide. The 
temperature is for the most part cold, from its ly 
ing nearly altogether close to the cordillera, and 
particularly so in those parts towards the w. ; but 
in the quebradas it enjoys a mild climate ; and here 
are gathered in abundance seeds, fruits, and vege 
tables, which are carried for sale to Lima, when, 
through the fickleness of the seasons there, they 
stand in need of supplies. In the market of this 
city are bought paltas, pomegranates, strawberries, 
gay abas , paUillos 9 pears, &amp;c. Its rivers are few, 
although there are various streams which irrigate 
it, and which owe their origin to the rains and the 
snow with which the mountains are continually 
covered. In the settlement of Yauli are found 
fountains of hot medicinal water, good for the cure 
of many infirmities. The river which passes 
through Lima rises in this province; and some of 
its waters flow into the province of Canete, passing 
through the province of Mala. It is stocked with 
fish, with which the province is supplied, and the 
surplus of which is carried to be sold on the 
coast. This province has many silver mines, 
which were formerly abundant ; and a few, at the 
present day, are worked, which afford only moderate 
profit. The mine called Nuevo Potosi has been 
celebrated for the abundance of metal and riches 
which it has yielded. The population consists 
of the 52 following settlements. The capital is 
Guarochiri ; Larao, 

San Lorenzo de Quinti, Huanza, 
Olleros, Santa Ines, 

Chorrillo, Pachachac, 

Cochahuaico, Chacapalpa, 

Carampoma, Sisicaya, 

Calahuaya, San Pedro de Casia, 

Huancaire, Matara, 

Tautarancha, Chayacancha, 

Quiuti, Langa, 

Carhuapampa, Lahuaitambo, 



O U A 

Iluamansica, Pomacancha, 

San Juan de Inis, Carahuancra, 

Huchupampa, Collapampa, 

S. Miguel de Viso, Santa Olaya, 

Pomacocha, Huanchor, 

Huaihuay, Soquicanchi, 

San Cosine, Panan, 

Matucana, Chaclin, 

Sicasica, Xicamarca, 

Chontay, Collata, 

Sunicanche, Surco, 

Tupicocha, Mama, 

Santiago de Tunia, Pucara, 

Chauca, Hauricuchis. 

Otao, 

GUAROCHIRI, the settlement and capital of 
this province. It has a great trade by collecting 
and carrying snow to Lima for the supply of that 
capital, from whence it is 57 miles distant. Lat. 
11 58 s. Long. 76 w. 

GUA HOMING, a settlement of the province 
and captainship of San Vicente in Brazil; situate 
on the shore of the river Espiritu Santo. 

GUAROMINO, a bay of this province and king 
dom, near the former province and settlement. 

GUAROPARI, some islands near the coast of 
the province and captainship of Espiritu Santo in 
Brazil. 

GUAROPAY, a settlement of the province and 
captainsh p of Espiritu Santo in Brazil ; situate on 
the shore of the river of its name. 

GUAUOPAY. This river runs e. and enters the 
sea opposite a small island, which is also of the 
same name. 

GUARPES. See CUYO. 

GUARU, a small river of the province and go 
vernment of Guayana or Nueva Andalucia. It 
rises w. of the lake Jcupa, runs s. and enters the 
Paragua by the e, side. 

GUARUAPO, CANO DE, a large arm of the 
river Orinoco, which communicates with the 
Zaiguin. 

GUARUMBA, or DEZAR, a river of the king, 
dom of Brazil, which runs n. n. e. collecting the 
waters of other smaller streams, and enters the 
Parana-iba. 

GUARUNOS, a settlement of the province and 
government of Maracaibo ; situate in the road 
which leads down from the Nuevo Reyno de 
Granada. 

GUARUPABA, PUNT A DE, a point on the 
coast of the province and captainship of Rey in 
Brazil, oetween the bay of Bngueraand the island 
Aboreda del Sur. 



QUA 

GUASAGA, or HUASSAGA, a large river of Hie 
province and government of iVIainas in the king 
dom of Quito. It runs from n. to s. through the 
territories and wood of the Xibaros and Muratas 
nations, is navigable as far as the height of Andoas ; 
and near to it, and at the source of the Balsayacu, 
which enters this river, dwell a nation of Indians 
of its name. It empties itself into the Pastaza by 
its w. shore, in lat. 3 24/ s. 

GUASAPU1NA, a small river of the province 
and captainship of Seara in Brazil. It runs n. and 
enters the sea between the losari and the Camueip. 

GUASCA, a settlement of the coriegimiento of 
Guatavita in the Nuevo Reyno de Granada. It is 
of a cold but healthy and delightful temperature, 
and abounding in the vegetable productions pe 
culiar to its climate. It contains more than 200 
housekeepers and 100 Indians ; arid it was in the 
time of its gcntilism the great city of the princes 
of Guasca-ytocou, but was taken by the Spaniards 
in 1537. It is near the settlement of Taravita, and 
eight leagues n. of Santa Fe. 

GUASCAZALOYA, a settlement of the alcaldia 
mayor of Tulanzingo in Nueva Espana. It con 
tains a convent of the religious order of San Agus- 
tin, and 102 families of Indians. It is threejeagues 
n. of its head settlement, Atotonilco. 

GUASCO, or HUASCO, a settlement of the king 
dom of Chile, with a celebrated port, on the coast 
of the S. sea, of the province and corregimiento of 
Copiapo, from whence it lies 79 miles to the s. It 
was formerly much frequented by trading vessels, 
and had a large population, but is at present no 
thing but a set of fishermen s huts. Its territory is 
very fertile, and it has large breeds of cattle, and 
an incredible quantity of partridges. It is fertilized 
by a river of its name, and which enters the S. sea. 
Mr. La Martinierc, from some source, which we 
have not been able to discover, asserts that the city 
of Santiago de la Estramedura (the capital of the 
kingdom) was founded on this spot. The father 
Alonso de Ovalle, who wrote the history of Chile, 
the chronologist Antonio de Herrera, and the Inca 
Garcilaso, say nothing of this sort; and no doubt 
the great author of whom we speak, took this 
apocryphal intelligence, as he did much other, 
from Juan Laet, although even here we have not 
been able to discover it. The port of Guasco is in 
lat. 28 29 s. Long. 76 6 w. 

GUASCO, a river of the former province and 
kingdom, formed by others which flow down from 
the cordillera, and run through two valleys, 
with the names of Alto de Espanoles arid Baxo de 
Indios, through two settlements, and which, after 
uniting; themselves, run into the sea. 



G U A 



205 



GUASCO, a settlement, called Alto tie Espanoles, 
in the same province ; the territory of which is 
very fertile in vines, from which much fine wine is 
made. 

GUASCO, another, called Baxo of the Indians, in 
the same province, founded at the mouth of the 
river which gives it its name, in lat. 28 SO . . 

GUASECO, a large settlement of the district 
and government of San Juan de los Llanos in the 
Nuevo Reyno de Granada ; situate at the foot of 
the mountains of Bogota, at the entrance of those 
llanos. Its climate is hot, but, salutary and fertile, 
and abounding in dates and other fruit. 

GUAS1NA, a port of the island and government 
of Trinidad, on the e. coast. 

GUASPALTEPEQUE, a settlement and head 
settlement of the district of the alcaldia mayor of 
Xalapa in Nueva Espana. 
GUASPI. SeeANoPE. 
GUASU. See SAN IGNACIO. 
GUASUNTOS, a settlement of the province 
and corregimiento of Chimbo and Alausi in the 
kingdom of Quito ; situate on the shore of a river 
of the same name, and which it takes from a nation 
of Indians. It belongs to the district of Alausi, is 
of a very fertile soil, and produces many fruits in 
the estates of Castillo del Inca, Sctelec, Sincayan, 
and Savanac. It is in lat. 2 13 s. 

GUATAHUACAS, a barbarous nation of In 
dians, to the n. e. of the province of Guanuco in 
Peru. They are few, and bounded by the Pantaguas 
and the Nindasos. 

GUATAMU, a river of the island of St. Do 
mingo, which rises in the valley of Guaba, near 
the n. coast, runs *. and enters the Neiba in the 
valley of Ban ica. 

GUATAPORI, a large and abundant river of 
the province and government of Santa Marta in 
the Nuero Reyno de Granada. It rises in the 
cordilfera of the sierra Nevada, runs into the llan r s 
of Upar, and unites itself with the Cesare or Porn- 
patao, near the city of Los Reyes, to enter the 
Magdalena. 

GUATAQUI, a settlement of the district and 
jurisdiction of Tocaima, in the government of 
Mariquila, and Nuevo Reyno de Granada. It is 
of a very hot temperature, very poor and small, 
and annexed to the curacy of the settlement of Las 
Piedras. It produces the fruits of a hot climate, 
and is much infested with long-legged musqviioex^ 
and other venomous and troublesome insects ; but 
it is otherwise cheerful and pleasant, being situate 
on the shore of the grand river Magdalena, and en 
joying a continual tratlic by means of the vessels 
which navigate this river. This was the spot 



206 



G U A 



where Gonzalo Ximinez de Qucsada built the 
brigantines, in which he embarked after having 
conquered that kingdom to drop down to Carta 
gena, and afterwards to return to Spain. It is 50 
miles s. of Honda. 

GUATAQU1R1, a small river of the island of 
Cuba, which rises near the s. coast, runs to this 
rhumb, and enters the sea between the cape Bonze 
and the port of La Sabana del Mar. 

GUATA VITA, a settlement and capital of the 
corregimiento of this name in the Nuevo Ilcyno de 
Granada. It is of a healthy and pleasant, though 
cold temperature ; situate on a beautiful plain 
abounding in wheat, maize, papas, and other ve 
getable productions. It was a conversion of the 
religious order of St. Francis, and in the time of 
the Indians was one of the most opulent and rich 
cities in that kingdom, and a court of a prince of 
the Mozca nation. It was one of the best supplied 
and best defended garrisons when it was taken by 
Gonzalo Ximenez de Quesada in 1537 ; and he 
gave it the name of Espiritu Santo, having arrived 
there on this festival. In sacking it, the Spaniards 
obtained great wealth, from its having been the re 
sidence cf the greater part of a very opulent no 
bility. In its public square still stands one of the 
idols adorned by the Indians. These were very 
powerful and great, not only from the considerable 
commerce that they carried on in salt, but from 
their being well acquainted with the art of found 
ing metals and of working jewels, this being pe 
culiar to them in contradistinction to all the other 
Indians of the same kingdom : indeed, several 
stoves or furnaces, used no doubt for the above 
purposes, have been since discovered. When fr. 
Pedro de Tobar was curate here, there was 
also discovered a large flat piece of marble which 
shut up the entrance of a tomb, in which was de 
posited the remains of a giant. The doctrinal 
curate of the Indians here was the Fr. Juan La- 
drada, of the order of St. Domingo, afterwards 
bishop of Cartagena. Its population at the pre 
sent day may amount to 200 Indians, and as many 
other Spaniards. It is eight miles n. of Santa Fe. 
GUATAVITA, a lake of the above province and 
kingdomj celebrated for the immense riches which 
were thrown into it by the Indians, by way of adora 
tion which they were accustomed to offer it, and 
from whence no inconsiderable part has been ex 
tracted by the industry of the Spaniards. It lies 
amongst some snow-clad mountains, which from it 
have the appearance of a large bowl of a league in 
circumference. It is very deep, and the water 
crystal and pure, since whatever is thrown into it, 
it regularly throws on shore. On its bank stood 



G U A 

one of the finest temples of those celebrated in the 
times of the Indian geritilism. Hernan Perez was 
the first who discovered a plan of draining it, for 
the purpose of extracting its wealth, when here- 
covered as much as was equal to 4000 dollars. 
This example was followed by Antonio de Sepnl- 
veda, who was equally successful, besides finding an 
emerald of excessive value. Subsequently to these, 
various attempts have been made, and always 
with very great profit. It is 15 leagues e. of To- 
caima. 

GUATA VITAS, a barbarous nation of Indians, 
of the Nuevo Reyno de Granada, to the n. e. of 
Santa Fe. They are descended from the ancient 
Moscas, are very pusillanimous and timid, but ex 
cellent gold and silver smiths. The greater part 
of them are already Christians, and reduced to set 
tlements. 

GUATEMALA, and not GOATRMALA, as some 
will have it, a name derived from that of Quauthe- 
mallan, which is the name given to this kingdom 
by the Indians. It is a kingdom of N. America, 
bounded w. by the province of Oaxaca of Nueva 
Espana, n. e. by that of Yucatan, s. e. by that of 
Santiago de Veragua of the kingdom of Tierra 
Firme, s. and s. w. by the. Pacific, and n. by the 
ocean. Its length is more than 300 leagues from 
s. e. to n. w. from the confines of Tecountepec as 
far as those of Costarica, arid its width J80. It 
contains 13 provinces, into which the district of its 
government is divided; and these are called So- 



conusco, Chiapa, Suquitepeque, Vera Paz, Hon 
duras, Icalcos, San Salvador, San Miguel, Nica 
ragua, Xerez de la Choluteca, Tegucigalpa, anil 
Costarica. Its temperature is generally hot and 
moist, and consequently unhealthy. The territory 
is for the most part mountainous, and abounding in 
exquisite kinds of wood. It has many valleys and 
llanuras, which, although small, are very fertile in 
the most delicate fruits not only of America but 
Europe. The maize, which is much better than 
that of Nueva Espana, yields regularly SOU bushels 
for one ; a:id it is not less rich in cacao, which 
used to pass instead of coin, and now produces 
sufficient for the supply of the whole kingdom, 
and of Nueva Espana ; also that which grows in 
the province of Soconusco is esteemed even in 
Europe. The breed of cattle of all kinds has mul 
tiplied infinitely. In the woods are found a great 
variety of animals, birds, and exquisite balsamic 
plants ; and on the coasts of both seas are different 
ports, which afford great facilities to commerce 
with the provinces of Peru, Nueva Espaiia, and 
Tierra Firme, as also fine fishing. It has many 
mines of various metals, which produce immense 



G U A 

wealth, and particularly so those of silver. [Ac 
cording to Humboldt, the dollars imported into 
Guatemala and Nucva Espaiia, in 1803, amounted 
to 22,000,000, and the exports consisted of pro 
duce to the value of 9,000,000 dollars, besides 
22,500,000 dollars in specie. He also states their 
population at 7,800,000 in 1808. The receipts of 
Guatemala, Caracas, and Chile, are consumed 
within the country.] 

This kingdom is watered by several large rivers, 
some of which enter the N. sea, and others the S. 
It abounds in salt, which they have a peculiar 
mode of extracting by a process of boiling the 
earth which is washed up by the sea. This king 
dom was conquered by Captain Pedro de Alvarado, 
native of Baclajoz, in 1524, who was under the 
commission of the celebrated conqueror of Mexico, 
Hcrnan Cortes. The natives followed the same 
idolatrous rites as the Mexican Indians : they 
sacrificed men to their idols and eat them : they 
had pictures of the heroic actions of their nation 
for more than 800 years back. It was no easy 
task to reduce them to the catholic faith, through 
their extreme indolence, and the multitude of their 
idioms. The 13 aforesaid provinces are divided into 
25 governments and alcaldias mat/ores; and these 
are, 

Nicaragua, Escuintla, 

Leon, Amatitanes, 

Castillo dc S.Juan, Soconusco, 

Matagalpa, Quesaltenango, 

Matiria, San Miguel, 

Comayagua, Chiquimula, 

Castillo del Peten, Vallede Guatemala, 

San Fernando de Omoa, Tuxtla, 
Golfo Dulce, Solola, 

Totonicapan, Suchitepeque, 

San Salvador, Sonsonate, 

Vera Paz, Chimaltenango. 

This kingdom is governed by a president, who 
is captain-general of it, subordinate to the viceroy 
of Mexico, and by a royal audience established in 
1544, which was at first called De los Confines, 
having been stationed at the city of Gracias de 
Dios. Its archbishopric has the sutfragans of 
Chiapa, Honduras, and Nicaragua. The capital 
is Santiago de Guatemala. 

GUATEMALA. The province which is thus 
called, and one of the three composing the above 
kingdom, extends along the coast of the S. sea, 
from the limits of the province of Oaxaca in 
Nueva Espafia to the confines of that of Nicara 
gua ; is 70 leagues long from n. w. to s. e. and 
30 wide from n. to s. It is of mild temperature, 



G U A 



207 



fertile in cotton, wheat, cacao, and other vegetable 
productions; scantily supplied with water at 
times, and at others partially deluged ; which 
latter happens from the months of April to Oc 
tober. The winds are cold and strong, and it is 
very subject to earthquakes. 

GUATEMALA, SANTIAGO DK, The City of, the 
capital of the aforesaid province and kingdom ; 
founded by Pedro dc Alvarado in 1524, in a valley 
surrounded by mountains; but where it remained 
only a short time, from its having been inundated 
by a violent tempest of rain, and entirely destroyed. 
Its inhabitants, in rebuilding it, removed its situa 
tion to a spot in the same valley, about half a 
league s distance. The temperature is mild, and 
it abounds in wheat, maize, and all kinds of fruit, 
as well European as American. In its territory is 
found much cochineal and cacao, these being the 
principal fruits of its commerce ; also cattle of 
every species, which have multiplied in an incre 
dible manner. It was situate on the skirt of a 
volcano, contained six convents of the religious 
order of St. Domingo, St. Francis, St. Augiistin, 
La Merced, San Juan de Dios, and a college 
which belonged to the Jesuits ; also two monas 
teries of St. Dominic, one with the title of La Con- 
cepcion, the other of Santa Catalina Martin ; an 
hospital which was founded by its first bishop, an 
other of San Lazaro, for lepers, which was at a 
quarter of a league s distance from the city, and 
the third of San Alexo, under the care of the reli 
gious order of St. Domingo ; a college, which is 
a seminary, and another called De la Asuncion. 
It has been destroyed several times by earthquakes, 
and was at last totally extirpated in 1775, having 
been rebuilt by the president Don Martin de 
Mayorga, at some distance from where it before 
stood. This city was the head of the bishopric, 
erected by the chief pontiff Paul III. in 1534, and 
afterwards made metropolitan, at the instance of 
Philip V. king of Spain, by Benedict XIV. in 
1742, when for its suffragans were appointed the 
bishoprics of Nicaragua, Chiapa, and Comayagua. 
It is the residence of the president, who is governor 
and captain-general of the kingdom, and also of 
the tribunal of the royal audience. 
Catalogue of the Presidents, Governors, and Cap 
tains-general of Guatemala. 
1. The adelantndo Don Pedro de Alvarado, na 
tive of Badajoz, knight of the order of Santiago, 
conqueror of the kingdom, and founder of the 
city ; he governed until his death, which hap 
pened in 1541 ; having, on his return to Spain, 
left as intermediate governor, in 1527, his brother 



208 



GUATEMALA. 



Alonso de Alvarado ; returning: again in 1529, and 
again being absent from 1537 to 1540. 

2. Don Francisco de la Cueva, brother-in-law 
of Pedro de Alvarado, at whose death the cabildo 
appointed to the government his wife Dona Bca- 
triz de la Cueva, and she for her lieutenant the 
aforesaid Don Francisco, who was approved by 
the viceroy of Mexico, until affairs might be dif 
ferently arranged by his Majesty. 

3. The Licentiate Alonso de Maldonado, who 
found himself serving as oidor of Mexico when he 
was nominated to be first, president of Guatemala, 
at the creation of the royal audience in 1542, with 
the name of De los Confines, the same having been 
established in the city of Gracias a Dios. 

4. The Licentiate Alonso Lopez de Cerrato, 
who found himself serving in the presidency of the 
island of St. Domingo, with the greatest character 
for integrity and literary acquirements, when he 
was nominated to this government of Los Con 
fines in 1547 ; he removed the audience to the city 
of Santiago de Guatemala in 1549. 

5. The Doctor Quesada, oidor of Mexico, no 
minated for visitor of the audience of Guatemala, 
and also its president, which office he resigned a 
short time after, through his death. 

6. The Licentiate Pedro Ramirez de Quinones, 
oidor-decano of the royal audience of Guatemala ; 
lie remained intermediate governor, through the 
death of his antecessor, until the .arrival of the pro 
prietor nominated by the king, when he was re 
moved to the situation of oidor of Lima. 

7. The Licentiate Juan Martinez de Landecho ; 
he entered, having been nominated by the presi 
dent in 1560 ; but such were the clamours raised 
against him at court, that a judge inquisitor was 
sent out to examine him ; when, being fearful of 
the punishment due to his crimes, he embarked 
with all his fortune as fugitive to Spain, but was 
drowned at sea. 

8. The Licentiate Francisco Briceno, nominated 
visitor of the audience, and who was president for 
years, until 1564, when the king removed the au 
dience to the city of Panama, leaving in Guate 
mala a governor ; whom he nominated, 

9. Juan de Bustos Villegas, who found himself 
governor of the kingdom of Tierra Firme, and city 
of Panama, and who could not fill the office to 
which he was promoted, through a disgraceful 
death which he met with. 

10. The Doctor Antonio Gonzalez, who went 
over to re-establish anew the audience in Guate 
mala, and died within a short time. 

11. The Doctor Pedro de Villalobos, oidor of 



Mexico, nominated president of Guatemala by the 
king. 

12. The Licentiate Valverde, oidor of Lima, 
native of Caceres in Estremadura. 

13. The Licentiate Pedro Mallen de Rueda. 

14. The Doctor Don Francisco de Sande, nomi 
nated president in 1594, and promoted to the pre 
sidency of Santa Fe, in the Nuevo Iteyno de Gra 
nada, in 1596. 

15. The Licentiate Don Alvaro Gomez do 
Abaunza, the oldest oidor of the audience of Gua 
temala; he was intermediate president, through the 
promotion of the former, until 1598, when ar 
rived, 

16. The Doctor Alonso Criado de Castilla, oidor 
of Lima. 

17. Don Antonio Peruza Ayala Castilla y 
Roxas, Count of La Gomera ; he passed from 
the province of Chucuito in Peru, where he was 
governor to the presidency of Guatemala, which 
office he exercised until 1619. 

18. Don Juan de Guzman, who was promoted 
from the presidency of St. Domingo, where he go 
verned with the greatest zeal and disinterested 
ness. 

19. Don Gonzalo de Paz y Lorenzana, who 
passed over from the presidency of Panama, and 
governed until 1638. 

20. Don Francisco de Escovedo, knight of the 
order of San Juan, afterwards grand prior of his 
order. 

21. Don Lope de Sierra Osorio, who passed 
from the presidency to Guatemala, and was then 
promoted to the place of the council of the In 
dies. 

22. Don Juan Miguel de Agurto, nominated 
president in 1680. 

23. Don Enrique Enriquez de Guzman, knight 
of the order of Alcantara ; he was promoted to a 
place in the council of war. 

24. Don Jacinto de Barrios Leal, knight of the 
order of Calatrava ; he died in 1696. 

25. Don Joseph de Escalls, oidor-decano of the 
royal audience of Guatemala, nominated as inter 
mediate governor, through the death of the former. 

26. Don Gabriel Sanchez de Berrospe, who en 
tered the presidency in 1698. 

27. Don Francisco Rodriguez Vivas. 

28. Don Tomas de Rivera y Santa Cruz. 

29. Don Joseph de Araujo y Rio, who had 
been president of the royal audience of Quito. 

30. Don Francisco Antonio de Abarca y V aides, 
who lud been commander of the galleon of Fili- 
pinas. 



GUATEMALA. 



200 



31. Don A1ono de Arcos y Moreno, briga 
dier of (he royal armies ; he died in 1766, 

32. Don Alonso Fernandez de Heredia, bri 
gadier of the royal armies, promoted from the 
government of Campec ie ; he governed only three 
years, when he was separated from the presidency, 
and was succeeded by, 

33. Don Joaquin de Aguirre, a naval captain, 
knight of the order of Santiago Mayor, admiral of 
the armada, an ollicer of singular qualifications, 
but of which his country was deprived by his 
sudden death, which happened a short time after 
bis arrival. 

34. Don Pedro de Salazar y TIcrrera, knight 
and comendador of Venaroz y Benecarlo, in the 
order of Montesa, brigadier of the royal armies, 
and who had been captain of the grenadiers in the 
regiment of the royal Spanish guards ; he found 
himself governor of Ciudad Rodrigo at the time 
that he entered to take possession of this, in 1766 ; 
he died in 1771. 

35. Don Martin de Mayorga, knight of the 
order of Alcantara, brigadier-general of the royal 
armies ; he was governor of the pfaza of Alcantara 
in Estremadura, after a long career of services in 
the regiment of Spanish guards, where he had ar 
rived to the rank of captain, when he was called 
to the presidency of Guatemala in 1713; in his 
time the city was destroyed by a succession of 
earthquakes, and he rebuilt it, removing its situa 
tion to the place where it now stands ; he was in 
termediate viceroy of Mexico in 1780. 

36. Don Matias de Galves, brigadier-general of 
the royal armies ; he passed over as commander 
and inspector of the militia of that kingdom, and 
was afterwards promoted to the viceroyalty of 
Nueva Espaila in 1784, and afterwards made 
lieutenant-general. 

37. Don Joseph de Estacheria, brigadier of the 
royal armies ; he left the command of Louisiana 
for the presidency of Guatemala in 1784. 
Bishops and Archbishops who have presided in 

Guatemala. 

1. Don Francisco Marroquin, native of the bi 
shopric of Osma, master in philosophy and theo 
logy ; he became exceedingly zealous, from what 
he^ had heard in Madrid from Pedro de Alvarado, 
of employing himself in the conversion of the in 
fidels ; he accordingly passed over to Mexico, 
where he was vicar-general, and from thence to 
Guatemala; in this city he was first curate, made 
himself master of all the Indian idioms, made in 
numerable conversions, was much venerated, and 
reduced many to a settlement, which, to this day, 

VOL. II. 



is called Del Obispo ; lie w r as made bishop in 1533, 
and died full of merits, and in the odour of sanctity, 
in 1563. 

2. Don Bernardino de Villalpand^, native of 
Talavera de la Reyna, promoted from the bi 
shopric of Cuba in 1564 ; he had great contro 
versies with the religious orders of San Francisco 
and St. Domingo, whom he deprived of their cu 
rates, substituting the regular clergy ; his zeal for 
doing good caused him much labour and anxiety, 
and brought on an infirmity, of which he died, 
though at an advanced age, in 1569. 

3. Don Fr. Gomez Fernandez de Cordoba, 
native of this city in Andalucin, of the order of 
St. Gerome, of the house of the Dukes of Sesa ; he 
was presented to the bishopric of Nicaragua, and 
promoted to this church of Guatemala in 1574 ; he 
was most zealous, virtuous, and charitable; and 
when loaded with years and infirmities, he endea 
voured to be nominated coadjutor : this lie did not 
at that time obtain, though he afterwards suc 
ceeded ; and the king elected Don Fernando Ortiz 
de Hinojosa, who died before he was consecrated, 
in 1598. 

4. Don Fr. Juan Ramorez, of the order of St. 
Domingo, native of Murillo in La Rioja ; he 
passed over to Nueva Espaiia, was missionary in 
the province of Misteca, where he learnt the In 
dian language, was lecturer of theology in Mexico 
24 "years, returned to Spain, and was made pri 
soner by the English, arid carried to London ; on 
his return to Madrid he was presented by the king 
to the bishopric of Guatemala in 1600, and made a 
journey to Rome on foot, where his virtue and 
probity met with great marks of approbation from 
the pontiff; he governed his church for seven 
years, and died in 1609. 

5. Don Jr. Juan Cabezas Altamirano, native 
of Zarnora, who studied in Salamanca laws and 
canons, and entered as a monk of St. Domingo, 
studying the arts arid theology, graduated as 
master, was prelate in various convents, and 
speaker for the chapter-general, when he was 
elected bishop of Cuba ; he was taken in the port 
of Bahama by some pirates, promoted to the bi- 
shopric of Guatemala in 1610, governed with great 
tranquillity and prudence, learned several of the 
Indian idioms, and died after having been elected 
bishop of Arequipa, in 1615. 

6. Don Pedro de Valencia, native of Lima, cu 
rate of Arequipa and of Cuzco, chanter in that holy- 
church, elected bishop of that of Guatemala in 
1616, and before he took possession, promoted to 
that of La Paz, 



210 



GUATEMALA. 



7. Don Pedro de Vega y Sarmiento, dean of the 
holy metropolitan church of Mexico, presented to 
this bishopric, which he renounced, as he had also 
before done with regard to that of Popayan. 

8. Don Fr. Juan Zapata y Sundoval, monk of 
the order of San Agustin, native of Mexico ; he 
passed over to Spain, and was 11 years regent in 
the college of San Gabriel de Valladolid, elected 
bishop of Chiapa in 1613, promoted to Guatemala 
in 1621 ; he governed with much zeal, and died in 
1630. 

9. Don Agustin de Ugarte y Saravia, native of 
the Nuevo lleyno de Granada; he was promoted 
from the holy church of Chiapa in 1630; and such 
was his merit that the cabildos and others, the re 
ligious officers, wrote to the king, saying that he 
was one of the best bishops who had ever been in 
Nueva Espaiia ; he was charitable, a friend to the 
Indians, and filled his office with zeal and dignity, 
and was promoted to the church ofArequipain 
1641. 

10. Don Bartolome Gonzalez Saltero, native of 
Mexico ; he studied in its university, where he 
graduated as doctor in theology and canons, was 
thrice rector, fiscal, and inquisitor of the holy tri 
bunal, performed several commissions with which 
he was charged by the king, and made the visit 
and inspection of the royal hacienda of Nueva 
Espana ; after this he was presented by his Ma 
jesty to the bishopric of Guatemala in 1645, and 
died in 1656. 

11. Don Fr. Pedro de Rivera, son of the Duke 
of Alcala, viceroy of Naples, native of Sevilla, 
monk of the order of San Agustin, graduate as 
master of theology in the university of Osma, 
taught in the convents of Burgos, Valladolid, and 
Alcala ; and at the command of his superiors, ac 
cepted the bishopric of Guatemala, to which he 
was presented in 1657, made the visitation of all 
its diocese, made many reformations, and was pro 
moted to the bishopric of Mechoacan in 1667. 

12. Don Juan Saens Manosca y Murillo, native 
of Mexico, where he followed his studies and gra 
duated as doctor, obtained the charge of inquisitor, 
was presented to the bishopric of Cuba, and from 
thence promoted to that of Guatemala in 1667, 
where he governed with such skill that the king 
confided to him the presidency ; he was from 
thence promoted to the bishopric of La Puebla de 
los Angeles. 

13. Don Juan de Ortega Montaiies, native of 
Llancs ; he studied jurisprudence in the university 
of Alcala, went as inquisitor to Mexico, and in 
1674 was presented to the bishopric of Durango, 



but before he took possession, promoted to this 
holy church of Guatemala, where he governed 
until 1682, when he was promoted to the church 
of Mechoacan. 

14. Don Fr. Andres de las Novas Quevedo, 
of the order of Nuestra Senora de la Merced, na 
tive of Baza in Andalucia ; after having held dif 
ferent prelacies, presented to the bishopric of 
Nicaragua in 1667, and promoted to Guatemala 
in 1682, where he suffered much in the defence of 
his flock, and in the just maintenance of his dig 
nity; he died at the advanced age of 80, in 
1702. 

15. Don Fr. Mauro de Larreategui Colon, 
native of Madrid, of the illustrious family of the 
renowned Christoval Colon, and of the Dukes of 
Veragua, monk of the order of San Ben i to, abbot 
of the monastery at Burgos and in others of his 
religion, master-general, preacher to the kings 
Charles II. and Philip V. ; presented to the 
bishopric of Guatemala in 1703 ; he governed 
with great edification, leading so humble a life 
that his only dress was a tunic, which he used to 
mend with his own hands. In 1710, when the 
city experienced a violent shock of an earthquake, 
and the volcano at the same time vomited fire, 
the bishop took the holy sacrament, and making 
the sign of the cross towards where the volcano 
was burning, it immediately became extinct; he 
died in 1713. 

16. Don Fr. Juan Baptista Alvarez de Toledo, 
a monk of the order of San Francisco, of whom 
we made mention amongst the bishops of Chiapa; 
pro noted from Guatemala in 1714, where he 
shewed himself to be a perfect prelate, gave abun 
dant alms to the churches and poor monasteries, 
endowed more than 20 young women as nuns, 
built a house for the reception of lost females, the 
convent of the nuns of Santa Clara, and tiie col 
lege of the missionaries De propaganda Fide of 
his own order ; promoted to the bishopric of Gua- 
dalaxara, but in consideration of his advanced 
age and infirmities renounced the dignity, resolv 
ing to end his days in his convent ; he died shortly 
after, and very suddenly, in 1726. 

17. Don Nicolas Carlos Gomez de Cervantes, 
native of Mexico, where he studied jurisprudence, 
collegiate-major of Todos Santos, professor of 
canons for 24 years, curate of one of the parishes 
of that city, and canon of its holy church, a man 
of exemplary conduct and great charity: elected 
bishop of this church of Guatemala in 1723, and 
promoted to that of Guadalaxara in 1725. 

18. Don Juan Gomez de Parada, native of 



G U A 

Corapostela in Nueva Galicia, collegiate of (be 
royal and most ancient college of San Ildcfonso de 
Mexico, where he studied philosophy arid theo 
logy ; he passed over to Spain, and received the de 
gree of doctor in Salamanca, was canon of Mexico, 
and afterwards nominated deputy of its cabildo 
in the court of Madrid ; there he dedicated him 
self to the study of theology, the councils, the 
holy fathers, and all kinds of erudition; was 
elected bishop of Yucatan, and translated to Gua 
temala in 1729, visited his extensive diocese, and 
laboured indefatigably in setting all things in good 
order ; founded the convent of the Capuchinos, 
and was promoted to the bishopric of Guadalaxara 
in 1735. 

19. Don Fr. Pedro Pardo Figueroa, native of 
Lima, monk of the order ofMinimode San Fran 
cisco de Paula, professor of philosophy and theo 
logy ; sent upon affairs of importance to the courts 
of Madrid and Rome, where he was secretary 
to the general; elected bishop of Guatemala in 
1735, and the last of this class ; for having done 
many things of the greatest utility in his diocese, 
he had the honour of raising his cathedral to a 
metropolitan church, after it had been in vain at 
tempted for two centuries by his predecessors, the 
chief pontiff granting him the pall in a bull of 
1742; he died with universal regret, in 1751. 

20. Don Francisco de Figueredo, native of the 
Nuevo Reyno de Granada, curate for many years 
in the bishopric of Popayan, prelate of this holy 
church, and promoted to the archbishopric of 
Guatemala in 1752 ; he visited the whole diocese, 
and notwithstanding that he was blind in the 
latter years of his government, and a prey to great 
misfortunes, .omitted none of the duties of his 
sacred function ; he died in 1766. 

21. Don Pedro Cortes y Larranz, native of 
Belchite in the kingdom of Aragori, doctor in 
theology, professor of arts in the university of 
Zaragoza, and penitentiary canon of the cathedral ; 
he died in 1777. 

22. Don Cayetano Francos de Monroy : elected 
in J779. 

GUATEQUE, a settlement of the province 
and corregimiento of Sta Fe in the Nuevo Reyno 
de Granada ; situate on the w. shore of the river 
Magdalena. It is of a moderately hot tempera 
ture, abounding in sugar-canes, plantains, and 
i/ucas, and more particularly in arracachas, pota 
toes, and turmas, which are its principal articles 
of traffic, and very lucrative. One hundred and 
three miles s. w. of Tunja, 50 from Santa Fe, and 
three from Tocayma. 



G U A 



211 



GUATES, a barbarous nation of Indians, in 
habiting the shores of the river Paraguay, to the n. 
extending as far as the Guaibas and the lake of 
Los Xarayes. It is but little known. 

GUATICA, a settlement of the province and 
government of Popayan, in the district of Pasto. 

GUATICAS, a barbarous nation of Indians, 
now extinguished, but who used to dwell in the 
vicinities of the city of Anserrna. They were 
cruel, treacherous, extremely lascivious, and can 
nibals. 

GUATIE, a small river of the province and 
government of Guayana or Nueva Andalucia, 
rising in the country of the Quiriquiripas Indians, 
and running e. to enter the Aruy. 

GUAT1NGUAPAS, a barbarous nation of In 
dians, bounded n. by the Payansos in Peru. The 
river Guanuco laves and fertilizes the llanura on 
which they dwell : some of them have been re 
duced to the Catholic faith. 

GUAT1RE, a settlement of the province and 
government of Venezuela, built subsequently to 
the establishment of the Guipuzcoana company; 
situate 26 miles e. of the city of Caracas, arid 25 
s. w. of cape Codera. 

GUAT1ZAPA, a beautiful, extensive, and fer 
tile valley of the kingdom of Peru, between the 
mountains of Guanuco and those of the Andes, 
where the nation of the Payansos Indians dwell. 

GUATLATLAUCA, an alcaldia mayor of the 
kingdom of Nueva Espaiia, so small as not to ex 
tend further than the jurisdiction of the settlement, 
and of another which is the head settlement, in 
cluding some small wards, in which are found 
large cattle and goats, and seeds which are culti 
vated in the estates. 

The principal settlement is of the same name, of 
a mild temperature. It contains 30 families of 
Spaniards, Musiees, and Mulattoes, and 450 of 
Mexican Indians, with a good convent of the re 
ligious order of S. Domingo. Thirty-five leagues 
to the s. one-fourth to the s. e. of Mexico ; in lat. 
1858 . 

GUATO, a small river of the province and go 
vernment of Guayana, which rises in the country 
of the Maquisas Indians, and enters the Parime or 
Puruma at its source. 

GUATO, a mountain of this province, on the 
shore of the river Caroni, and to the n. of the 
source of the Usupania. 

GUATUARO, a point or extremity ofthe&amp;lt;% 
coast of the Island of Trinidad, close to the port 
Marayo. 

GUATU1, a small river of the province and 

BE2 



G U A 



G U A 



government of Buenos Ayres, which runs w. and 
enters the Uruguay, between those of the Guarey 
and the Deny. 

GUATUMA, a river of the province and coun 
try of Las Amazonas, in the part possessed by the 
Portuguese. It runs s. s. e. and enters the Ma 
ra non. 

GUATUPI, a river of the province and govern 
ment of Paraguay, which runs s. and enters the 
Uruguay. 

GUAVU, a town of the island of St. Domingo, 
in the s. part, and in the limits of the French 
possessions. 

GUAVAO, a river of the province and country 
of Las Amazonas, in the part possessed by the 
Portuguese. It runs nearly w. and enters the 
Paravillanas or Parime. 

GUAVAQUETA, a small river of the province 
and government of Paraguay, which runs 5. and 
enters the Gatome. 

GUAUCII1NANGO, an alcaldia mayor and 
jurisdiction of the kingdom of Nueva Espana. It 
is 30 leagues in extent from n. to s. from the bar 
of the river of Carazoncs to the lake of Tampico, 
in the middle of which is the bar of Tabuco. The 
greater part of this territory consists of mountains, 
hollows, and very rough serrania-; ; also of many 
rivers which fertilize it, and which, at times, are 
so abundant as to render the roads impassable : 
the vegetable productions are seeds, cotton, and 
different kinds of woods. This territory termi 
nates on the e. by the coasts to windward, arid 
consists of 46 settlements. 

The capital is of the same name, of a cold and 
moist temperature, and its population is composed 
of 50 families of Spaniards, 200 of Mustees and 
Mulattoes, and 971 of Indians, scattered in 38 
wards arid ranchcrias. It has a convent of the 
nuns of San Agustin ; is 91 miles n. e. of Mexico, 
in lat. 20 23 -n. and long. 97 54 w. The other 
settlements are, 

Tlaola, Atlapanala, 

Yetla, Chahuantla, 

Chicahuastla, Atla, 

Naupan, Pahuatlan, 

Xolotla, Tlacuilotcpec, 

Tericstitlan, Xocotepec, 

Santa Maria, La Mesa, 

Meralapa, Thamapachi, 

Tencxco, Tamiahua, 

Tabuco, Tapahoy, 

Cacateapa, Xoebinacatlan, 

Huaztotipac, Icolixtla, 

Ouamila, Chiconcuautla, 



Tlaspanaloya, Tlaxco, 

Meztla, Icotitlan, 

Atla Segundo, Copila, 

Papalolipan, , San Pablo, 

Xalpantepec, San Andr6s, 

San Antonio, Pantepec, 

Tepezitla, El Pozo, 

Amatlan, Tihuatlan, 

Zempoala, Acala. 

Tlahualpa, 

GUAUCO, a settlement of the island of Cuba; 
situate on the ??. coast, between Sta Cruz and the 
strand of Savarima. 

GUAULACIS, a river of the province and 
country of Las Amazonas, in the Portuguese pos 
sessions. It is in the grand peninsula formed by 
the rivers Cuchivara and Madera with the Mara- 
non, runse. and making, at the beginning of its 
course, a large pool or lake, runs out by two arms, 
entering by the one into the Madera, and by the 
other into the Marafion, thus forming a large 
island. 

GUAURA, orHuAURA, a town of the pro- 
vince and corregimiento of Chancay in Peru, 
founded in 1608. It consists of one long street, 
at the entrance of which is a gate with a large 
bridge across the river, also a tower defended with 
a redoubt, though without artillery: it has a con 
vent of Franciscan monks and an hospital. To 
its parish are annexed the settlements of Mazo and 
Vegueta. The English pirate Edward David 
sacked it in 1685, cutting off the head of the 
alcalde of La Hermandad, Don Bias de la Carre ra, 
who was taken prisoner whilst valiantly defending 
the town. It has a good, capacious, and conve 
nient port, also the renowned salt mines of Peru, 
formerly belonging to the king, but made public 
by the decree of 1719. The temperature here is 
mild and benign, and the territory pleasant and 
fertile. In its vicinity are to be seen the remains 
of some royal buildings which belonged to the 
Incas. It is 61 miles n. by a&amp;gt;. from Lima, and 27 
from Chancay, in lat. ll 6 s. and lori&amp;lt;&amp;gt;- 76 
23 w. 

GUAURA, a river of the above province, which 
rises in the mountains of the province of Caxatambo, 
and passes very rapidly betore the city, to which 
it gives its name. Over it is a beautiful bridge of 
stone, of a single arch, built in the time of the 
viceroy of Peru, the Marquis de Montes Claros. 
It empties itself into the S. sea, forming a bay, 
which is called Iluacho, and washing a mountain 
on the coast of the same province and corregi- 
inieuto, called the M orro de Giuuira. 



G U A 

GUAUHA, some isles near the coast of the above 
province, which are called Farullones de Guaura, 
for H tiara. ] 

GUAUTAZIS. SeeGuAULACis. 
GUAUT1TLAN, a settlement and head settle 
ment of the alcaldia mayor of Tampico, in the 
province of Pantico and kingdom of Nueva Es 
pana. 

GUAUTLA, a settlement and head settlement 
of the district of the alcaldia mayor of Yagualica 
in Nueva Espann, containing 2 &amp;gt;0 Indian families. 
GUAUTLA, another settlement, in the alcaldia 
mayor and head settlement of the district of Te- 
pozcolula, of the province of Oaxaca, with 70 
families of Indians. A quarter of a league s dis 
tance to the w. of its head settlement. 

GUAUTLA, another, of the alcaldia mayor of 
Nochistlan in the same kingdom. It contains 58 
families of Indians, employed in the cultivation of 
cotton and cochineal, which are grown in this 
settlement in greater abundance than in any of this 
jurisdiction. 

GUAUTLA, another, which is a real of silver 
mines in the province of Panuco in the same king 
dom. Twenty-five leagues from Mexico. 

[GUAXACA, Intendancy of, the same as 
OAXACA, which see.] 

GUAXAYACA, a river of the island S. Juan 
of Puertorico, which rises in the mountains of the 
n. coast, runs to this rhumb, and enters the sea 
between the Camuy and the point of Boriquen. 

GUAX1, a small river of the province and go 
vernment of Choco, in the district of Barbacoas. 
It passes before this city, and near it enters the 
river of Patia, just before this runs into the sea. 

GUAXICOLl, a settlement of the missions 
which were held by the religious order of San 
Francisco, in the alcaldia mayor of Acaponeta, 
and kingdom of Nueva Galicia. Four leagues n. 
of its capital. 

GUAXIROAPOS, a barbarous nation of In 
dians or Paraguay, to the e. maintaining them 
selves by fishing, and living continually near the 
rivers and lakes. Their territories lie low, and are 
very subject to inundations. 

GUAXOSPAN, a settlement and head settle 
ment of the district of the alcaldia mayor of Teu- 
tillan in Nueva Espana, of a cold temperature. 
It contains 150 Indian families, who cultivate 
maize and some baynilla. Twelve leagues n. of 
its capital. 

GUAY, a settlement of the province and go 
vernment of Cumana; situate near the coast, on the 
side of the city of Cariaco. 



G U A 



GUAYABAL DE LA MESA, a settlement of 
the jurisdiction of Tocairna, and corregimiento of 
Mariquita, in the Nuevo Reyno de Granada. It 
was formerly called also Paime and Calandania, 
but which names it changed for that which it at 
present possesses, from the circumstance of its 
being situate on the descent of the table-land of 
Juan Diaz, which is a fine plain, fertilized by a 
beautiful stream, and of so delightful a tempera 
ture as to serve as a spot of recreation and enjoy 
ment to the inhabitants of Sanla Fe. It is sur 
rounded by an infinite number of estates and mills, 
produces abundance of sugar-cane, maize, yiicas, 
and plantains, and some cacao, of which it makes 
a great commerce, particularly on the Saturdays, 
when there is a general market, at which assemble 
people from the immediate provinces of Ibague, 
Tocairna, Neib;i, La Plata, and Timana. Its 
population consists of 800 housekeepers; it is 63 
miles n. w. of Santa Fe, and 17 s. w. from Mari- 
quita. 

GUAYABAL, another settlement in this go 
vernment and kingdom, distinct from the for 
mer, of an hot temperature, abounding in fruits 
of such a climate, and very healthy. It has a 
chapel of ease, with more than 100 Indians and 
400 whites. 

GUAYABAL, another, of the province and go 
vernment of Antioquia in the same kingdom; 
situate on the shore of the river Cauca, close to the 
settlement of Nechi, in the sierras of Guamoco. 

GUAYABAL, another, in the province and 
corregimiento of Tunja in the same kingdom. 

GUAYA BE KO, an abundant river of the pro 
vince and government of San Juan de los Llanos 
in the Nuevo Neyno de Granada, rising in the 
mountains of the paramo of Fosca, and running e. 
to enter the Guabiare, when it changes its name 
to this, and runs into the Orinoco. It is frequently 
called Guabiare. 

GUAYABOS, a settlement of the head settle 
ment of the district of Tamazunchale, and alcaldia 
mayor of Vallcs, in Nueva Espana; situate at 
the foot of a scrrania which divides this jurisdic 
tion from that of San Luis de Potosi ; of a mild 
temperature, and annexed to the curacy of Tala- 
cun : contains 40 families of Paine* Indians, who 
live by sowing crops of seed which yield but 
scantily, owing to the dry ness of the serrania. 
Twenty leagues from its head settlement. 

GUAYACGCOTLA, a jurisdiction and alfal- 
dia mayor of Nueva Espana, very fertile, from 
being irrigated by several rivers ; and its inhabi 
tants have very fine crops ia its numerous and 



214 



GU AY AN A. 



cultivated estates. In the rivers are found abun 
dance of bobos, a much esteemed kind of fish, 
and the inhabitants have, on the shores of the river, 
habitations for the convenience of carrying on this 
species of fishery. This jurisdiction consists of 
six principal or head settlements of districts, some 
of which are under the archbishopric of Mexico, 
and others the bishopric of La Puebla. The 
capital is of the same name. 

It has the dedicatory title of San Pedro, is of a 
warm and moist temperature, with 45 families of 
Spaniards, Mustees, and Mulattoes, and 648 of 
Otomies Indians, including those of its wards. 
Sixty leagues n. e. one fourth to the e. of Mexico, 
in lat. 20 15 . The other settlements are, 
Azontomatlan, Chinantepec, 

Izhuatlan, Ilamatlan. 

Atlachichilco, 

GUAYAGUAYA, an island of the river Ori 
noco, formed by an arm of the river Apure, call 
ed Caviani. 

GUAYAL, a settlement of the province and 
government of Cartagena ; situate on the shore of 
the river Gauca, in the district of Moaipox. 

GUAYANA, [Gui ANNE, GUIANA, or GUI 
NEA], alarge province of the government of Cu- 
mana, and part of Nueva Andalucia ; one of the 
largest in S. America. It comprehends all that 
country which is bounded e. and n. e. by the At 
lantic ocean, n. and partly w. by the river Ori 
noco, w. by the kingdom of Grenada, and s. by 
the large chain of mountains which separates the 
waters running into the Orinoco and Atlantic 
ocean, from those running into the Amazonas. 
A great part of this vast province is unknown, from 
its not having been visited by olhers than the Ca- 
talanian Capuchin missionaries, and by these very 
triflingly ; consequently the information is very 
confused which we possess concerning the Caribes 
Indians ; knowing, however, that they are a war 
like and wandering people. The territory is va 
rious, since in the boundaries of its vast extent 
are found large and inaccessible serranias and im 
penetrable mountains, in which are found all kinds 
of exquisite woods, and amidst and between them 
shady valleys, maintaining their verdure all the 
year round, and where every thing fructifies that 
is sown, no other labour of man being necessary 
than that of cutting wood for his fuel. Again, 
although in some parts rain is wanting, others 
supply such deficiency by their exceeding lux- 
uriande and richness. 

The temperature is for the most part hot and 
moist ; for such is the luxuriance of the herbage 



and vegetable world, clothing the fields, that they 
prevent the sun, however burning, completely to 
dry up the waters which flow from the innume 
rable rivers and streams ; and very great is the 
number of cattle thus supported. But it is not to 
be supposed thatthe heat is always excessive; on 
the contrary, the frequent winds blowing from the 
e. and which are called briza, render a pleasing 
coolness. In some parts the rain will descend in 
violent torrents, accompanied with tempests of 
thunder and lightning, almost daily; and in this 
province the days and nights are equal throughout 
the year, save by a few minutes. 

In what relates to the colonies which have 
been founded by foreigners in this country, see the 
articles SURINAM, BERBICE, ESSEQUKBO, CAY 
ENNE, &amp;c. Among the infinite number of its ri 
vers the principal are, the Orinoco, Carom, Pa 
raguay, Caura, Ventuari, Usnpania, Cayena, 
Oyapok, Marouini, Essequebo, Surinam, Sa- 
ramacca, Bnizo, Casiqnari, and others. The In 
dian nations most known, who live dispersed in the 
woods, are the Arvacas, the Caribes, viz. those 
of the mountains and of the plains, the Yaos, 
Aricuris, Aricaretes, Sebayos, Papinis, and Cari- 
bines. The most considerable islands are Casana, 
Maraca, Maiparo, Iracapono, Ovaracapa, and 
Cayenne. The first monks who entered upon the 
conversion of these Indians, were the Fathers 
Ignacio Llauri and Julian dc Vergara, of the 
abolished order, in 1576 ; but they were, three 
years after, obliged to retire, through the inva 
sion of Captain Hanson, a Dutchman. In 1687, 
the Capuchin fathers of the province of Cataluna 
made an entry here, and had reason to be well 
pleased with the fruit of their labours, for they 
founded 28 settlements, which are, 

Caroni, Cumamo, 

Santa Maria, Topequen, 

Cupapuy, Aima, 

Palmar, Puedpa, 

San Antonio, Aguri, 

Altagracia, Santa Ana, 

San Joseph, Santa Rosa, 

Divina Pastora, Monte Calvario, 

Miamo, San Pedro, 

Carapo, Barinagotos, 

Morocuri, Upata, 

Guasipati, Maruanta, 

Caruasi, Parapana, 

Santa Barbara, San Juan Baptista ; 

And those of Guirior and Barce oneta, of Spa 
niards 

In the woods of this province are found the 
2 



G U A Y A N A. 



315 



sano or vera, dhidibi, caoba, guaracan, gate ado, 
pomegranate, mulberry, Brazil, charaguaray, cei- 
bas, habillas, cedars, sasaparilla, also honey, 
indigo, and wax : several kinds of reeds are also 
very common, and serve as ropes to bind together 
the beams of houses, &amp;c. and these are so incor 
ruptible, that, although exposed to the moisture of 
the earth, they remain lor GO years as strong as 
when they were first cut. Here is also a kind of 
pitch, which the Indians call cantata, and the 
Spaniards cocuiza, which they mix in the manu 
facture of cords and ropes; different kinds of 
palms, such as the royal palms, the caratas, coro- 
zos, moricheS) chagttaramas, the palma de Som 
brero or hat-palm, and many others; some of 
which are esteemed for their fruit, and others for 
their shoots, which, being boiled, make fine ve 
getables : also, of others are made hats of curious 
workmanship, used not only by the Indians and 
people of colour, but also by the Spaniards. The 
fruits are may a, quechue, chara, quamache, au 
tumn and summer figs, paugi, cocopriz, mamon, 
cherries, johos, and hicacos ; all of which are pro 
duced without cultivation : and besides these, su 
gar-canes, maize of five sorts, calabashes, melons, 
water-melons, potatoes, plantains of four kinds, 
medlars, mameyes, vegetables, anones, chirimoyas, 
papayas, guaynbas, and plums. 

It also abounds in animals, as lions, tigers, cu- 
napuaroa, baquiras, chacharitas, potichis, bears, 
ant-eaters, me/eros or honey-eaters, ant as, wild 
boars, araguatos, cusicusis, rahcpclndos, mapuri- 
tos, acuris, squirrels, deer, foxes, and rabbits, ar 
madillos, morrocois, pericos ligtros, (small light- 
footed dogs) alligators, iguanas, chiguires, lapas, 
water-dogs, dormice, galapagos or snails, catuchis, 
manaties or sea-cows: and in the class of reptiles 
and insects, in various kinds of snakes, amongst 
which are the rattle-snake, the coral and macagua ; 
in monstrous centipcds, spiders, scorpions, sala 
manders, nigttas, ticks, flies of various sorts, gusa- 
nos dc monte, or mountain-maggots, which en 
gender between the skin and the flesh, from the 
bite of one of the above flies, and which grow un 
til they become covered with hair, causing the 
most intense, burning pain. It abounds also in a 
great variety of ants, which destroy the temples, 
houses, clothes, and garments ; of mice, and a 
multitude of other noxious reptiles, to such a de 
gree that it should appear that the Creator had 
thought good to afflict this province with as many 
plagues as Egypt ; but in contradistinction to these, 
innumerable are the birds, which for exquisiteness 
of note or plumage render the groves delightful: 
the most worthy of remark are the parrots, of 



which there are six species: besides which, there 
are the birds called guacamoi/os, cardenales, spar 
rows, turpiales, paugies, ring-doves, guacharacas, 
uquiras or mountain turkeys, partridges, quails, 
mountain fowl, arid many kinds of doves and 
ducks, which serve as an amusement to the Spa 
niards and Indians fond of the chase. 

The capital is of the same name, with the dedi 
catory title of Santo Tome ; founded by Antonio 
Berrio, in 1586, on the shore of the river Ori 
noco : of an hot and unhealthy temperature, but 
fertile in tobacco, cacao, and producing much 
cattle. The English, commanded by Walter 
Raleigh, sacked and destroyed it in 1617, and the 
Dutch, before the year 1579, instigated at the pro 
hibition of a commerce of tobacco, which they 
used to carry on, presented themselves in a ship of 
war, under the pretence that they were merely 
about to recover some old debts; and accordingly, 
having disembarked about night-fall, pillaged and 
burnt the city. It was, however, shortly rebuilt, 
and its situation removed to the spot where it now 
stands, 10 leagues below the river Caroni, at its 
narrowest part. At the mouths of this river, and 
in the islands situate there, is a part known by the 
name of Nueva Guayana, which has suffered the 
same misfortune as that we have just mentioned, 
having been attacked by a French privateer; but, 
in order to guard against a repetition of the same 
fate, a castle was built, called San Francisco, and 
another fort, with the name of San Diego del Pa- 
drasto ; and besides this, it was fortified by a 
contract entered into between the king and the go 
vernor Don Martin de Mendoza y Berrio. 

The capital has a good parish church, and a 
convent of Franciscan monks, but a very small 
population, on account of its losses in the above 
invasions. Its principal commerce is in hides 
and tobacco, which is much esteemed for its ex 
cellent quality. Sixty leagues from the city of 
San Joseph de Oruna, and 130 from the mouth of 
the Orinoco, in lat. 6 30 n. Long. 63 54 w. 

[INDEX TO ADDITIONAL INFORMATION RE- 

spicTiNG GUAYANA. 

1. Portuguese, French, Dutch, and Spanish divi 
sions. 2. Importance of Guayana. 3. Extent 
and populat on. 4. Political intercourse 6e- 
tween the Dutch of Surinam and Spanish of 
Guayana, Sfc. 

I. Portuguese, French, Dutch, and Spanish 
divisions. The coast of Guayana, from the mouth 
of the river Amazonas to that of the Orinoco, oc 
cupies an extent of 120 leagues, formerly pos 
sessed by four different powers. We shall here 
explain the divisions of each, previously to their"] 



G U A Y A N A. 



{"coming exclusively into the hands of the English 
and Spanish. The Portuguese possessed the s. 
part. They spread, before the treaty with France, 
of Sept. 29, 1801, from the mouth of the river 
Amazonas to cape North, and the e. of the island 
af Carpori. By this treaty the boundaries of Por 
tuguese and French Guayana were formed by the 
river Carapaua, which discharges itself into the 
Amazonas, at lat. 20 n. above fort Macapa. 
These boundaries follow the course of the river up 
to its source; from whence they take a direction 
towards the great chain of mountains which divide 
the courses of the waters, and are guided by the 
sinuosities of these mountains as far as the near 
est point to Rio Blanco, between the 2d and 3d 
degrees of n. lat. 

Portuguese Guayana was therefore entirely on 
the left bank of the river Amazonas ; bounded to 
the n. by the French possessions, as far as long. 55 
from Paris. The line of separation between the 
Portuguese and Span ; ards laid more to the w. 
The equator, according to the treaty, ought to 
have served as the boundary; but, they so en 
croached on the Spanish territory, that their colo 
nies extended 32 leagues n. of the line, namely, 
as far as the island of St. Joseph, and the mount 
De la Gloria del Cocui. The Spanish fort of San 
Carlos, at 1 53 n. was intended to prevent all 
further usurpation, and to recover, if possible, 
the lost ground. 

French Guayana was bounded to the s. by the 
river Carapana, Avhich flows into the river Ama 
zonas, to the n. by the river Maroni, to the e. by 
the sea, and to the w. by the Spanish possessions. 

Surinam, Essequebo, and Uernerara, though 
now belonging to the English, (having been taken 
in the present war), were Dutch settlements, and 
were bounded to the e. by the sea, to the s. by the 
river Maroni, to the n. by the river Essequebo, ac 
cording to the treaty, (though they have since 
made cape Nassau the n. boundary), and to the w. 
by Spanish Guayana. 

What remains of Guayana for the Spaniards is 
bounded on the e. by the sea, from cape Nassau to 
the mouth of the Orinoco, which are 30 leagues 
distant from each other. The river Orinoco forms 
the s. boundary as far as 150 leagues from the sea, 
when it becomes the w. boundary ; because from 
this first point the river takes its course to the s. 
for a space of 100 leagues, where it receives the 
waters of the Guaviavi : from this place the Ori 
noco, having its course to the e. uo longer serves 
as a boundary of Spanish Guayana, the other 
limits iu these parts being formed by the Portu 
guese settlements. 



The conquest of the provinces of Venezuela, 
Cumana, and of Maracaibo, occupied too much, 
during the first forty years, the few Spaniards 
to whom it w;&amp;gt;s confided, for them to think of 
carrying their arms further, whilst the ground 
they occupied was so warmly disputed, that their 
existence there was for a long time considered as 
precarious. 

The first European who attempted to enter the 
Orinoco was Lieat. -general John Cornejo. He 
ventured, in J55J,to penetrate by the mouths of 
the river, and surmounted many obstacles ; but at 
length his vessel was dashed to pieces on the break 
ers. The most of his attendants were saved, but 
these unhappy people escaped the waves to fall a 
prey to the Indians. 

2. Importance of Guayana. It is difficult to 
find, throughout all the Spanish dominions, a set 
tlement so favoured by nature and so little valued 
as Guayana. Its extent, which is estimated at 
1000 leagues circumference, gives it the importance 
of an empire. The soil is so fertile that it would 
yield more produce than has been ever reaped 
from the whole of the other Spanish settlements. 
The rivers which are received into the Orinoco in 
its course of 500 leagues, and which exceed the 
number of 300, are so many canals, which would 
carry to Guayana the riches which they them 
selves have contributed to obtain from the earth. 
The Orinoco, which crosses it, and which is the 
port by which an enemy can penetrate into Vene 
zuela, Barinas, and Santa Fe, can be defended 
only by Guayana, which is consequently the bul 
wark of the provinces which she alone can gua 
rantee. 

It might well be asked, why a country, which 
industry would prefer to all others, is a desert? 
and why such ad vantages for a military position 
have not hitherto more engaged the attention ot 
government ? 

To the first of these two questions it may be re 
plied, that the Spanish population in America, 
possessing a hundred times as much ground as 
they can cultivate, has no inducement to wander 
in quest of more ; and that the Spaniard, who is 
far from being possessed of the insatiable ambition 
that cannot be satisfied but by the sweat of the 
brow, but who, on the contrary, quickly attaches 
himself to the place, whether good or bad, where 
fate has placed him, cannot consent to abandon 
the spot where he has procured himself ease, and 
formed connections, to run after comfort which 
can be procured only by fatigue, the very idea of 
which is enough to terrify him. 

The second question can scarcely be answered] 



G U A Y A N A. 



217 



[ but by tire considerable cxpence that the fortifica 
tions and garrisons of Guayana would occasion, 
unless the government, relying on the difficulty 
and danger of the navigation of the Orinoco, 
thinks that no nation would undertake the conquest 
of an uncultivated country, which is defended by 
its miseries better than could be done by arms. 

3. Extent and population. Spanish Guayana, 
from the rnouth of the Orinoco to the Portuguese 
boundaries, occupies a space of more than four 
hundred leagues. Its breadth, in the first eighty 
leagues to thee. is not more than thirty leagues to 
wards the s. where it is bounded by the Dutch set 
tlements, but afterwards the breadth increases to 
more than 150 leagues. 

Over this immense surface there are but 34.000 
inhabitants of every condition and colour, of which 
19,425 are Indians under the conduct of mission 
aries, 6575 are in the capital, and the remaining 
8000 are in the villages. The population is 
thickest from the distance of 50 leagues from the 
sea to 130 leagues up the Orinoco. 

Guayana is divided into High and Low Orinoco ; 
and the capital is taken as the point of separation. 
But this honour more justly belongs to the river 
Caroni, because it bounds, in all the w. part, a 
tract which might properly be called an island ; 
for it has the Orinoco to the n. the sea to the e . the 
river Essequcbo to the s. and the, Caroni to the w. 
It forms almost a square, which is 70 leagues from 
e. tow. and 30 in its narrowest part from n. to s. 
America has not much land more fertile than this 
inclosure. 

The missionaries charged with bringing the In 
dians to a social life by means of Christianity, be 
gan their work by this part of Guayana. Twenty- 
seven villages built to the e. of the river Caroni be 
speak the success of the Catalonian Capuchin fa 
thers. They have not, however, approached the 
coast by above 30 leagues ; because it is inhabited 
by the Caribes, the most ferocious and courageous 
of all the Indians, who have invariably made mar 
tyrs of the apostles who have endeavoured to con 
vert them to Christianity. It is true that the fero 
city of the Caribes would have been softened by 
the morality of the missionaries, if the Dutch of 
Surinam, wishing to extend their trade to Spanish 
Guiana, had not made it a part of their politics to 
protect the vagabond life of the Caribes, who pre 
vent the Spaniards approaching their coast. It is 
certain that Spanish Guayana appears upon the 
maps to occupy 30 leagues of coast from the 
mouth ofthn Orinoco to cape Nassaw, but might 
in reality be said not to occupy an inch ; for the 
natives have defended their independence so well 

VOL. !1. 



that they have never been converted, reduced, nor 
conquered ; and are, in fact, as free as they were 
before the discovery of America. It is lamentable 
that the barbarous u^e they make of their liberty 
obliges the philosopher to wish rather that thej 
should lose than that they should preserve it. 

High Guayana. All that which is to the e. of 
the river Caroni, beginning a league above St. 
Thomas, is under the mission of the Franciscans. 
If we judge of their zeal by the result of their la 
bours, we shall not have reason to be astonished ; 
but if we contrast what they have done with 
the difficulties they must have had to over 
come, and of the decided repugnance of these In 
dians to receive the light of Christianity, we shall 
find it was hardly possible for human efforts lo ac 
complish more than these Franciscans have done 
on the higher shores of the Orinoco. 

The most considerable of the Indian nations of 
Guayana are the Caribes, the Arvaques, the Yaos, 
and the Galibis. These are well proportioned, for 
the most part, are swarthy, and go naked. The 
Caribes are enterprising, and so cautious of sur 
prise, that they post out-guards and centincls with 
as much care and art as the Europeans. The 
Caribes of Guayana still fondly cherish the tradi 
tion of Sir Walter Raleigh s alliance ; and to this 
- day preserve the English colours which he left 
with them at parting, above 200 years since. 

4. Political intercoursebetween the Dutchof Suri 
nam and the Spanish of Gtiaj/ana, &amp;c. The Dutch 
have been thought to be much more vigilant and 
solicitous about the protection of their settlements 
in this quarter than the Spaniards. For the latter 
have no advanced posts on the frontiers of the for 
mer, whilst the Dutch have on the coast a body of 
guards, and occupy a fort called the Old Castle, 
at the junction of the river Mazurini with the Es- 
sequebo : they also keep an advanced guard of 
twenty-five men upon the river Cuyuni. By 
means of these precautions, they are not only re 
spected on their own territory, but they over-run 
with safety all the neighbouring Spanish posses 
sions. They remove their limits whenever their 
interest invites them, and maintain their usurpa 
tion by force. 

The natural result of this is, that the Spaniards 
and Dutch live at Guayana not like very good 
neighbours. They reproach each other with in 
juries, some of which are very serious. The Spa 
niards pretend that the Dutch constantly encroach 
upon their territory, and respect no limits; that 
they destroy the Spanish trade to Guayana, by the 
contraband goods they introduce ; that they con 
tinually excite the Caribes against them, and pie-] 

F F 



218 



GU AY AN A. 



[vent their subjection by the advice they give them, 
and the arms with which they furnish them. The 
Dutch, on their part, impute to the Spaniards the 
desertion of their slaves, who meet at Guayana with 
a hospitable reception, with their liberty and the 
protection of the government. It is true, that the 
Spaniards have for a long time protected, more 
from a principle of vengeance than of humanity, 
all the slaves of Surinam who have sought an 
asylum among them. They have even peopled 
with these fugitives two very considerable villages 
upon the banks of the river Caura, where they re 
ceive likewise the Indians who are forced by the 
Caribes to fly from the slavery of the Dutch. 

In one of the treaties between the Dutch and 
Spaniards, previously to the taking of Dutch 
Guayana by the English, it was stipulated on the 
part of the Spaniards to give up to the Dutch all 
the slaves who might have retired into the Spanish 
territory, or to pay their value ; and indeed, if this 
condition was always as faith fully fulfilled as it was 
latterly, it would re-establish between the two 
countries a harmony most decidedly in favour of 
the Spaniards; in as much as this is undoubtedly 
the weaker party. See CAYENNE, and DUTCH 
AMERICA.]) 

Governors who have presided in Guayana and 
Cumana. 

1. Don Diego Fernandez de Zerpa, native of 
Cartagena de Lcvante, a man of fortune ; he capi 
tulated with the king to undertake the conquest 
of Nueva Andalucia, and passed over there under 
the title of governor of whatever he might con 
quer, with a supply of people, arms, and ammuni 
tion, in 1568 ; but met with his death the same year, 
with manv of his followers, in a battle against the 

TV 

Indians. 

2. The addanlado Don GonzaloXimenez de Que- 
sada, conqueror of the Nuevo Reyno de Granada, 
by the declaration of his Majesty, and under which 
kingdom was included that of Nueva Andalucia. 

3. Don Francisco de Vides ; nominated gover 
nor and conqueror of Nuevar Andalucia, which he 
exercised only a short time, since the excesses 
which he manifested induced the council of the 
Indies to take from him his situation, and to send 
him prisoner to Spain, where he died. 

4. Don Juan de Ilaro, nominated provisionally. 

5. Don Antonio Berrio y Oruna, heir to the 
estates of Don Gonzalo Ximencz de Qticsada, from 
having married this person s niece ; he capitulated 
with the king the conquest of the Dorado, but 
having lost the greater part of his army at entering 
this supposed country, he died of mortification iu 
the city of Santo Tomas de la Guayana,. in 1595. 



6. Don Fernando de Berrio, son of the former, 
on whom, his father having capitulated for the go 
vernment for his heir, the right thus regularly de 
volved ; he exercised it some years, and at last, 
owing to some complants lodged against him, was 
separated from it in 1610. 

7. Don Sancho de Alquiza, who was then go 
vernor of the province of Venezuela ; he held the 
government of Guayana until the year 1615. 

8. Don Diego Palomeque y Acuiia ; he entered 
in the above year ; and the city being attacked by 
Walter Raleigh, an English privateer, in 1618, he 
was killed whilst valiantly defending it. 

9. Don Fernando de Berrio, sent by the audi 
ence of Santa Fe to the succour of La Guayana, 
and to govern for the second time ; he arrived in 
1619, and exercised his command until 1622. 

10. Don Juande Dios Valdes, nominated pro 
visionally. 

11. Don Luis dc Monsalve, native of Sevilla, in 
16S2, 

12. Don Diego Lopez de Ficobar, in 1638. 

13. Don Martin de Mcndoza y la Iloz, in 1640. 

14. Don Juan de Urpin, native of Barcelona in 
the principality of Cataluna, doctor of laws, advo 
cate in the audience of St. Domingo; he had dis 
tinguished himself in his military career, proposed 
to the above tribunal the conquest of Cumana, and 
notwithstanding he had many competitors, was 
elected to the government of whatever countries he 
might conquer, in 1641 ; he founded different 
cities, and after many fatigues, combats, and la 
bours, died in 1615. 

15. Don Christoval de Vera, nominated pro 
visionally. 

16. Don Pedro de Bri/uela, in 1656. 

17. Don Pedro de Pad ilia, nominated in 1657. 

18. Don Juan de Viedma, who governed from 
1659 to 1664. 

19. Don Joseph de Aspe y Zuuiga, who died 
in 1665. 

20. Don Francisco Ventura y Itada, governor 
in 1665. 

21. Don Juan Baptista de Valdes, provisional. 

22. Don Juan Bravo de Acuiia, in 1667. 

23. Don Diego Xirnenezde Aldana, in 1670. 

24. Don Francisco de Rivera yGalinilo, in 1681. 

25. Don Juan de Padilla y Guardiola, of the 
council of his Majesty, knight of the order of Cu- 
latrava. 

26. Don Gaspar Matoode Acosta, in 1688. 

27. Don Gaspar del Hoyo y Solorzano. 

28. Don Joseph Ramirez de Arellano, in 1701. 

29. Don Mateo Ruiz del Mazo, in 1712; he 
died in 1715. 



G U A 

SO. Don Joseph Carreiio, in 1717. 
3J. Don Juan de la Torncra, in 1724. 
32. Don Agustin de Arredondo. 
S3. Don Carlos Sucre, brigadier of Hie royal 
armies, till 1734. 

34. Don Gregorio Espinosa de los Monteros, 
brigadier of the royal armies, deputy inspector of 
dragoons, till 1741. 

35. Don Diego Tabares, brigadier of the royal 
armies, knight of the order of Santiago ; he passed 
to the government of Cartagena in 1751. 

36. Don Mateo Gual, in "l 752. 

37. Don Joaquin Moreno, in 1762. 

38. Don Joseph Dibuja y Quinones, in the 
aforesaid year, till 1764, when he was promoted to 
the presidency of Quito. 

39. Don Manuel Centurion, till 1766. 

40. Don Pedro Joseph de Urrutia, colonel of 
infantry, till 1774. 

41. Don Maximo Dubouchet, captain of the 
royal armada, in 1775, till 1783. 

42. Don Antonio Pereda, in 1783 till 1786. 

43. Don Miguel Marmion, in 1786. 

GUA YANO, a river of the province and govern 
ment of Honduras. It runs n. and enters the sea 
opposite the island of Tortuga. 

GUAYAPA, SAN ANDRES DE, a settlement of 
the head settlement of Cuilapa, and alcaldia mayor 
of Quatro Villas, in Nueva Espaua. It contains 
107 families of Indians, employed in the cultiva 
tion and commerce of cochineal, seeds, fruit, and 
charcoal, and in cutting wood. One league and 
an halt&amp;gt;. n. e. of its head settlement. 

GUAYAPE, a river of the province and go 
vernment of Honduras, which runs n. and enters 
those of Guayano and Agnan. 

GUAYAPEGUE, a large wood of palms, of 
12 miles in length and 31 wide, one mile from the 
shore of the river Atariari, being the spot where a 
bloody battle was fought in 1669 by the Guaibas 
and Chicoas against the Achaguas Indians, the 
latter being victorious. 

GUAYAQUIL, a province and government of 
the kingdom of Quito. Its jurisdiction begins at 
cape Pasao to the n. in lat. 22 s. and extends s. 
as far as the settlement of Machala, or the banks of 
the Payama and mouth of the river of Tumbe, in 
lat. 3 26 s. and bounded in that direction by the 
province of Truxillo, and juridiction of the corre- 
gimiento of Piura in Peru, &amp;lt;f. by that of Cuenca, 
n. by that of Esmeraldas, and n. e. by those of 
Riobamba and Chimbo. It is composed of seven 
small provinces or districts, which are, La Punta, 
Daule Puna, Machala, Puerto Viejo, Babahoyo, 
Baba, and Yaguachc ; in all of which there is a 



GUA 



lieutenant-governor, heretofore nominated by the 
governors, for the consideration of 2000 dollars ; 
but this nomination was afterwards abrogated by 
the viceroy of Santa Fe. The extent of this pro 
vince is 110 miles from n. to s. from the mountain 
of the point of Santa Elena to the strands of the 
settlement of Ojiba ; nearly as many wide, from 
the port of Manta to the settlement of Tumbes, al 
though the Ex-jesuit Coleti makes it much less. 
It takes the name of its Cacique Guayas, who met 
his death by chance at the hands of one of the 
Spanish conquerors. It is of an extremely hot and 
moist temperature, of a low and plain territory, 
and subject to inundations during the winter. It 
is watered by several rivers, the four largest of 
which give their names to the districts of Daule, 
Baba, Babahoyo, and Yaguache, which flow down 
from the sierras of Quito, in the paramos and 
mountains of Tacunga, Guaranda, and Chimbo, 
and join in the plain, so as to form a navigable 
river, which straightway empties itself into the 
sea. In these rivers are abundance of fish of va 
rious kinds, such as robalos, corbhias, sabalos, ba- 
gres, cazoneS) skates, maids, r atones, barbudos, cie- 
gos, eels, bios, boca-cJiicos, biejas, mackerel, dicas, 
the sword-fish, and large alligators, besides others 
peculiar to the sea into which they run. The 
territory produces much cacao, of which two crops 
are gathered annually, the best sort being that of 
Machala and of Troncoso ; a considerable number 
of neat cattle, mules, and horses ; also cotton, to 
bacco in leaf, dried fish, salt, wax, rice, qjonjoli, 
mani, honey, and cocos ; in all of which a great 
commerce is carried on with the other .provinces of 
the kingdom, from which it takes in exchange 
cloths, baizes, carpets, cotton linens, called tuciiijos, 
flour, and the necessaries of life, hams, cheese, 
sugar, and sweetmeats : also from Guatemala and 
Nicaragua it receives tobacco in dust, dye, indigo, 
pitch , tar, and simples ; from the provinces of Tierra 
Firme, European wares and merchandise ; and 
from the ports of Peru, flour, sweetmeats, soap, 
tallow, sugar, and hides ; and this continual traffic 
causes it tube ricli and abound ing in every thing that 
can conduce to the comfort or luxury of life. Its 
woods abound with trees of the most superior qua 
lity, and by which its capital dock is supplied with 
the timber for building vessels ; the most esteemed 
sorts being the oak, guachapdi, saffron, cedar, 
balsam, laurel, cinafistolo, negro, mulberry, mala- 
sarna,jugano, figueroa, rtiaria, seco, ebony, cascol, 
guayacaii, Colorado, guayado de monte, zeibo, ma- 
matapalo, mangle, the large fig-tree, gnarango, 
medlar, cinnamon, carotu, pihuchi, and buck 
thorn. But in the midst of all these advantages it 



G U A 

does not want the plague of insects, and animals of 
a noxious kind ; tor fro:n the stagnation of the 
pools, and by the intolerable heats, are bred a host 
of venomous insects, mosquitoes, toads, mice, scor 
pions, vipers, and snakes ; namely, the boba, ma- 
panae, coral, rattle, and bejuco ; and these would 
be in greater abundance but that the bird of prey, 
the curiqutngui) is constantly looking out for them 
to devour them. The number of alligators found 
in the rivers, and which frequently go a great way 
on the land to bask themselves in the sun, is incre 
dible; some of these creatures have been found to 
measure seven yards. The Indians make a diver 
sion of taking them ; for they wait for them armed 
with a weapon, which is a piece of very hard wood 
of about half a yard long, finely pointed at both 
cuds, and which they call to/etc; moreover, to it 
is attached in its centre a leather thong; and this 
they succeed in thrusting into the animal s mouth 
when open, to devour them, so that they com 
pletely gag it, leaving the jaws fully distended, 
when this monster becomes perfectly harmless, and 
serves the children as an amusement. The popu 
lation consists of only 10 settlements, and of these 
there were four of the doctrinal establishments of 
the religious order of St. Domingo, before that 
their curacies had been removed. The capital is 
the city of 

GUAYAQUIL, SANTIAGO, of the same name, 
founded in 1533, in the bay of Charapoto, by Don 
Francisco Pizarro. It is the second town of 
Pern, as according to a schedule of the Emperor 
Charles V. which the city still preserves. It was 
entirely destroyed by the Indians, and rebuilt by 
Francisco de Orellana, in 1537, on the w. shore of 
the river of its name, from whence it was removed 
to the place called Ciudad Vieja, and lastly, in 
1693, to where it now stands. From the great in 
crease of its population, it has been divided into 
two distinct wards, the which are separated by a 
wooden bridge of 800 yards long, erected against 
the inundations of the salt water lakes, which are 
frequent on account of the lowness of the territory. 
The city is \\ mile long, of a beautiful plant, and 
good houses ; these however being of wood, render 
it liable to conflagration. It has three convents, 
namely, of the religious orders of San Francisco, 
San Domingo, and San Agustin, a college which 
belonged to the Jesuits, and an hospital of S. Juan 
de Dios, two small forts with very little defence, a 
celebrated and commercial port in the river, and a 
capital dock to the s. on the shore of the same 
river. Mere have been built an infinite number of 
ships of the line, owing to the excellent quality 
and incorruptibility of the wood, and which is cut 



G U A 

at no greater a distance than 200 paces. With all 
these advantages the city was nearly abandoned 
until the year 1770, when the king ordered it to be 
re-established, and the construction to be con 
tinued. In it reside the governor, dependent on 
the president of Quito, a cabildo composed of two 
ordinary alcaldes and J 2 re gidors, with the other 
necessary officers, namely, two royal ofidales^ who 
with the accountant and treasurer have the charge 
of the king s duties. Here is a battalion of militia 
of six companies, whose services are pointed out 
by the viceroy. Its population in both towns, 
new and old, amounts to 22,000 souls, amongst 
whom are many illustrious families, such as those 
of Calvo, Aguirrc, Mispireta, Aviles, Casaus, Arel 
lano, Betancur, Cocllo, Plazaert, and others. The 
temperature is very warm and moist, the streets 
dirty, and swarming with venomous and trouble 
some insects. The natives are spirited, cheerful, 
courteous, liberal, and hospitable. It is filled with 
all kinds of productions, as well European as Ame 
rican, and wants none of the necessaries of life. 
It has a well-provided repository of arms, and a 
good custom-house, and once one of the richest 
cities in Peru ; but it has suffered much from the 
misfortune of 10 several conflagrations, and in 
1692, 1707, arid 1764, it was almost burnt to 
ashes. It has also been thrice invaded by ene 
mies ; the first time by Jacob Hcrernite Clerk, -in 
1624 ; the second by Edward David, in 1687 ; and 
the third by William Dampierre, in 1707. [At 
an average of four years, from 1799 to 1803, the 
quantity of cacao exported hence amounted to 
600,000 frmegas.l It has been the native place of 
the Father Lucas Maxano, of the abolished order 
of the Jesuits, an apostolic missionary of singular 
eminence in the province of Mainas ; of Father 
Lucas Ximenez, who was employed the same way; 
and of Don Pedro Franco Davila, once director of 
the royal cabinet of natural history in this court. 
It is 238 leagues from Callao, 220 from Panama, 
98 from Quito, and 40 from Paita, in lat. 2 11 
21" s. Long. 79 40 w. 

GUAYAQUIL, a river of this province and go 
vernment, formed of various others, flowing from 
the cordillcra of the Andes, and especially from 
the mountains of San Antonio. It washes the city, 
and is nearly a league wide; is navigable for 28 
leagues, as far as Caracol, arid opposite the same 
place it divides itself into two arms, forming an, 
island. It ebbs and flows with the sea-tides ; its 
shores are covered with mangles, which form thick 
groves, called manglares. The sand-banks \\hich 
are in it, and which shift their situation by the im 
petus of the current, render its navigation very 



QUA 

difficult for large vessels ; and these are steered by 
an experienced pilot, after Laving left their guns 
in the island of La Puna. This river abounds in 
alligators, which are ordinarily found in the large 
lakes or swamps left by the river; and it enters the 
sea in the gulf of its name, in lat. 2 27 s. 

GUAYASCATE, a settlement of the province 
and government of Tucuman in Peru, belonging to 
the jurisdiction and district of the city of Santiago 
del Estero. 

GUAYAS, a settlement, of the province and 
captainship of Espiritu Santo in Brazil, where are 
the rich diamond mines worked to such advantage 
by the Portuguese. 

GUAYAZIS, a barbarous nation of Indians, 
who dwell on the s. shore of the river Maranon, 
not far to the e. of the river Xingu ; they are pu 
sillanimous and cowardly, and a part of them are 
dependent on the Portuguese, and another part on 
the Tapinambos. 

GUA YO, a small river of the province and go 
vernment of San Juan de los Llanos in the Nuevo 
Reyno de Granada. At a small distance from 
its source it loses its name, and enters the Ca- 
queta. 

GUAYOBIN, a river of the island of S. Do 
mingo, which rises near the w. coast, runs n. and 
enters the Jacques. 

GUAYOLA, SAN PABLO DE, a settlement of 
the province and government of Mainas in the 
kingdom of Quito. 

GUA YON, a small river of the province and 
government of Guayana in Nueva Andalucia ; one 
of those which enter the Cuyuni by the n. side. 

GUAYUCAC111, a settlement of the province 
and corregimiento of Xauxa in Peru. 

GUAYUTA, a settlement of the province and 
government of Cumana. 

GUAZABAS, a settlement of the province and 
government of Ostimuri in Nueva Espana. 

GUAZACOALCO, an abundant river of Nueva 
Espana, which rises in the province and alcaldia 
mayor of Acayuca, and runs through the same in 
a continued course to the s. until it enters the sea 
in the gulf of Mexico. Its banks, on either side, 
are covered with fine trees, which are carried to 
Vera Cruz tor building ships, having been cut at 
the expence, and on account, of the royal revenues. 
Where this river enters the sea is a bar or sand 
bank, which is somewhat dangerous. There for 
merly was here a town of the name of Espiritu 
Santo, but this was destroyed, though a guard is 
still posted. In lat. 18 1 n. Long.^94 23 w. 

GUAZAIPARES, a settlement of the missions 



GUA 



or conversion of Indians, of the province and go 
vernment of Cinaloa. 

GUAZA1PARO, SAN ANTONIO DE, a settle 
ment of the province and government of Cumana. 
Although it belongs to the district of the province 
of Guayana, it is of the missions founded and held 
in this province by the religious observers of S. 
Francisco, the missionaries of Piritu. 

GUAZAIPATE, a settlement of the province of 
Guayana, and government of Cumana ; one of the 
missions which are held there by the religious Ca 
puchins of Cataluna. 

GUAZAMOTA, a settlement of the province 
and government of Zacatecas in Nueva Espana ; 
a reduction of Indians, made by the religious order 
of San Francisco, after great labours and exer 
tions. Here the Fr. Juan Cerrado suffered mar 
tyrdom whilst instilling the faith into the minds of 
these barbarians : 20 leagues from the settlement 
of S. Francisco del Mezquital. 

GUAZARA, a settlement of the province and 
government of Venezuela ; situate on the shore of 
the lake Tacariqua, between this lake and the 
coast. 

GUAZARA, a river of the province and govern 
ment of Santa Mart a, and district of the Rio del 
Hacha, in the Nuevo Reyno de Granada. It rises 
at the foot of the sierra of Perija, and runs n. till 
it enters the Hacha. 

GUAZIGUA, a small river of the province and 
government of Paraguay, which runs w. between 
the rivers Tedi and Jaquari, and enters the 
Parana. 

GUAZIMAL, S. JOSEPH DEL, a settlement of 
the government and jurisdiction of Pamplona in 
the Nuevo Reyno de Granada ; of a very hot cli 
mate, abounding in cacao, and many other vege 
table productions peculiar to its climate, of which 
it makes a great commerce. It contains upwards 
of 400 housekeepers, and is eight leagues n.w. of 
Pamplona, close upon the river Pamplonilla, which 
divides the jurisdictions of this town and of that 
of S. Christoval. 

GUAZIMOS, a settlement of the jurisdiction of 
the town of S. Christoval in the Nuevo Reyno de 
Granada. It is of an hot but healthy climate, 
although much infested with mosquitoes, snakes, 
and other insects ; abounds in cacao, sugar-cane, 
plantains, i/ucas, and many other productions pe 
culiar to the climate. 

GUAZQU1AS, a barbarous nation of Indians, 
descended from the Pantagoros in the Nuevo 
Reyno de Granada, who inhabit the woods to 
the e. of the Rio Grande de la Magdalena. 



222 



G U E 



GUEBAVI, SAN FELIPE DE JESUS DE, a town 
and real of silver mines of the province and go 
vernment of Sonora in Nueva Espana; founded in 
the country of the Sobaipuris Indians, on the bank 
of a river. It lias a fortress and garrison for its 
defence against the incursions of the infidels. 

GUECHAS, a name given to a body of troops 
of infantry which used to belong to the Zipas of 
Bogota in the Nuevo Reyno de Granada. It was 
a select troop, being composed of the most robust, 
tall, valiant, handsome, and skilful men. Their 
heads were shorn, and had no floating hair like the 
other Indians ; they bored holes through their lips 
and nostrils, drawing through them small gold 
wires, arid these were to the number of the deaths 
each man had inflicted on their enemies the Pan- 
clies. This was the most confidential military ia 
the service of those princes. 
[GUED1. SeeGuALi.] 
GUEDO, SAN JUAN DK, a settlement of the 
head settlement of San Juan del Rio, and alcaldia 
mat/or of Queretaro, in Nueva Espana, annexed to 
the curacy of Tequisquinapan ; containing 36 fa 
milies of Indians. 

GUEGAI, a small river of the province and 
government of Buenos Ay res, running to the w. 

GUEGUETENANGO, a settlement and head 
settlement of the district of the akaldia mayor of 
Tomtom icapan in the kingdom of Guatemala. 

GUEGORESE, S. PEDRO DE, a settlement of 
the head settlement of Cuilapa, and alcaldia mayor 
of Quatro Villas, in Nueva Espana, containing 31 
families of Indians, who employ themselves in the 
cultivation and commerce of cochineal, seeds, 
fruit, and coal, and in cutting wood. Five 
leagues w. and s. of its head settlement. 

GUEHUETLAN, a river of the province and 
akaldia mayor of Soconusco in the kingdom of 
Guatemala, which runs into the sea near the ca 
pital. 

GUEJOLOTITLAN, a settlement of the /- 
caldia mayor of Guajuapa in Nueva Espana, con 
taining 72 Indian families. 

GUKJOLOTITIIAN, another settlement, the ca 
pital of the alcaldia mayor, in the province and 
bishopric of Oaxaca in Nueva Espana ; of a tem 
perature rather cold than warm, producing some 
cochineal and wheat, though of an inferior quality, 
but abounding in other seeds, and particularly in 
maize. Its population consists of the settlements 
of its district, and amounts to 950 families of Mis- 
tecos and /apotecos Indians : 75 leagues s. w. of 
Mexico. Lnt. 18 25 w. 

GLJEJOTITLAN, a settlement of the missions 
5 



G U E 

which were held by the Jesuits, in the province 
of Tepeguana and kingdom of Nueva Vizcaya. 

GUEJOZINGO, or HUIJOZINGO, a district 
and alcaldia mayor of Nueva Espana ; bounded e. 
by the jurisdictions of Tlaxcala and Cholula, w. 
by the heights of the sierra which divides this ju 
risdiction from those of Ghalco and Choatepeque, 
n. by that of Tezcoco, and ,?. by the town of Car 
rion and the valley of Atrisco. Its length from e. 
to w. is five leagues, and its breadth seven from n. 
to s. ; and in it are 2j leagues of mountainous 
country, being skirits of the sierra, also the Rio 
Frio, a spot well known throughout the kingdom 
as being the necessary road for all travellers and 
merchants going to Guatemala and the inland 
provinces as far as Vera Crriz. It is very fertile 
in seeds, of which it gathers out of the many culti 
vated estates of its district two abundant crops an 
nually, and in which it carries on a good trade. 
The temperature is mild, rather inclining to warm. 
In this jurisdiction is a convent of the monks of 
San Francisco, in ruins, but of most beautiful ar 
chitecture and of large size, a work of the first 
architects who were sent into that kingdom by the 
Emperor Charles V. but it is now somewhat the 
worse for age. The population of this district is 
included in 2t&amp;gt; settlements of Indians, and three 
head settlements of districts, in the which are 569 
families of Spaniards, 350 of Mustees and Mulat- 
toes, and 50 of Caciques Indians, exempt from 
tribute. 

The capital is the city of the same name; situate 
in a plain at the foot of the sierra Nevada, but, 
notwithstanding, of a mild temperature. It has a 
good parish church, with four vicars, who must 
understand the Mexican language, assisted in their 
spiritual labours by the religious order of Sari 
Francisco, of a convent which is there. Eighteen 
leagues s.w. of Mexico, in lat. 19 7 n. Lori"-. 
98 26 w. 

The other settlements are, 
Tianguizolco, Texmeluean, 

Xaltepetlan, Tianguistengo, 

Coyotzingo, San Pedro, 

Xalolpan, San Andres, 

Azitla, 
Santa Maria de las 

Nieves, 
Tlanicotla, 
Calputitlan, 
San Rafael del Monte, 



Azala, 

Tlatenco, 

Xalminulco, 



Tlauzingo, 

Atzopau, 

Tlalmilolpan, 

Tianquismanalco, 

San Martin, 

Talancaleca, 



San Estevan, 

Tetla, 

Tepetlaxco, 



G U E 

Alolozingo, Huiazacualco, 

Palmillas, Tcmaxcala, 

San Nicolas, S. Buenaventura. 

GUELACHE, SAN JUAN DE, a settlement of 
the head settlement of the district of Tlapacoya, 
and alcaldia mayor of Quatro Villas, in Nueva 
Espana. It contains 124 families of Indians, who 
occupy themselves in the cultivation and com 
merce of some cochineal, seeds, and fruits, and in 
cutting wood. Somewhat less than four leagues 
from its head settlement. 

GUELATAO, SAN PEDRO DE, a settlement 
of the head settlement of Ixtlan, and alcaldia 
mayor of Antequera, in the province and bishop 
ric of Oaxaca, and kingdom of Nueva Espana; 
situate immediately by its head settlement. 

GUELAVIA, SAN JUAN DE, a settlement of 
the head settlement of Macuilzucbil, and alcaldia 
mayor of Teutitlan, in Nueva Espana. It contains 
64 families of Indians, who trade in cotton, cochi 
neal, maize, and fruit. Two leagues between the 
w. and s. of its head settlement. 

GUEMES, a city of the province and govern 
ment of La Sierra Gorda in the bay of Mexico, 
and kingdom of Nueva Espana ; founded in 1745 
by Don Joseph Escandon, colonel of the militias 
of Queretaro, who gave it this name m honour of 
Don Juan Francisco Guemes, Count of Revillagi- 
gedo, then viceroy. 

GUENOAS, a barbarous nation of Indians, of 
the province and government of Paraguay in 
Peru, bounded by the Paranas. In 1746, the 
Father Miguel de Herrera, superior of the mis 
sions, began to preach the gospel amongst them ; 
but such was the stubbornness of these infidels, 
that lie was a long time before he could make the 
least impression upon them : at last, however, he 
succeeded in reducing to the Catholic faith the 
CMcique, together with a great number of the other 
Indians, and he established them in a settlement 
in the same territory, which has for its limits the 
sea and the rivers Uruguay and La Plata. This 
country is subject to very violent winds, such as 
scarcely to leave a tree in the ground. In the 
winter the cold is intense, and in the summer the 
rains are continual, with mighty tempests : on this 
account the country is full of lakes and rivers, 
which fertilize it, and render it abundant in fine 
pastures, which maintain large herds of neat 
cattle. 13 ere are also many fierce tigers, with 
the skins of which the Indians clothe themselves, 
and in the winter with the fur inwards. 

GUEPACA, a settlement of the province and 
government of Sonora in Nueva Espana ; situate 



223 



on the shore of a river, between the settlements of 
Acotzi and Babiacora. 

GUEQUE, a river of the province and govern 
ment of Venezuela. It rises near the coast, runs 
e. and enters the sea in the point of Piragua. 

GUERRA, CRUZ DE, a settlement of the pro 
vince and government of Buenos Ay res; situate 
on the shore of the river Saladillo. 

GUERRERO, a gold mine, celebrated for its 
abundance and quality of metal, in the province 
and government of Veragua and kingdom of 
Tierra Firme. It is in some mountains near the 
sea-coast, and opposite the bay of Almirantc. 

CUERVO, a small river of the province and 
government of Maracaibo, which rises in the 
table-land of Cachicarno in the valley of Charna, 
runs n. and empties itself into the lake of Mara 
caibo, by the part opposite its entrance. 

GUESCO, a settlement of the jurisdiction 
and alcaldia mayor of Valles in Nueva Espana, 
annexed to the curacy of Tamazunchale. It is 
small, consisting of only 22 families of Indians, 
who breed, in many estates, neat cattle, and groAV 
tobacco, in which they trade. Twenty-five leagues 
s. of its capital. 

GUEUSA, a settlement of the corregimiento 
and jurisdiction of Velez in the Nuevo Reyno de 
Granada. It is small, and in it live retired some 
50 poor Indians with a few whites, who cultivate 
and gather a very few vegetable productions. 

GUEYA, a river of the province and govern 
ment of Venezuela, which rises s. of the port of 
Ocumare, in some mountains, runs s. and enters 
the Orituco. 

GUEYAPA, SANTIAGO DE, a settlement of 
the head settlement of Tlaulauquitepec, and alcal 
dia mayor of Llanos, in Nueva Espana, contain 
ing 205 families of Indians. 

^GUEZALAPA, a small settlement of the head 
settlement of Almololoyan, and alcaldia mayor of 
Colima, in Nueva Espana, founded on the skirt of 
a volcano of the same name; of a cold tempera 
ture, and its natives are occupied in the fisheries 
of the river Grande, which passes near it. Four 
leagues from its head settlement. 

GUGUA, a river of the province and govern 
ment of Honduras, which runs into the sea, on the 
side of the Morro Chico. 

GUIA, NUESTRA SENORA DE, a settlement of 
the province and captainship of Itamaraca in 
Brazil; situate n. n. E&amp;gt;. of Nuestra Seiiora de los 
Placercs. 

GUIA, with the dedicatory title of San Juan, 
a river of the province and government of Santa 



224- 



G U I 



Marta in the Nuevo Reyno de Granada. It runs 
into the sea, between those of Enca and Pira. 

GUI A, a cape or point of land on the coast of the 
same province and government as the former river, 
between the point of La Aguja and the river Del 
Hacha. 

GUIANA. SeeGuAYANA. 

[GUIANDOT, a river of Virginia, which rises 
in the Cumberland mountain, and running a n. 
by w. course about 80 miles, falls into the Ohio 
river, about 3i miles below the Great Kanhaway. 
It is said to be 60 yards wide at its mouth, and as 
many miles navigable for canoes.] 

GUIA-PARANA, a river of the province and 
country of Las Amazonas, which rises in the 
territory of the Abdicates Indians, runs .. n. w. 
and enters the Madera, between those of Yamari 
and Crena. 

GUIBARA, a bay on the n. coast of the island 
of Cuba, between port Del Padre and the river 
Timones. 

GU1CAGARE, a spacious and fertile llanura 
of the province and government of Santa Marta 
in the Nuevo Reyno de Granada ; of an hot 
climate and unhealthy, and in consequence nearly 
depopulated ; discovered by Captain Luis de 
Manjarres, in 1537. 

GUICANI, a settlement of the province and 
correg tmienlo of Tunja in the Nuevo Reyno de 
Granada, contiguous to that of Cocuy, to which 
it is annexed. It was a reduction of Tunebos 
Indians, who were under the charge of the Jesuits 
up to the year 1767. 

GUICH1COV1, a settlement of the head settle 
ment of the district and alcaldia mayor of Tehu- 
antepec in Nueva Espana. It is of a mild tem 
perature, contains in its district various sugar- 
mills, at which assist various families of Spaniards, 
Indians, and Mustees, they employing themselves 
also in some agricultural estates. Twenty leagues 
n. of its capital. 

GUIGEROTE, a settlement of the province 
and government of Curnana : situate on the coast. 

GUIGUITAI. See the Rio GRANDE on SAX 
FRANCISCO, or Rio FONDO. 

GUIJAR, a settlement of the province and 
government of San Juan de los Llanos in the 
Nuevo Reyno de Granada; situate on the shore 
of the river Ariari. 

GUI LA, a settlement of the province and go 
vernment of Popayan, and Nuevo Reyno de Gra 
nada. 

GUILCO, a settlement of Indians, of the dis 
trict and government of Valdivia in the kingdom 



GUI 

of Chile, between the source of the river Tolten 
and the river Plal. 

[GUILDHALL, a township in Essex county 
in Vermont, is situated on Connecticut river, and 
contains 158 inhabitants, ft is opposite the 
mouth of Israel river, in New Hampshire.] 

[GU1LFORD, a township in Franklin county, 
Pennsylvania.] 

[Gu IF, FOR i), a township in Windham county, 
Vermont, on the zo. bank of Connecticut river, 
and opposite to the mouth of Ashuelot river, in 
New Hampshire. It has Hinsdale on the s. e. and 
the state of Massachusetts on the s. and contains 
2432 inhabitants.] 

[G u J LFOR i&amp;gt;, a post-town of Connecticut, in New 
Haven county, situated on the s. side of Long 
Island sound, about 18 miles e. by s. of New 
Haven city. The township is large, and is divided 
into five parishes, and was settled in 1639. It 
was called Menuncatuck by the Indians ] 

[GUILFORD County, in Salisbury district, N. 
Carolina, is bounded e. by Orange, w.by Rowan, 
s. by Rockinghara county, and n. by the state of 
Virginia. It is noted for the extensive and rich 
tracts called New Garden, Buftaloe, and Deep 
River lands. It contains 7191 inhabitants, 
inclusive of 576 slaves. Chief town, Martin- 
ville.] 

[GuiLFORD Court-House. See MARTIN- 
viLijF. It is on the post-road from Halifax to 
Salisbury, 48 miles 5. w, of Hillsborough, and 61 
e. of Salisbury.] 

GUILFORD, an island near the coast of the 
county of Salisbury in N. Carolina, i 

GU1LLAUME, S. a settlement of the head 
settlement and alcaldia mayor of Marinalco in. 
Nueva Espana. One short league from the 
coast. 

GUILLAUME, S. a river of the island of St. Do 
mingo, which rises in the mountains of the sierra 
Prieta, in the French possessions, near the s. coast, 
runs s. s. e. and enters the sea between the bay of 
Gros Gravier and the river Salado. 

GUIL.I.AUIVIE, S. See WIM.IAM. 

GUILLEN, a settlement of the province an J 
government of Maracaibo ; situate within the lake 
of this name, on the e. side. 

GUILLEN, a river of the province and govern 
ment of Venezuela, which rises from a small lake 
near the city of Gibraltar to the e. runs w. and re 
turning to that rhumb, enters the lake of Mara 
caibo. 

GUILLESON, a fort of the French, in the 
province and county of the Jroquces Indians, on 



GUI 

the shore of the St. Lawrence, and opposite the 
mouth of the river Asuncion. 

GUILLOU, a small river of the island of St. 
Christopher, one of the Antilles. It enters the sea 
on the 5. coast, between the river Pentecoste and 
Marigot bay. 

[GUILMES, a settlement of Indians of the 
province and government of Buenos Ayres ; si 
tuate on the Parana, about GO miles n. of Buenos 
Ayres. Lat. 33 38 45" s. Long. 58 16 50" 



.] 
G 



UIMEO, a settlement and head settlement of 
the alcaldia mayor of Cirandaro inNueva Espaua, 
containing 50 families of Indians, and in its dis 
trict are various estates or farms, with 70 families 
of Spaniards, Mustees, and Mulattoes. A quarter 
of a league from its capital. 

GU1NAPARE, a province but little known, 
being part of that of Coropa, to the m. of the Ma- 
raiion. Inhabited by many barbarous nations, 
and said to be very rich in gold mines. It belongs 
to the Portuguese and to the captainship of Gran 
Para, has a river of the same name which irrigates 
it, and which enters by the n. into the Maraiion. 
Forty-five miles before the mouth of this river, on 
the e. shore, the Portuguese had a fort called El 
Destierro, which is at present abandoned. 

GUINAT1NGA, a small river of the province 
of Charcas, which enters the Parana near the 
settlement of Santo Tomas, of the missions which 
were held by the Jesuits. 

GUINCHOS, CAYO DE, a small isle near the 
coast of the island of Cuba, is just where, in 1714, 
the ship San Juan of the windward armada was 
lost. 

GUINEA, a settlement of the province and 
government of Antioquia in the Nuevo Reyno 
de Granada; situate on the shore of the river 
Nechi. 

GUINEA. SeeGuAYANA. 

[GUINET, a township in Montgomery county, 
Pennsylvania. 1 

GUINIME, a river of the province and go- 
Ternment of Guayana in N. America. Jt rises 
in the interior of its serrania, and after a short 
course incorporates itself with the Guarrapiche. 

GUION, an island of the N. sea, near the 
coast of Acadia. 

GU1ONES, CABO DE, a cape on the coast 
of the province and government of Costarica in 
(he S. sea, between, cape Blanco and the Morro 
Hem;ano. 

GU1PUNABIS, a barbarous nation of Caribes 
Indians, who dwell in the woods close by the river 
Negro. They are but little known. 

\OI,. II. 



G U L 



GUIR1ON, a settlement of the province and 
government of Guayana, founded by the go 
vernor Don Manuel Centurion, who gave it this 
name in honour of the viceroy of Santa Fe, Don 
Manuel Guirior, with the title of city. It lies at 
the sources of the Paraba, and at the entrance or 
mouth of the river Parabamuxi. 

GUIRIPA, a river of the province and go 
vernment of Guayana, which enters the Meta, 
according to the map and description of Mr. 
Bellin. 

GUJRIRI, a small river of the province and 
captainship of Para in Brazil. It rises between the 
rivers Negro and Cariai, runs n. and turning its 
course to the n. n. e. enters the Xingu. 

GUISVANI, a settlement and real of silver 
mines, of the province and government of So- 
nora. 

GUITEPEC, a settlement of the head settle 
ment and alcaldia mayor of Aillalta in Nucva 
Espafia, with 35 families of Indians. Eight 
leagues to the e. of its capital. 

GUITIGU1T1, a settlement of the island of 
Jamaica ; situate on the s, coast. 

GU1TZO, a settlement of the head settlement 
and alcaldia mayor of Gnejolotitlan, in the pro 
vince and bishopric of Oaxaca in Nueva Es- 
paila. 

GUIZINCLAN, a settlement of the head 
settlement of Mazatepec, and alcaldia mayor of 
Cuernavaca, in Nueva Espaua ; situate a little 
to the w. of the royal road which leads from 
Acapulco to Mexico. It is of an extremely hot 
temperature, and contains 40 families of Indians, 
who live by the commerce of fruits, which they 
cultivate, as also by fishing for bagres in a river 
which runs in its vicinity. They likewise gain 
something by the passing of merchants and tra 
vellers going to Acapulco. [Lat. 18 37 n. 
Long. 99 24 a&amp;gt;.] 

GUJABENO, a river of the province and go 
vernment of Mainas and kingdom of Quito. Rising 
in the limits of the province of Quixos, it runs c. 
and enters the Aguarico. 

[GULF OF FLORIDA, or NEW BAHAMA Chan 
nel, is bounded on the w. by the peninsula of 
E. Florida, and on the e. by the Bahama islands. 
It is generally about 40 miles wide, and extends 
from the 25tli to the 28th deg. of n. latitude.] 

[GuLF Stream. This remarkable phenomenon 
is a current in the ocean, which runs along the 
const, at unequal distances from ope I o id a to 
the isle of Sables and the banks of Newfoundland, 
w here it turns of 1, and runs down through the West 
ern islands ; thence to the coast of Africa, and 



226 



GUN 



along that coast in a s. direction till it arrives at, 
and supplies the place of, those waters carried by 
the constant trade-winds from the coast of Africa 
towards the w. ; thus producing a constant circu 
lating current. This stream is about 75 miles from 
the shores of the s. states, and the distance increases 
as you proceed n. The width of it is about 40 or 
50 miles, widening towards the n. Its common 
rapidity is three miles an hour. A n. e. wind nar 
rows the stream, renders it more rapid, and drives 
it nearer the coast : n. w. and a?, winds have a con 
trary effect. The Gulf stream is supposed to be 
occasioned by the trade-winds, that arc constantly 
driving the water to the w. which being com 
pressed in the gulf of Mexico, finds a passage be 
tween Florida and the Bahama islands, and runs to 
the n. e. along the American coast. This hypo 
thesis is .confirmed by another fact. It is said that 
the water in the gulf of Mexico is many yards 
higher than on the a&amp;gt;. side of the continent in the 
Pacific ocean. It is highly probable that the sand 
carried down by great rivers into bays, and the 
current out of these bays meeting with the Gulf 
stream, by their eddies, have formed Nantuckct 
shoals, cape Cod, George s bank, the island of 
Sable, &amp;c. 

Skilful navigators, who have acquired a know 
ledge of the extent to which this stream reaches on 



the New England coast, have learnt, in their 




course between the w. edge of the Gulf stream, and 
the shoals and banks of Sable island, George s 
bank, and Nantucket, by which they make better 
and quicker voyages to America.] 

GULIMAR, a river of the province and cap 
tainship of Rey in Brazil, which runs e. and en 
ters the lake of Mini. 

GULL, a small island of the N. sea, near the 
coast of S. Carolina, in the strait of Pamticoe. 

GUI.L, another, near the e. coast of the island of 
Newfoundland, at the entrance of Cork bay. 

GULLIVERS, a small island near the coast of 
Nova Scotia or Acadia, at the entrance of the great 
bay of Fundy and of the port of Annapolis. 

GUMARA, a river or the province and govern 
ment of Popayan in the NURVO Reynode Granada. 
It enters, just ai tcr its ris&amp;gt;ing, into the river Ca- 
queta. 

GUMAREBO, a settlement of the government 
of Maracaibo and province of Venezuela; situate 
on the coast, at a little distance from the city of 
Coro. 

GUNNING, a settlement of the Lslaftd of Bar- 



G U Z 

badoes, of the district of the parish of Christchurch, 
on the s. coast. 

[GUNPOWDER, a river of the w. shore of 
Maryland, whose chief branches unite a little above 
Joppa, and empty into Chesapcak bay, about 12 
miles above Patapsco river. It is navigable only a 
few miles, by reason of falls.] 

[GUNPOWDER Neck, near the head of Chesa- 
peak bay, is a curious peninsula formed by Gun 
powder river and Bush river.] 

GURAPJA, RAUDAL DE, a whirlpool of waters, 
very dangerous, of the river Cauca, above another 
which it forms, called OfParu, and near the place 
where this river is entered by the Iniquiari. 

GURATINGUETA, a town of the province 
and captainship of San Vicente in Brazil ; si 
tuate on the shore of the river Paraiba, on the s. 
side. 

[GURNET, The. See DUXBOHOUGH.] 

GURUPA, SIERRAS r&amp;gt;ii, some mountains of 
Brazil, on the coast of the province and captainship 
of Para. They run between the river Gururiba 
and the settlement of Percahumo. 

GURURIBA, a small river of the province and 
captainship of Para in Brazil, which rises near the 
coast, and runs into the sea between the river 
Tuwasu and ihc sierra Gurupa. 

GUSA1QUIRARA, a river of the province arid 
government, of Buenos Ayrcs, which runs w. and 
enters the Parana, close to the Icare-gazu. 

GUSMAG1S, a barbarous nation of Indians, 
who dwell in the woods to the s. of the Maraik&amp;gt;n, 
above the mouth of the Cayari ; bounded K. by 
the nation of the Maraguas, and e. by that of the 
Burais or ISuraes. 

GUSPACA, a settlement of the province arid 
government of Sonora in Nucva Espaila ; situate 
on the shore of the river of its name, between the 
settlements of A/otzi and Banaichi. 

GUTIERRE, a settlement of the province and 
government of Venezuela ; situate on the shore of 
the river Mosquitos. 

GUYKNDOTE, a river of the province and 
colony of N. Carolina. It runs w. and enters the 
Ohio, between those of Grand Sabloneux and of 
Con h away. 

GUYRIA,. a settlement of the island and go 
vernment of Trinidad ; situate on the interior 
coast, which looks to the a), and forms the jjulf 
Tristc. 

[G U YSBOROUGH, or MANCHESTER, a town 
ship in Nova Scotia, on Chedabucto bay, JO 
leagues n. w. of cape Canso, and 40 leagues e. of 
Halifax, contained 250 families in 1783.] 

GUZE, a small river of the province and go- 



HAG 

yernment of Guayana or Nueva Andalucia. It 
rises in the country of the Quiriquiripas Indians, 
runs e. and enters the Aruy. 

GUZMANGO, a settlement of the province and 
corrregimiento of Caxamarca in Peru. 

GWAHAGO, a town of Iroquees Indians in 



HAD 



New France ; situate near the shore or s. coast of 
the lake Erie. 

GYVINS, a small island of the N. sea, near the 
coast of (he province and colony of N. Carolina, 
within the bay of Chesapeak, at the mouth of the 
river Piankatank. 



H 



LJtlLA BRAGA, formerly called Fort Dauphin, a 
f brt i n the island of Cuba.] 

HACAS, a settlement of the province and cor- 
regimiento of Guamalies in Peru ; annexed to the 
curacy of Chavin de Pariarca. 

HACAS, another settlement, in (he province and 
corregimiento of Caxatambo in the same kingdom. 

HACHA, a province and government of the 
Nuevo Keyno de Granada, and bishopric of Santa 
Marta, with which it is bounded on (he s. w. and 
on the s. by the said kingdom ; on the e. s. e. and 
n. e. by the lake of Maracaibo, and n. by the sea. 
Its district is much reduced, since it is only eight 
leagues in length n. s. and four in width e. w. In its 
temporal concerns it is subject to the jurisdiction of 
the audience of St. Domingo. It is very fertile, al 
though little cultivated, and is not without gold 
mines and salt earths which yield abundantly. Its 
population is so much reduced as to contain no more 
than three or four settlements. The capital is Ciudad 
del Hacha, in lat. 1 1 30 n. Long. 72 51 w. 

HACHA, a large river of this province, the which 
takes its name from the said river. It was thus 
called from the first Spanish settlers, from the cir 
cumstance of their having given a hatchet to the 
Indians, to induce them to shew them where water 
might be found. It runs from s. ion. and has been 
famous for its fisheries of pearls. The pearls are 
not indeed large, but they are extremely fine, and 
held in higher estimation than any in America. 
This lucrative trade is at present abandoned, or 
only practised by the barbarian Guaxiros Indians. 
It enters into the N. sea, in lat. 11 31 30" n. 

HACIENDA, a settlement of the province and 
captainship of Todos Santos in Brazil ; situate on 
the sea-shore, between the rivers Ponica and Joana. 

HACIENDA, with the addition of La Marquesa, 
another small settlement, of the corregimiento of 
Coquimbo in the kingdom of Chile. In its terri 
tory is found a stone of lead-colour^ which, in every 



part where it is broken, discovers a shield and hel 
met, perfectly delineated, of a red colour. It is six 
leagues to the e. of its capital. 
^ [HACKETSTOWN, a small post-town in 
Sussex county, New Jersey, on then. ZD. side of 
Musconecunk river. It is about three miles above 
the mineral spring near Roxbury, on the opposite 
side of the river, 15 miles n. by zs. of Morristown, 
16 s. w. by w. of Sussex court-house, and 56 n. n. e. 
of Philadelphia.] 

[HACKINSACK, a river of New Jersey, which 
rises in New York, and runs a s. course four or 



miles w. of Hudson s river. It unites with 
issaic river, at the head of Newark bay, and is 



five 

PC 

navigable about 15 miles.] 

[HACKINSACK, the chief town in 
county, New Jersey, is situated near the to. bank 
of the above river, 10 miles n. u\ of New York 
city. The inhabitants are mostly Dutch. The 
houses arc chiefiy built of stone, in the old Dutch 
taste. Here are four public buildings, a Dutch 
and Episcopal church, a court-house, and a 
flourishing academy. The people, who are mostly 
farmers, carry their produce to New York.] 

IIACQUET, a settlement of the island of Bar- 
badocs ; situate near the s. coast. 

[I1ADDAM, a town of Connecticut, the second 
in rank in Middlesex county ; situated on the w. 
side of Connecticut river, 18 or 20 miles from its 
mouth, and eight miles s. e. of the city of Middle- 
town. This township, including E. iladdam, on 
(he opposite side of the river, was purchased of the 
Indians, May 20th, 1662. A spot in E. Haddam 
was famous for Indian Pazoaws, and was subject 
for many years to earthquakes and various noises, 
which the first settlers, agreeable to the superstitious 
ideas of that age, attributed to these Pazcaws. An, 
old Indian being asked what was the reason of such 
noises ia this place, answered, " The Indian s 
God was very angry because the Englishmen s 

G G2 



228 



HAL 



God came here." These noises are now frequently 
beard.] 

[HADDONFIELD, a small town in Gloucester 
county, New Jersey, nine miles s. e. by c. of Phi 
ladelphia, and 14 from Burlington.] 

HADERSHILL, a small river of the province 
and colony of New York. It runs n. e. and enters 
the Katskil. 

[HADLEY, a pleasant town in Hampshire 
county, Massachusetts, lying on the e. side of 
Connecticut river, nearly opposite Northampton, 
15 miles n. of Springfield, and 74 w. of Boston. 
The town consists of two long spacious streets, 
which run parallel with each other, and with the 
river. The township contains 882 inhabitants.] 

[HAGARSTOWN, now called ELIZABETH 
Town ; which see. It has a considerable trade 
with the a , country, and has between 2 and 300 
houses. It is situated in Washington county, 
Maryland ; is a post-town, 19 miles n. w. of Fre 
derick town, 52 n. zo. by ze. of Baltimore, and 20 s. 
by w. of Chambersburg in Pennsylvania.] 

HAGUABA, a river of the island of St. Domingo. 
It rises near the n. coast, runs n. and unites itself 
with the Macabon to enter the rivers laques and 
Santiago. 

HAHATONADEBA, a river of New France or 
Canada. It runs w. and enters the Vieux Deserts, 
or Old Deserts. 

I1AICHAYO, a settlement of the province and 
corregirniento of Parinacochas in Peru. 

[HALBUT Point, the n. e. point of cape Anne 
in Massachusetts.] 

HALCI1IAPA, a settlement of the head settle 
ment of Cuzamnla, and alcaldia mayor of Azuch it- 
Ian, in NuevaEspana; situate in a plain, at the 
foot of a lofty sierra called San Vincente, close by 
a large stream which flows down from the same 
sierra, the waters of which are very pure and sa 
lutary, and run to the w. of the town. On the 
skirts of this sierra are mines of silver, copper, and 
sulphur, with many other veins, which are not yet 
dug. The settlement has much diminished, and 
it is inhabited only by some families of Indians, 
who should amount to 67, and these are employed 
in agricultural pursuits. Jt is four leagues to the 
s. of its head settlement, and eight from the capital. 
[HALES, a spot of ground in Grafton county, 
New Hampshire, having nine inhabitants.] 

[HALF-MOON, an extensive township in 
Albany county, New York. It contains 3600 in 
habitants ; of these, 128 are slaves, and 563 arc 
qualified electors. Waterford, a neat, compact, 
thriving village of about 70 or 80 houses, two miles 
e n. e. of the Cohoez, and nine miles , of Albany, 



HAL 

is situate at the forks or junction of the river Hud 
son with the Mohawk in this township.] 

HALF1ELD, a settlement of the province and 
co ony of Massachusetts; situate on the shore of 
the river Connecticut. 

[HALIFAX, a county in the e. part of the 
British province of Nova Scotia. It contains 
Halifax, the capital, the townships of London 
derry, Truro, Onslow, Colchester, Lawrence, 
Southampton, Canso, and Tinmouth. The in 
habitants are chiefly Irish, Scotch and New Eng- 
landers. It has numerous bays and rivers ; the 
chief of the latter are Shabbenacadie, which is a 
boatable river, the Petitcodiac, Mernramcook, &amp;c. 
See NOVA SCOTIA.] 

[HALIFAX, the capital of the province of Nova 
Scotia, in the county of its name, was settled by a 
number of British subjects in 1749. It is situated 
on a spacious and commodious bay or harbour, 
called Chebucto, of a bold and easy entrance, 
where a thousand of the largest ships might ride 
with great convenience and safety. The town is 
built on the w. side of the harbour, on the declivity 
of a commanding hill, whose summit is 236 feet 
perpendicular from the level of the sea. The 
town is laid out into oblong squares ; the streets 
parallel and at right angles. The town and 
suburbs are about two miles in length ; and the ge 
neral width a quarter of a mile. It contained in 
1793 about 4000 inhabitants and 700 houses. At 
the n. extremity of the town, is the king s naval 
yard, completely built, and supplied with stores 
of every kind for the royal navy. The harbour of 
Halifax is reckoned inferior to no place in British 
America for the seat of government, being open 
and accessible at all seasons of the year, when al 
most all other harbours in these provinces are locked 
up with ice ; also from its entrance, situation, and 
its proximity to the bay of Fundy, and principal 
interior settlements of the province. 

This city, tying on the s. coast of Nova Scotia, 
has communication with Pictou, 85 miles to the 
n. e. on the gulf of St. Lawrence, by a good cart- 
road, finished in 1792. It is 12 miles n. of cape 
Sambro, which forms in part the entrance of the 
bay ; 25 s. e. of Windsor, 40 s. s. w. of Truro, 84 
&amp;lt;?. of Annapolis on the bay of Fundy, and 157 s. e. 
of St. Ann, in New Brunswick, measuring in a 
straight line. Lat. 44 40 n. Long. 63 30 w.] 
[HALIFAX, a fort in the town of Winslow, in 
Lincoln county, Maine, erected by order of Go 
vernor Shirley, in 1754. It stands on the point of 
land formed by the confluence of the Sebastacook 
with the Kennebeck, 24 miles below Sandy river.] 
[HALIFAX, a township in Windham county, 

5 



HAL 

Vermont, 23 miles e. by s. of Bennington, lias Marl- 
borough on the n. and the Massachusetts line s. It 
contains 1309 inhabitants.] 

[HALIFAX, a township in Plymouth county, 
Massachusetts ; situated 23 miles s. e. of Boston. 
It was incorporated in 1734, and contains 6b4 in 
habitants.] 

[HALIFAX, a village or settlement on the e. side 
of Susquchannuh river in Dauphin county, Penn 
sylvania, 13 miles n. of Harrisburg.] 

[HALIFAX, one of the middle districts of N. 
Carolina, bounded n. by the state of Virginia, e. 
by Edenton district, w. by Hillsborough, and s. by 
Newbern. It is divided into seven counties, viz. 
Northampton, Halifax, Martin, Edgcomb, War 
ren, Franklin, and Nash, which contain 64,630 in 
habitants, including 25,402 slaves. Besides smaller 
streams, the Roanoke passes through this district 
in a s. e. course, and the Pamplico has its source 
in it. Chief town, Halifax.] 

[HALIFAX, a county of the above district, 
bounded n. by Northampton, s. by Edgcomb, e. 
by Bertie, and is. by Warren. It contains 7459jn- 
habitants, and 6506 slaves. Chief town, Halifax.] 

[HALIFAX, the chief town of the above county, 
and of the district of its name in N. Carolina, is a 
post-town, pleasantly situated on the w. bank of 
the Roanoke, about six miles below the falls, re 
gularly laid out, and besides dwelling houses, has 
a court-house and gaol. It is 24 miles n. of Tar- 
borough, 21 miles from Grenvil e court-house, 75 
n. e. of Fayetteville, 59 ,v. of Petersburg, Virginia, 
and 255 s. w. by s. of Philadelphia. Lat. 36 16 n. 
Long. 77 38 o&amp;gt;.] 

[HALIFAX, a county in Virginia, bordering on 
the state of N. Carolina. It is about 42 miles 
long and 39 broad, and contains 14,722 inhabi 
tants, including 5565 slaves.] 

HALL, a settlement of the island of Barbadoes, 
in the district of the parish of St. George. 

HALL, another settlement of this island, distinct 
from the former ; situate on the ,v. coast. 

[HALLAM, a township in York county, Penn 
sylvania.] 

HALLEBY, a settlement of Indians of S. 
Carolina ; situate at the source of the river Albania. 

[HALLOWELL, a flourishing post-town in 
the district of Maine, and the shire town of Lin 
coln county ; situated in lat. 44 16 n. at the head 
of the tide waters, on the w. side of Kenucbeck 
river. An academy is established here, with a con 
siderable fund in lands. The court-house here is 
12 miles .?. of Vassulborough, 20 n. n. w. of Wis- 
casset, 24 n. e. of New Gloucester, and 129 n. by 
e. of Boston. Hallowell hook lies on the same 



HAM 



side of the river, three miles below the town, and 
five n. of Pittston. The whole township contains 
1194 inhabitants.] 

HALPANALOYA, a settlement of the head 
settlement of Atitalaquia, and alcaldia mayor of Tc- 
petango, in Nueva Espaua. It contains 34 families 
of Indians. 

HAM, a settlement of the province and colony 
of Massachusetts in New England ; situate on the 
shore of the bay of Barnstable in Cape Cod. 

HAM, another settlement of this province and 
colony; the two being distinguished, the former 
by the E. and this by the W. 

[HAMBATO, a principal asiento or jurisdic 
tion in the province of Quito. It is situated hi 
lat. 1 14 s. Long. 78 36 w. and 63 miles s. 
of the city of Quito ; and has six small villages 
in its dependence. Its inhabitants are mostly 
employed in weaving stuffs, and in knitting. 
Its proper name is AMBATO, which see.] 

[HAMBDEN, or HARDEN, a township in New 
York state, bounded n. by land ceded to Massa 
chusetts, s. by the n. line of Pennsylvania, and e. 
by Sidney. Susquehannah river passes in a w. 
course through both towns. The centre of the 
town lies 13 miles w. by s. of the mouth of Che- 
nengo river.] 

HAMBRE. SeeFiLiPOLis. 

HAMBKE, a river of the province and govern 
ment of Mainas. It runs from w. to e. through 
the woods ; and near it towards the . dwell the 
barbarous Indian nations of the Mainas and Umu- 
ranns. It enters by the s. into the Chambirayacu. 

[HAMBURG, a small post-town of New Jer 
sey, 17 miles from Goshen in New Y ork, 12 from 
Newtown, and six from Sussex.] 

[HAMBURG, a handsome town in Burke s 
county, Pennsylvania, seated on the e. side of 
Schuylkill. Here are about 50 or 60 houses, a 
German, Lutheran, and Calvinist church, united. 
It is 14 miles n. by w. of Reading, and 52 n. n. w. 
of Philadelphia. Lat, 40 34 n. Long. 76 a&amp;gt;.] 

HAMDEN, a township in New Haven county, 
Connecticut, about eight miles w. of New H a ven city . 

[HAMDEN, a township of the district of Maine, 
in Hancock county, on the w. side of Penobscot 
river, opposite Orrington ; having about 50 fa 
milies in 1796.] 

[HAMILTON, a cape on the n. end of New 
foundland island.] 

[HAMILTON. There are three townships of this 
name in Pennsylvania ; one in each of the counties 
of York, Franklin, and Northampton.] 

[HAMILTON, a settlement iii Vermont, on the 
Canada line.} 



230 



HAM 



[HAMILTON, in Herkemer county, New York, 
a township 12 miles square, 24: s. of Old fort 
Schuyler, a level township of good land, fast 
settling. Oriske or Olhiske creek, a water of 
Mohawk, and Chemung, a water of Susquehan- 
jialr, vise in this township. In 1796, there were 
1202 inhabitants, of -whom 196 were electors.] 

[HAMILTON, a town or settlement lately laid out 
in Albany county, New York, in the extensive 
township of Water Vliet, formerly called the 
Glass Factory ; and has its present name in ho 
nour of that great patron of American manufac 
tures, the late secretary of the treasury of the 
United States of America. It lies 10 miles w. of 
Albany, two miles from the Schenectady road; 
and is one of the most decisive efforts of private 
enterprise in the manufacturing line, as yet ex 
hibited in the United States. The glass manufac 
tory is now so well established, and so happily 
situated for the supply of the . and w. parts of 
the states of New York, as well as Vermont and 
Canada, that it is to be expected the proprietors 
will be amply rewarded for their great and expen 
sive exertions. The glass is in good reputation. 
Here are two glass-houses, and various other build 
ings, curious hydraulic works to save manual la 
bour by the help of machinery. A copious stream 
runs through the heart of the settlement, which 
lies high ; and being surrounded by pine plains, 
the air is highly salubrious. The Great Schoharie 
road traverses the settlement. A spacious school- 
house, and a church of an octagon form, are soon 
to be erected. 

The enterprising proprietors of the glass and 
other works in this thriving settlement, were incor 
porated by the legislature of New York in the 
spring of 1797, by the name of " The Hamilton 
Manufacturing Society," which act has given a 
spring to the works here, and authorises a hope 
that American manufactures may not only be con 
ducive to the interests of the country, but also 
to that of the proprietors. 

In the neighbourhood of these glass works, a 
block was cut out of an ancient tree, not many 
years ago, containing evident marks of an axe or 
some edge tool, made 185 years ago, determined 
according to the usual and certain mode of ascer 
taining the age of trees. The block is preserved 
in Albany as a curiosity. Henry Hudson ascended 
the river which bears his name, as high as Albany, 
in tlic autumn of 1609, 187 years ago, and these 
rr.avks were probably made by some of his 
men.] 

[HAMILTON, on Chaleur Bay. See BONA- 

VENTtRE.] 



HAM 

[HAMILTON Ford lies near the mouth of Bul 
lock s creek in N. Carolina. This was the route 
pursued by Tarleton, after his defeat at Cowpens, 
in January 1781.] 

[HAMILTON, a district in the state of Tennessee ; 
situated on the waters of the Holston and Clinch ; 
bounded s. by Tennessee river, and separated 
from Mero district on the w. by an uninhabited 
country. It contains the counties of Knox, Jef 
ferson, Blount, Sevier, and Grainger.] 

[HAMILTON, a county of the N. VV. Territory, 
erected Jan. 2, 1790 ; " beginning on the bank of 
the Ohio river at the confluence of the Little Mi 
ami; and down the said Ohio river to the mouth 
of the Big Miami, and up said Miami to the Stand 
ing stone, forks, or branch of said river; and 
thence with aline to be drawn due e. to the Little 
Miami, and down said Little Miami river to the 
place of beginning."] 

[HAMILTON, Fort, stands on the e. side of the 
Great Miami, in the N. W. Territory; 25 miles 
s. effort St. Clair, and 25 n. of Cincinnati. It is 
a stockaded fort, capable of containing 200 men. 
The situation is as advantageous for defence as 
pleasing to the eye. It is built upon a narrow 
neck of land, commanding the Miami on the??, w. 
and a prairie and sheet of water on the n. e. about 
a mile wide, and 2f miles long. The soil near it 
is rich and fertile ; and forage may be got by re 
peated mowings of natural grass.] 

[HAMILTON, a port in the Bermuda islands.] 

HAMINA, a river of St. Domingo, It rises 
near the n. coast, runs n. n. w. and enters the large 
river laques or Santiago. 

[HAMMEL S Town, a town in Dauphine 
county, Pennsylvania, five miles from Susque- 
hannah river, and 85 from Philadelphia. It con 
tains a German church, and about 35 dwelling- 



houses.] 
HAiV 



See PRINCE 



[HAMPDEN SYDNEY College. 
En WAR i) County, Virginia.] 

HAMPSHIRE, NEWJ a province of New 
England, one of the four which form its govern 
ment, and the second in extent. It lies to the n. 
was formerly one of the estates of America, and of 
the royal government belonging to the crown of 
England ; and as such, its governor and other civil 
and military officers held their appointments under 
the king. It extends s. from Massachusetts to the 
limits of Quebec. Its n. limits were established 
by proclamation of 1774, and on the e. it lias the 
three counties of Massachusetts, Maine or York, 
and Lincoln, the which is farthest 5. and from 
which it i.s divided by the county of Cumberland. 
This province provided the arsenals of England 



H A M 



H A M 



231 



with trees for masts arid ship-timbers, and thus 
carried on a considerable trade, as also in fish and 
cattle, and other effects, which were embarked an 
nually in 200 vessels. Although it is not divided 
into counties like the other colonies, it is well 
peopled ; and, according to the last census, [pre 
vious &amp;lt;o 1790], contained 59,000 souls in the 100 
cities and settlements that follow. 

Kingston, Rochester, 

Windham, New Durham, 

Pel ham, Gilrnantown, 

.Nottingham,, Sambertown, 

D unstable, Canterbury, 

Hollis, London, 

Mason, Boseawen, 

New Ipswich, Perry, 

Rindge, Alexandria, 

Richmond, Salisbury, 

Hensdale, New Britain, 

Swansby, New Chester, 

Linsborough,. Plymouth, 

Wilton, Montenborough, 

Amherst, Cockermouth, 

Mrrrymack, Grafton, 

.Bedford, Claremont, 

Derryfield, Plainfield, 

Poplin, Lebanon, 

Kensington, Hanover, 

Rye, Dorchester, 

Durham, Rumney, 

Dover, Campion, 

Canain, Sandwich, 

Epsom, Tarn worth, 

Allenton, Eaton, 

Goffstown, Thornton,. 

Bow, Fair field, 

Wears, Pierrepont, 

New Boston, Ilaverhill, 

Frances Town, Landaf, 

Bearing, Warren, 

Limbrick, Lyman, 

Packcrsfield,. Lloyd Hills, 

Keene, Chiswick, 

Gilsome, Whitcfield, 

Westmoreland,. Breton Woods, 

Alstead, Dartmouth, 

Marlow, Lancaster, 

Hillsboroughy Northumberland, 

Bradford, New Stratford, 

Fisher jSeld, Cockburn Town, 

Almsbury, Colebroke Town, 

Hennaker, Stuart Town, 

Hopkintown, Millsfield, 

Concord, Errol, 

Barrington, Dummer,, 



Cambridge, Success, 

Paulsbourg, Durand, 

Mainsbourg, Shelbourn. 

The author from whom we have extracted those 
accounts of the English colonies makes tins pro 
vince much reduced, and to consist only of eight 
settlements. In this he was clearly much deceiv 
ed, as we shall exhibit in the accounts we give 
in the respective articles, the which are ex 
tracted from faithful documents. [See NEW 
HAMPSHIRE.] 

[HAMPSHIRE, an extensive, populous, and 
wealthy county in Massachusetts, made a shire in 
1662. It is in many parts mountainous and hilly, 
and extends across the state from n. to a. bounded 
n. by the states of New Hampshire and Vermont, 
s. by the state of Connecticut, e. by Worcester 
county, and zo. by Berkshire. It contains 60 
townships, 9181 houses, 9617 families, and 59,681 
inhabitants. Its principal towns lie on both sides 
of Connecticut river, which intersects it from 
n.tos. These are Springfield, W.Springfield, 
Northampton, Hadley, llatfield, Dcerfield, and 
Northfield. It is generally of a fertile soil, and 
produces the necessaries of life, and some of its 
luxuries in great plenty.] 

[HAMPSHIRE, a county in Virginia, bounded 
n. and n. w. by the Potowmack river, which di 
vides it from the state of Maryland. It is about 
60 miles long and 50 broad, and contains 7346 in 
habitants, including 454 slaves. It is well watered 
by Potowmack and its s. branch. Iron ore and 
coals have been discovered on the banks of this 
river. Chief town, Romney.] 

[HAMPSTEAD, a town in Rockingham 
county, New Hampshire, about 30 miles a&amp;gt;. of 
Portsmouth. It Avas incorporated in 1749, and 
contained, in 1775, 768 inhabitants; in 1790, 
724.1 

[HAMPSTEAD, a town on Long island, New 
York, nine miles c. of Jamaica, and 23 miles e. 
of Ne.v York city. In this town is an extensive 
and remarkable plain, called II ampstead Plain. 
See LONG Island.] 

[HAMPSTEAD, a village in Georgia, about four 
miles from Savannah, and about a mile from 
another village called Highgate. The inhabi 
tants arc gardeners, and supply the town with 
greens, pot-herbs, roots, &amp;c.J 

[HAMPTON, a township in Windham county, 
Connecticut, three miles //. c. of Windham, of 
which it was formerly a parish, but lately incor 
porated.] 

[HAMPTON, EAST, a township in Hampshire 
county, Massachusetts, containing 457 inhabitants, 



HAN 



and situated 105 miles w. of Boston. It was in 
corporated in 1785.] 

[HAMPTON, EAST, on thee. end of Long island, 
New York, a half- shire town of Suffolk county. 
It has 3260 inhabitants ; and in it is Clinton aca 
demy, which in 1795 had 92 students.] 

[HAMPTON, a township on the sea-coast of 
New Hampshire, on the e. side of Rockingham 
county, and called Winicumet by the Indians. 
It was settled under Massachusetts, and incorpo 
rated in 1638. In 1775, it contained 862 inhabi 
tants ; and in 1790, 853. It is 12 or 14 miles s. 
by a&amp;gt;. of Portsmouth, and eight s. e. of Exeter. 
In 1791, a canal was cut through the marshes in 
this town, which opens an inland navigation from 
Hampton through Salisbury into Merrimack river, 
for about eight miles ; loaded boats may pass 
through it with ease and safety.] 

[HAMPTON FALLS, a small town taken from 
the above town, lying on the road which leads 
from Exeter to Newburyport, six miles s. e. of 
the former, and eight w. of the latter. In 1775, it 
contained 645 ; and in 1790,541 inhabitants. It 
was incorporated in 1712.] 

[HAMPTON, a township in the n. part of Wash 
ington county, New York, having Skeensborough 
on the w. It has 463 inhabitants, of whom 107 
are electors.] 

[HAMPTON, the capital of Elizabeth county, in 
Virginia, also a port of entry and post-town ; 
situated at the head of a bay which runs up n. 
from the month of James river, called Hampton 
Road, five miles n. w. of point Comfort. It con 
tains about 30 houses, an Episcopal church, a 
court-house and gaol. The value of its exports 
of grain, lumber, staves, &amp;c. amounted to 41,997 
dollars in one year, ending September 30, 1794. 
This town was anciently called Keconghton by 
the Indians. It is 11 miles n. of Norfolk, 14 s. e. 
ofYorktown, 60 e. s. e. of Richmond, and 180 
w. by .&amp;lt;?. of Philadelphia.] 

H.YNCARAMA, a settlement and asiento of the 
mines of silver in the province and corregimiento 
of Condesuyos de Arcquipa in Peru ; annexed to 
the curacy of Andahua. 

[HANCOCK S Harbour, called by the Indians 
Clioquot, is situated about 20 leagues e. s. e. of 
Nootka, in lat. 48 30 n. Long. 125 26 o&amp;gt;. from 
Greenwich. The entrance of this harbour is 
about five miles in length, and has good anchor 
age ; about it are scattered a number of islands, 
and several sand-banks or shoals. It has also a 
number of fine coves. The land round the har 
bour is generally uneven, rocky, and mountainous; 
covered, however, with pine, fir, spruce, cedar, 



HAN 

hemlock, cypress, and other trees of a remarkable 
size. The climate here is much milder than in the 
same latitude on the e. side of the continent ; the 
frost in winter being seldom so severe as to prevent 
vegetation. An e. wind is considered here as a 
prognostic of a storm, and zo. winds bring fair 
weather. Deer, racoons, wolves, bears, squirrels, 
martins, land otters, beaver, and wild cats, are 
the animals which inhabit the forests. The am 
phibious animals are the common seal and the 
sea otter. The skin of the latter is very valuable. 
The inhabitants are said to be cannibals. This 
and other places of the same name have their ap 
pellation in honour of the late Governor Han 
cock of Massachusetts.] 

[HANCOCK, a river of Washington island, on 
the n. K&amp;gt;. coast of N. America, called Masheet 
by the Indians, discovered by Captain Crowell in 
1791. It empties into the sea from the n. end of 
the largest island. At its mouth it is nearly 2| 
nautical miles wide ; and a considerable size 10 
miles up. It lias at its mouth five fathoms water, 
gradually increasing in breadth ; and for 7| miles 
to Goose island, has not less than 10 fathoms. 
Captain Ingraham examined it about 12 miles ; 
but by the information of the natives, he judged 
that it communicates with Skittikiss bay, or near 
it, on the e. side of the islands. It is by far the 
most eligible for a new settlement of any place the 
captain had seen on the coast. The land is low, 
and apparently very fertile ; and the river abounds 
with salmon. Were a good house erected on some 
of the pleasant spots, it would have every appear 
ance of being long settled. Beautiful bushes and 
grass occupy the skirts of the woods. The mouth 
of the river is in lat.54 7 n. Long. 131 54 a).] 

[HANCOCK., a township in Addison county, 
Vermont.] 

[HANCOCK, a large maritime county of the 
district of Maine, bounded n. by Lower Canada, 
5. by the ocean, e. by Washington county, and 
w. by Lincoln county. It is 190 miles long from 
?i. to s. and nearly 60 broad. It contains 24 town 
ships and plantations ; of which Penobscot and 
Castine are the chief. The number of inhabitants 
is greatly increased .since 1790. At that time there 
were 9519 souls. It is remarkably well watered 
by Penobscot river and its branches, Union river, 
and other small streams. The n. part of the county 
sends its waters in one stream from numerous 
branches, in a n. c. course to St. John s river. On 
the sea-coast arc many harbours and inlets, hid by 
a multitude of fertile*isles ; the largest of these, and 
in a s. w. direction from Golds borough, are 
Mount Desert, Swan isles, Viual haven, Haut isle, 



H A N 

Deer, and Islesborough ; all situated in Penobscot 
bay. Great part of the country is yet unsettled. 
The towns along the sea-coast, and on the banks 
of Penobscot and Union rivers, are the most fertile 
and populous. Castine is the shire town. See 
MAINE and PENOBSCOT.] 

[HANCOCK, a township in Lincoln county, 
Maine, embosomed by the Kennebeck and Sebas- 
ticook rivers, bounded n. u . by Canaan, and seven 
miles n. of the confluence of the two rivers. It 
contains 278 inhabitants.] 

[HANCOCK, a township in Hillsborough county, 
New Hampshire ; situated between two w. branches 
of Contoocook river, 14 miles e. of Keene, and 
between GO and 70 w. by s. of Portsmouth. It 
\vas incorporated in 1779, and contains 634 inha 
bitants.] 

[HANCOCK, a long 1 , narrow, and mountainous 
township on the New York line, in Berkshire 
county, Massachusetts, having the towns of 
Lanesborough and Partridgefield on the n. and 
Pittsfield on the s. It was incorporate/! in 1776, 
Las 1211 inhabitants, and lies 20 miles n. by w. 
of Lenox, and 150 w. of Boston.] 

[HANCOCK, a small post-town of Maryland; 
situated in Washington county, on the??, bank of 
Potowmack river, between Conolowy and Little 
Conolowy creeks, about 25 miles s. e. of Bed 
ford in Pennsylvania, 34 n. e. of Old-town in 
Maryland, and 70 n. w. of Baltimore.] 

[HANCOCK, a new county in the upper district 
of Georgia.] 

HANCOHUALLUAS, an ancient nation of 
Indians, who inhabited the province of Charcas of 
Peru. It was subjected to the empire by the Inca 
Capac Yupanqui, and was confounded amongst 
the rest. 

HANGARO, a river of the province and go 
vernment of Honduras. 

[HANNAH BAY House, a factory of the Hud 
son s bay company, at the 5. end of James bay, 
in North America, and on the e. side of Harrica- 
naw river, 45 miles e. by s. of Moose fort, and 18 
below a house on the same river.] 

[HANNAH S Town, in Westmoreland county, 
Pennsylvania, 4 miles n. n. e. of Grcensburg, 54 
miles n. ro. of Badford, and 23 e. of Pittsburg.] 

[HANNIBAL, a military township in the 
state of New York, on lake Ontario, 10 miles s. 
by w. of fort Oswego.] 

[HANOVER, a bay in the sea of Honduras : 
situated on the e. side of thepeninsula of Yucatan, 
from which it receives the waters of the Rio 
Hondo. The tract of land between the river 
Monde and the Balize was ceded by the Spanish 

VOL. II. 



H A N 

king to the king of Great Britain, at the peace of 
1783, for the purpose of cutting and carrying 
away logwood. See BAHIA DE GHETUMAL.] 

[HANOVER, a township in Luzernc county, 
Pennsylvania. Also a township in Washington 
county. E. and W. Hanover are two townships 
in Dauphine county in the same state.] 

[HANOVER, or M A BLISTER S Town, apost-town 
in York county, Pennsylvania ; situated between 
Cadorus creek and a branch of Little Conewago, 
which flows into the Susquehannah. It contains 
nearly 300 dwelling-houses, and a German and Lu 
theran church. It is five miles n. of the Maryland 
line, 14 miles s. w. of York, and 84 w. by s. of 
Philadelphia.] 

[HANOVER, a township in Plymouth county, 
Massachusetts, 25 miles s. e. from Boston ; was in 
corporated in 1727, and contains 1083 inhabitants.] 
[HANOVER, a post-town of New Hampshire; 
situated on the e. side of Connecticut river in Graf- 
ton county. Dartmouth college, in this town, is 
situated on a beautiful plain, about half a mile 
from the river, in lat. 43 44 n. and long. 72" 14 w. 
from Greenwich. It derives its name from Wil 
liam Earl of Dartmouth, one of its principal be 
nefactors, and was founded in the year 1769 by 
the late Dr. Eleazer Wlieelock. The funds of 
the college consist chiefly of lands, amounting to 
about 80,000 acres, which are increasing in value 
in proportion to the growth of the. country ; 1200 
acres lie contiguous to the college, and are capable 
of the best improvement ; 12,000 lie in Vermont. 
A tract of eight miles square was granted by the 
assembly of New Hampshire in 1789. The re 
venue of the college, arising from the lands, in 
1793, amounted annually to 140/. By contracts 
then made they would amount, in four years after, 
to 450/. and in 12 years to 650/. The income from 
tuition is about 600/. per annum. The number of 
under-grad nates is, on an average, from 150 to 
180. A grammar-school of about 50 or 60 
scholars is annexed to the college. The students 
are under the immediate government and instruc 
tion of a president, who is also professor of his 
tory, a professor of mathematics and natural phi 
losophy, a professor of languages, and two tutors. 
The college is furnished with a handsome library 
and a plilosophical apparatus tolerably complete. 
A new college edifice of wood, 150 by 50 feet, and 
three stories high, was erected in J786, contain 
ing 36 rooms for students. Its situation is elevated, 
healthful, and pleasant, commanding an extensive 
prospect to the w. There are three other public 
buildings belonging to the college, and a hand 
some Congregational mccting-house has lately been 
H H 



erected, in which the commencement exercises 
are exhibited. It is 30 miles n. of Charlcslown, 
76 n. iff. by w. of Portsmouth, 100 7/. w. of Bos 
ton, and 254 n. e. by n. of Philadelphia.] 

[HANOVER, a township in Morris county, New 
Jersey. In a ridge of hills in this township are 
a number of wells, 40 miles from the sea in a 
straight line, which regularly ebb and flow about 
six feet twice in every 24 hours. It is about 12 
miles n. w. of Elizabeth town, and joins upon 
Morristown.] 

[HANOVUU, a county of Virginia, lying be 
tween Pamunky and Chickahominy rivers. Its 
length is about 48 miles, and its breadth 22 ; and 
contains 14,754 inhabitants, including 8223 
slaves. It abounds with lime-stone.] 

[HANOVER, a small post-town of Virginia, of 
the above county ; situated on the w. side of the 
Pamunky, in which is an academy. It is eight 
miles from Newcastle, IS/?, e. by e. of Richmond, 
and 73 s.s. a\ of "Washington city.] 

HANSON, a settlement of the island of Bar- 
badoes ; situate on the s. coast, near the city of 
Bridgetown. 

[HANTS, a county of Nova Scotia, beginning 
about 30 miles from Halifax, contains the town 
ships of Windsor, Falmouth, and Newport: se 
veral valuable tracts remain unsettled. The road 
from Halifax runs part of the way between Wind 
sor and Newport, and has settlements on it at 
small distances. The county is about 20 miles 
square, and is well watered. The rivers St. Croix, 
Kerietcoot, and Cocmigueri, empty into the Avon, 
and are all navigable except the last. The Caca- 
gnet and Cobeguet are navigable 40 miles for ves 
sels of 60 tons.] 

[HAPAEE, four small islands among the 
Friendly isles, in the S. Sea.] 

[HARBOUR Island. See ELEUTHERA.] 

If AU BOLT u, OLD, in the island of Jamaica. 

HARBIIT, a settlement of the island of Bar- 
badoes ; situate on the s. coast. 

[HARDIN, a new county in the state of Ken 
tucky, bounded n. e. by Washington and Lin 
coln, n. w. and zo. by Nelson and Greene, and 
s. e. by Logan counties.] 

HARDING, a settlement of the island of Bar- 
badoes ; situate in the district of the parish of St. 
George. 

HARDWARE, a small river of Virginia, in the 
county of Albermarle. It runs s. e. and enters the 
river St. James. 

[HARD WICK, a township in Caledonia county 
in Vermont.] 

K, a township in Worcester county. 



H A R 

Massachusetts, 25 miles n. te. of Worcester, and 
56 s. a?, of Boston. It is separated from New 
Braintree and Ware by Ware river. There are 
within this town 245 houses, 1725 inhabitants, five 
corn and four saw mills, and two clothiers works.] 

[HAROWICK, a township in Sussex county, 
New Jersey, nearly 10 miles s. w. of Newton.] 

[HARDWICK, a small town of Georgia, at the 
mouth of Ogeechee river, and about 18 miles .v. by 
w. of Savannah. It has lately been made a port of 
entry.] 

[HARDY, a county of Virginia, bounded;?, by 
Hampshire. It is about 60 miles long, and 40 hi 
breadth, and contains 7336 inhabitants, including 
369 slaves. Chief town, Moorfield.] 

[HARDYSTON, a township in Sussex county, 
New Jersey, containing 2393 inhabitants, includ 
ing 26 slaves.] 

[HARE Bay, a large buy on the e. coast of 
Newfoundland.] 

[HARE Indians inhabit near M Kenzie s river, iu 
the n. w. part of N. America.] 

HAKE, an island of the river St. Lawrence, in 
New France, to the a\ of Rose island. 

[HARFORD County, in Maryland, is bounded 
n. by York county in Pennsylvania, e. by Susque- 
hannah river and Chesapeak bay. The chief 
waters within the county are Bush river and Deer 
creek; on which arc 16 mills of different kinds. 
On the former and its branches are the towns of 
Harford, Abington, Coopstown, and Belle Air. 
The other towns are Havre de Gras at the mouth 
of Susquehannah, and Joppa below the forks of 
Gunpowder. It contains 14,976 inhabitants, in 
cluding 3417 slaves. Chief town, Belle Air.] 

[HARFORD, or BUSH Town, in Harford county, 
Maryland, lies at the head of the tide waters of 
Bush river, between Binam s and James s runs ; 
the former separating it from Abington. It has 
few houses, and is failing to decay since the courts 
of justice have been removed to Belle Air. It is 
nine milos s.e. of Belle Air, and 20 n. e. by e. of 
Baltimore.] 

[HARIIAM S Station is a fort in Virginia; 
situate on the e. side of the w. branch of Big Sandy 
river, which river separates Virginia from Ken 
tucky. It is 15 miles .&amp;lt;?. of Barclutha.] 

HAR1HAMBIC, or TIETG, a large river of the 
kingdom of Brazil, in the province and captains/tip 
of San Vicente. It rises in the mountains which 
are to the w. of the city of San Pablo, and col 
lecting the waters of various other rivers to the 
n. w. enters the Parana before this runs into the 
Parapamene. 

[HARLEM, a township in Lincoln county. 



H A R 

Maine, incorporated in 1796. It was formerly 
called Jones s Plantation.] 

[HARLEM or EAST River, a river which con 
nects Long Island sound with North or Hudson 
river, and forms York island.] 

[HAULEM, a division of New York county, in 
the n. part of York island, which contains 803 in 
habitants, including 189 slaves. The village of 
its name stands nine miles n. of New York city, 
and four s. v). of W. Chester. It is opposite to 
the 10. end of Hell-gate.] 

HARLEY, a settlement of the county of Ulster, 
in the province and colony of New \ork. 

[HARMAtt, a well constructed fort in the N.W. 
Territory; situated at the mouth of the Muskin- 
gum. It has five bastions, and three cannon 
mounted, and is garrisoned by four companies. 
It is conveniently situated to reinforce any of the 
posts up or down the river Ohio. The place is 
remarkably healthy.] 

[HARMONY, a village in Liizerne county, 
Pennsylvania, close on the line of New York, on 
the e. side of the c. branch of Susquehannah. Be 
tween this and Stockport on Delaware river, dis 
tant 18 miles e. s. c. there is a portage. It is about 
125 miles n. by w. of Philadelphia, and 110 n. w. 
of New York. Lat. 41 58 w.] 

[HARPATII,asmaH boatable river in Tennessee, 
which, after a . n. z&amp;. course of about SO miles, 
falls into Cumberland river, 17 miles n. w. of 
Nashville.] 

[HARPERSFIELD, a township in Otsego 
county, in New York, bounded s. w. by Unadilla 
township, and 28 miles s. e. of Cooperstown ; 155 
of its inhabitants are electors. Through this town 
runs the great post-road from Hudson to Williams- 
burgh, 45 miles zo. of Hudson city.] 

[HARPLE, a township in Delaware county, 
Pennsylvania.] 

[HARPS WELL, a township in Cumberland 
county, district of Maine, incorporated in 1758, 
and contains 1071 inhabitants. It is bounded e. 
by Georgetown ; from which it is separated by a 
navigable river. The people here are opening a 
communication by a canal between the waters of 
Kennebeck river and those of Casco bay, through 
the arm of the sea called Stevcns s river. The 
point called Merryconeag, projecting itself into the 
bay, together with the island Sebascodeagan, and 
several other small islands, are incorporated, and 
form this township. The waters round this island 
extend to within two miles of the waters of the 
Kennebeck, and thus form what is called Small 
Point.] 



235 



[HARRINGTON, a township in Bergen 
county, New Jersey.] 

[HARRINGTON, a thriving town in Lincoln 
county, district of Maine, ;it the head of the tide 
waters on the Kennebeck river, three miles n. of 
Hallowell, of which, till its incorporation in 1797, 
it was a part, and known by the name of Fort 
Western. Vessels of 100 tons ascend the river to 
this town. The judicial courts for the county are 
held alternately in this town, and at Pownalborough. 
There is here a court-house and gaol. A bridge 
is about to be erected upon the Kennebeck, oppo 
site Old fort Western. Several merchants and 
traders are settled here, and carry on a brisk com 
merce with the back country. The to .vnship con 
tains 36,000 acres of land, and about 1000 inha 
bitants. Lat. 4-l25 w.J 

HARRINGTON, a fort of the English, in the pro 
vince of Sagatlahock ; situate on the coast, at the 
point of Penragucd. 

HARRIS, a settlement of the island of Barba- 
does, in the district and parish of St. George. 

[HARRISIJURG, a post-town, and the capital 
of i)au plane county, Pennsylvania, is situated on 
the n. e. bank of Susquehannah river. It is laid 
out regularly, and contains about 300 houses ; of 
which several are neat and convenient; some of 
brick and others of stone. In 1789, it contained 
130 houses, a stone gaol, and a German church* 
At that period it had been settled about three years. 
It is 82 miles w. n. ?c\ of Philadelphia, 45 to. s. w\ 
of Reading, and J4 e. n. c. of Carlisle. Lat. 40 
Jb v .] 

HARRISKINTON, a settlement of Indian?, 
of the province and colony of Virginia ; situate on 
the shore of the river Sewta. 

HARRISO, a settlement of the island of Barba- 
does, in the district of the parish of San Felipe. 

[HARRISON, a township in W. Chester 
county, New York, containing 1004 inhabitants ; 
of whom 115 are electors, and 54 slaves.] 

[HARRISON, a county in the w. part of Virginia, 
bounded n. by Ohio county, n. e. by Monongalia, 
s. by Grecnbriar, arid s. w. by Kcnhawa. Its 
length is about 11^0 miles, its breadth 80 ; and the 
number of inhabitants 2080, including 67 slaves. 
Chief town, Clarksburg.] 

[HARRISON, a new county in the n. c. part of 
the state of Kentucky 9 n. of Bourbon.] 

[HARROiJSL&amp;gt;URG,orIiARRODSTo\VN,apost- 
town in Mercer county, Kentucky, at the head of 
Salt river, which contains about 20 .houses, and is 
eight miles n. w. of Danville, and 19 s. of Frank 
fort.] 

H H 2 



236 



H A R 



[HARTFORD, a township in Windsor county, 
Vermont, on Connecticut river, opposite the town 
of Lebanon, in New Hampshire. It contains 988 
inhabitants.] 

[HARTFORD, a township on the e. bank of Ge- 
nessec river, in New York state, 32 miles w. of 
Geneva, and 62 s. e. by e. of fort Niagara.] 

[HARTFORD, a fertile and populous, though 
hilly, county in Connecticut ; bounded n. by the 
state of Massachusetts, s. by part of Middlesex 
and New Haven counties, e. by Tolland, and w. 
by Litchfield county. It is about 34 miles from 
n. to s. and its greatest breadth from e. to w. is 30 
miles. It is divided into 15 townships, and con 
tains 28,029 inhabitants, including 263 slaves. 
Chief town, Hartford city ] 

[HARTFOIU&amp;gt; City, the capital of Connecticut, 
lies on the a&amp;gt;. bank of Connecticut river, in the 
county and township of its own name, 38 miles 
n. u\ from the mouth of the river, at Saybrook bar, 
in Long Island sound ; and thus far the tide flows. 
The township is six miles square ; bounded n. by 
Windsor, n.e. by E. Windsor, w. by Farmington, 
e. by E. Hartford, s. e. by Glastcnbury, and s. by 
Wethersfield. The town is divided by a small 
stream, called Little river, with high romantic 
banks, over which is a bridge connecting the two 
divisions of the town. The city is regularly laid 
out, the streets intersecting each other at right 
angles. Its buildings are an elegant state-house, 
lately built, two churches for Congregationalists, 
one for Episcopalians, and between 400 and 500 
dwelling-houses, a number of which are hand 
somely built with brick. The inhabitants amount 
to upwards of 4000. A bank was incorporated in 
1792, with 100,000 dollars capital, number of 
shares 250. The corporation have the power to 
extend their capital to 500,000 dollars. A woollen 
manufactory was established here and encouraged 
by the state, but has not succeeded. The town is 
advantageously situated for trade, has a fine back 
country, enters largely into the manufacturing 
business, and is a rich, flourishing, commercial 
town. 

This town was first settled in the year 1636, by 
Mr. Ilaynes and Mr. Hooker, who, with their ad 
herents, removed from Massachusetts. The Dutch 
had then a trading house at the confluence of Mill 
and Connecticut rivers. They soon relinquished 
the settlement, and their lands were confiscated by 
a commibsioa from the commonwealth of England 
in 1653. A point of land, which formed part of 
their possessions, is still called Dutch Point. It is 
35 miles n. e. by n. of New Haven, 37 n. w. of 



HAT 

New London, 76 s.to. of Boston, 91 n.e. of New 
York, and 161 n.e. of Philadelphia. Lat. 41* 
40 n. Long. 72 36 w.~] 

[HART LAND, a township of Connecticut, the 
n. easternmost in Litchfield county.] 

[HART LAND, a township in Windsor county, 
Vermont ; situated on the w. bank of Connecticut 
river, 11 miles below the Fifteen- rnile falls.] 

HARTVVEL Town, a city of the province 
and colony of Maryland. 

[HARVARD, a township in the e. part of 
Worcester county, Massachusetts, 23 miles n.e. 
of Worcester, and 35 n. e. of Boston. It was in 
corporated in 1732 by this name, in honour of the 
founder of Harvard university in Cambridge. It 
has 1400 inhabitants.] 

[HARVARD University. See CAMBRIDGE.] 

[HARWICH, a township on cape Cod, in 
Barnstable county, Massachusetts, lying between 
Yarmouth and Chatham, about 88 miles s. e. of 
Boston, containing 2392 inhabitants. It extends 
quite across the cape, which is here about six 
miles over. Their marine business lies chiefly in 
the fishery. The remains of the Indians of this 
township are only six or seven souls ; they live at 
Potanumaquut.] 

[HARWICH, a township in Rutland county, 
Vermont; containing 165 inhabitants.] 

[HARWINGTON, a post-town of Connecti 
cut, in Litchfield county, seven miles c. of Litch 
field, and 20 w. of Hartford.] 

HASARI, a river of the province and govern 
ment of Quijos and Macas in the kingdom of 
Quito, and of the district of the second. It runs 
nearly from n. to s. near the city of Bridgetown. 

[HATBOROUGH, a small town in Montgo 
mery county, Pennsylvania; situated on the n.e. 
side of Pannepack creek, which runs into Delaware 
river about five miles above Frankfort. It con 
tains about 20 houses.] 

[HATCH A CONES. See PEARL River.] 

HATCHES, a river of the island of Burbudoes, 
in the district of the parish of San Juan. It runs 
e. and enters the sea on the e. coast, between the 
point Broken and the rock called Conger. 

[HATCHI. See PEARL River.] 

[HATCH Y, a navigable river in the state of 
Tennessee, runs w. into the Mississippi, about 19 
miles n. of Wolf river, and is about 80 yards wide 
seven miles from its mouth.] 

HATERAS, an island of the N. sea, near the 
coast )f S.Carolina; the which, with the conti 
nent, forms the straits of Pampticoe. 

[HATFIELD, a very pleasant town in Ilarap- 



H A T 

shire county, Massachusetts ; situated on the is. 
bank of a bend of Connecticut river, where it is 80 
rods wide, five miles n. of Northampton, and 75 
w. of Boston. It lies chiefly on one street, and 
contains 103 houses, and 703 inhabitants. Here 
are two ferries on Connecticut river ; the one to 
Hadley, the other to Amherst. North of the ferry 
to Amherst, the river meets with a bed of rocks, 
which lessens its breadth 20 or 30 rods ; no full, 
but a large eddy at high water.] 

[HATTERAS is the most remarkable and dan 
gerous cape on the coast of N. America. This 
point extends far into the ocean, from the coast of 
N.Carolina, in lat. 35 9 n. and long. 75 54 w. 
The water is very shallow at a great distance from 
the cape, which is remarkable for sudden squalls 
of wind, and for the most severe storms of thunder, 
lightning, and rain, which happen almost every 
day, during one half the year. At the time of 
Sir Walter Raleigh s approaching this coast, the 
shoals in the vicinity of Hatteras were found so 
dangerous, so extensive, and so shallow, many of 
them covered with not more than five or six feet 
water, that no vessels in that latitude ventured 
within seven leagues of the land. 

At present the out-shoals, which lie about 14 
miles s.zo. of the cape, are but of five or six acres 
extent; and where they are really dangerous to ves 
sels of moderate draught, not above half that ex 
tent. On the shoalest part of these is about 10 
feet at low water ; and here, at times, the ocean 
breaks in a tremendous manner, spouting, as it 
were, to the clouds, from the violent agitation of 
the Gulf stream, which touches the e. edge of the 
banks, from which the declivity is sudden, that is 
to say, from 10 fathoms to no soundings. On the 
spot above-mentioned, which is firm sand, it has 
been the lot of many a good vessel to strike, in a 
gale of wind, and go to pieces. In moderate wea 
ther, however, these shoals may be passed over, if 
necessary, at full tide, without much danger, by 
vessels not drawing more than eight, nine, or 10 
feet water. From this bank, formerly of vast ex 
tent, and called the Full Moon shoal, a ridge runs 
the whole distance to the cape, about a n. w. 
course; is about half a mile wide, and at low water 
has generally 10, 11, and 12 feet water. There 
are gaps at equal intervals, affording channels of 
about 15 or 16 feet water. The most noted of 
these is about a mile and a half from the land, arid 
is at least two miles and a half wide, and might at 
full sea be safely passed by the largest ships ; but 
is rarely used except by coasting vessels. It may 
be easily known by a range of breakers always seen 
on the w. side, and a breaker head or two on the 



237 



c. side ; which, however, are not so constant, 
only appearing- when the sea is considerably 
agitated. A little n. of the cape is good anchor 
ing in four or five fathoms, and with the wind to 
the w. a boat may land in safety, and even bring 
off casks of fresh water, plenty of which is to be 
found every where on the beach, by digging a 
footer two, and putting a barrel into the sand.] 

[HATTON S Ford, on Tugeio river, a village 
10 miles from Pendleton court-house, in S. Caro 
lina, and 13 from Franklin court-house, in 
Georgia.] 

HAUT, a settlement of Indians, of the province 
and country of the Iroquees, where the English 
have a fort and establishment for their commerce, 
on the confines of Pennsylvania, on the shore of 
the river Mohawks. 

[HAUT Isle is the southernmost of the large 
islands in Penobscot bay, in Lincoln county, 
district of Maine.] 

HAVANA, a city of the island of Cuba, one of 
the largest of the Antilles, founded by Diego Ve 
lazquez, who conquered the island in 1511. It 
was at first but small, and was called Puerto de 
Carenas ; it afterwards changed its situation, and 
by its increase and riches became one of the most 
considerable cities of America, taking the name of 
San Christoval de la Havana. In 1536, it was 
sacked by a French pirate, and was then so small 
as to ransom itself from being burnt, for the trifling 
sum of 700 dollars. A short time afterwards it was 
taken by the English, and again by the French, 
but neither was its importance yet known in Spain, 
nor was there as yet sufficient care taken to fortify 
it until the reign of Philip II. and indeed, in 1666, 
it was in no state of defence. This city is situate 
on the w. side of the port, in a pleasant and de 
lightful plain, which is washed in front by the 
sea, and on its other sides by the river Lagida. 
The buildings are handsome but not lofty ; they 
are built of stone, are of good construction, and 
prettily ornamented : the churches arc rich and 
magnificent. Here are convents of the religious 
orders of St. Francis, St. Augustin ; an hospital of 
San Juan de Dios, of La Merced, of St. Domingo, 
in which is founded an university, and the mo 
nasteries of the nuns of Santa Clara and Santa 
Catalina. Although the capital of the island is 
Cuba, yet this is the residence of the governor, 
captain-general, as well as of the bishop, whose 
cathedral is also here. The port is not only the 
best in all America, but in all the world : it is 
capable of containing 1000 ships at anchor, in 
perfect security ; its entrance is through a channel 
of about half a mile long and very narrow, and 



238 



H A V 



very difficult for an enemy to enter, from its being 
well defended : at the end of the port is another 
small bay, having a small island in its e. part. At 
the entrance of the channel are various castles well 
furnished with artillery, the principal of which is 
that called El Morro, formerly known by the 
name of Los Tres Reyes, and built by the cele 
brated engineer Juan Baptista Autoncli, in 1584 : 
this is on the e. side of the entrance, and has a 
battery or low platform, on a level with the water, 
containing 12 cannons, some of which are 36 
pounders, called the Twelve Apostles. On the side 
of the city, and opposite the aforesaid castle, is the 
fort of San Salvador de la Punta, built at the same 
time as the former ; and within the town, at the 
extremity of the channel which looks to the port, 
is the castle of La Fuerza, the residence of the 
governor, the same being the work of the Alcayde 
Mateo de Aceytuno, in 1544. Besides these there 
are the forts of Coximan and Chorrera, to defend 
the Plaza, which were built in 1646; also the walls 
and bastions of La- Plaza, built in 1633 ; and lastly, 
in 1763, two large castles, called San Carlos and 
Santo Domingo de A tares, which were begun by 
the governor Count de Ricla, in the spot called 
La Cabana, at the back of the mountain of this 
name, and commanding the Plaza. What adds 
still further to the excellence of this port is its 
capital dock, where ships arc constantly built for 
the royal armada, as are also merchant-vessels, 
and of the very best sorts of wood; having for 
this business a marine department, the com 
mandant of which is a general officer, who com 
mands the squadrons commonly known here by 
the name of Armada de Barlovento, the same be 
ing for the security of these coasts, and for the 
purpose of transporting the allowances from Vera 
Cruz to this and the other islands. The commerce 
of this port, which is the most considerable of 
America, is to be divided generally into that which 
is done by the island of Cuba, and of which we 
have treated in this article, and into that which 
is peculiar to it ; for it is the general resort of all 
ihe vessels from the ports of Tierra Firme and 
Nucva Espana, ihe same being accustomed to 
touch here in their ,way to Europe. Indeed it 
seldom happens that there are less than 40 or 50 
vessels lying here at a time ; and during their stay, 
here is, as it were, a continual fair, which was 
still greater when the fleets used to sail to Nueva 
Espana and Tierra Firme ; the which used to join 
company in order to proceed on their voyage in 
the month of September, this being 1 the most 
favourable season in which to make the mouth of 
the canal of Bahama. The city may be about two 



H A V 

miles in circumference, and is of an hot tempera 
ture, but abounds in every thing necessary for the 
convenience of life. It is inhabited by many rich 
and noble families, and in its customs, policy, 
traffic, and establishments, it may vie with the best 
cities in Europe. It suffered much in 1762, by a 
siege made against it by the English, who attack 
ed it with a strong squadron under the command 
of Admiral Pocock, and a numerous army headed 
by the Duke of Albermarle; but it at last capitu 
lated after a glorious defence made by the Spa 
niards, under the command of the governor and 
brigadier Don Juan de Prado, assisted by the 
lieutenant-general Don Joseph Manso, Count of 
Superunda, who had been viceroy of Peru, and 
the brigadier Don Diego Tabares, governor of 
Cartagena, all of whom happened to be here on 
their way to Spain ; and thus, by this event, did 
the enemies find themselves masters of the town, 
in which there were great riches, not to mention 
a squadron of 12 ships of war. It was, however, 
afterwards restored to the Spaniards in the peace 
of Versailles. In 1703, there was lost upon the 
castle of La Punta, the fine ship of war called El 
Bueno, of the French squadron of Mr. Ducase; 
in 1721, the S. Juan, commanded by the captain 
Don Francisco Maldonado; and in J740, the ship 
Invincible, of the squadron of Don Rodrigo de 
Torres, afterwards Marquis of Matalaria : this 
latter vessel having come within the bay, and 
blowing up from having been stricken with light 
ning, when also great mischief was done to the 
city. Its population amounts to about 26,000 
souls. It is in hit. 23 8 30" n. Long. 82 16 
30" w. 

[HAVERFORD, a township in Delaware 
county, Pennsylvania.] 

[IIATERHILL, a post-town of New Hamp 
shire, and the capital of Grafton county : situated 
on the e. side of Connecticut river, in Lower 
Coos. It has between 40 and 50 compact houses, 
a well constructed court-house, and a Congrega 
tional church. This township was incorporated 
in 1763, and contains 552 inhabitants. In it is a 
bed of iron ore, which has yielded some profit to 
the proprietor, also a quarry of free-stone, fit for 
hearths and chimney-pieces. It has also a fulling- 
mill, an oil-mill, and many other excellent mill- 
seats. It is opposite to Newbury in Vermont, 23 
miles above Dartmouth college, 81 miles H. a?, of 
Portsmouth.] 

[HAVEiiHiLJj, a handsome post-town of Mas 
sachusetts, in Essex county ; situated on the ri. 
side of Merrimack river, across which is an elegant 
bridge, connecting this town with Bradford, 65Q 



HAW 

foot long and 34 Avide. It has three arches of 180 
tret each, supported by three handsome stone 
piers, 40 feet square ; also a draAV of 30 feet, over 
the channel of the river. Haverhill has a consi 
derable inland trade, lying about 9,7 miles n. of 
Boston, and 12 miles from Newburyport, at the 
mouth of the river, and about 24 s.w. of Ports 
mouth in New Hampshire. It lies chiefly upon 
two streets, the principal of Avhich runs parallel 
with the river. Vessels of 100 tons burthen can 
go up to it. Travellers are struck with the plea 
santness of the situation ; and a number of neat 
and Avell finished houses give it an air of elegance. 
Here are two churches, one for Congregationalists, 
and one for Baptists, three distilleries, one of 
which has lately undergone a laudable transmuta 
tion into a brewery. Some vessels are annually 
built here, and several are employed in the West 
India trade. A. manufactory of sail-cloth was 
begun here in 1789, and is said to be in a promis 
ing way. The trade of this place, however, is 
considerably less than before the revolution. The 
whole township contains 330 houses, and 2408 
inhabitants.] 

HAVERSON, a city of the province and colony 
of New York ; situate on the w. shore of the river 
Hudson, in which there is a good port. It is 35 
miles to the ;?. of New York. 

[HAVERSTRAW Bay, called by some HA- 
VEUSHAM, in Hudson s river, 35 miles above 
New York city, spreads s. of Stony point, and 
before the town of its own name ; is 10 miles long 
and about three wide.] 

[HAVERSTRAW, atownshipin Orange county, 
New York ; situated on the w. side of the above 
bny, 32 miles n. of New York city. It contains 
4826 inhabitants, of whom 98 are qualified electors, 
and 238 slaves.] 

HAVJCUI, SANTA ROSA DF, a settlement of 
the missions Avhicli are held by the 
order of San Francisco, in Nuevo Mexico. 

[HAVRE DE GUACE, or GRAS, a post-town 
and port of entry in Harford county, Maryland, 
on the za\ side of Susquehannah river, at its mouth 
in Chosapeak bay. It contains about 40 houses, 
250 inhabitants, and is the port of entry for all the 
shores of Chesapeak bay above Turkey point. It 
is 30 miles n. e. of Baltimore, and 54 is. s. w. of 
Philadelphia. Lat. 39 35 n.] 

HAVRUCUCHJS, a settlement of the province 
and corrcgimienio of Guarochiri in Peru; annex 
ed to the curacy of Yauli. 

[HAW, a water of Cape Fear, which unites 
Avith Deep river. It may be rendered navigable 
for 50 miles. Sec SAXAPAHAW River.] 



HAY 



239 



religious 



[HA WKE, a township in Rockingliam county, 
New Hampshire, distant 27 miles from Ports 
mouth, was incorporated in 1760, and contained 
in 1775, 504, and in 1790, 402 inhabitants.] 

[HAWKINS Harbour is art arm of Igornachoi.v 
bay, Newfoundland island, j 

[HAWKINS, a county in Washington dis 
trict, in Tennessee, having 6970 inhabitants, in 
clusive of 807 slaves. Chief town, Rogersville. j 
[HAAVKINS Court-house, in Tennessee, is 25 
miles from Free-stone gap, 72 from Abingdon, 
and 178 from Danville in Kentucky.] 

[HAWK S Bay, on the coast of W. Florida, 
w. of the moutli of Mobile bay, is between Pelican 
and Dauphin islands. There is a broad channel 
of 11 and 12 feet water, afterwards safe anchorage 
in four fathoms, good holding ground, and shel 
tered from most winds ; on which account it is 
very convenient for small vessels.] 

[HAWLEY, a township in Hampshire coun 
ty, Massachusetts, 90 miles w. of Boston. Pre 
vious to its incorporation, in 1792, it Avas called 
Plantation No. 7, and had 539 inhabitants. It is 
composed of parts of several adjoining towns, and 
is about 20 miles n. K. of Northampton.] 

HAAVLEY, a settlement of the island of Bar- 
badoes ; situate on the s. coast, near the city of 
BridgetoAvn. 

HAY, a river of the province and government 
of Buenos Ayres, which runs s. s. w. and enters 
the Gil. 

HAYABAMBA, a settlement of the province 
and corregimiento of Chachapoyas in Peru, 
founded in a beautiful and extensive valley of its 
name. 

IIAYAY, a river of the province and govern 
ment of Mainas in the kingdom of Quito. It rises 
to the s. of the lake Pachina, runs c. and enters 
the Manay just before this enters the Maranon. 

[HAYCOCKS, a small isle in Delaware river, 
about seven miles beloAv Easton in Northampton 
county, Pennsylvania.] 

HA YE, Island of, or Of the FATHERS. It is in 
the N. sea, near the n. e. coast of Martinique, and 
is but small. 

HAYES, Island of, in the country of S. Wales, 
formed by the rivers Nelson and Hayes, which, 
after running together for some time, separate into 
two arms ; that towards the n. taking the first 
name, and the other the second. Near their 
mouth, or entrance into the sea, is York fort, 
called by the French De Bourbon ; also to (lie arm, 
called, as AVC have just observed, by the Ei^glisli 
Hayes, the French give the name of Sainte Teresa. 
Inoneajul the other the stream is so gentle that 



240 



H E C 



vessels of large size might here carry goods 
in any quantity, since there is no tide to work 
against. 

HAYES, another river, of the island of Guada- 
lupe, which rises in the mountains on the s. e. 
part. It runs to this point, and enters the sea be 
tween the aiices or creeks of San Pedro, and the 
mountain of Gros Morne. 

HAYES, a settlement of the island of Barbadoes ; 
situate near the s. coast. 

[HAYNE S Fort, COLONEL, is situated in 
Nelson county, Kentucky, on the n. side of Green 
river, 25 miles w. of Craig s fort, and 53 from the 
Ohio.] 

[HEATH, a township in Hampshire county, 
Massachusetts, containing 379 inhabitants. It 
was incorporated in 1785, and is 125 miles n. w. 
of Boston, and about 18 miles n. n. w. of North 
ampton.] 

HEBERE, a settlement of Nova Scotia or 
Acadia ; situate on the shore of the river Cheben, 
between the coast and the Basin des Mines. 

[HEBRON, a town in Cumberland county, 
Maine, situated on the n. e. side of Little Andros- 
coggin, was incorporated in 1792. It is 35 miles 
n. by w. of Portland.] 

[HKBROX, a township in Washington county, 
New York, containing 1703 inhabitants, of whom 
4 14 are electors.] 

[HEBRON, a township in Tolland county, Con 
necticut, settled in 1704 from Northampton. 
Most of the lands were given by Joshua, sachem 
of the Mohegan tribe, in his last will and testa 
ment. It lies between Lebanon and Glastenbury, 
about 18 miles s. e. of Hartford, and 16 s. of Tol 
land.] 

[HEBRON, a Moravian settlement in Pennsyl 
vania, 16 miles from Litiz, which is 70 miles 
n. of Philadelphia. This settlement began in 
1757.J 

HECHIZERO, a river of the province and 
country of Xivaros in the kingdom of Quito. It 
runs from n. tos. and enters the Morona on the n. 
side, in lat. 3 23 s. 

HECHIZERO, a river of the province and go 
vernment of Quixos and Macas in the kingdom of 
Quito, and of the district of the second. It rises 
in the sierra which divides it from the government 
of Mainas, runs nearly due s. and enters the 
Morona. 

HECHO.TOA, a settlement of the province of 
Cinaloa in Nueva Espana ; situate on the shore of 
the river Mayo, between the settlements of Campo 
and Santa Cruz. 

[HECTOR, a military township in the state 



H E L 

of New York, on the e. side of Seneca lake y to 
wards the s. end, having Ovid on the n. and 
Newtown township on the s. and 29 miles 5. by 
w. of the ferry on Cauga lake.] 

HEDGE MAN, a small river of the province 
and colony of Virginia. It runs s. e. and enters 
the Thornton. 

HEE, a secure and convenient port of the 
island of Martinique, within the bay of the Cul de 
Sac Royal. 

[HEIDELBERG, a Moravian settlement in 
Pennsylvania, begun in 1743 ; situated 24 miles 
from Litiz, which is in Warwick township, Lan 
caster county.] 

[HEIDELBERG, a handsome town in Dauphine 
county, Pennsylvania, containing about 100 
houses and two German churches for Lutherans 
and Calvinists ; one of the churches is a hand 
some stone building. It is 33 miles e. by n. of 
Harrisburg, and 74 n. w. by w. of Philadelphia. 
There are two other townships of this name in the 
state, the one in York county, the other in that of 
Northampton.] 

[HEIGHT OF LAND, a range of mountains 
which extend from s. w. to the n. e. and separate 
the district of Maine from Lower Canada, giving 
rise to many rivers which fall into St. Lawrence 
river, and others which fall into the Atlantic ocean. 
The principal growth between the Height of Land 
and St. Francis river is beech, maple, birch, hem 
lock, and fir, very few white pines, and no oak of 
any sort. Some of the rivers have fine inter 
vales.] 

[HELENA Island, ST. on the coast of S. 
Carolina, with the continent on the n. forms St. 
Helena sound or entrance, and gives name to a 
parish in Beaufort district.] 

[HELENA Parish, ST. in Beaufort district, S. 
Carolina, consists of a cluster of islands, on the 
5. w. side of St. Helena island, one of the largest 
of which is Port Royal. Adjacent to Port Royal 
are St. Helena, Ladies, Paris, and Hunting islands. 
The Hunting islands are five or six in number, 
bordering on the ocean, so called from the number 
of deer and other game found upon them. All 
these islands, and some others of less note, belong 
to this parish. The produce of the islands is rice, 
indigo, cotton, corn, and sweet potatoes ; the culti 
vation of which, as well as in other parts of the 
state, is entirely carried on by slaves. Taxes paid 
by St. Helena parish, 1 144/. 13.?. 2d. Chief town, 
Beaufort, on Port Royal island.] 

[HELENA, ST. a town on the coast of Florida, 
built by the Spaniards, and burnt by Sir Francis 
Drake, in 1585.] 



HEN 

[HELL-GATE. This celebrated strait is near 
the w. end of Long Island sound, opposite to 
Harlem in York island, and about eight miles n. e. 
of New York city, and is remarkable for its whirl 
pools, which make a tremendous roaring at certain 
times of the tide : these whirlpools are occasioned 
by the narrowness and crookedness of the passage, 
and a bed of rocks which extend quite across it ; 
and not by the meeting of the tides from e. to w. 
as 1ms been conjectured, because they meet at 
Frog s point, several miles above. A skilful pilot 
may conduct a ship of any burden, with safety, 
through this strait, at high waterwith the tide, or 
at low water with a fair wind. There is a tradition 
among the Indians, that in some distant period, 
in former times, their ancestors could step from 
rock to rock, and cross this arm of the sea on foot 
to Hell-gate.] 

[HEMLOCK, a lake in New York state, 12 
miles long and one broad, in the Genessee coun- 

try.] 

[HEMPF1ELD, the name of two townships in 
Pennsylvania, the one in Lancaster county, the 
other in that of Westmoreland.] 

[HENDERSON S GRANT, a tract 12 miles 
square, on the peninsula formed by the junction 
of Green river with the Ohio, in the state of Ken 
tucky.] 

HENDRIE, a city of the province of Long 
island in New York. It is situate in Queen s 
county, and on the shore of the river Narrows, 
20 miles to the n. e. of Bedford, and seven to the 
n. of New York. 

[HENEAGUAS, or INAGUES, the two of the 
most 5. of the Bahama islands, the largest of 
which (called Great Heneagua) is of very consider 
able magnitude. They are separated from each 
other by a passage of about five miles wide, and 
the navigation near them is most dangerous. 
Little Heneagua is not at all inhabited ; it lies 
about 28 miles w.s.zo. from Pequeno island, which 
is the most w. of the Caycos islands, and about seven 
miles n. bye. from thew.e. pointoftheGreatHenea- 
gua. The latter island is 45 miles in length, and about 
19 wide at its greatest breadth : there are exten 
sive salt ponds upon it, but very few inhabitants, 
and the interior of it has scarcely ever been explored. 
The most w. extremity of it is called Middle or 
Devil s Point, and there is an anchorage to the s. of 
it, in Fisher s bay, (between Devil s point and the 
*. w. point), and also to the n. of it in Ocean 
Bight, towards the w. w. point : from this latter 
point a very dangerous reef runs to the e. for many 
leagues, about a mile from the shore.] 

HENLEY, a fort and establishment of the 
YOL. n. 



HEN 



241 



English, in New France or Canada ; situate on the 
shore of the river Peray, between lake Christinaux 
and Hudson s bay. 

HKNLEY, a cape in the province and colony 
of Virginia. 

[HENLEY House, a station of the Hudson s 
bay company, on the n. bank of Albany river, 
in New S. Wales, 150 miles s. w. of Albany fort, 
and llOw. w. by w. of Brunswick house. Lat. 
51 14 27" n. Long. 85 5 54" a&amp;gt;.] 

[HENNJKER, a township in Hillsborough 
county, New Hampshire, about 12 miles w. of 
Concord. In 1775, it contained 367; and in 
1790, 1 127 inhabitants.] 

[HENLOPEN, HINLOPEN, or JAMES Cape, 
forms the s. w. side of the entrance of Delaware 
bay, and cape May the n. e. side, J6 miles apart. 
Cape Henlopen lies in lat. 38 48 n. and in long. 
75 9 30" w. There is a light-house here, a few 
miles below the town of Lewis, of an octagon form, 
handsomely built of stone, 115 feet high, and its 
foundation is nearly as much above the level of 
the sea : the lantern is between seven and eight 
feet square, lighted with eight lamps, and may be 
seen in the night 10 leagues oft at sea ; its annual 
expence is about 650/. There is a strong iron net 
work, in order to prevent birds from breaking the 
glass at night ; yet so attractive is the light to the 
winged tribe, that shortly after its erection, 110 
birds of different kinds were found dead one morn 
ing ; and a duck, in particular, flew against it with 
such force, as to penetrate through both the wire 
and glass, and was found dead in the lantern: 
since the above accident, few similar ones have 
occurred, and the birds have become more wary. 

Vessels off the Delaware, upon displaying a 
jack at the fore topmast-head, will be immediately 
furnished with a pilot. None, however, are to be 
depended upon, unless they are furnished with 
branches, and with a certificate from the board of 
wardens of Philadelphia.] 

[11 ENRICO, a county of Virginia, about SO 
miles long, and seven broad, contains 12,000 in 
habitants, including 5819 slaves. It is surrounded 
by Hanover, Charles City, and Goochland coun 
ties, and James river. A number of coal mines 
are in the county, and pits have been opened by 
many of the proprietors, and worked to consider 
able profit. The coals in several of the pits are 
found nearly 200 feet above the level of the river, 
and three or four feet below the surface of the 
ground. It is supposed that 500,000 bushels 
might be raised from one of these in a year. Chief 
town, Richmond.] 

HENBICO, a cape of the s. coast of the above 
II 



242 



HER 



province, at the entrance of the bay of Chesapeak, 
in lat 36 57 . Long. 76 23 . 

[HENRIQUELLE, a remarkable sal t-pond, in 
the Spanish part of the island of St. Dorningo, 
about 22 leagues in circuit. It is inhabited by 
lizards and alligators, and land tortoises, all of a 
large size. The water is deep, clear, bitter, and 
salt, and has a disagreeable smell. Near the middle 
of this pond is an island about two leagues long, 
and a league wide, in which is a spring of fresh 
water, well stocked with cabritoes, and thence 
called Cabrito island. This pond is about 11 
leagues e. of Port au Prince.] 

[HENRY, a cape, then. e. extremity of Prin 
cess Ann county in Virginia, 14 miles s. by w. of 
cape Charles in Northampton county. These 
capes form the entrance of Chesapeak bay. Cape 
Henry lies in lat. 37 1 n. Long. 76 w".] 

[HENRY, a fort in Pennsylvania, eight miles 
n. by w. of Myer s town, at the head of Tulpe- 
hocken creek, 27 n. of Lancaster, and nearly 32 
*. e. of Sunbury.] 

[HENRY, a mountainous and hilly county of 
Virginia, bounded n. by Franklin, 5. and s. e. by 
Patrick, s. z. by Grison, and n. w. and w. by 
Montgomery. It is about 40 miles long, 15 broad, 
and contains 6928 inhabitants, including 1551 
slavesj 

[HENTIONITAN, an island in the n. e. part 
of lake Huron.] 

HERBAE, a river of the province and corre- 
gimiento of Canete in Peru. It enters the sea close 
to the river Topana. 

HERBES, a small river of the island of Gua- 
dalupe. It rises in the mountains, runs w. and 
enters the sea between that of Galion and that 
of Peres Jacobins, or the Fathers of Santo Do 
mingo. 

HEREMITENS Island, a small island of the 
N. sea; situate to the w. of the strait of Mairc, 
near Staten island. It was discovered in 1624 by 
Jacob Heremite Clerk, a Dutchman, who gave it 
his name : it is desert and of a very cold climate, 
but contains a very convenient bay. It is in lat. 
55 37 s. 

HERINA, a bay formed by the lakeofMara- 
caibo, in the Nuevo Reyno de Granada; dis 
covered by Pedro de Simpias in 1535, who took 
out of its territory quantities of gold. Many have 
since endeavoured, but in vain, to enter it, not 
being apprised of the route adopted by its dis 
coverer. 

[HERKEMER, a new county of New York, 
divided into 20 townships, viz. German Flats, 
Warren, Frankfort, and Litchfield, formed out 



HER 

of German Flats, in February 1796; Herkemer, 
Fairfield, and Norway, formed out of Fairfield, 
February 1796. Schuyler. The following were 
comprehended originally in Whitestown, viz. 
Paris, Sangerfield, Hamilton, Sherburn, Brook- 
field, Cazenovia, Westmoreland, Mexico, Rome, 
Steuben, and Floyd. By the state census of 1796, 
this county contains 25,573 inhabitants, of whom 
4161 are electors. It is bounded n. by part of 
Lower Canada and the river St. Lawrence, n. w. 
by the e. end of lake Ontario, and the river St. 
Lawrence, s. by Otsego county, e. by Clinton 
and part of Washington county.] 

[HERKEMEa Town, in the above county, is 
situated on the n. side of Mohawk river. The 
township includes the village called Litlle German 
Flats, and the celebrated plain called German 
Flats. The village contains a court-house, gaol, 
a Dutch church, and about 40 dwelling-houses, 
which last are very indifferent buildings. It is 
80 miles n. w. by w. of Albany, 16 s. e. of Old 
fort Schuyler, and 20 in a like direction from 
Whitestown. In the midst of the Flats is a shrub 
oak plain of 80 or 100 acres, barren and stony, 
of no use but for building lots. The township is 
named in honour of General Herkemer, who was 
mortally wounded in the late war. It contained 
in 1796, by the state census, 2073 inhabitants, of 
whom 338 were electors.] 

HERMANAS, THREE, or SISTERS, some shoals 
of the S. sea, which arc three rocks close upon the 
coast, in the bay of Panama, of the province of 
Tierra Firme. They lie between the point Chi- 
riqui, and the island and port Perico. 

HERMANAS, three small rivers, which run pa 
rallel, at a small distance from each other, in the 
province and government of Buenos Ayres, and 
which enter the river La Plata. 

HKRMANAS, SEVEN, a point of land which is 
called Of the Seven Sisters, or Siele Hermanas, 
on the coast of the province and corregimiento of. 
Quillota and kingdom of Chile, between the creek 
of Rihero and the port Valparaiso. 

HERMANOS, Los SIETE, some small islands 
of the N. sea; situate close to White island, to 
the w. e. of that of Margarita. 

HERMANOS, some other small islands of the N. 
sea ; situate between the s. point of the Caico 
Grande and the Panuelo Quadrado. 

HERMANOS, an island of the province and go 
vernment of Paraguay, formed by the rivers Pa 
rana, Amambay, and Escupil. 

HERMANOS, three very lofty mountains of the 
coast of Tierra del Fuego, close to the cape of St. 
Vincent, according to Frezier. 



HER 

HERMANOS, a river of the province and go 
vernment of Buenos Ayres. It runs n. n. e. and 
enters the Parana, between the Sala and La Ma- 
tanza. 

HERMOSA, a bay of the s. coast of the straits 
of Magellan, in the canal of Santa Barbara. 

HERMOSA, another bay, on the coast of Brazil, 
and in the province and captainship of the Rio 
Janeiro, near cape Trio. 

HERMOSO, a river of the former province 
and captainship,. It runs e. and enters the sea near 
cape Trio, between those of San Juan and De las 
Osteras. 

[HERO, NORTH, an island in lake Cham- 
plain, is a township annexed to Chittenden county 
in Vermont, and contains 125 inhabitants. It is 
13 miles in length, and two in breadth.] 

[HERO, SOUTH, an island in the same lake, 
belonging to Chittenden county, Vermont, is a 
township and port of entry, and contains 557 in 
habitants. It is JO miles long, and five broad. 
Numerous small isles surround the Heroes. This 
island produces good crops of wheat and other 
grain. In it is a quarry of bluish grey marble, 
which has the appearance of being a petrefaction 
of scallops, a species of shell common in the 
vicinity of the lake, together with the common 
earth of the shore, .which is of a marly sub 
stance.] 

[HERON, PASS AU, at the bay of Mobile, in 
W". Florida, is 18 miles e. of Pascagoula river, 
and has four feet water ; and from thence to the 
point which is on the e. side of the bay of Mobile, 
in lat. 30 17 n. is nearly six miles.] 

HI RON, Cape of, on the e. coast of Nova 
Scotia or Acadia, and in the strait formed by this 
coast atid St. John s island. 

HERON, an island, situate near that of Cape 
Breton, between fort Forchu and that of Rigaud. 

HERRADURA, a settlement of the province 
of Muzo, in the corregimiento of Tunja, in the 
Nuevo Reyno de Granada. It contains some 
what more than iOO housekeepers, who engage 
themselves in planting sugar-cane and cotton, of 
which they make some profit, as they do also from 
the vegetable productions which are peculiar to a 
warm cli;r,tite. 

HERRADURA, another settlement, of the pro 
vince and government of Popayan ; situate in the 
road which leads to the province of Quito. 

HEURADUIIA, a port on the coast of the king 
dom of Chile, of t lie province and corregimienfo 
of Quillota, between the port of Conception and 
the mouth of the river Itata, in lat. 32 44 s. 

HERUAJDUHA, another port, of the coast of the 



H E U 



243 



S. sea, in the province and government of Costa 
rica, arid kingdom of Guatemala, between the river 
Cartago and the settlement of Qnipos. 

HERIIADURA, a point of the coast of Tierra. 
Firme, in the province of Santa Murla, one of those 
which form the gulf of Venezuela. 

HERRERA, a settlement of the province and 
government of La Nucva Santander, or sierra 
Gorda, in the bay of Mexico, and kingdom of 
Nueva Esp;u"i:i ; founded by tlie Count of Sierra 
Gorda, Don Joseph de Escandon, colonel of militia 
of the city of Queretaro, and its conqueror. 

HERRERA, a port of the coast of Tierra Firme, 
in the province and government of Cartagena, be 
tween that of Portete and the island Tortuga. 

[HERRING Bay lies on the w. side of Chesa- 
peak bay, Maryland, 26 miles s. of Annapolis, 
and derives its name from the fish of its name 
which frequent it.] 

[HERIIING POND Indians. See SANDWICH.] 

HEKRINGTON, a city of the province and 
colony of Maryland. 

[H ERTFORD, a county of Edenton district, N. 
Carolina ; bounded n. by the state of Virginia, s. 
by B -rtie county, e. by Chowan, and w. by North- 
amnton, and contains 5828 inhabitants, of whom 
2442 are slaves. Chief town, Wynton.] 

[HBRTFOED, a post-town of N. Carolina, in 
Edenton district, and capital of Gates county; 
situated on the w. side of Perquimiu s river. It 
contains about 20 houses, a court-house and gaol, 
and is 12 miles n. n. e. of Edenton, 141 n. n. e. 
of Wilmington, and 38 5. by w. of Suffolk in 
Virginia.] 

[HERVEY S Isle, one of the new discovered 
islands in the S. sea, visited by Captain Cook in 
1778. Lat. 19 18 7 s. Long. 159 6 a).] 

HEUE, a port of the province and colony of 
Nova Scotia or Acadia, on the s. coast. Its en 
trance is formed on the w. by the point of a small 
island called Round island, and on the e. by the 
promontory of a very small peninsula, scarcely a 
quarter of a league long. This port, which passes 
for one of the best, runs continually a&amp;gt;. ; its width 
is half a league and its length a league, and it 
forms as it were the shape of an horse-shoe, shel 
tering from every wind the vessels that lie in it, 
and affording them excellent anchorage from four 
to 20 fathoms. The French had here a fort de 
fended by palisades, which was taken by the En- 
lish in 17J2; it having capitulated with the loss 
of its commander, and the greater part of its people. 
It is 85 miles to the n. e. of the cape Sable or 
Sand. 

HEUE, a river of the same prorince and colony 
i i 2 



244 



HIE 



as is tbe former port, it runs s. e. near the s. coast, 
and runs in a la^ge body into the sea by the afore 
said port. 

IIEUDA, a small river of the district of Pucha- 
cay in the kingdom of Chile. It runs n. and en 
ters the Itata, near where thi runs into the sea. 

HEUHEUJL, a settlement of the province of 
Canada or New France. It contains from 25 to 
SO houses, well built, also a fort, in which the En 
glish had a governor and a guard of 30 soldiers, 
which were sent thither from England. The 
French took it in 1708. 

HI AQUI, a large and abundant river of Nueva 
Espana, in the province of Ostimuri. It empties 
itself in the gulf of California or Mar Roxo de 
Cortes. 

[HIATSTOWN, a village in Middlesex county, 
New Jersey ; 13 miles n. e. of Trenton, and 17 
s. by w. of New Brunswick.] 

H1ATY, a parish of the province and govern 
ment of Paraguay ; situate on the e. bank of the 
river Tebiquari-mini, about 63 miles s. e. from 
Asuncion, in lat. 25 44 42" s. Long. 56 34 
12" w. 

HIBUERAS. See HONDURAS. 

H1CACOS, PUNTA DE, on the n. coast of the 
island of Cuba, celebrated for the abundant salt 
earths found here. It is 12 leagues from Matanzas, 
in lat. 36 16 . Long. 293 10 . 

HICACOS, PUNTA DE, another point of land, on 
the coast of the province and government of Vene 
zuela, opposite the bay of Curazao. 

HICAMAPEQUE, a river of New France or 
Canada. It runs n. between the lakes Michigan 
and Superior, and enters the latter in front of the 
Great island. 

HLCHI, a river of the province and government 
of Guayana or Nueva Andalucia. It rises to the 
*. of the capital, runs e. and unites itself with the 
Tocome to enter the Caroni. 

[HICKMAN S, a settlement in Fayette county, 
Kentucky, on the n. side of Kentucky river, 10 
miles n. of Danville, and 15 s. of Lexington.] 

HICOTEOS, PUNTA DE, one of the interior 
points of the coast of the canal, and entrance of the 
lake of Maracaibo, on the e. part. 

HICOT1MON1, a small river of N. Carolina, 
in the county of Grenville. It runs e. and enters 
the Dan. 

[HID Island is situated on the N. W. Terri 
tory, in Plein river, the n. head water of the 
Illinois.] 

HIDE. The district and jurisdiction of the 
province and colony of N. Carolina. 

[HIETANS, or COM A NCHES, Indians of N. Ame- 



H I E 

rica, called by both these names ; have no fixed 
place of residence ; have neither towns nor villages, 
and are divided into so many different hordes or 
tribes, that they have scarcely any knowledge of 
one another. No estimate of their numbers can 
Avell be made. They never remain in the same 
place more than a few days, but follow the buffalo, 
the flesh of which is their principal food. Some of 
them occasionally purchase of the Panis corn, 
beans, and pumpkins ; but they are so numerous, 
any quantity of these articles the Panis are able to 
supply them with, must make but a small propor 
tion of their food. They have tents made of neatly 
dressed skins, fashioned in the form of a cone, 
sufficiently roomy for a family of ten or twelve 
persons; those of the chiefs will contain occasion 
ally 50 or 60 persons. When they stop, their 
tents are pitched in very exact order, so as to form 
regular streets and squares, which in a few minutes 
have the appearance of a town, raised, as it were, 
by enchantment ; and they are equally dexterous 
in striking their tents and preparing for a march, 
when the signal is given. To every tent two horses 
or mules are allotted, one to carry the tent, and 
another the poles or sticks, which are neatly made 
of red cedar ; they all travel on horseback. Their 
horses they never turn loose to graze, but always 
keep them tied with a long cobras or halter ; and 
every two or three days they are obliged to move, 
on account of all the grass near them being eaten 
up, they have such numbers of horses. They 
are good horsemen and have good horses, most of 
which are bred by themselves ; and being accus 
tomed when very young to be handled, they are 
remarkably docile and gentle. They sometimes 
catch wild horses, which are every where amongst 
them in immense droves. They hunt down the 
buffalo on horseback, and kill them either with 
the bow, or a sharp stick like a spear, which they 
carry in their hands. They are generally at war 
with the Spaniards, often committing depredations 
upon the inhabitants of Santa Fe and St. Antoine; 
but have always been friendly and civil to any 
French or Americans who have been among them. 
They are strong and athletic, and the elderly men 
as fat as though they had lived upon American 
beef and porter. 

It is said, the man who kills a buffalo, catches 
the blood and drinks it while warm ; they likewise 
eat the liver raw, before it is cold, and use the 
gall by way of sauce. They are, for savages, un 
commonly cle an in their persons. The dress of 
the women is a long robe, that reaches from their 
chin to the ground, tied round with a fancy sash 
or girdle, all made of neatly dressed leather, on]| 



HIE 

[which they paint figures of different colours and 
significations : the dress of the men consists of close 
leather pantaloons, and a hunting shirt, or frock of 
the same. They never remain long enough in the 
same place to plant any thing. The small Cayenne 
pepper grows spontaneously in the country ; with 
which, and some wild herbs and fruits, particularly 
a bean that grows in great plenty on a small tree 
resembling a willow, called musketo^ the women 
cook the buffalo beef in a manner that would be 
grateful to an American squire. They alternately 
occupy the immense space of country from the 
Trinity and Braces, crossing (he Red river, to the 
Leads of Arkansa and Missouri, to the river Grand, 
and beyond it, about Santa Fe, and over the divid 
ing ridge on the waters of the w. ocean, where they 
say they have seen large peroques, with masts to 
them; in describing which, they make a drawing 
of a ship, with all its sails and rigging : and they 
describe a place where they have seen vessels as 
cending a river, over which was a drawbridge 
that opened to give them a passage. Their native 
language of sounds differs from the language of 
any other nation, and none can either speak or 
understand it ; but they have a language by signs, 
that all Indians understand, and by which they 
converse much among themselves. They have a 
number of Spanish men and women among them, 
who are slaves, which they made prisoners when 
young. 

About 20 years since, a party of these Indians 
passed over the Grand river to Chewawa, the re 
sidence of the governor-general of what is called 
the Five Internal Provinces ; lay in ambush for 
an opportunity, and made prisoner the governor s 
daughter, a young lady, going in her coach to 
mass, and brought her off. The governor sent 
1000 dollars for the purpose of recovering his 
daughter, and dispatched a confidential trader, 
with the amount of the 1000 dollars in merchandise, 
who repaired to the nation, found her, and pur 
chased her ransom : but to his great surprise, she 
refused to return with him to her father, and sent 
by him the following message : That the Indians 
had disfigured her face by tattooing it, according 
to their fancy and ideas of beauty, and a young 
man of them had taken her for his wife, by whom 
she believed herself pregnant ; that she had become 
reconciled to their mode of life, and was well 
treated by her husband ; and that she should be 
more unhappy by returning to her father, under 
these circumstances, than by remaining where she 
was. Which message was conveyed to her father, 
who rewarded the trader by a present of 300 dollars 
more for his trouble and fidelity. His daughter is 



H I G 



245 



now living with her Indian husband in the nation, 
by whom she has three children.] 

[H1GHGATE, a village in Georgia, about 
four miles from Savannah. See HAMPSTI;AD.]J 

[HiGiiGATE, the n. westernmost township, ex 
cept Alburgh, in Vermont, in Franklin county, 
contains 103 inhabitants.] 

[HIGHLANDS, a mountainous tract of coun 
try on the banks of Hudson s river, in the state of 
New York, between 40 and 60 miles n. of New 
York city. The passage on the river through 
these highlands, for the distance of about 18 miles, 
is grand and romantic in a high degree. The 
opening seems to have been formed on purpose for 
the passage of this noble river. In these highlands 
are situated the important and famous fortresses of 
West Point, Fort Montgomery, and Stoney Point. 
The most noted peaks are, as you ascend the river, 
Thunder Hill, St. Anthony s Nose, Sugar Loaf, 
Butter Hill, and Break-neck Hill. After passing 
the two last, the country opens delightfully, and 
presents to the eye the pleasant villages of New 
Windsor and Newburgh. Those mountain* 
abound with iron ore.] 

[HIGHWASSEE. See HIWASSEE River.] 

HIGUERAS, River of, in the province and go 
vernment of Veragua, of the kingdom of Tierra 
Firme. It takes its origin in the sierras of Gua- 
nico, and running s. e. enters the S. sea, at the back 
of the round mountain of Puercos. 

HIGUERON, a rirer of the province and go 
vernment of Costarica in the kingdom of Guate 
mala. It runs 5. s. w. and enters the S. sea in port 
Ingles. 

HIGUEROTE, Lake of, .in the province and 
government of Venezuela. It is near another, 
which is called De la Tentacion, and is formed by 
an arm of the river Portuguesa, to the n. of the 
town of S. Sayme, the said river dividing the town 
from the lake. 

HIGUEROTE, a river of New France or Canada. 

HIGUEY, a settlement of the island of Cuba; 
situate on the n. coast. 

[HIGUEY, or ALT A GRACIA, a city in the s. e. 
part of the Spanish division of St. Domingo, the 
easternmost of all the settlements in the island, ce 
lebrated formerly for its fertility, and the quantify 
of sugar it produced. It was formerly the seat of 
Cayacoa, the most powerful cacique of the island. 
It has now only about 500 inhabitants, and is dis 
tant about 63 leagues to the e. of St. Domingo, be 
tween which and Higuey are three roads, the cir 
cuitous and northernmost of which leads by Baya- 
guana. Lat. 18 30 n.] 

HIG UE v. The above river rises in the mountains 



246 



H I L 



H I N 



of the e. bead. It runs s.s. e. and turning e. enters 
the sea between the cape of Engano and the point 
of Espada. 

HI.J1TO, EL, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Copiapo in the kingdom of Chile ; 
situate near the sea-coast, on the shore of the river 
Mamas, and to the n. of the capital of the pro 
vince. 

HJJURE, a settlement of the province and go 
vernment of Venezuela ; situate on the shore of the 
the river of its name, to the n. of the town of Hua- 
nare. 

HIJURE, a river of the same province and go 
vernment, which runs to the s. arid enters that of 
La Portuguese. 

HILABAYA, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Larecaja in Peru. 

H1LANCHOS, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Guarochiri in Peru. 

HI LADE, a settlement of the province and go 
vernment of Chucuito in Peru, eight leagues dis 
tant from the capital. 

HILLAPEL, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Quillota in the kingdom of Chile. 

[HILLS, a river in New S. Wales, which rises 
from Pathapoowinepee lake, and empties into 
Hudson s b.iy at York fort.] 

[H1LLSBOROUGH, an island on the Labra 
dor coast, on a bay, at the head of which is Nain. 
See NAIN.] 

[HILLSBOROUGH, a county of New Hampshire, 
bounded n. by Grafton county, s. by the state of 
Massachusetts, w. by Cheshire, and e. by Rock- 
ingham county. It is divided into 37 townships 
and four gores of land, which contain 32,871 in 
habitants, all free people, who chiefly follow agri 
culture. The academy at Amherst has SOO/. 
funds, and another at New Ipswich of 1000/. Chief 
towns, Amherst and Hopkinton.] 

[HILLSBOROUGH, a township in the above 
county ; situated on the n. head branches of Con- 
tocook river, about 18 or 20 miles a?, of Concord, 
was incorporated in 1772, and contains 798 inha 
bitants.] 

[HILLSBOROUGH, a township in Somerset coun 
ty, New Jersey, containing 2901 inhabitants, in 
cluding 386 slaves. It is about 15 miles w. of 
Brunswick, and 18 n. of Trenton.] 

[H ILLS BOROUGH, a village on the e. side of 
Chesapeak bay, in Caroline county, Maryland ; 
sealed on the e. side of Tuckahock creek, one of 
the chief branches ol Choptank river, seven miles 
*. &amp;lt;?. hy e. of Der.ton, nine n. w. of Greensborough, 
and 27 s. s. w. of Chester.] 

[lliLLSBOuoucu, one of the middle districts of 

2 



N. Carolina, bounded w. by the state of Virginia, 
s. by Fayetteville district, e. by Halifax, and w. 
by Salisbury. It comprehends the counties of 
Granville, Person, Gas well, Orange, Wake, Chat 
ham, and Randolph ; and contains 59,983 inha 
bitants, of whom J 3,506 are slaves. Chief town, 
Hillsborongh.] 

[HILLS HO HOUGH, a post-town of N. Carolina, 
and capital of the district of its name, is situated in 
Orange county, on the n. side of Eno river, in a 
high, healthy, and fertile country. It contains 
about 80 houses, a court-house and gaol ; and had 
in 1788 an academy of 60 or 80 students, patronized 
by the principal gentlemen of the state. The Eno 
unites with Little and Flat rivers, and forms the 
Neus, about 17 miles below the town. It is 180 
miles w. n. w. of Newbern, 1.9 s. by w. of Person 
court-house, 36 w. by s. of Halifax, 70 e. n. e. of 
Salisbury, and 300 s. w. by s. of Philadelphia.] 

[IHLLSDALE, a township in Columbia 
county, New York, having Claverack on the w. 
and Great Barrington in Berkshire county, Massa 
chusetts, on the e. It contains 4556 inhabitants, 
of whom 31 are slaves.] 

HILL Town, a city of the county of Chester, 
in the province and colony of Pennsylvania. It 
is situate in the centre of this county, 28 miles to 
the w. of Philadelphia, 20 to the n. of Wilming 
ton, in the county of Newcastle, and 21 to the 
n. zc. of Chester. [Also the name of a township 
in Bucks county in the same slate.] 

H1LO, a small port of the coast of Peru and S. 
sea, in the province and corregimiento of Arequipa. 
It is fit for small vessels only. 

[HILTON Head is the most*, sea land in S. 
Carolina. W.and s. w. of Hilton head lie Pinck- 
ney s, Bulls, Dawfu.skies, and some smaller 
islands, between which and Hilton head are Cali- 
bogie river and sound, which form the outlet of 
May and New rivers.] 

[HILTON S Point, in Piscataqua river, in New 
Hampshire, is the spot where the united stream of 
Newichawannock and Cochecho rivers, which 
comes from Dover, meets the w. branch arid forms 
the Piscataqua. From thence to the sea is seven 
miles, the course generally s. to s. e. and the river 
is so rapid that it never freezes.] 

HILTON, Cape of, on the coast of Georgia, one 
of tltose which form the Port Royal in the island 
of Trenches. 

H IMA RES, a settlement of the province and 
government, of La Sonora in Nueva Espaiia; 
situate on the shore of a river, between the settle 
ments of Tepo and Reined ios. 

HJLNCAP1E, a settlement of the province and 



HIP 

government of Cartagena ; situate on the shore of 
the river Magdalena, two leagues to the n. of the 
town of Maria. 

[HINCHE, a territory and town in the Spanish 
part of St. Domingo. The canton of Hinche is 
bounded w. by the French parishes of Gonaives, 
Petit Riviere, and Mirebalais, and contains, with 
some appendages, about 12,000 souls. The town 
contains about 500 houses, and, together with its 
dependencies, 4500 souls, 500 of whom are ca 
pable of bearing arms. It is situated on the e. 
side of the mouth of the river Guayamuco, 64 
miles n. w. of St. Domingo. Lat. 19 3 w.] 

HINCHUPALLA, a settlement of the province 
and corregimiento of Paucarcolla in Peru ; an 
nexed to the curacy of Huancane. 

[HINESBURGH, a township in Chittenden 
county, in Vermont, lies e. of and joins Charlotte 
on lake Champlain. It contains 454 inhabitants.] 

[HINGHAM, a post-town in Suffolk county, 
Massachusetts ; situated on a small bay which sets 
up s. from Boston bay. It contains a number 
of houses compactly built, two Congregational 
churches, and a well endowed school, called, in 
honour of its principal donor and founder, Derby 
School. It is 10 miles .?. e. of Boston, and 16 
n. w. from Plymouth. The township is about 
four miles square, consists of two parishes, was 
incorporated in 1635, and contains 2085 inhabi 
tants. Here are six grist mills, 3 saw mills, and 
a fulling mill ; four of which are tide mills. The 
hills in this town, one of which is called Baker s 
bill, present extensive and delightful prospects of 
Boston bay, its islands, and the adjacent country.] 

HINCHANETON, a settlement of Indians of 
Louisiana ; situate near the river San Pedro. 

[H1NDALE, the s. easternmost township in 
Vermont, and in Windham county. It contains 
482 inhabitants.] 

[H1NSDALE, a township in Cheshire county, 
New Hampshire, on the e. bank of Connecticut 
river, where the ft. line of the state strikes the river, 
in lat. 42 43 59" n. and is opposite to Hinsdale 
in Vermont. It was incorporated in 1753, and 
contains 52 V 2 inhabitants. It is about, 23 miles 
above Northampton, and 76 from Portsmouth.] 

H1OREE, Mountains of, in S. Carolina, and 
in the country of the Middle Choraquis Indians. 
They run from s. to n. 

HIOR1, a settlement of Indians of S. Carolina ; 
situate on the shore of the river Tennessee. 

HjyPEKiUGH, a small river of the province and 
captainship of Seara in Brazil. It runs n.n.e. 
and enters the sea between the point Daniel and 
the river Hoec. 



H I W 



847 



HIPIALES, a settlement of the province and 
corregimicnto of Pastos, in the jurisdiction and dis 
trict of the presidency of Quito ; situate in the 
road which leads down from the province of 
Popayan. 

HJPOLITO, S. a settlement of the head settle 
ment and alcaMia mat/ or of Tepeaca in Nueva Es- 
pafia. It contains 42 families of Indians, and is 
two leagues from its capital. 

HIPOLITO, S. another settlement, in the head 
settlement of Tlachicomula, and alcaldla mat/or of 
the same settlement, in that kingdom ; situate upon 
a lofty plain. It contains 43 families of Otornies 
Indians, and is eight leagues to the n. e. one- 
fourth to thee. of the capital. 

HIPOLITO, S. another settlementand m?/ of the 
mines in the province and government of Sonora, 
in the same kingdom as the former two. 

HIQU1NA, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Atacama, and archbishopric of 
Charcas, in Peru ; annexed to the curacy of 
Chiuchiu. 

HIQUIRA, a settlement of the province and 
government of Tucuman in Peru ; situate on the 
confines of the kingdom of Chile. 

[HIRAM, a small settlement in York county, 
Maine. See NEW ANDOVEH.] 

H1RAPUA, a small river of the province and 
government of Buenos Ayres. It runs n. and en 
ters the large river of the Portuguese, between those 
of Ipane and Ibari. 

[HISPAN1OLA, or ST. DOMINGO. See ST. 
DOMINGO.] 

[HITCHELAGA, or HOCHELAGA, an Indian 
village in Lower Canada; situated in the isl md of 
Montreal, and at the foot of the mountain so call 
ed. It is fortified after the Indian manner, and 
the inhabitants speak the Huron language.] 

[HITTEN, a small village in Ann Arundel 
county, Maryland, 13 miles w. by s. of Balti 
more.] 

HIUIAS, a settlement of the province and cor 
regimiento of Guanta in Peru, 14 leagues from 
Guamanga. 

HIVER or WINTER Port, on the coast of the 
province of Connecticut ; one of those of New 
England. It lies between the cape Elizabeth or 
Isabel, and the island of Bois or Wood. 

H1WAREE, a river of N. Carolina. It run* 
to the s. w. and enters the Pedi. 

[H1WASSEE is the only river of any conse 
quence which empties into the Tennessee from the 
s. It is a bold river, passing through the Chero 
kee towns, and empties into the Tennessee about 
30 miles below the mouth of the Clinch, and 46 



248 



HOC 



above the Whirl or Suck, by land, but 60 by 
water. It is navigable till it penetrates the moun 
tains on its s. side. Ore was found in these moun 
tains, when in possession of the British, from 
which gold was extracted. The Indians know 
the spot ; but are very anxious to keep it a secret. 
A branch of the Hiwassee, called Amoia, almost 
interlocks a branch of the Mobile. The portage 
between them is short, and the road firm and 
level.] 

HIZCOTEPEC, SAN LUCAS DE, a settle 
ment of the ulcaldia mayor of Nexapa in Nueva 
Espafia ; situate on a small plain surrounded by 
craggy steeps. It contains 42 families of Indians. 

HIZTZILAN, SANTIAGO E, a settlement of 
the head settlement of Zapotitlan, and alcaldia 
mayor of Zacatlan, in Nueva Espana ; two 
leagues distant from its head settlement. 

HOBO, or JOBO, a settlement of the govern 
ment of Neiba, in the Nuevo Reyno de Granada, 
so small and reduced as to amount to scarcely 20 
Indians, whose employment is in searching tor 
the gold found in the lanaderos or washing places 
which abound here. IX is situate on the shore of the 
great river Magdalena, above the road which 
leads to Popayan, eight leagues from the city of 
Neiba or Neyva. It is annexed to the curacy of 
the settlement of Paso, from its church having 
been burnt, and from the inhabitants not being able 
to rebuild it , even in the most common manner, 
owing to their extreme poverty. 

[HOBOKEN, a tract of land in Bergen county, 
New Jersey ; situated on the w. bank of the Hud 
son, in the mountainous country between the town 
of Bergen and fort Lee, about seven miles above 
New York city.] 

HOB S-HOLE, a city of the county of Suf 
folk, in the province and colony of Virginia ; 
situate on the w. shore of the river Rapannahock, 
15 miles to the n. e. of Walkerton, 32 to the s. e. 
of port Royal, and 67 to the n, of Williamsburg. 

HOCHELAGA, a settlement of savage In 
dians of New France or Canada. It is large, and 
situate on an island known by the name of Mont 
real, of a round figure. This settlement is sur 
rounded by three rows of palisades. It contains 
50 very large cabins, each of them being 50 paces 
long and from 14 to 15 wide, having only one 
door of entrance. The first palisade consists of a 
sort of gallery, which is mounted by means of a 
ladder, and is provided with large heaps of stones 
for defence. The inhabitants speak the Huro- 
nian tongue. This settlement is at a foot of a 
mountain, which Mr. Carter called the same as 
the island. 



H O L 

HOCKHOCK1NG, or MARGARITE, a town 
of the province and colony of Virginia ; situate 
on the shore of the river of its name. 

[HocK HOCKING, a river in the N. W. Terri 
tory, about 20 miles below the Muskingum, which 
it resembles, but is inferior to it in size. It rises 
near a branch of the Sciota, and taking a s. w. 
course enters the Ohio at Bellpree, in lat. 38 57 n. 
It is navigable for large flat-bottomed boats, be 
tween 70 and 80 miles ; has fine meadows with 
high banks, which are seldom overflowed, and 
rich uplands on its borders. On the banks of this 
fine river are inexhaustible quarries of freestone, 
large beds of iron ore, rich mines of lead, and 
coal pits. There are also productive salt springs, 
beds of white and blue clay of an excellent quality. 
Red bole, and many other useful fossils, have been 
found on the banks of this river.] 

[HOCKQUAR, orHocKQUART, an island of 
Upper Canada, on the e. side of lake Superior.] 

[HOG, an island on the e. side of lake Cham- 
plain, in Franklin county, Vermont, nine miles 
long, and generally about three broad.] 

[HoG, an island in Naraganset bay, in the state 
of Rhode island, about two miles in circumference, 
two miles from Bristol.] 

HOG Island. See NEW PROVIDENCE.] 

"HoG Key. See EXUMAS.] 

^HOGOHEGE, CALLANANCO, and CHERO 
KEE ; names formerly applied to Tennessee river. 
See CHKROKEES.] 

HOGOLIG1S, a settlement of Indians of 
Georgia, where the English have a fort and esta 
blishment for their commerce. It is situate on the 
river Apalachicola. 

[HOGSTIES, The, a dangerous reef of rocks; 
situated between the Great lleneagua or Inague, 
and Crooked island, among the Bahamas. Ships 
sailing to Europe from Jamaica through the 
Crooked Island passage, will clear them safely by 
steering from Ocean Bight in the Great Heneagua, 
12 leagues n. w. then n. by w. \ w. about ll 
leagues to Castle island, the s. point of S. Crooked 
island.] 

HOLCAZAUTITLAN, a settlement of the 
head settlement and alcaldia mayor of Chilapa in 
Nueva Espana, belonging to the bishopric of La 
Puebla de los Angeles. It contains 76 families of 
Indians, and is seven leagues to the n. of its ca 
pital. 

[HOLDEN, a township in Worcester county, 
Massachusetts, was formerly the n. w. part of 
Worcester, from which it is distant seven miles, 
and 52 miles w. of Boston. It contains 1080 
inhabitants. It was incorporated in 1740. In 



H O L 

the earthquake in 1755, there were several 
acres of land, in an obscure place in the n. e. 
corner of the township, quite surrounded by a vi 
sible fracture in the earth, of a circular form, and 
of various width and depth. The small river 
there had its bed raised so as to occasion a consi 
derable tall of water where there was little or none 
before. The stump of a tree, that stood directly 
over the chasm, on the e. was divided into two 
equal parts, one standing on the outside of the 
chasm, the other upon the inside, but not opposite 
to each other; the half within the chasm being 
carried five feet forward towards the river.] 

[HO LDEK.NESS, a township in Graflon county, 
New Hampshire; situated on the c. side of Pemi- 
gewasset river, was incorporated in 1761, and con 
tains 329 inhabitants. A corner of Squani lake is 
in this township ; and Rattle-snake mountain lies 
partly in this and Sandwich, the adjoining town 
ship on the n. e. It is 64 miles n. n. w. of Ports 
mouth.] 

[HOLD-WITH-HOPE, the first land disco 
vered bv Hudson on the e. coast of Greenland, in 
J607. "Lat. 73 w.] 

HOLE, a district of the island of Barbadoes. 
See ST. GKORGE. 

[HOLE-IN-THE-WALL, a village in Talbot 
county, Maryland, on the e. side of Chesapeak 
bay ; seven miles e. of Oxford, and a like dis 
tance s. of EastoH.] 

HOLGUIN, a settlement of the island of 
Cuba. 

[HOLLAND, atownship in Hampshire county, 
Massachusetts, which, until incorporated in 1785, 
was the c. parish of S. Brimfield, and is bounded 
s. by Tollaud county in Connecticut, e. by Wor 
cester county, and n. by Brimfield. It contains 
428 inhabitants, and is 75 miles s. w. by w. of 
Boston.] 

[HOLLAND COMPANY Lands are situated in 
Pennsylvania, on the navigable waters of Alle- 
ghany river and French Creek.] 

[HOLLAND S Islands are, near to, and*, of Hoo 
per s island and slraits in Chesapeak bay.] 

[HOLLAND S Point, on the w. side of Chesa 
peak bay, together with Parker s island, form the 
mouth of Herring bay.] 

HOLLDIP, a settlement of the island of Bar 
badoes, in the district and parish of St. George.] 

HOLLIBUT, Cape of, on the s. coast of Nova 
Scotia or Acadia, between the cape Gidore and 
that of Vieux. 

[HOLLI DAY S Island lies 15 miles upChowan 
river in N. Carolina : thus far the river is three 
miles wide.] 

VOL. II." 



H O L 



249 



[HOLLIS. the Nisitissct of the Indians, a 
township in Hillsborou&amp;lt;ch county, New Hamp 
shire ; situate on the Massachusetts line, incor 
porated in 1746, and contains 1441 inhabitants. 
It is about 43 miles s. w. of Portsmouth, and 36 
n. w. of Boston.] 

[HOLL1STON, the most s. township in Mid 
dlesex county, Massachusetts, has Hopkinton on 
the n. Wrcntham on the e. and is 24 miles s. by 
w. of Boston. The first settlements were made 
here in 1710, and in 1724 the town was incorpo 
rated by its present name, in honour of Thomas 
Hollis of London, one of the patrons of Cambridge 
university; audit now contains 875 inhabitants.] 

HOLMANS, a port of Nova Scotia or Acadia, 
on the s. coast, and within the threat bay of 

T&amp;lt; 1 

1 undy. 

HOLONDA, Cape of, on the n. coast of the 
str^ils of Magellan. 

[HOLSTON, the largest branch, of Tennessee 
river, rises in Virginia, and joins that river 22 
miles below Knoxvilie. It is a large, bold river, 
upwards of SCO yards wide at that town, is about 
200 miles in length, and receives in its course se 
veral considerable rivers, viz. from its head down 
wards, Watauga, French Broad, (which includes 
Limestone Creek, Nolachucky, Swanano, Big 
Laurel, and Big and Little Pigeon), and Little 
rivers. The streams on the n. side are creeks of 
no great size or length of course. Ilolston is na 
vigable for boats of 25 tons upwards of 100 miles, 
as high as the mouth of the N. fork. At the 
mouth of this river, on the n. side, stands fort 
Grainger. The river is 150 yards wide, and it 
enters the Tennessee in lat. 36 48 n. Long. 
83 30 w. See TENNESSEE and LONG Island.] 

[HOLSTON, a settlement on the river abovemen- 
tioned, in the state of Tennessee, containing 28,649 
inhabitants, though in the year 1775 it had hardly 
2200 ; yet its importance during the revolution 
may be conceived, when it is known that a great 
part of those volunteer troops who attacked and 
defeated the British and tories on King s moun 
tain, who were commanded by Colonel Ferguson, 
came from this country. 

The land is generally fertile, but the face of 
the country is much broken. Placed between two 
large mountains, it seldom suffers for want of rain. 
It abounds with iron ore. A capital furnace and 
forge have lately been erected in Ilolston near the 
Virginia line, a bloomery below the mouth of 
Watawga, and another 25 miles above the mouth 
of the French Broad. There are sundry lead 
mines in the settlement; one in particular on the 
French Broad, that produces 75 per cent, pur* 
K K 



250 



H O N 



lead. Long island on Holston river is 340 miles 
*. u\ by w. of Richmond in Virginia.] 

HOLT, a small island of the N. sea, near the 
const of the province of Sagadahoc, between the 
islands of Melinaces and the bay of Penobscot. 

[HOLY-ROOD, a bay and pond in Newfound 
land island. The bay is at the head of Concep 
tion bay.] 

HOMA, a settlement of the province and go 
vernment of Buenos Ayres ; situate on the bank 
of a streamlet, near the river La Plata. 

HOME, Passage of, or Of the MAN, a strait or 
channel opposite the e. coast of the island of Gua- 
dalupe, between the isle Mobile and the sand 
bank called Brissant. 

[HOMER, a military township in Onondaga 
county, New York, on the head waters of the 
n. w. branch of Chenengo river ; 56 of its inhabi 
tants are electors.] 

[HONA CHITTO, or AOOMO CHITTO, a river 
which rises in Georgia, in lat. 32 2 n. between 
Pearl or Amita and Yasoo or Big Black river. It 
runs s. w. about 80 miles, and enters the Missis 
sippi a little to the n. w. of fort Adam.] 

HONDA, SAN BARTOLOME DE, a town of the 
Nuevo Reyno de Granada, founded in the pro 
vince of Los Marquetones, on the w. shore of the 
large river Magdalena, at the part where this is 
entered by the Guali or Guidi, and where there 
was a magnificent stone bridge, now fallen to de 
cay. It was at first a small settlement, established 
for the convenience of lading and unlading vessels, 
being the port for all the commerce of the Nuevo 
Reyno and the province of Quito. It is to this 
that it owes its present flourishing state ; and it is 
in fact one of the best ports in the kingdom, hav 
ing had the title of town conferred upon it by the 
king, in 1643. It is of a hot temperature, but 
liealthy, although infested with musquitoes. It is 
very rich and fertile in cacao^ sugar-cane, tobacco, 
maize, and the other fruits of a warm climate. 
It has some very good buildings, and, besides the 
parish church, a convent of the religious order of 
San Francisco, another of Santo Domingo, a 
house of entertainment of the barefooted monks of 
San Agustin ; and without the town, a college 
which belonged to the regulars of the extingushed 
company of Jesuits, an house of entertainment, 
arid an hermitage. It was for a long time a curacy 
of the Jesuits. It is the residence of a judge of the 
ports, who is entrusted with the care of the lad 
ing and unlading effects at the royal storehouses. 
Its inhabitants, who amount to 10,000, have the 
credit of being very faithful to their commercial 
engagements, but at the same time very haughty. 



H O N 

Tins to\vn is 56 miles to the n. w. of Santa Fe; 
but the road to it is very bad, and filled with 
quagmires, owing to the softness of the soil. It 
is in lat. 5 12 n. Long. 74 54 w. 

HONDA, Fall of, a strait of the large river Mag- 
dalena, which is confined in a rift of rocks near 
the former town, and afterwards bursts forth with 
an extraordinary violence and noise. 

HONDA, a bay on the w. coast of the island of 
Cuba, which was entered by Sancho de Urdana- 
via, when he burnt the galleon of Nuestra Senora 
de Regla, one of those which were under the 
charge of the Admiral Don Carlos de Ibarra, the 
same having made great resistance in a combat 
maintained against a Dutch privateer Pie de Palo, 
in 1638. 

HONDA, another bay on the coast of the pro 
vince and government of Honduras, close to the 
cape of Gracias a Dios. 

HONDA, another, in the province and government 
of the Rio del Hacha, between this and the cape of 
La Vela. It is very large, good, convenient, and 
handsome; and frequented by the English and 
Dutch, who carry on a trade with the Guajiros 
Indians. 

HONDEN EYLAND. See DOGS Island. 
HONDO, a river of the coast of the straits of 
Magellan. It runs into the sea by the side of the 
point of San Julian. 

HONDO, a valley of the same coast, between 
the mountain of Lomas and the river Aguabuena, 
where the Captain Narborough tarried three days, 
enjoying the beautiful woods and meadows found 
here. 

HONDO, a river of the province and go 
vernment of Texas. It runs s. s. e. and enters 
the sea in the bay of Mexico, at the mouth of the 
river Nueces. 

HONDO, another, of the province and govern 
ment of Darien and kingdom of Tierra Firme. 
It rises in the mountains to the s. and enters the 
sea opposite the great island of Iley. 

HONDO, a large lake on the coast of the same 
kingdom and province, and of the government of 
the Rio del Hacha ; situate to the a&amp;gt;. 

HONDO, a settlement, called Arroyo Hondo, in 
the province and government of Popayan, of the 
Nuevo Reyno de Granada ; situate on a long strip 
of land on the shore of a river near the city of Cali. 

HONDURAS, or HIBUERAS, a province and 
government of the kingdom of Guatemala. It ex 
tends from e. to w. the length of the coast of the 
N. sea, for 185 leagues, being 50 in width n. s. It 
is bounded the whole length of its extent by the 
provinces of Guatemala, San Salvador, San Mi- 



H O N 

guel, Choluteca, and Nicaragua; on the s. w. by 
the province of VeraPaz, and n. n. e. and n. w. by 
the gulf of its name ; and this it had from the cir 
cumstance of (he Spaniards, after great distress, 
not being able to find a port for a great distance 
along the coast, having thanked God at their de 
livery from so many honduras or depths. It is 
also called Hibneras, through the abundance of 
the calabashes of an extraordinary size found here, 
and which are thus called in St. Domingo. This 
country is for the most part mountainous, although 
it is not without valleys and Ucmuras. It is of a 
hot arid moist temperature, and consequently un 
healthy. It produces much cotton, of which are 
made quilts much and universally esteemed, the 
same forming one of the principal branches of its 
commerce. It abounds no less in honey, which 
is made by the bees in cells under ground, in wax, 
qji or pepper, Spanish potatoes, maize, and French 
beans ; and from these three crops are gathered an 
nually, since the country is rendered extremely 
fruitful by the inundations of the rivers, which or 
dinarily begin from the feast of St. Michael the 
archangel; and at this time the natives make ca 
nals and aqueducts for irrigating their orchards 
and gardens. This benefit is produced by various 
large rivers, the largest of which is the Hangaro. 
They all abound with fish ; and these are caught 
by the course of the river being blocked up by 
trees and earth, ami the men and women then going 
into the water and killing them, by means of sticks 
and javelins. The vines yield fruit twice a year, 
for the first vintage is scarcely over before the se 
cond crop of fruit is set ; and this is gathered be 
fore Christmas. Notwithstanding this great ferti 
lity of the country, much distress and scarcity was 
felt by the inhabitants previous to the coming of 
the Spaniards; for, being naturally idle, they cul 
tivated so few things, that they were under the ne 
cessity of supporting themselves by roots and even 
insects. They Mere much given to drunkenness, 
and were extremely fond of a liquor which they 
used to make from the honey of bees : at the same 
time they committed the most outrageous cruelties, 
reforming however t! eir conduct as soon as they 
were reduced to the Catholic faith. The town was 
formerly very large, though now mucli reduced. 
This country was conquered by Christoval de 
Olid Estremeno, one of the captains of Hernan 
Cortes, and renowned in the conqilest of Mexico. 
Finding that he was sent hence, he denied obe 
dience to his master Cortes, who with the intent to 
punish him followed him in a long and tedious 
pursuit, and when he came up with him found that 
lie had been treacherously killed by his soldiers, 



251 



as a reward for excesses he had committed. The 
capital is Valladolid, or Comayagua. 

HONDURAS, a very large and convenient bay of 
the above province, between the cape Honduras, 
in lat. \b\ n. and that of Coteche, at the e. 
extremity of the province of Yucatan, in Sly . 
This bay is celebrated for the establishment which 
the English made here, for cutting dyeing wood, 
and has been on various occasions the subject of 
many differences between the courts of Madrid and 
London. The part fixed upon for this establish 
ment is, according to Mr. Uringe, a great plain, 
the greater part of the same being swampy and 
full of lakes. In the dry season, when the wood 
cutters have a certain quantity of trees cut, they 
build a kind of cabin for their residence; they take 
oft the bark from the trees, heap them together, 
and when the rains come and deluge the country, 
let themselves be carried along with them down to 
the place where they are laden, where they are 
sold at 5/. the ton, Jamaica currency. At first 
the English carried on this trade in the bay of 
Campeche, but being driven from thence by the 
Spaniards, they transferred it to that of Honduras, 
where they have maintained themselves by force 
of arms, increasing until their numbers amounted 
to 1500, including masters and public officers. 
At the peculiar season the wood-cutters go in 
search of these trees, which grow in a line for 
many miles : they then cut the branches into large 
pieces, which they leave upon the ground until 
the rains bear them down to the river : from thence 
they are transported in canoes to the great public 
storehouses and lading places. The youth who 
dedicate themselves to this employ receive at first 
wages equal to a ton of Campeche wood for each 
month, with the liberty of working one day in 
each week on their own account. If they are 
sober and conduct themselves well, they are al 
lowed after a certain time to join their stock with 
that of their masters, and thus to carry on a free 
commerce. These labourers have a king, who 
governs them by laws which he enacts; also the 
vessels which come into the bay are under his cus 
tody. The wood is brought hither in flat-bottomed 
boats and during the night, in order that the day 
may be spared for putting it aboard. When the 
sailors of Jamaica find themselves persecuted, 
either by fancied or real ills, they embark for the 
bay of Honduras, where they follow the aforesaid 
employment. The whole of their equipment gene 
rally consists in a certain quantity of hatchets, 
chisels, saws, large knives, a grindstone, a musket, 
some powder anil ball, and small shot-; all the 
which they enclose in a chest, or roll up in a bit 

K K2 



252 



H O N 



of canvas, tied round by a cord. Their business 
is to cut the wood as near as possible to the sea, 
and the Tartans of New England who go to Ja 
maica, if they do not find a cargo there, come to 
seek one at this bay. The wood -cutters often make 
heaps of wood before the season for embarkation, 
and in that case they are never touched or-violated 
by others. This traffic was at one time a nest of 
pirates, and at another of a set no better than rob 
bers : indeed, all the malefactors of Jamaica, Mar 
tinique, Curazao, and the other islands, were sure 
of finding at this bay men of a bold, enterprising 
spirit, ready and fit for deeds of hardship, Avho 
were moreover well armed and excellent mariners. 
In 1722, this commerce was interrupted by five 
Spanish frigates, the which took and burnt 12 ves 
sels, destroyed the establishments that were made 
Lere, as also all the wood that was cut, and put to 
death the colonists ; but after some years, a fresh 
establishment had formed itself, which at last ob 
tained the royal permission from the crown of 
Spain to maintain itself under certain limits and 
conditions. Some of the above trees of the dyeing 
wood grow high and straight, but they afterwards 
become crooked ; they have a small leaf, their 
branches low and full of sharp points, and their 
Iruit is similar to white plums. They flower and 
bear a seed, which, falling on the earth, springs up 
and is rendered luxuriant by the inundations. All 
the rivers which run into the sea at this bay, 
abound in alligators and fish ; and in the woods is 
a great variety of birds and quadrupeds, such as 
stajjs, which are weak and small, tigers, and mon 
keys. In the small islands of the bay are found 
many small tortoises, or, as they are called there, 
galapagos, which are sought for with great eager 
ness. Here are also quantities of manaties, there 
called Jews fish, the same being very bulky and 
somewhat resembling a cod, although larger and 
better tasted ; they have moreover strong scales, 
and are accustomed to weigh 80 pounds each. 
The Oampeche wood that is carried hence by the 
English is reputed at 20,000 ton per annum, and 
the product of that which is carried away by the 
Dutch, amounts, including the various sorts, to 
.300,000 dollars. 

HoNDURAs,atown,withthededicatorytitleofSan 
Pedro, of the province and government of its name, 
and kingdom of Guatemala, founded by Pedro de 
Alvarado in 1536. It is very small, and the 
greater part of its inhabitants arc Indians of the 
country. It is 30 leagues from Comayagua. 

[HONDURAS, Sea of, is that part of the N. sea 
bounded n. by the island of Cuba, .v. by the Mos 
quito shore, s. w. by the bay of Honduras, w. by 



HOP 

the peninsula of Yucatan, n. w. by the gulf of 
Mexico, e. n. e. by Jamaica and the Caribbean 
sea.] 

[HONEYYOE, a lake in the Genessee coun 
try, in New York state, w. of Canandargua lake, 
five miles long and three broad.] 

HONGO, an isle of the N. sea; situate, with 
various others, between the point of the Caico 
Grande and (he Panuelo Quadrado. 

[11ONOMINIES, a river in the N.W. Terri 
tory, which runs ,?. s. e. into Puan bay. Between 
the head of this river and lake Superior is a short 
portage.] 

HOOCK, a river of the province and captain 
ship of Seara in Brazil. It runs into the sea be 
tween port Daniel and the river Guamara. 

[HOOD S Island, one of the Marquesas islands 
in the S. sea, so called by its discoverer Captain 
Cook. It lies in lat. 9 26 s. five or six leagues n. 
by w. of the e. point of Dominica.] 

[HOOK Island. See BOMBAY Hook.] 

[HOOKSET Falls, or HOOKSBT ISLE Falls, 
in Merrirnack river, just below the mouth of 
Suncook, seven miles above Amuskeag falls, and 
eight below Concord in New Hampshire.] 

[HOOKSTOWN, a village on the w. side of 
Chesapeak bay, in Maryland, in Baltimore county, 
six miles n. w. of the town of Baltimore.] 

[HOOKTOWN, a village on the e. side of 
Chesapeak bay, in Talbot county, Maryland, lies 
n. of Easton, and s. ie. of Williamsburg, nearly 30 
miles from each.] 

HOOPER, a settlement of the island of Barba- 
does, in the district of the parish of Christchurch, 
and on the s. coast. 

[HOOPER S Island and Straits lie on the e. side 
of Chesapeak bay, and on the s. w. coast of 
Dorchester county, Maryland. The island is seven 
miles long and 2| broad.] 

HOOPES, a large and narrow island of the bay 
of Chesapeak, in the province and colony of Mary 
land, opposite the entrance or mouth of the river 
Patuxen. 

[HOOSACK, a river of New York, which falls 
into the Hudson from the e. about eight miles 
above the city of Lansinburgh. It rises in Berk 
shire county, Massachusetts, runs n. w. through 
Pownal in Vermont, thence into New York state. 
Its length is about 40 miles. The curious mill- 
stream called Hudson s Brook, which falls into a 
n. branch of Hoosack, is described in the account 
of ADAMS, in Massachusetts.] 

[HOPE, a village in Sussex county, New Jersey, 
on the post-road frornNewtovrn to Easton in Penn 
sylvania, 16 miles s. w. of the former, aud 20 n. e. 



H O Q 

of the latter. It is inhabited by about 100 of the 
Moravian United Brethren.] 

[HOPE Bay, or, as it is more commonly called, 
PORT DE BUKNA ESPEIIANZA o DE CAYUCUA, 
lies a little to the n. w. of Nootka, the entrance of 
which is in lat. 49 51 n. Long. 127 8 a\] 

[HOPE, a Moravian settlement, in Wachovia 
in N. Carolina, in Surry county, where is a meet 
ing-house of the United Brethren.] 

[HOPE, a small island in Narraganset bay, state 
of Rhode Island.] 

[HOPKINS, or HOPKINSVILLE, a township in 
Caledonia county in Vermont, was granted to Dr. 
Hopkins; 11 miles n.w. of the upper bar of the 
Fifteen-mile falls in Connecticut river.] 

[HOPKINTON, a township in Hillsborough 
county, New Hampshire, on Contoocook river, 
nine miles s. w. from its confluence with the Mer- 
rimack, and divided from Concord on the e. by 
the Rockingham county line. It was first granted 
by Massachusetts, was incorporated in 1765, and 
contains 1715 inhabitants, who are chiefly farmers. 
It is 42 miles e. by s. of Charlestown on Connecti 
cut river, and about 64 w. by n. of Portsmouth.] 

[HOPKINTON, a township in Middlesex county, 
Massachusetts. It was incorporated in 1715, and 
contains 1317 inhabitants. The rivers Concord, 
Providence, and Charles, receive each of them a 
branch from this town. These streams furnish 
seats for seven or eight grist-mills, a number of 
saw-mills, iron-works, &amp;c.] 

[HOPKINTON, a township in Washington 
county, Rhode Island ; situated on the w. line 
of the state, on several branches of Pawcatuck 
river. It contains 2462 inhabitants, including 
seven slaves.] 

[HOPEWELL, a township in Cumberland 
county, in the province of New Brunswick ; situ 
ated on Chepodie river, which runs e. into a n. 
arm of the bay of Fundy, and is navigable four or 
five miles.] 

[HOPEWELL, the name of three townships in 
Pennsylvania, viz. in York, Huntingdon, and 
Washington counties.] 

[HOPEWELL, a township in Hunterdon county, 
New Jersey ; situated on Delaware river, nine 
miles w. of Princetown, 11 above Trenton, and 
20 s. w. of New Brunswick. It contains 2320 in 
habitants, including 233 slaves. Another town 
ship of this name lies in Cumberland county in 
New Jersey.] 

HOQUAKT, an island of New France or Ca 
nada, in lake Superior; situate near the e. coast. 

HoQifART, a cape or point of land on the e. 
coast of the same lake. 



H O R 



253 



HORADADA, PENA, a rocky shoal on the 
coast of the province and government of Santa 
Marta, and country of the Taironas Indians, be 
tween cape San Juan de Guia and the Rio del 
Hacha. 

HOIIADADA, a point of land on the coast of the 
province and government of Cartagena : it is one 
of those which form the bay of Sispata. 

HOUADADA, another rock, on the coast of the 
province and government of Piura, in the S. sea, 
and kingdom of Peru, close to the point of Paita. 

HORCASITAS, a town of the province and 
government of Sierra Gorda, in the bay of Mexico 
and kingdom of Nueva Espana, founded by the 
Colonel Don Joseph Escandon, in the year 1749 ; 
when he gave it this title in honour of the viceroy, 
who was at that time Count of Revillagigedo, and 
who had also this appellation. Here is a garrison 
and fort for the defence of the frontier. 

HORCASITAS, another settlement and garrison, 
of the province and government of Sonora, in that 
kingdom, the denomination of which arises from 
the same origin. It is situate between the two 
rivers which enter the Pitqui. 

HORCHAPS, a bay of the e. coast, in the 
island of Newfoundland, between Green bay and 
the cape of Good-luck, 

HORCONES, a settlement of Indians, of the 
province and corregimiento of Quillota in the king 
dom of Chile ; situate on the shore of the river 
Laraquitc. 

HOREK1LL, a port of the coast of the N. soa, 
in the province and colony of Maryland, at the 
entrance of the bay of Delaware. 

HO RH ETON, a settlement of Indians, of 
Louisiana; situate on the shore of a small river 
which enters the Mississippi, and extending as far 
as the French establishment formed here. 

HORM1GAS, LAS, a sand-bar, scattered with 
many rocks, in the N. sea, between the island of 
Cuba and that of Jamaica. 

HORN, Cape, a promontory, much celebrated, 
and known also by the name of San Salvador or De 
Hornos. It is at the point or extremity of S. Ame 
rica, in the S.sea or of Magellan, which looks to 
the arctic circle, at the terminal ion of the Land of 
Fuego. It is lofty, cold, and full of woods. It 
was first discovered by Jacob Le Maire, a Dutch 
man, in 1616, and since that ti.ne it has been 
made an easy and common pass into the S.sea. 
Admiral Alison, and the chief of the squadron, 
Don Joseph Pizano, bolh experienced lu*r", on 
their return to Europe, great tempests and calami 
ties, in J742, in attempt ing to. make it: the- first, 
with the view of committing hostilities a^aiubt the 



II O R 



coast of Peru ; and the second, to restrain the 
former. They both, however, lost the greater part 
of their ships, through the violence of those seas, 
as from their having attempted the voyage at a 
very bad season ; also from the coasts not then 
being so well known as they are now. In the last 
century this navigation was thought very difficult, 
and it was rarely ventured upon ; but since the 
time that the French have, from the beginning of 
the present century, [1800], frequented it through a 
thirst after a commerce with Peru, and that they 
found it preferable to the long and troublesome 
voyage of the straits of Magellan into the S. sea, 
its navigation has become very general. Tin s cape 
is inhabited by some Indian savages, of whom we 
have no accounts. It is in lat. 55 56 s. Long. 
67 20 w. 

HORN, a sand-bank of the w. coast of Nova 
Scotia or Acadia, between the port of its name, 
and the bay of St. Mary. 

HORN, a port on the coast of the same province 
as the former bank, between it and the Tusquets 
isles. 

[HORN, an island on the coast of W. Florida, 
between Ship and Massacre islands. Horn island 
is nearly 17 miles long, and about half a mile wide. 
There are more trees on the middle of the island 
than in any other part of it ; and for about three 
miles from the e. end there arc no trees at all ; but 
there are a number of sandy hillocks.] 

[HonN Town, a village in Maryland, 15 miles 
from Snowhill, 15 from Onancock, in Virginia, 
and 1^0 from Philadelphia.] 

HORN 1 L I ,-OS, a settlement of the province and 
government of Tucuman in Peru. It belongs to 
the district of the jurisdiction of Xuxuy, and is 
situate on the shore of the river Laquiaca. 

HORNILLOS, some isles of the river of Valdivia, 
in the kingdom of Chile. 

HORNOS, a small island of the river La Plata, 
situate near the w. coast. 

[HORSENECK FIELD Point, a round bluff on 
the coast of Greenwich township in Connecticut, 
two miles e. of the New York line, at Byram 
river.] 

[HORSENECK, a point of land on the n. side of 
Long island, between Hog s neck and Easton s 
neck.] 

[HORSENECK, a town in Fairfield county, Con 
necticut, called by the Indians Pai-hom-sing^ was 
settled in 1680. It lies six miles n. e. of Rye, in 
W. Chester county, New York state. A bloody 
battle was fought here between the Dutch and the 
Indians in 1646. The Dutch with great diffi 
culty obtained the victory. Great numbers were 



H O U 

slain on both sides ; and their graves appear to 
this day. It is 53 miles s. w. of New Haven, and 
37 n. e. of New York city.] 

[HORSENECK, a village in Essex county, New 
Jersey, on the s. bank of Passaic river, above the 
Little falls, four miles 5. w. by s. of the town of 
Patterson.] 

[HORSHAM, a township in Montgomery 
county, Pennsylvania.] 

[HOHTOiN,a township in King s county, Nova 
Scotia. Salmon river runs through Horton, and 
supplies the inhabitants with excellent salmon.] 

[I1OSACK, or HOOSACK, a township in liens- 
selaer county, New York, situated on the e. 
boundary of the state, contains 3035 inhabitants, 
419 of whom are electors.] 

HOSPITAL, a settlement of the province and 
corregimienfo of Maule in the kingdom of Chile ; 
situate on the shore of the river Maipo. 

HOSTIOS, some small isles or rocks near the 
Lucayas isles, between the island of Inagua and 
the Platas islands. 

[HOST1MURI, a small but well-peopled town 
of the intendancy of Sonora in Nueva Espana, sur 
rounded with considerable mines.] 

HOSTOTJPAN, a settlement of the akaldia 
mayor of Tixtlan in Nueva Espana, inhabited by 
30 families of Indians, and annexed to the curacy 
of the settlement of Apanco. 

HOSTUTLA, a settlement of the head settle 
ment, and alcaldia mayor of Chiiapa, in Nueva 
Espana. It contains 27 families of Indians, and is 
seven leagues to the e. of its capital. 

[HOT Spring. See VIRGINIA.] 

[HOTTE, a mountain in the w. part of the s. 
peninsula of the island of St. Domingo.] 

[HOUAHEINE, one of the Society islands, in 
the S. sea. Lat. 16 44 *. Long. 151 I w. \ 

[HOUAKILA, a name by some applied to the 
n. e. branch of Illinois river. See THEAK.IKI.] 

HOUEL, an island of the N. sea, one of the 
Antilles ; it is very small and also desert. Jt is 
situate between those of Guadalupe and Mariffa- 
lante. 

HOUGUE, a small fort, two leagues from the 
Havana, in the island of Cuba, close by the Pan de 
Matanzas, which is a mountain of the shape of a 
sugar-loaf, and which serves as a land-mark to 
mariners tor the entrance of the bay of Matanzas 
the which is 14 leagues distant from the Havana. 

HOUMAS, a settlement of Indians, of the pro 
vince and government of Louisiana ; situate on the 
shore of the river Mississippi, in the island which 
this river forms with the river Akankia. 

[HOUSATONICK, a river of Connecticut, in 



H U A 

the Indian language signifying over the mountain, 
rises by two sources ; the one in Lanesborough, 
and the other in Windsor, both in Berkshire 
county, Massachusetts. These branches form a 
junction near Salisbury, and the river, after passing 
through a number of towns, empties itself into 
Lori Island sound, between Stratford and Mil ford 
in Connecticut. It is navigable about 12 miles to 
Derby. A bar of shells, however, at its mouth, 
obstructs the navigation of large vessels. In this 
river, between Salisbury and Canaan, is a cata 
ract, where the water of the whole river, which is 
150 yards wide, falls perpendicularly 60 feet.] 

[HOUSE OF THE DEVIL. See LAKE ON 
TARIO.] 

HOUSSATONICK, a settlement of the English, 
in the province of Massachusetts and colony of 
New England ; situate on the shore of the river of 
its name. 

HOUSSAYE, Point of, on the . e. coast of the 
island of Martinique, between the bay of Sazevot 
und the island of Haye. 

HOWE, a settlement of the island of Barbadoes, 
in the district and parish of St. Philip ; situate on 
the e. coast. 

[Ho WE, Fort, on St. John s river in New Bruns 
wick, is capable of containing 100 men.] 

[HOWE S Island, in the S. sea, was discovered 
by Captain Wallace, July SO, 1767. Smoke was 
seen to arise from it, but no inhabitants could be 
discerned. Lat. 16 46 5. Long. 154 8 w.~\ 

[HO\V 7 LAND S Ferry is the narrow part of 
the waters that separate Rhode island from the 
mainland. It is about a quarter of a mile wide. 
The bridge built across this strait cost 30,000 dol 
lars, and was carried away by a storm in January 
1796. It is rebuilt.] 

HOYA, LA, a settlement of the missions which 
were held by the regulars of the company of Je 
suits, in the province of Taraumara, and kingdom 
of Nueva Vizcaya, 16 leagues to the s. one quarter 
to the s. w. of the real of the mines and town of 
San Felipe de Chiguagua. 

HOYA, LA, another settlement, the head settle 
ment of the district of the alcaldia mayor of Vil- 
lalta in Nueva Espana. It contains 35 families of 
Indians, and is five leagues from its capital. 

HOYOS, a town of the province and govern 
ment of the Sierra Gorda, in the bay of Mexico, 
founded in 1748 by the colonel of the militia of 
Queretaro, Don Joseph Escandon. 

HUACA, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Lampa. in Peru ; annexed to the 
curacy of Caracoto. 

II u AC A, another settlement, of the province and 



H U A 



255 



corregimiento of Caxatambo in Peru ; annexed to 
the curacy of Cochamarca. 

HUACACI1I, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Conch ucos in Peru ; annexed to 
the curacy of Zinga in the province of Gua- 
malies. 

HUACAHUACA, a settlement of the province 
and corregimiento of Castro Vireyna in Peru ; an 
nexed to the curacy of its capital. 

HUACAIBAMBA, a settlement of the province 
and corregimiento of Guamalies in Peru. 

HUACANA, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Lucanas in Peru. 

HUACA NCA, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Paucartarnbo in Peru ; annexed 
to the curacy of Challabarnba. 

HUACAPATA, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Larecaja in Peru ; annexed to the 
curacy of Ayata. 

11UACAR, SAN MIGUEL DE, a settlement of 
the province and corregimiento of Guanuco in 
Peru. 

HUACAR, another, in the province and corregi 
miento of Chancay in the same kingdom ; annexed 
to the curacy of Paccho. 

HUACAR, another, of the province and corregi 
miento of Castro Vireyna in the same kingdom ; 
annexed to the curacy of Chupamarca in the pro 
vince of Yauyos. 

HUACAKACHUCO, a settlement of the pro- 
vince and corregimiento of Guamalies in Peru. 

HUACARGUE, a settlement of the province 
and corregimiento of Colchagua in the kingdom of 
Chile ; annexed to the curacy of its capital. 

HUACAS, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Lucanas in Peru ; annexed to the 
curacy of Laramate. 

HUACAZ1NGO, S. MARCOS DE, a settlement 
of the head settlement of Oapan, and akafdia 
mayor of Textlan, in Nueva Espana ; situate near 
the river of Las Balsas. It contains 62 families of 
Indians, and is two leagues from its head settle 
ment. 

HUACCA, a settlement of the province and go 
vernment of Pastes, in the district and jurisdiction 
of the presidency of Quito. 

HUACHACALLA, a settlement of the province 
and corregimiento of Carangas in Peru, and of the 
archbishopric of Charcas. 

HUACHAPURE, Point of, on the coast of the 
kingdom of Chile, between the mouth of the river 
Itata, and the island of Curanta. 

HUACHI, a settlement of the province and cor 
regimiento of Conchucos in Peru ; annexed to th 
curacy of Uco. 



256 



H U A 



HUACIIICOLPA, a settlement of the province 
ami corregimiento of Cajatambo in Peru ; annexed 
to the curacy of Churin. 

HuACiiicoLPA, another, in the province .and 
CorregiinientQ of Chancay in the same kingdom. 

1ILJACHINGA, a settlement of the province 
and eofregimienlo of Chancay in Peru : annexed 
to the curacy of Iquasi. 

HUACHOCOLLPA, a settlement of the pro 
vince and correginiienlo of Angaraes in Peru ; an 
nexed to the curacy of Lircay. 

HUACIION, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Tarnia in Peru. 

HUACHOP, PUNT A DE, a point on the coast of 
the province and corregimiento of Itata and king 
dom of Chile, between the point of Humos and the 
river Itata. 

HUACHOS, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Castro Vireyna in Peru. It has 
annexed to its curacy a village, with a church 
called Pariconga. 

HUACHULA, a settlement of the province and 
bishopric of Tlaxcala in Nueva Espafia. 

HUACLLAN, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Guailas in Peru ; annexed to the 
curacy of Aija. 

HUACOS, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Canta in Peru ; annexed to the 
curacy of San Buenaventura. 

HUACQUILL, a settlement of the district of 
Guadalabquen in the kingdom of Chile. 

HUACQLJIRCA, a settlement of the province 
and corrcghiwn iO of Aimaracs in Peru. 

HUACLLLANI, a settlement, and the seat of 
the silver mines, of the province and corregimiento 
ofChucuito in Peru; annexed to the curacy of 
the settlement of Santiago. 

HUAHUA, or CHACHAPOYAS, a river of the 
province and corregimiento of this name in Peru. 
It rises in the cordillera, runs n. with the name of the 
Uccubamba, then turns its course to the w. when it 
changes that name, and incorporates itself with the 
Maranon, opposite the settlement of Tom penda. 

HUAHUI, a river of the province of Barbacoas. 
It runs from s. e. to n w. near the capital, and en 
ters the river TVlembi, in lat. I46 J I" n. 

HUA1CAMUACHO, a settlement of the pro 
vince and corregimiento of Lucanas in Peru ; an 
nexed to the cumcy of Cabana. 

HUAICHAO, a settlement of the province and 
com gi intent ) of Cant. i in Peru; annexed to the 
curacy of Pari. 

HUAICIIO, a settlement of the province and 
corrcgimient ;&amp;gt; of Omasuyos in Peru ; situate on the 
. shore of the lake iiticaca. 



H U A 

HUAICHO, another settlement, in the pro 
vince and corregimiento of Chancay, of the same 
kingdom ; annexed to the curacy of Iquari. 

HUA1CO, a settlement of the province and cor 
regimiento of Lipes in Peru, and archbishopric of 
Charcas ; annexed to the curacy of its capital, 

HUAICOI, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Canta in Peru ; annexed to the 
curacy of Atabillos Baxos. 

HUA1COMA, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Chayanta or Charcas in Peru. 

HIJAICURUS, a settlement of the province 
and government of Buenos Ayres. 

HUAIHUAI, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Guarrochiri in Peru ; annexed to 
the curacy of Yauli. 

HUAILAS. See GUAILAS. 

HUAILASH1RCA, a settlement of the province 
and corregimiento of Tarma in Peru ; annexed to 
the curacy of Chacayan. 

HUA1LLABAMBA, a settlement of the pro 
vince and corregimiento of Urubamba in Peru. 
It contains within its district various estates, and 
amongst these is a reduced convent of the monks 
of St. Francisco, called Urquillos, where the sacra 
ments are adminstered to the inhabitants of the 
precincts. 

HUAILLABAMBA, a large, fertile, and beautiful 
valley of the province and corregimiento of Cha- 
chapoyas in Peru. 

HUAILLACAYAN, a settlement of the pro 
vince and corregimiento of Caxatambo in Peru ; 
annexed to the curacy of Caxacay. 

HUAILLACUCHU, a settlement of the pro 
vince and corregimiento of Angaraes in Peru ; an 
nexed to the curacy of Santa Ana. This is the 
place where are made the glazed earthen-ware ves 
sels for extracting quicksilver, from which busi 
ness great emolument is derived. 

HUA1 LLAMA RCA, a settlement of the pro 
vince and corregimiento of Carangas in Peru, and 
of the archbishopric of Charcas. 

HUA1LLARIPA, a settlement of tlie province 
and corregimiento of Aimaraez in Peru, where 
there were formerly some rich washing places of 
gold, which have fallen much into disrepute, since 
the gold now extracted from them is comparatively 
little. 

IIUA1LLA8, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Carita in Peru; annexed to the 
curacy of Pari. 

HUAILLATI, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Cotabamba in Peru. 

HUAILLAY, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Angaraes in Peru, where is yene- 



H U A 

rated a miraculous image of Christ crucified, to 
which great devotion is paid by the surrounding 
neighbourhood. It is annexed to the curacy of 
JL/ircay. 

HUAIT^AY, another settlement, in the province 
and corregimiento of Guanta in Peru ; annexed to 
the curacy of Lauricocha. 

HUA1NAMOTA, a settlement of the missions 
which were held by the regulars of the company 
of Jesuits, in the province of Nayarith and king 
dom of Nueva Galicia. It is 15 leagues to the s. e. 
of the settlement of La Mesa. 

11UAIQUI, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Quispicanchi in Peru ; annexed 
to the curacy of Acomayo. 

HUAIRAHUACHO, a settlement of the pro 
vince and corregimiento of Airnaraez in Peru ; an 
nexed to the curacy of Sirca. 

HUA1MAPATA, a settlement of the province 
and cerregfmftnto of Sicasica in Peru ; annexed to 
the curacy of Coroico. 

HUAITARA, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Castro Vireyna in Peru. 

[HUAJOC1NGO, or UUEXOTZINCO, a consi- 
der bte town of the intendaucy of La Pueblade los 
Angeles in Nueva Kspana ; formerly the chief 
town of a small republic of the same name, at en- 
inity with the republics of Tlascalla and Cholula.] 

HUALLA, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Calca and Lares in Peru ; annexed 
to the curacy of Lares. 

HUALLA, another settlement, in the province 
and corregimiento of Vilcashuaman, of the same 
kingdom. 

HUALLABAMBA, or GUALLAPAMBA, a set 
tlement of the kingdom of Quito ; situate to the n. 
on a delightful plain, but of a hot and unhealthy 
climate ; near to which passes the river Tumbaco, 
which there changes its name into that of the settle, 
ment. Here is the celebrated road called Ladera 
de Huallabamba, cut in the side of a mountain, 
on the bank of the same river, the same beginning 
from the bridge and ending at the place called 
Cara-pungo, which signifies bridge of skins. It is 
two leagues in length. The settlement is in lat. 4 
2&amp;lt; s. 

HUALLANCAHUAMBO, a settlement of the 
province and corregimiento of Guailas in Peru ; 
annexed to the curacy of Pararin. 

HUALLANTO, a settlement of the province 
and corregimiento of Castro Vireyna in Peru ; an 
nexed to the curacy of its capital. 

H UAL LISA, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Guanta in Peru; annexed to the 
curacy of Pampas. 

VOL. II. 



25? 



I1UALLMI, a spacious plain, also called the 
Valley of Guarmey, in Peru. It was formerly very 
populous, and was one of the conquests of the Inca 
Pachacutec. 

IIUALLON, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Guailas in Peru ; annexed to the 
curacy of Pararin. 

HUALLPI, a settlement of the missions which 
are held by the religious orders of S. Francisco, in 
the province of Moqui of Nuevo Mexico. 

HUALLUUA, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Lucanas in Peru ; annexed to the 
curacy of Saiz^i. 

II UALLUi 1 AS, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Xauja in Peru ; annexed to the 
curacy of S. Geronimo. 

HUAMACMUCO. See GUAMACHUCO. 

HUA VIAL, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Xauja in Peru ; annexed to the 
curacy of Apata. 

HUAiVlALA TA, a settlement of the province 
and corregimiento of Coquimbo in the kingdom of 
Chile ; situate in a valley of the same name. 

HUAMALIES. See G -AMAMES. 

HUAMANGA. See GUAM ,NGA. 

HUAMANGUILLA. SeeGi:AMANOuiLLA. 

HUAMANAPALA, an ancient province of 
Peru, on the coast of the Pacific sea. It was con 
quered and united to the empire by the Inca Capac 
Yupanqui. 

HUAMANSICA, a settlement of the province 
and corregimiento of Guarochiri in Peru ; annexed 
to the curacy of Chorrillo. 

HUAMBA, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Santa in Peru ; annexed to the 
curacy of Guarmey. 

11 U A MBA CIIO, a settlement of the same pro 
vince, corregimiento 9 and kingdom as the former ; 
annexed to the curacy of Nepena. 

HUAMBALPA, a settlement of the province 
and corregimiento of Vilcashuaman in Peru, 
where there is a sanctuary of the most devout 
image of Nuestra Seuora de la Concepcion ; at the 
festival of which a great concourse of people meet 
from the surrounding provinces. 

IIUAMBO, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Collahuas in Peru, in the vicinity 
of which is a lake called Motorca, which is three 
leagues in circumference, and in which is bred a 
kind of fish eaten by the Indians, and called ispi. 
From this lake are led certain canals for irrigating 
the territory, and in these canals are formed petre- 
factions, which have much the resemblance of 
pumice stone, of an extremely hard quality. They 
are under the necessity of being cleaned out yearly, 
L L 



258 



H U A 



as otherwise they would become choked, and the 
course of the waters impeded ; the natural conse 
quence being the sterility of the surrounding lands. 
These waters, when drank, are noxious. 

HUAMBO, another settlement, in the province and 
corregimiento of Guailas in Peru ; annexed to the 
curacy of Marca. 

HUAMBO, another, of the province and corrcgi- 
tnicnto of Chachapoyas in the same kingdom. It 
is a very ancient reduction of the infidels, made by 
the religious missionaries of Hnaillabamba. 

H U AM BOS, S. JUAN nr,, a settlement of the 
province and corregimiento of Caxamarca iu 
Fern. 

HUAMELUA, or GUAMELULA, the okaldia 
mayor of Nueva Esparto, in the province and 
bishopric of Oaxaca. It is 39 leagues long from 
f. to w. and the same wide n. s, terminating by 
this part at the coasts of the Pacific. It produces 
much cotton, of which several sorts of woven 
manufactures of high estimation are made. It 
abounds in lakes filled with Various kinds of fish ; 
and this article forms one of the branches of the 
commerce of its jurisdiction. At the distance of 
eight leagues from the capital is a large lake, whose 
witters are red, and therefore it is called Colorada. 
On the coasts are found, thrown up by the sea, 
shells containing a purple colour, used in dyeing 
cotton, and of high estimation, the same being 
called maritime purple. This jurisdiction is 
bounded e. by that or Tehuantepec, and by the 
boundaries of the marquisatc of Valle, the termi 
nation or limit of which is an elevated mountain 11 
leagues from the capital ; and three leagues from it, 
by a sand-bank lying on the sea-shore, there formerly 
stood a settlement, which is to-day desert and 
ruined ; all its inhabitants having died through a 
general plague, which occurred in the year 1737. 
The aforesaid lakes, which are regularly fished, 
are the property of the Indians by a special privi 
lege and concession of the king; and these natives, 
independently of this employment, are much given 
to agriculture. 

HUAMELUA, the capital, which is the resi 
dence of the alcalde mayor, is of the same name, 
having also the dedicatory title of S. Pedro. It 
consists of 232 families of Chontales Indians, who 
cultivate and trade in the fruits that we have men 
tioned as peculiar to this climate. It is 45 leagues 
.v. e. of Mexico, in hit. 16 13 n. Long. 95 44 w. 
The other settlements are, 
Santiago Aztalla, S. M iguel Chongo, 

Santa Maria Huatulco, San Miguel A catepec, 
S. Miguel, Zapotlan, 

S. Pedro, S. Pedro Pocbutla, 



II U A 

Santa Maria Tonameca, Santa Maria Tlacolula, 
Santa Maria Xuchite- San Juan Elotepec. 
pec, 

HUAMOSTITLAN, a settlement and head 
settlement of the alcnldiu mayor of Tlapa in Nueva 
Espafm. It contains 152 families ot Tlapanecos 
Indians, and 10 of Musters and Mulattocs, who, the 
one and the other, are employed in agriculture and 
making sugar. It is four leagues and an halt from 
its capital. 

HLJAMPARA, a settlement of the province and 
CO) regimiento of Yauyos in Pern; annexed to the 
curacy of the settlement of Ayaviri. 

HUANACACHE. See GUANACACHE. 

HUANACANTI, a very lofty mountain of the 
correginn ettto of Cuzco, where the Incas had a 
temple dedicated to the sun, and where the Indians 
assert that the first Inca appeared, the same having 
been the founder of the empire, and sent from the 
aforesaid luminary, the sun, for the purpose of 
civilizing the natives. It is s. of the capital. 

HUANACAS. See GUANACAS. 

HUANACO, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Yauyos in Peru; annexed to the 
curacy of Arma in the province of Castro V ireyna. 

HUANACOS, Mountain of the, in the island of 
La Laxa in the kingdom of Chile, on the shore of 
the river Huague, where this enters the Rarinco. 

HUANACTAMBO, a settlement of the province 
and corregimiento of Yauyos in Peru ; annexed to 
the curacy of Arma in the province of Castro 
V ireyna. 

HUANAGASTA, a settlement of the province 
and government of Tucuman, in the district and 
jurisdiction of the city of Santiago del Estero, 
where there is a chapel annexed to its curacy. 

HUANAHUE, some lakes of the kingdom of 
Chile, in the district of Guadalquen. They are 
three and very large ; and from them the river 
Valdivia takes its rise. 

HUANAHUE, a settlement of Indians, of the same 
district and kingdom as the former lakes, and si 
tuate near them. 

HUANANGUI, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Chancay in Peru ; annexed to the 
curacy of Paccho. 

HUANAPE. SecGuAXAPE. 

HUANCA, a settlement of the province and cor- 
regimiento of Collahuas in Peru ; annexed to the 
curacy of Llauta. 

II UANCABAMKA , a settlement of the province 
and corregimiento of Piura in Peru. 

HUAtfCAllUANCA, a settlement of the pro 
vince and corregiwiettto of Chilques and Masques 
in Peru ; annexed to the curacy of lluaiioquite. 



H U A 

HUANCAIIUANCA, another settlement, of the pro 
vince and corregimiento of Chilques and Masques 
in Peru; annexed to the curacy of the settlement 
ot Huafioquite. 

HUANCAHUANCA, another settlement, in the 
province and corregimiento of Angaraez in the 
same kingdom ; annexed to the curacy of Lircay ; 
situate on the shore of the river of its name. 

HUANCAHUANCA, another, in the province and 
corregimiento of Camana of the same kingdom ; 
situate mi the shore of the river Mages. 

HUANCAIRE, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Camana of the same kingdom ; 
situate on the shore of the river Mages. 

HUANCAIRE, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Guarochiri in Peru ; annexed to 
the curacy of San Lorenzo of Quinti. 

HUANCANE, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Paucorcalla in Peru. It contains 
a chapel dedicated to the Virgin of La Concepcion, 
whose picture is painted against the wall. It is 
situate on the e. shore of the great lake Titicaca. 

HUANCANE, another settlement, in the province 
and corregimiento of Paria in the same kingdom ; 
annexed to the curacy of Ghallapata. 

HUANCANI, SAN ANTONIO DE, a settlement 
of the province and corregimiento of Xauja in 
Peru ; annexed to the curacy of Matahuasi. 

HUANCAPAMPA, an ancient province of 
Peru, to the n. n. w. of Cuzco. It was reduced by 
force of arms to the dominion of the Incas by 
Capac Yupanqui, twelfth emperor, who also made 
it tributary. 

HUANCAPI, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Vilcashuaman in Peru. 

HUANCARACUCMA, a settlement of the same 
province and corregimiento as the former ; annexed 
to the curacy of Cangallo. 

HUANCARA1LLA, a settlement of the same 
province and corregimiento as the former. 

H UANCARALN E, a settlement of the province 
and corregimiento of Paria in Peru ; annexed to 
the curacy of Challacollo. 

HUANCARI, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Andahuailas in Peru. 

HUANG ART, a settlement of the province and 
corregiiniento of Aimaraez in Peru ; annexed to 
the curacy of Pachaconas. 

HUANCARQUI, a settlement of the province 
and corregimiento of Carnana in Peru ; situate in 
the valley of Mages, close upon a river, by which 
it is made fertile ; and especially so in vines, pro 
ducing annually grapes sufficient for S00,000 
bottles of wine, which., tor the greater part, is con 
verted into brandy- 



H U A 



259 



HUANCAS, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Chachapoyas in Peru ; annexed 
to the curacy of Levanto. 

HUANCAY, a settlement of the asicnto or seat 
of the silver mines of the j^rovince and corregi- 
miento of Guamachuco in Peru ; annexed to the 
curacy of Luctna. 

HUANCAYA, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Yauyos in Peru. 

HIJANCHAI, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Caxatambo in Peru ; annexed to 
the curacy of Cochas. 

HUANCHAT, another, in the province and corre- 
gimiento of Guailas in the same kingdom ; annexed 
to the curacy of Pampas. 

HUANCHOR, S. MATFO DE, a settlement of 
the province and corregimiento of Guarochiri in 
Peru. 

HUANCR1N, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Guamalies in Peru ; annexed to 
the curacy of Jesus. 

HUANDACOL, a settlement of the province 
and government of Tucuman in Peru, oi the juris 
diction of the city of Rioja. 

HUANDO, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Angaraez in Peru ; annexed to 
the curacy of Acoria. 

HUANDO, a cordillera of mountains or sierra of 
Peru, which begins in the province of Abancai, 
tuns s. forming a curve, then turns e. and serves as 
a limit between the province of Chumbivilcas and 
that of Cotabambas. 

HUANDOVAL, a settlement of the province 
and corregimiento of Conchucos in Peru ; annexed 
to the curacy of Cavana. 

IIUANGASCA, a settlement of the province and 
correg/mienfo of Castro Vireyna in Peru ; annexed 
to the curacy of Vinac in the province of 
Yauyos. 

HUANIC, a settlement of the province and cor 
regimiento of Yauyos in Peru. 

HUANICAPA, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Abancay in Peru. 

HUANIPAYA, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Yarnparaes in Peru, and of the 
archbishopric of Charcas. 

HU AN MA RCA, a settlement of the province 
and correghnient o- of Vilcashuaman in Peru ; an 
nexed to the curacy of Vilcas. 

HUANOQUITE, a settlement of the province 
and corregimiento of Chilques and Masques in 
Peru. 

ll UANTA. SeeGuANTA. 

HUANTAJAYA, a mountain of the province, 
of Arjca in Peru, at two league? distance iVozn the 
L i ^ 



H U A 

sea, where there are some rich silver mines, which 
yield but little, through a scarcity of water. 

HUANTAN, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Yauyos in Peru ; annexed to the 
curacy of its capital. 

HUANTAll, a settlement oi the province and 
Corregimiento of Conch ucos in Peru ; annexed to 
the curacy of Chavin. 

HUANTAR, another settlement, in the same pro 
vince, with the additional title of Chavin, to dis 
tinguish it from the former. 

HUANUCO. See GUANUCO. 

HUxVNZA, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Guarochiri in Peru ; annexed to 
the curacy of farampoma. 

HUAPANTE, a large and abundant river of 
the kingdom of Quito, in the province of Arnbato. 
It flows down from the mountain of Quclendana, 
which is eternally covered with snow, runs from 
a. to s. then turns w. and enters the river Arnbato 
on the e. just before this runs into the Pachanlica 
on the opposite part. 

HUAQUE, a river of the island of La Laxa in 
the kingdom of Chile. It runs w. between the 
rivers Duquesa and Laxa, and enters the Biobio. 

H UAQUI, a settlement of the province and cor 
regimiento of Pacajes in Peru. 

HUAQUILPA, a settlement of the jurisdiction 
and alcaldia mayor of Pachuca in Nueva Espaiia ; 
annexed to the curacy of Tesayuca. It contains 
SO families of Indians. 

HUAQU1RI, a river of the province and go 
vernment of Guayana or Nueva Andalucia. It 
rises in the country of the Paudacotos Indians, 
and enters the head of the Aruy. 

HUAQUIS, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Yauyos in Peru ; annexed to the 
curacy of the settlement of Laraos. 

HUARACONDO, a settlement of the province 
and corregimiento of Abancay in Pern. 

HUARAL, a settlement of the province and cor 
regimiento of Chancny in Peru. 

H UAI1ARE, a lake of the province and country 
of La;; Amazonas, which is formed by a waste 
branch of the river Maranon, opposite the settle 
ment of the missions of San Ignacio de Pevas, 
which were held by the regulars of the company 
of Jesuits. 

HUARAS, a barbarous nation of warlike Indians 
of Peru, who, after a resistance of a cruel and 
bloody war which lasted six months, became sub 
jected to the empire under the Inca Pachacutec, 
tenth emperor. 

HUARAZ, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Peru, and capital of the same; 



H U A 

situate in the n. part, two leagues from a hot me 
dicinal stream of very celebrated virtues. Its po 
pulation amounts to 5000 souls; it has two 
parishes, a convent of the recoletan order of Sari 
Francisco, and an hospital of Bethlemitcs. 

HUARCAS, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Caiiete in Peru, founded in a 
beautiful valley of the same name by the Marquis 
of Canete, viceroy of that kingdom in 1556. By 
it passes a great river, which fertilizes its territory ; 
and it was very populous in former times, but has 
fallen to decay, without being able to re-establish 
itself, after the earthquake which happened here 
in 1687, and after the mischief it experienced when 
it was sacked by the English pirate Edward 
David. It has two convents of monks, one of San 
Francisco and another of Sari Agustin, both reduced 
to the greatest poverty. In its vicinity are seen 
the ruins of a palace of the Incas. It is one league 
from the sea and 24 from Lima. 

HUARI, a settlement of the province and corre 
gimiento of Paria in Peru ; annexed to the curacy 
of Condocondo. 

HUARI, another settlement, with the dedicatory 
title of San Luis, in the province and corregimiento 
of Conchucos in the same kingdom. 

HUAIU, another, with the surname of Rey, the 
capital of the same province and corregimiento as 
the former. 

HUARIACA, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Tarrna in Peru. 

HUARIBAMBA, a settlement of the province 
and corregimiento of Guanta in Peru. 

1IUARHUA, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Parinacochas in Peru, in the dis 
trict of which is a mountain of salt, in which it 
trades, and supplies the other provinces for the use 
of the silver mines. 

HUARICANGA, S. JUAN DE, a settlement of 
the province and corregimiento of Caxatambo in 
Peru ; annexed to the curacy of Pativilca in the 
province of Santa. 

HUAR1GANCHA, a settlement of the province 
and corregimiento of Gnamalies in Peru; annexed 
to the curacy of Huacaibamba. 

UUAR1NA, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Omasuyos in Peru, where is vene 
rated the image of the Most Holy Christ, with the 
dedicatory title of the Seiior de las Batallas, the 
same having been sent hither by the Emperor 
Charles V. Its miracles attract the devotion of the 
faithful of these provinces. In the vicinity is a 
field culled De la Batalla, from the battle which was 
gained by the army of Gonzalo Pizzarro against 
the loyalists, these being commanded by Diego 



H U A 

Centeno, in 1547. It is situate on the e. shore of 
the lake Titicaca. 

MUAR1PAMPA, a settlement of the province 
and corregimienlo of Xauja in Peru. 

HUARMARCAS, a settlement of the province 
and corregimienlo of Piura in Peru. 

HUARMEI. See GUARNEY. 

IIUAR-MICOCHA, a lake of the province and 
corregimiento of Yauyos in Peru, and district of 
Pampas. It is two leagues long, and a quarter 
wide. In it grows a very rare herb, called pircay, 
with which the Indians dye their woollen cloths of 
a bright and durable red. 

HUAROAYA, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Vilcashuaman in Peru ; annexed 
to the curacy of Chuschi. 

HUAROC, a settlement of the province and 
corrcgimienlo of Quispicanchi in Peru ; annexed 
to the curacy of Urcos. 

IIUAROCHJR1. SeeGuARocHiRi. 

HUAROQU1N, a settlement of the province 
and corregimiento of Canta in Peru ; annexed to 
the curacy of Atabillos Altos. 

HUAROS, a settlement of the same province 
and corregimiento as the former ; annexed to the 
curacy of San Buenaventura. 

HUASAC, a settlement of the province and cor 
regimiento of Paucartambo in Peru ; annexed to 
the curacy of the settlement of Caicai. 

HUASAGA. See GUASAGA. 

HUASAH1CASI, a settlement of the province 
and corregimiento of Tarma in Peru, where a fort 
has been built to restrain the incursions of the in 
fidel Indians of the mountains. 

HUASCO. SeeGuAsco. 

HUASTA, a settlement of the province and cor- 
reghniento of Caxatambo in Peru ; annexed to the 
curacy of Chiquian. 

HUATA, a settlement of the province and cor 
regimiento of Parinacochas in Peru ; annexed to 
the curacy of Lampa. 

HUATACONDO, a settlement of the province 
and corregimiento of Arica in Peru ; annexed to 
the curacy of Pica. 

HUATANAI, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Quispicanchi in Peru. 

HUATES, a settlement of the province and go 
vernment of Mainas in the kingdom of Quito; si 
tuate on the shore of the river Napo. 

HUATIAPA, a very lofty mountain of the pro 
vince and corregimiento of Canuina in Peru, where 
there is an excellent mineral of crystal of various 
colours. 

HUATICLAME, a settlement of the province 
and corregimiento of Coquimbo in the kingdom 

2 



H U A 



of Chile ; situate on the shore of the river Li 
ma y . 

HUATUJLCO, SANTA MARIA BE, a settle 
ment of the head settlement of Aztatla, and alcaldia 
mayor of I uamelula, in Nueva Espnna ; situato 
on an extensive lofty level, on the sides of which 
runs a river rather scantily supplied with water, 
although this is very sweet and clear, and is the 
source from whence the whole neighbourhood is 
furnished. The population amounts to 44 fami 
lies of Indians, and these have gardens and or 
chards lying in a level plain, which are surround 
ed and irrigated by the waters of the said river. 
Here they have cochineal and some seeds used for 
dyeing, as also cotton. This settlement is annexed 
to the curacy of San Miguel de las Piiias, in the 
jurisdiction of Miahuatlan, and it is 18 leagues 
from its head settlement. At the distance of two 
leagues is a chapel, in which is venerated a cross, 
in regard to which the following wonderful miracle 
has happened: When the pirate Francis Drake 
arrived here in an English vessel, and was disap 
pointed at not finding any thing to relieve his 
hunger and necessities, he, with his companions, 
under the impulse of rage, resolved to revenge 
themselves by venting their fury against the cross 
which was standing fixed here, and accordingly, 
having taken the trouble to besmear it with pitch, 
they set fire to it ; but the pitch burnt ofi , and the 
wood, remained uninjured. More indignant still at 
this, they attached one end of a cable to the holy 
wood, and the other to the ship s mast, so that it 
might pull whilst the ship was in sail; and not 
withstanding the violence of the shock, the cross 
was not the least disturbed from its situation, but 
the cable snapped in twain. After some time these 
same sailors returned ashore, and began with 
hatchets and other instruments to hew down this 
wonderful tree ; but the miracle did not stop here, 
for their heaviest blows could make no impression 
whatever, whilst their implements broke to pieces. 
In testimony therefore of this event, the chapel 
was built on the very spot, where also the cross is 
to be seen at this day. The whole of this story is 
told by Don Joseph de Villaseiior, in his Teatro 
Americano de Nueva Espana. 

HUALUZCO, SAN ANTONIO DE, a settlement 
and head settlement of the district of the alcoldia 
mayor of Cordoba in Nueva E&amp;gt;pana. It is of a 
hot temperature, inhabited by six families of Spa 
niards, 40 of Muslees, and 350 of Indians. It is 
10 leagues to the . of its capital. 

HUAM 7.co, another settlement, with the dedi 
catory title of Santiago, being also the head s t(le- 
nient of a district of the same alcaldia and king- 



262 



H U A 



dom. It contains 39 families of Indians, who 
employ themselves in fishing for bobos, in a river 
which passes through it. lit is filled with puddles 
and waste waters flowing from the said river. 

II UATZALIXGO, a settlement and head settle 
ment of the district of the alcafdia mayor of Yau- 
hualica in Nueva Espana, where dwell 450 fami 
lies of Indians. 

^ H UAUCHINANGO, an alcaldia mayor of the 
kingdom of Nueva Galicia, and bishopric of Gua- 
dalaxara. It is one of those whose jurisdiction is 
the most extensive, but whose vegetable produc 
tions and whose population are the most limited. 
It is watered by the river of La Purificacion, on 
the shores of which are various farms and grazing 
lands of large and small cattle ; and of these pas 
tures there is a great abundance, owing to the heat 
of the climate. 

The capital is of the same name, inhabited by 
more than 50 families of Indians and some Spa 
niards, Mustees, and Mulattoes. It is 26 leagues 
to the zo. s. w. of Guadalaxara, in long. 266 15 . 
Lat. 21 42 . The other settlements are Mistan 
and Ateguillo. 

HUALJINA, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Arica in Peru ; annexed to the 
curacy of Tarapaca. 

mJAURA. SeeGirAURA. 

HUAUTLA, a settlement of the head settle 
ment of the district of Tetchi, and alcaldia mayor 
of Azuchitlan ; situate in a narrow defile, at the 
skirt of two mountains which are surrounded by 
two rivers, which precipitate themselves from the 
sierra Mad re. It contains 33 families of Indians, 
dedicated to the cultivating of the vegetable pro 
ductions with which its territory abounds. It is 
20 leagues to the s. e. of its capital. 

HUAUTLA, another settlement, which is the 
head settlement of the district of the alcaldia 
mayor of Cuicatlan in Nueva Espana. It is of a 
cold and moust temperature, situate at the ascent 
of a mountain. It contains 352 families of Maza- 
tccos Indians, including those of the wards of 
its district. It is 11 leagues to the e. of its capi 
tal. 

HUAUTZOTLA, a settlement of the head 
settlement of Olinala, and alcaldia mayor of Tlapa, 
in Nueva Espana. It contains 37 families of In 
dians, and is three leagues to the n. c. of its head 
settlement. 

HUAYACONGA, a settlement of the province 
and corregimiento of Chilqucs and Masques in 
Peru ; annexed to the curacy of Colcha. 

HUAYALULCO, a settlement of the head 
.settlement of the district of Xocotla, and alcaldia 



H U A 

mm/or of Tlapa, in Nueva Espaiia. It contains 
84 families of Indians, and is three leagues to the 
w. n. e. of its head settlement. 

II UA YAM A, a settlement of the province and 
correghniento of And.viuailas in Pern. 

I1UAYAN, a settlement of the province and 
cofregfnrienfo of Guailas in Peru. 

HuAYCHAO, a settlement of the province 
and corregimiento of Guunta in Peru ; annexed to 
the curacy of Lauricocha. 

IIUAYCHU, a part of the kingdom of Peru, 
in the province of Collas, celebrated for the battle 
fought against these natives by Mayta Capac, 
fourth emperor of the Incas, by which they were 
overcome, and made subject to the empire of the 
latter. 

HUAYLLARUM, a large lake of the province 
and corregimiento of Tarma in Peru. It is five 
leagues in length and three in width, and from it 
is formed a small river, which enters the Paria. 

HUAYLLAS, a barbarous and ancient nation 
of Indians of Peru, to the e. of Cuzco. It was 
rendered tributary to the empire by the Inca Pa- 
chacutec, tenth emperor. 

HUAYO, SANTA MAGDALENA DE, a settle 
ment of the province and corregimiento of Caxa- 
marquilla in Pern. It has a good port in the river 
Maraiion, by which it carries on a commerce with 
the province of Guamachuco. 

HUAYOCACIH, a settlement of the province 
and corregimiento of Xauja in Peru ; annexed to 
the curacy of Huancayo. 

IIUAYTARA, an ancient province of Peru, 
to the n. of Cuzco. It is full of woods, rivers, and 
lakes. It was conquered by the Inca V iracocha, 
eighth emperor. 

HUAYTARA, or GUAYTARA, a large and abun 
dant river of the province of Pasto in the kingdom 
of Quito. It flows down from the mountains to 
the e. of the settlement of Furies, and runs w. until 
it enters the Rumichaca, with the which it turns 
its course to the n. ; and after that it has collected 
nearly at the same time the waters of the Huachi- 
cono and the Iluayo, it enters into the s. side of 
the Patia, in lat. 1 28 n. 

HUAZCALTEPEC, a settlement of the head 
settlement of the district and ulcaldia mayor or* 
Xicayan in Nueva Espana. It contains 78 fami 
lies of Indians, and two of Spaniards, who are en 
gaged in trading in cochineal and sowing rice, 
these being its natural productions. It is two 
leagues n. zo. of its head settlement. 

IIUAZOLOTITLAN, a settlement of the same 
head settlement of the district and alcaldia mayor 
ai the former. It contains 200 families of Indians, 



HUD 

10 of Spaniards, and 80 of Mtilatfoes, who trade 
in cochinral, seeds, and cotton. It is 15 leagues 
to the c. of its head settlement. 

HUAZTOTIPAC, a small settlement of the 
alcaldia mayor of Guanchinango in Nueva Es- 
pana ; annexed to the curacy of Tlaola. 

[HUBBARDSTON, a township in Worcester 
county, Massachusetts, and formed the n. e. 
quarter of Rutland, until incorporated in 1767. 
It borders on the w. part of Wachuset hill, and 
contains 933 inhabitants. It is 20 miles n. w. of 
Worcester, and 60 w. of Boston.] 

[IIUBBARDTON,asmall river rising in the n. 
part of this township, noticeable only for its five 
falls, which furnish excellent mill-seats.] 

[HUBRERTON,utowuship in Rutland county, 
Vermont. It contains 401 inhabitants, and lies 50 
miles w. of Bennington.] 

HUB1ERNA, a river of the province and go 
vernment of Tucuman, in the disl; : ct of Salta. 
It runs f. and enters the Salado, between the Cal- 
dera and the Baquero. 

HUBINAS, a nation of Indians of Peru, in 
the province of Condesuyos. Their numbers are 
few, and they are divided into various small settle 
ments. 

HUCAN, a settlement of the province and cw- 
regimiento of Collahuas in Peru ; annexed to the 
curacy of Sihuas, situate in a valley which is 10 
leagues in length, and extends itself through the 
province of Camana. as far as the sea. 

IIUCHUPAMPA, a settlement of the province 
and corregimicnto of Guarochiri in Peru ; annexed 
to the curacy of San Pedro de Casta. 

HUCO, a town of the province and corregi- 
miento of Cuyo in the kingdom of Chile, founded 
in a valley of this name, where is the fort of San 
Carlos to restrain the infidel Indians, who on that 
part have made continual irruptions, destroying 
the greater and better part of its estates. 

HUCSUMANE, a settlement of the missions 
which belong to the religious order of San Agustin, 
in the country of Paititi, of the province and cor- 
repimiento of Larecaxa in Peru. 

IIUUSON, Bay of, a large bay of N. America, 
where the English company of its name have 
various establishments and forts, and where, 
through the medium of their factors, they carry 
on a great trade with the Indians, taking from 
these castor-skins and other articles, on which they 
make a very great profit. This bay is about 860 
miles long from Moose fort on the s. to Cumber 
land island on the n. : its width is unequal, since 
in some parts it is 590 miles, and in others as nar 
row as 130. At its entrance are the islands of 



II U D 



263 



Resolution and Mansfield, and in the strait those 
of Charles, Salisbury, and Nottingham. From 
Resolution island to cape Diggs, at the entrance 
of the bay, it is about 388 miles. The lands on, 
either side, which are those of Labrador and North 
Main, are in general very high, sometimes precipi 
tous; and in some places are found large breaches, 
which are inhabited by savages, of whom little 
is known. The r. part of the bay, which is in lat. 
57 n. is called Bottom bay, and the most e. part 
James bay. The coast of the cape Harriot or 
Henrietta Maria is in lat. 55 15 n. From the be 
ginning of James bay to the bottom of the bay it is 
near 267 miles, and the average width of the 
whole is from 40 to 50 leagues. On the e. part or 
coast of Labrador, are situate the small islands 
called the Sleeping, Northern and Western isles, 
Baker s Dozen, and Belcher; and in James bay 
those of Bear, Vinner, Charlton, and Cape of 
Good Hope. The whole of the country that lies 
between the s. arid e. as far as the land of Labrador, 
is called New South Wales. 

This country was discovered by an Englishman 
named Hudson, who gave it his name; he was 
in search for a pass to China in three different 
voyages made in 1607, 1608, and 1610, when he 
arrived at 80 23 lat. combating with the greatest 
difficulties against snow and ice, which detained 
him until the spring of the following year, 1611. 
A great part of his crew becoming mutinous, de 
serted him, and committing themselves to the 
mercy of the seas in the open boat, were all sup 
posed to have perished, having never since been 
heard of. The French pretend that this country 
had been previously discovered by themselves, 
and that they had already formed establishments 
in it ; but on this point we do not find them ad 
ducing any proofs. 

The climate, although under the torrid zone, is 
incredibly cold and severe, and people are obliged 
to live with the greatest precaution lest they should 
be frozen ; and thus they make to themselves small 
caverns, in which they have large fires, and no 
other hole than such as may be sufficient to keep 
the samealive. Notwithstanding this, the cold is so 
powerful that the bed Clothes are frozen in the 
morning, and slick to the walls that they touch, 
and the breath of a person sleeping freezes. Any 
thing that is a\vay from the fire is sure to freeze, 
and no liquor, not even brandy or spirits of wine, 
escape the all-subduing power. It you touch a 
piece of steel, iron, or other solid body, your 
hands become rivetted to the same ; and in the act 
of drinking, the skin of the lips or tongue becomes 
so glued to the side of the cup as to be sometime? 



254 



H U D 



stripped off when the cup is withdrawn. Elliz, 
who made a voyage to this country, relates, that 
having ordered a umn to put his finder to the 
hole of a cask of beer for fear it should run out 
and waste, the poor fellow, in endeavouring 1 to get 
his finger away, lost a part of it behind. The 
effect of this extraordinary cold manifests itself on 
all the animal kingdom, for there is not a creature 
but which, on the approach of the severe season, 
puts on a wintry and snow-coloured garb; and 
notwithstanding those who inhabit these parts take 
the utmost precaution to defend themselves against 
being frozen to death, yet the cold is often found 
to surprise them, attacking first the extremities. 
Nay, the aforesaid author further asserts, that the 
oom pass itself has been known to lose its magnetic 
powers. With all this the country is healthy, and 
the people live to a great age. 

The natives are as barbarous as their neigh 
bours; they acknowledge a God as being supreme 
and of infinite goodness, and they call him Uk- 
keuma, which in their language signifies great 
head. To him they look as the author of all the 
good they enjoy, and they speak of him with great 
respect, singing hymns with great solemnity and 
pomp, though considerable harmony ; their ideas 
are, however, v;\gue, confused, and hard to de 
termine with respect to their religion and public 
worship. They have another being, whom they 
call Witikka, whom they represent as the origin 
of all ills, and of whom they stand in the greatest 
awe ; but it is riot known that they make any sa 
crifice to him to ensure his favour. They have 
so remarkable a fondness for their children, that 
they willingly, both father and mother, will vie in 
sacrificing their lives to their safety. The dogs 
here are nearly similar to the mastiffs of Europe : 
they never bark, but only growl when they are 
ansTy : these are the only animals of burthen 
used by the English and the Indians, and they will 
carry a great weight. 

The great expectations that the English and 
French formed of this country A?ere the cause of 
continual wars and hostilities between the two 
nations, and these lasted until the peace of Utrecht, 
in which, by the 10th article, it was ceded entirely 
to the former ; then followed the company s esta 
blishment of the four factories, called Churchill, 
Fort York, Albany, and Moose River : the second, 
which is considered the most important, is situate 
on the .v. arm of the river Hayes, five leagues 
above where. this enters the sea ; at this factory it is 
reckoned that from 40 to 50,000 fine skins are col 
lected annually. 

[The e. boundary of Hudson s bay is Terra de 



II U D 

Labrador; the n. part has a straight coast, faciag 
the bay, guarded with a line of isles innumerable. 
A vast bay, called the Arclmvinnipy Sea, lies 
within it, and opens into Hudson s bay, by means 
of gulf Hazard, through which the Beluga whales 
pass in great numbers. The depth of water in the 
middle of the bay is 140 fathoms. From cape 
Churchill to the s. end of the bay, are regular 
soundings, near the shore, shallow, with muddy 
or sandy bottom. To the n. of Churchill, the 
soundings are irregular, the bottom rocky, and in 
some parts the rocks appear above the surface at 
low water. In the account of New Britain, we 
have given a general account of the Hudson s bay 
companies settlements on both sides of James s bay. 
The commerce in the countries adjacent to this 
inland sea, is in the hands of an exclusive British 
company of its name, who employ only four ships 
and 130 seamen. The forts, Prince of Wales, 
Churchill River, Nelson, New Severn, and Al 
bany, are garrisoned by 186 men. The French, 
in J782. took and destroyed these settlements, &amp;c. 
said to amount to the value of 500,000/. sterling.. 
The company s exports are to the amount of 
16,000/. mostly the drugs of the market, which 
produce returns, chiefly in beaver skins and rich 
furs, to the value of 29,000/. ; yielding govern 
ment a clear revenue of 6734/. : this includes the 
fishery in Hudson s bay. The skins and furs 
procured by this trade, when manufactured, 
afford articles for trading with many nations of 
Europe to great advantage. See index to addi 
tional information respecting CANADA.] 

[HUDSON S City, a port of entry and post-town ; 
situated in Columbia county, New York, on the 
e. side of Hudson s river, 23 miles s. of Albany, 
and 97 n. of New York city. The limits of the 
corporation include a square mile, and its privi 
leges as a port of entry extend no farther. In the 
autumn of 1783, Mess. Seth and Thomas Jenkins, 
from Providence, in the state of Rhode Island, 
fixed on the unsettled spot, whereon this city 
stands, for a town, to which the city is navigable 
for vessels of any size. The city is laid out into 
large squares, bordering on the river, and divided 
into 30 lots. Other adventurers were admitted to 
proportions, and the town was laid out in squares, 
formed by spacious streets, crossing each other at 
right angles. Each square contains 30 lots, two 
deep, divided by a 20 feet alley. Each lot is 50 
feet in front, and 120 feet in depth. In the spring 
of 1784, several houses and stores were erected. 
The increase of the town from this period to the 
spring of 1786, two years only, was astonishingly 
rapid, and reflects great honour upon the enter- 



HUD 



II U D 



265 



[prising and persevering spirit of the original found 
ers. In the space of time just mentioned no less than 
J50 dwelling-houses, besides shops, barns, and 
other buildings, four warehouses, several wharfs, 
spermaceti works, a covered rope-walk, and one 
of the best distilleries in America, were erected, 
and 1500 souls collected on a spot, which three 
years before was improved as a farm, and but two 
years before began to be built. Its increase since 
has been very rapid ; a printing-office has been 
established, and several public buildings have 
been erected, besides dwelling-houses, stores, &amp;c. 
The inhabitants are plentifully and conveniently 
supplied with water, brought to their cellars in 
wooden pipes from a spring two miles from the 
town. It has a large bay to the s. and stands on 
an eminence, from which are extensive and de 
lightful views to the n. o\, w., and round that way to 
to the s. e. consisting of hills and valleys, varie 
gated with woods and orchards, corn fields and 
meadows, with the river, which is in most places 
a mile over, and may be seen a considerable dis 
tance to the n. forming a number of bays and 
creeks. From the s. e. to the s. w. the city is 
screened with hills at different distances, and w. 
afar off over the river and a large valley, the pros 
pect is bounded by a chain of stupendous moun 
tains, called the Katts Kill, running to the 20. n. w. 
which add magnificence and sublimity to the 
whole scene. Upwards of 1200 sleighs entered 
the city daily for several days together, in Fe 
bruary 1786, loaded with grain of various kinds, 
boards, shingles, staves, hoops, iron ware, stone 
for building, fire wood, and sundry articles of 
provision for the market, from which some idea 
may be formed of the advantage of its situation 
with respect to the country adjacent, which is 
every way extensive and fertile, particularly w. 
The original proprietors of Hudson offered to pur 
chase a tract of land adjoining the s. part of the 
the city of Albany, and were constrained, by a 
refusal of the proposition, to become competitors 
for the commerce of the n. country, when other 
wise they would have added great wealth and con 
sequence to Albany. There is a bank here, call 
ed Bank of Columbia, whose capital may not ex 
ceed 160,000 dollars. It is composed of 400 
shares, at 100 dollars each. Hudson city is go 
verned by a mayor, recorder, four aldermen, four 
assistants, arid a number of other officers. The 
number of inhabitants in Hudson township, by the 
census of 1790, amounted to 2584, including J93 
slaves ; and it appears by the state census of 1796, 
that 338 of the inhabitants are electors. Hudson 
VOL. n. 



cily is four miles s. w. of Claverack, 36 n. of 
Ponghkeepsie, and 29 s. of Lansinburg.l 

[HUDSON S Mouse, one of the Hudson s buy 
company s factories in N. America, lies on the 
n. w. side of Suskashawan river, 100 miles e. of 
Manchester house, and 167s. e. bye. of Bucking 
ham house. Lat. 53 6 n. Long. 106 27 20" BJ.] 

[HUDSON River passes its whole course in the 
state of New York, and is one of the largest and 
finest rivers in the United States. It rises in a 
mountainous country, between the lakes Ontario 
and Champlain. In its course s. e. it approaches 
within six or eight miles of lake George ; then, 
after a short course c. turns s. and receives the 
Sacondaga from the s. w. which heads in the 
neighbourhood of Mohawk river. The course of 
the river thence to New York, where it empties 
into York bay, is very uniformly s. 12 or 15. w. 
Its whole length is about 250 miles. From Al 
bany to lake George it is 43 miles. This distance, 
the river is navigable only for batteaux, and has 
two portages, occasioned by falls, of half a mile 
each. The banks of Hudson s river, especially 
on the w. side, as far as the highlands extend, are 
chiefly rocky cliffs. The passage through the 
highlands, which is 16 or 18 miles, affords a wild 
romantic scene. In this narrow pass, on each side 



of which the mountains tower to a 



great 



height, 



the wind, if there be any, is collected and com 
pressed, and blows continually as through a bel 
lows ; vessels, in passing through it, are often 
obliged to lower their sails. The bed of this river, 
which is deep and smooth to an astonishing dis 
tance, through a hilly, rocky country, and even 
through ridges of some of the highest mountains 
in the United States, must undoubtedly have been 
produced by some mighty convulsion in nature. 
The tide flows a few miles above Albany, which is 
160 miles from New York. It is navigable for 
sloops of 80 tons to Albany, and for ships to Hud 
son. Ship navigation to Albany is interrupted by 
a number of islands and shoals, six or eight miles 
below the city, called the Overslaugh. It has 
been in contemplation to confine the river to one 
channel, by which means it will be deepened, and 
the difficulty of approaching Albany with vessels 
of a larger size be removed. About 60 miles above 
New York the water becomes fresh. The river is 
stored with a variety of fish, which renders a sum 
mer passage to Albany delightful and amusing to 
those who are fond of angling. The advantages 
of this river for carrying on the fur trade with Ca 
nada, by means of the lakes, are very great. Its 
conveniences for internal commerce are singularly] 



266 



II U E 



happy. The produce of the remotest farms is 
easily and speedily conveyed to a certain and pro 
fitable market, and at the lowest ex pence. In this 
respect New York has greatly the advantage of 
Philadelphia. A great proportion of the produce 
of Pennsylvania is carried to market in wag 
gons, over a great extent of country, some of 
which is rough ; hence it is that Philadelphia is 
crowded with waggons, carts, horses and their 
drivers, to do the same business that is done in 
New York, where all the produce of the country 
is brought to market by water with much less shew 
and parade. But Philadelphia has other advan 
tages to compensate for this natural defect. The 
increasing population of the fertile lands upon the 
n. branches of the Hudson, must annually in 
crease the amazing wealth that is conveyed by its 
waters to New York. The n. and w. canals, 
when completed, will be of incalculable advan 
tage to the trade of this state.] 

[HUDSON S Riv ? er, a broad but short river, 
emptying into Chesapeak bay, in Dorchester 
county, Maryland. Hill s po nt, n. e. of it, shapes 
the broad mouth of the river.J 

[HUDSON S Strait, or FKOBISHF.R S MISTAKEN 
Strait, which leads into Hudson s bay, in a w. 
course is 76 miles wide, between cape Chidley 
and the s. point of Resolution island.] 

HUECO, a river of the country of Maquega, 
in the kingdom of Chile. It runs w. and enters 
the Quepe. 

HUEGAPAN, a settlement of the head settle- 
merit of the district and alcaldia mayor ofTetda 
in Nueva Espana. It contains 95 families of In 
dians, and eight of Spaniards and Mustees. It is 
three quarters of a league from its capital. 

HUEHUETEPEQaE, a settlement of the 
alcaldia mayor of Tlapa in Nueva Espana. It is 
of a cold temperature, and inhabited by 85 fami 
lies of Indians. It is two leagues to the s. of At- 
lamaxaczingo. 

HUEHUETLAN, a settlement and head set 
tlement of the district of the alcaldia mat/or of 
Guatlatlauca in Nueva Espaiia. It is of a be 
nign temperature, contains 420 families of In 
dians, some of Spaniards, Mustees, Mulattoes, 
and a convent of the religious order of St. Do 
mingo. 

HUEHUETLAN, another settlement, the head set 
tlement of the district of the alcaldia mayor of 
Chiautla in this kingdom. It has also a convent 
of the order of St. Domingo, and 40 families of 
Indians, who employ themselves in the cultivation 
of thejr gardens and orchards, as also in fattening 



HUE 

swine, which they send to the other jurisdictions; 
and in this consists their commerce. 

HUEHUETLAN, another, of the head settlement 
of the district and afcafdia mayor of Igualapa in 
the same kingdom ; five leagues s. e. of its ca 
pital. 

HUEHUETLAN, another, the head settlement of 
the district of the alcaldia mayor of Cuicatlan in 
the same kingdom, it is of a cold temperature ; 
situate on the summit of a mountain. It contains 
10 families of Spaniards, Mustees, and Mulattoes, 
and 216 of Mazatecos Indians, who trade in co 
chineal, saltpetre, maize, arid cotton. It is an 
nexed to the curacy of Teutitlan ; from whence 
it lics^six leagues to the e. 

HUEHUETLAN, another, of the head settlement 
of Tonala, and alcaldia mayor of Guajapa, in the 
same kingdom. 

HUEHUETLAN, another, the capital of the pro 
vince and alcaldia mayor of Soconusco in the 
kingdom of Guatemala, founded by Pedro de Al- 
varado at his conquest. 

HUEHUETLAN, another, of the head settlement 
of Aquismon, and alcaldia mayor of V alles, in 
Nueva Espana ; situate between the table plains 
and craggy defiles; and in one of these is founded 
a convent of S. Francisco. It contains 814 funi- 
lies of Guastecos Indians, whose principal com 
merce consists in cottons. For the purpose of ga 
thering this commodity, the greater part of them 
live in the neighbouring estates, so that the settle 
ment may be said to cover six leagues in circum 
ference. It is two leagues to the s. e. of its head 
settlement, and 14 from the capital. 

HUEHUETLAN, another, with the dedicatory 
title of S. Salvador, of the head settlement of the 
district of Teutalpan, and alcaldia mayor of 
Zacatlan, in Nueva Espana; annexed to the 
curacy of Olinala. It contains 226 families of 
Indians, and is three leagues from its head settle 
ment. 

H U EH U ETOCA , n settlement of the alcaldia 
mayor of Coautitlan in Nueva Espana. It is the 
residence of the judge of the royal dcsa^ue (waste 
water) of the Lake, which was constructed on the 
following account : The river Coautitlan, running 
from s. to n. entered formerly into the lake Zum- 
pansro, close to the settlement of Coyotepec ; and 
having once burst its boundaries, it joined its wa 
ters with those of the lake S. Christoval de Ecate- 
pec : at another time also, being too full, it joined 
the lake Tezcoco ; and incapable of containing the 
waters of the lake Ohalco, and other tributary ca 
nals of Mexico, so completely overflowed as to 



HUE 

cause a great inundation. The recurrence, 
however, of this misfortune has been remedied, 
by constructing at the entrance of the river the 
aforesaid channel of waste water, which at once 
impedes the entrance of the river, and carries 
off its waters through the plain of Mexico, both 
towards the n. and s. where it evaporates and ab 
sorbs the nitre of the soil. This settlement con 
tains 226 families of Indians, lies from its capital 
three leagues to the n. | to the n. w. 

HUEJUCA, a settlement of the head settle 
ment and alcaldia mayor of Colotlan in Nueva 
Espaiia. It is five It-agues to the n. of the same. 

HUEJLQU1LLA, a settlement and interior 
garrison of the province of Nueva Vizcaya in 
Nueva Espana, for the purpose of restraining the 
infidel Indians. 

HUEJUTLA, a district and alcaldia mayor of 
Nueva Espana, on the opposite side of the sierra 
of Mextitlan. Jt is 16 leagues long n. s. and 14 
wide e. w. It is of a hot temperature, and so 
poor as to have no other commerce than that de 
rived from the loaf-sugar which is manufactured 
here, and sold to the neighbouring jurisdictions, 
and that derived from some larger cattle ; for al 
though they grow grain, yet this is in such small 
quantities as to be merely sufficient to supply their 
own wants. It consists of only lour settlements, 
in which there are a good number of estates ; but 
these yield very poorly. 

HUEJUTLA, the capital, is the settlement of the 
same name. It contains 115 families of Indians, 
57 of Spaniards, 70 of Mustees and Mulattoes, and 
a good convent of the monks of St. Augustin. 
It is 70 leagues to the n. e. of Mexico, in lat. 
22 35 . Long. 274 15 . The other settlements 
are Ixcatlan, Macustepetla, Tbehucttan, and S. 
Pedro. 

HUEJUTLA, also with the dedicatory title of S. 
Luis, another settlement and head settlement of 
the district of the alcaldia mayor of Tezcuco in 
Nueva Espana; situate on the skirt of a spacious 
mountain plain. It contains 300 families of In 
dians, and 22 of Mustees and Mulattoes, who 
employ themselves in sowing seeds and fruits pe 
culiar to that region. Here is a convent of monks 
of the order of S. Francisco. It is half a league 
to the s. of its capital. 

II UELM AMBI, a river of the province and go 
vernment of Barbacoas in the kingdom of Quito. 
It runs s. w. a d w. of the city of Barbacoas. At 
the distance of half a league, opposite the river 
Huahuy, it enters the river Telembi on the w. 
side. 

11UELOT1TLAN, a settlement of the head 



II U E 



267 



settlement of the district of Tonala, and alcaldia 
mayor of Gnajuapa, in Nueva Espaiia. 

HUENCUULLAMI, a settlement of the pro 
vince and corregimicnto of Maule in the kingdom 
of Chile; situate on the coast; off which place, 
in 1770, the merchant vessel, the Oriflame of 
Cadiz, was wrecked. 

He ENCHULLAMI, a river of this province arid 
kingdom. It runs n. n. w. and enters the sea on 
the side of the Mataquaro. At its source is a very 
luxuriant estate, called El Carrizal. 

HUENCHULLAMI, an island formed by an arm 
of the river Maule, which communicates itself 
with the former river. 

HUENCHULLANAI, a settlement of the pro 
vince and corregimiento of Itata in the kingdom 
of Chile; situate on the shore and at the mouth of 
a river of the same name. 

HUENCHULLANAI. This river runs w. and 
enters the sea between the rivers Maule and Ma- 
taquitos. 

11UENCIJUN, a lake of the province and co?-. 
regimietito of Itatan in the kingdom of Chile. 
It is formed by a waste water of the river Si- 
culeuvu. 

HUENUTIL, a river of the former province 
and district in the kingdom of Chile. It runs w. 
and enters the Nuble. 

HUEPACA, a settlement of the missions that 
were held by the regulars of the extinguished 
company of Jesuits, in the province and govern 
ment of Sonora. 

IIUEQUE-LEUUU, a river of the province 
and government of Buenos Ayres. It rises in the 
province and corregimicnto of Cuyo, of the king 
dom of Chile, close to the mountain of Pie de 
Palo. It runs s. as far as the city of Loyola, and 
turning afterwards to the s. s. e. runs for many 
leagues through the provinces of Tucuman and 
Buenos Ayres, until it enters the S. sea on the 
coast of the Patasjones. 

HUAQUEN," a small river of the island of 
La Laxa in the kingdom of Chile. It runs a&amp;gt;. 
and enters the Yergara. 

HUERARI, or UKRURI, a river of the king 
dom of the Nucvo Rcyno de Grenada. It runs in 
the territory of the Parianas Indians, runs s. e. and 
enters the Orellana or Amazons, on the side of the 
settlement of S. Carlos de Carachis, in lat. 3 27 s. 

HUERE, or GUAKE, a river of the province 
and government of Cumana. It rises in the table 
land of Guenipa, and enters in a large body into 
the Unare, having increased its waters by several 
streams. 

HUERTA, CONVENTO DE LA, a settlement 
M M 2 



H U I 

of the province and corregimicnto of Maule in 
the kingdom of Chile, near the river Tituben. 

HUERTAS, Dos, a settlement of the province 
and corregimiento of Caxamarca in Peru ; annexed 
to the curacy of Contumaza. 

H UES 1 CAS, a barbarous nation of I nd ians , of the 
province and country of Las Amazonas, bounded 
. by the nations of the Panataguas and Amama- 
zos. They live at the foot of the A tides, and are 
by their nature warlike and restless. 

HUETAMO, SAN JUAN DE, a settlement of 
the head settlement of the district of Pcrochucho, 
and alcaldia mayor of Guimeo, in Nucva Espana. 
It contains 146 families of Indians, and 52 of Mus- 
tees and Mulattoes. It is somewhat less than two 
leagues from its head settlement. 

HUEZTAHUALCO, SAN PEDRO DE, a set 
tlement of the head settlement of the district of 
Santa Ana, and alcaldia mayor of Zultepec, in 
Nueva Espana; situate in the dangerous moun 
tains of the place called Goleta. It contains 84 
families of Indians ; is annexed to the curacy of 
Huiztlan ; and has in its district two sugar engines, 
and two estates, in which large cattle are bred, and 
which are peopled by seven families of Spaniards. 
It is three leagues to the n. of Huiztlan. 

HUGHES, a river of the province and colony 
of N. Carolina. It runs n. a?, and enters the 
Ohio. 

[HUGHESBURG, a town in Northumberland 
county, Pennsylvania, called also CATAWESSY, 
being situated at the mouth of Catawessy creek, 
19 miles n. e. of Sunbury. It contains about 60 
handsome houses, and a meeting-house for Friends. 
It is 84 miles n. w. of Philadelphia. Lat. 
4057 w.]. 

HU1CATENANGO, a settlement of the head 
settlement of Acantepec, and alcaldia mayor of 
Tlapa, in Nueva Espana. It is of a mild tempe 
rature, contains 72 families of Indians, and is 12 
leagues to the w. s. w. of its head settlement. 

HUICHIAPAM, a province and alcaldia mayor 
of Nueva Espana. It is poor and much reduced. 
IIUICHILUYA, a settlement of the head set 
tlement of the district of Xonacatepec, and alcal 
dia mayor of Cucrnavaca, in Nueva Espana. 
[HIJIJOZ1NGO. SeeGuEJoziNGo.] 
HUILANCO, a settlement of the head settle 
ment of the district and alcaldia mayor of Tochi- 
milco in Nueva Espana ; situate in an hot tempe 
rature, but abounding in waters. These irrigat 
ing the territory, cause the land to produce a 
great variety of fruits, also great crops of grain. 
It contains 25 families of Indians, and is one league 
to the s. of its capital. 



H U I 

HUILOTEPEC, SANTA CRUZ DE, a settle 
ment of the head settlement of Tepacaltepec, and 
alcaldia mayor of Nejapa, in Nueva Espana ; 
situate in a narrow defile formed by some moun 
tains in the neighbourhood of the settlement of 
S. Pedro Martin. It contains 18 families of In 
dians. 

[HUILQUILEMU, a plain of the kingdom of 
Chile, in which, a water-course being opened, 
was discovered a vein of gold-dust, which pro 
duced more than 50,000 dollars without the least 
labour.] 

HU1LUAPAN, a settlement of the alcaldia, 
mayor of Orizava in Nueva Espana, of the dis 
trict of the settlement of Nogales, from whence it 
lies half a league to the s. e. 

IIUIMANGUILLO, SAN CHRISTOVAL DE, a 
settlement of the head settlement of Ocuapa, and 
alcaldia mayor of Nueva Espana. It contains 76 
families of Indians, including those of the ward in. 
its vicinity. It is five leagues to the s. of its head 
settlement. 

HU1PUXTLA, a settlement and head settle 
ment of the district of the alcaldia mayor of Te- 
tepango in Nueva Espana ; situate at the entrance 
of the Mexquital, where it very seldom rains. 
Its district contains nine settlements, and many 
wards and estates. It is 20 leagues to the n. \ to 
the n. e. of Mexico, and is inhabited by 954 fami 
lies of Indians, who trade in the productions of 
wheat, maize, and other grain, goats and sheep ; 
and from the skins of these they derive great ad 
vantage. 

HUIIUBIS, a settlement of the province of Os- 
timuri in Nueva Espana; situate on the coast of 
the gulf of California or Mar Roxo de Cortes, with 
a port of great traffic, the same being close to Ca 
lifornia. 

HUITEPEC, SANTA MARIA TIE, a settlement 
and head settlement of the district of the alcaldia 
mayor of Ixquintepec in Nueva Espana. It con 
tains 80 families of Indians, and is three leagues 
s. e. of its capital. 

HUITEPEC, another settlement, with the dedi 
catory title of Santiago, the head settlement of the 
district of the alcaldia mayor of Cuernavaca in 
Nueva Espana. It contains 100 families of In 
dians, 40 of Spaniards and Mulattoes, and a con 
vent of the monks of San Francisco. 

HUITZILAPA, SAN LORENZO DE, a settle 
ment and head settlement of the district of the 
alcaldia mayor of Metepeque in Nueva Espana. 
It contains 302 families of Indians. 

HU1TZ1LOQUE, a settlement of the head 
settlement and alcaldia mayor of Cuernavaca in 



HUM 

Nueva Espana. It contains 242 families of In 
dians, and is situate on an eminence of a moun 
tain, which is three leagues from the capital. 

HUITZILTEPEQUE, a settlement and head 
settlement of the district of the alcaldia mayor of 
Tixtlan in Nueva Espana ; situate on an extensive 
plain of a cold temperature, and inhabited by 150 
families of Indians. 

HUIXQUILUCAN, SAN ANTONIO DE, a set 
tlement of the alcaldia mayor of Tacuba in Nueva 
Espana ; situate amidst the mountains or s/errathat 
runs to the w. of the city of Mexico. It was an 
asylum for the refugee Indians, when that capital 
was conquered by the Spaniards. It contains 800 
families, who still pursue their rustic state of life. 
It is four leagues to the s. w. of its capital. 

IIUIYAZACUALCO, SANTA CATALINA DE, 
a settlement of the head settlement of Texmelu- 
can, and alcaldia mayor of Guejozingo, in Nueva 
Espana. It contains 53 families of Indians, and 
is to the K). of its capital. 

HUIZAPULA, a settlement of the head settle 
ment of Atlistac, and alcaldia mayor of Tlapa, in 
Nueva Espana ; of a cold and moist temperature. 
It contains 12 families of Indians, who maintain 
themselves by sowing maize, their poverty not per 
mitting them to do more. It is one league from 
the sell lament of Quiziapar. 

HUIZCULCO, a settlement of the head settle 
ment and alcaldia mayor of Cuquio in the king 
dom and bishopric of Nueva Galicia ; situate to 
the n. of its capital. 

HUIZ1TLATEPEC, SANTIAGO DE, a settle 
ment of the head settlement of Macuilzuchil, and 
alcaldia mayor of Teutitlan, in Nueva Espana. 
It contains 66 families of Indians, and lies one 
league to the s. of its head settlement. It pro 
duces maize, cotton, grain, and other fruits. 

HU1ZTLAN, SAN JUAN DE, a settlement of 
the head settlement of Santa Ana, and alcaldia 
mayor of Zultepec, in Nueva Espana, with 300 
families of Indians, whose commerce is in salt, 
which serves to supply the mines of the jurisdic 
tion, also in large cattle. It is eight leagues to 
the s. of its capital. 

[HULL, an inconsiderable town in Suffolk 
county, on the s. side of Boston harbour, Massa 
chusetts, containing 120 inhabitants. On the fort 
on the e. hill there is a well sunk 90 feet, which 
commonly has 80 odd feet of water.] 

HU LLOMA, a settlement of the province and 
corrcgimiento of Pacayes in Peru. 

HtJMAHUACA, a settlement of the province 
and government of Tucumun, in the district of 



HUN 



269 



Jujui ; situate on the shore of the river Laquiaca. 
It has seven chapels annexed to its curacy. 

[HUMAS, an Indian village on the e. side of 
Mississippi river in Louisiana, 60 miles above 
New Orleans. The Humas were formerly a con 
siderable nation ; but about 1770, were reduced to 
about 25 warriors. The Alabarnas, whose vil 
lages are near those of the Humas, had at the 
above period about 30 warriors, and followed the 
French here, when they abandoned the post on Ala 
bama river in 1762. The Chetimachas have about 
27 warriors.] 

riTTItfl 4 "X ^ 



, a settlement of the province and &amp;lt;?o? f - 
re.gimiento of lea in Peru ; in the district of which, 
at the distance of a league, are seen the ruins of 
an ancient palace of the Incas, which they call 
Tambo Colorado. 

[HUMBER, a river of Newfoundland island, 
which empties into the gulf of St. Lawrence 
through the bay of Islands.] 

HUM1LLA, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Coquiinbo in the kingdom of 
Chile; situate on the shore of the river Li- 
mary. 

[HUMMELL S Town, a thriving town in Dau- 
phine county, Pennsylvania, containing a Ger 
man Lutheran church and about 90 houses ; 
situated on the s. side of Swetara creek, four miles 
n. of Middletown, eight e. of Harrisburg, and 73 
w. n. w. of Philadelphia.] 

HUMOCORO, ALTO, a settlement of the pro 
vince and government of Maracaibo ; situate on 
the shore of the river Portuguesa, at its source, and 
to the e, of the paramo or mountain-desert of 
La Rosa. 

HUMOCORO, another settlement, in the same 
province, with the addition of Baxo,to distinguish 
it from the former. This is situate on the opposite 
side of the river, and at a small distance from the 
above. 

HUMOS, COSTA DE LOS, a part of the Brazil 
coast, in the province and captainship of Seam, 
which lies between the mouth of the river Cuni 
and the point of Palmeras. 

HUMOS, a point of land on the coast of the king 
dom of Chile, and province and corregimiento of 
Hata, between the isle of Curanta and the coast of 
Chanco. 

HUMUCENS, a settlement of the missions that 
were held by the regulars of the extinguished com 
pany, in the province of Topia, and kingdom of 
Nueva Vizcaya ; situate on the shore of the river 
Piastla. 

HUNA r a large river of the island of St. Do- 

5 



270 



HUN 



mingo, in the mountains of the centre of this 
island. It runs n. n. e. and enters the Camu. 

1IUNCAPON, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Caxatambo in Peru; annexed to 
the curacy of Gorgon. 

HUNCHOS, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Guanta in Peru; annexed to the 
curacy of Paucarbamba. 

IIUNE, Point of, on the s. coast of the island 
of Newfoundland. 

[HUNGER Creek, a stream which carries the 
various water machinery in the new and thriving 
manufacturing town of Hamilton, between Albany 
and Schenectadv, New York.] 

[HUNGERFORD, a township in Franklin 
county, Vermont, containing 40 inhabitants, 
seven miles s. of the Canada line, and 14 e. of lake 
Cham plain.] 

HUNIHUE, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Chilian in the kingdom of Chile; 
situate near the river Maule. 

HUNOCO, a river of the district of Toltenbaxo 
in the kingdom of Chile. It runs to the n.n.w. 
and enters the Cauten. 

[HUNTER, Fort, 21 miles w. of Schenectady, 
on the s. side of Mohawk river, at the mouth of 
Schohary creek, over which a bridge is about to 
be built. Here is an old church, built in the reign 
of Queen Anne, and three or four houses. At this 
place was the Old Mohawk town, which was 
abandoned by that nation as late as the spring of 
1780. These Indians had made considerable ad 
vances in civilization, could generally speak the 
English language, and numbers of them made pro 
fession of their faith in the Christian religion. In 
the church which is now standing, they used to 
attend public worship in the Episcopal form. 
These Indians are now settled, a part of them on 
Grand river, a n. water of lake Erie, and a part 
of them in another part of Upper Canada. None 
of this nation now remain in the United States. 
The father of the only remaining family was 
drowned in 1788.] 

[HUNTERDON County, in New Jersey, is 
bounded n. by that of Morris, e. by Somerset, s. e. 
by Burlington, s.zo. and w. by Delaware river, 
which separates it from the state of Pennsylvania, 
and n. w. by Sussex county. It is about 40 miles 
long and 32 broad, is divided into 10 townships, 
and contains 20,253 inhabitants, including 1301 
slaves. On the top of Muskonetcong mountain 
in this county, is a noted medicinal spring much 
resorted to. It issues from the side of a mountain 
into an artificial reservoir, for the accommodation 



HUN 

of those who wish to bathe in, as well as to drink 
the waters. It is a strong chalybeate. Trenton 
is the chief town.] 

[HUNTERSTOWN, a village of Pennsyl 
vania ; situated in York county, 25 miles w. by s. 
of York town.] 

[HUNTING Creek, in Virginia, runs e. into 
Potowmack river, at the s. corner of the territory 
of Columbia.] 

["HUNTING CHEEK Town, a village in then, part 
of Dorchester county, Maryland, 14 miles n.n.i. 
of Vienna, J6 s. by w. of Den ton, and 18 n. e. of 
Cambridge.] 

[HUNTING Town, a village on the w. side of 
Chesapeak bay in Maryland ; situated on the s. e. 
side of Hunting creek in Calvcrt county, three 
miles n. by w. of Prince Frederick, and 19 e. n.e. 
of port Tobacco.] 

[HUNTINGDON College. See GEORGIA.] 

[HUNTINGDON, an extensive and mountainous 
county in Pennsylvania; bounded n. and n.w. by 
Lycoming county, e. and n.e. by Mifflin, s.e. by 
Franklin, .?. and s.w. by Bedford and Somerset, 
and w. by Westmoreland. It is about 75 miles 
long and 39 broad ; contains 1,432,960 acres of 
land, divided into seven townships, which contain 
7565 inhabitants. Limestone, iron ore, and lead, 
are found here. A furnace and two forges manu 
facture considerable quantities of pig and bar iron, 
and hollow Trare ; large works have also been esta 
blished for manufacturing of lead. Chief town, 
Huntingdon.] 

[HUNTINGDON, the capital of the above county; 
situated on the w. e. side of Juniatta river, and at 
the mouth of Standing Stone creek, 43 miles from 
the mouth of Juniatta ; contains about 90 houses, a 
court-house, and gaol. It is about 21 miles w.s. w. 
of Lewis town, and 132 w. n. zc. of Philadelphia.] 

[HUNTINGDON, a post-town on the n. side of 
Long island, New York ; situated at the head of a 
bay in Suffolk county, which sets up s. from the 
sound ; contains about 70 houses, a Presbyterian 
and Episcopal church. It is 2.3 miles e. by n. of 
New Vork city. It is opposite to Norwalk in 
Connecticut, and contains 3260 inhabitants ; of 
these, 552 are electors, and 213 slaves.] 

[HUNTINGDON, a township in York county, 
Pennsylvania.] 

[HUNTJNGTON, a township in Fairfield 
county, Co mecticut, separated from Derby on the 
n.e. bv Stratford river.] 

[HUNTSBUftG, a township in Franklin 
county, in Vermont. It is situated on the Canada 
line, having 46 inhabitants.] 



H XT R 

[HUNTSVILLE, a post-town in N. Carolina, 
nine miles from Bethania, and 16 from Rock- 
ford.] 

11 UQUIA, a settlement of the province and go 
vernment of Tucuruan, in the jurisdiction of Jujue; 
situate on the shore of the river Laqaiaca. 

[HUKLEY, a township in Ulster county, New 
York, containing 847 inhabitants, of whom 116 
are electors, and 245 slaves. The compact part 
contains about 50 houses; situated on Esopns 
kill, about five miles from the w. bank of Hud 
son s river, and 100 n. of New York. The lands 
around it are low and fertile, but infested with wild 
onions.] 

[HURON, one of the five principal n. lakes. 
It lies between lat.43 17 and 46 40 n. and be 
tween long 1 . 79 35 and 84 6 w and is reckoned 
to be upwards of 10i miles in circumference. 
The fish are of the same kind as in lake Superior, 
and it communicates with that lake through the 
the straits of St. Marie on the n. tr. with Michigan 
on the w. and with Erie on the s. It is of a trian 
gular shape, and on the s. w. part is Saguinum or 
Sagana bay, SO miles in length, and about 18 or 
20 in breadth ; the other most remarkable bay is 
THUNDF.H Bay, which see; also see MANA- 
TATJLIN Island, and MICHILT.IMAKKIN ACK. On 
the banks of the lake are found amazing quantities 
of sand cherries. The land bordering on the w. 
shore of the lake is greatly inferior in quality to 
that on lake Erie. It is mixed with sand and 
small stones, and is principally covered with pines, 
birch, and some oaks; but a little distance from 
the lake the soil is very luxuriant. Twenty years 
ago, part of the Indian nations, called Ghepaways 
and Ottawas, who inhabited round Saguinum bay, 
and on the banks of the lake, could furnish 00 war 
riors ; and those of the latter nation, who lived on 
thee. side of lake Michigan, 21 miles from Michil- 
limakkinack, could furnish the same number.] 

[jIuuoN, a small river of the N.W. Territory, 
which, after a course of 25 miles, falls into lake 
St. Glair from the n. w. Gnadenhuetten lies on this 
river. Also the name of another small river in the 
same territory, which runs n.e. into lake Erie, 40 
miles w. of Cayahoga, and 15 s. e. of the mouth of 
Sandusky lake.] 

HU HONES, a barbarous nation of Indians, who 
live near the former lake, in Canada. Their true 
name is Yendats., which they have lost for another 
given them by the French ; for these seeing their 
very short hair, and willing to express their sur 
prise at the curious appearance these Indians ma 
nifested, exclaimed " quells heures" and from 



H Y C 



271 



thence they were afterwards called Hu rones. If 
we may credit the traditions of this nation, it was 
formerly divided into four cantons or settlements, 
which afterwards increased to six, and from this 
augmentation it was that this nation is so much 
comparatively larger than those which surround it. 
The country that these Indians inhabited at the be 
ginning of the last century [1700] had for limits the 
lake Erie to the s. the Huron to the w. and the 
Ontario to the e. It is situate between lat. 42 and 
45 n. and in it were very many settlements. The 
number of souls at the present day amount to 
50,000. The territory is not the most fertile of 
New France ; but some parts of it are so. It is of 
a healthy climate; and notwithstanding all that the 
French have experienced here from scarcity and 
other calamities, in consequence of the wars, BO 
one ever died here of sickness. It abounds in 
beautiful prairies, which produce much wheat, 
and it would produce other fruits were it culti 
vated. The woods are full of trees, especially of 
cedars, which are very lofty and bulky. It is 
watered by many rivers of delicate water, and it is 
said that there are found here certain stones, which 
may be melted down like metals, and which con 
tain veins of silver. We also learn, by the as 
surances of some historians, that some of the rarest 
animals are found in this country ; the one a bird 
which mews like a cat, another a kind of hare 
which sings like a bird, the flesh of which is deli 
cate to eat. The Hu rones have maintained a cruel 
and bloody war for many years with the Iroquees 
and the Algonquines, who were formerly their al 
lies ; and in this war the numbers of either of the 
parties engaged has considerably diminished, ac 
cording to the history written by the Father Pedro 
Xavier de Charlevoix. This author says, that its 
government, customs, and religion, is a chaos im 
possible to be comprehended. The French regu 
lars of the company of Jesuits established some 
missions amongst the natives to reduce them to 
the Gatholic faith, and the Father Brebeuf, who 
assisted at them for many years, wrote several 
particulars touching their laws and extravagan- 
cies. 

HUYLLANES, a barbarous nation of In 
dians, who inhabit the straits of Magellan on the 
s. part ; being scattered over the islands of the 
Tierra, del Fuego, and being descended from the 
Ghnniariis, who inhabit another part to the n. of 
the strait. 

[HYANIS Road. See BARNSTABLE in Mas 
sachusetts.] 

[HYCO-OTEE, or HYCOO, a small river which 



372 



I B A 



empties into the Dan, about four miles above the 
mouth of Staunton river.] 

[HYDE, a maritime county in Newbern dis 
trict, N. Carolina ; bounded e. by the ocean, w. 
by Beaufort county, n. by Tyrrel, and s. by Car- 



I B A 

teret. It contains 4120 inhabitants, of whom 
1048 arc slaves.] 

[HYDESPARK, a township in Orleans county 
in Vermont ; containing 43 inhabitants.] 



See SANTIAGO.] 
("1ATA, a bay on the coast of Chile.] 
IBAGUE, SAN BONIFACIO DE, a city of the 
corregimiento of Mariquita in the Nuevo Rcyno 
de Granada, founded in 1550, in the valley of 
Las Lanzas, by the oidor of Santa Fe, Andres 
Lopez de Galarza, and translated the following 
year to where it now stands. Its temperature is 
very hot, although healthy. It abounds in mines 
of copper, gold, quicksilver, and loadstone. Here 
are large breeds of neat cattle and horses. It pro 
duces cacao, rice, sugar-canes, maize, yucas, bata- 
ta-Sy patillas or water-melons, pomegranates, and 
many other vegetable productions, by which it 
carries on a great commerce ; but it is much in 
fested with mosquitoes, and various other venomous 
insects. The rivers Chipalo and Cornbeirna run 
near the city, and upon their shores the natives 
find and wash much gold. These, the natives, are 
esteemed to be ingenious, courteous, and of good 
dispositions. Here is a convent of the monks of 
St. Domingo ; and one of the same order, called 
Fr. Francisco de la Cruz, discovered a rich quick 
silver mine, which is however not worked. This 
city was ruined in 1593 by the Pijaos Indians. 
At present its population amounts to 400 house 
keepers. It is 70 miles to the w. s. w. of Santa 
Fe, and 23 from Tocaima, in the road which leads 
to Call, Buga, Anserma, and also to Popayan. 
Lat. 4 28 n. Long. 75 18 w. 

IBAPO1, a river of the province and colony 
of Surinam. It runs into the sea on the e. coast, 
between the city of Middlebourg and the mouth of 
the river Dcmcrary. 

IB ARAL a small river of the province and go 
vernment of Buenos Ayres, which runs 10. and en 
ters the Ibiquei-guazu. 

IBAfiAINA, a settlement of the same province 
and government as the former river ; situate on the 
shore of the river Cavacuan. 



IBARRA, a province and corregimiento of the 
kingdom of Quito ; bounded e. by the province 
of Sucumbios, and by the woods inhabited by the 
ancient nation of Cofanes Indians ; n. by the pro 
vince of Pastos, to. by that of Esmeraldas, and s. 
by that of Otavalo. It is 20 leagues in length 
from n. w. to s. e. Its climate is for the most part 
hot, but extremely fertile ; and it abounds in sugar- 
canes, of which much and fine sugar is manu 
factured. Here grow great quantities of cotton, 
and every kind of fruit, as well European as Ame 
rican. Its principal commerce consists in the very 
fine woven cotton stuffs ; and this province supplies 
the whole kingdom with stockings, caps, gloves, 
flags or colours, coverlets, &amp;c. The whole of 
this jurisdiction is scattered with well cultivated 
estates ; in which many Indians and Negroes are 
employed. The wheat produced here is esteemed 
the very best, and the conserve of Guayobas or of 
the fruit of the Guava-tree, that is made here, is in 
much request at Quito. It is watered and ferti 
lized by many rivers : those of the greatest esti 
mation are the Pisco, the Tiguando, and the 
Blanco; all of which united form the Mira. Its 
population consists of 16 settlements, and these 
are, 



Cayambe, 

Tabacundo, 

Mira, 

Pirnampiro, 

Otavalo, 

Carangue, 

S. Antonio, 

Salinas, 



Urcnqui, 

Fontaqui, 

Cotacache, 

S. Pablo, 

Quilca, 

Caguasqui, 

Lachas, 

Cayapas. 



IBARRA, the capital, is the town of the same 
name, with the dedicatory title of S. Miguel, 
founded by the president oi the audience of Quito, 
Don Alvaro de Ibarra, oidor of the audience of 
Lima, who gave it his name, in 1597. It is situate 
on an extensive and delightful plain, watered on 



I B E 

the e. by the river Taguando, and w. by the 
Ajavi. It is of a mild and healthy temperature, 
extremely fertile, and abounding in cattle, sugar, 
honey, sweetmeats, and fruits. In its looms much 
fine cloth and cotton stuffs are manufactured, by 
all of which it maintains a rich commerce. The 
great church is a sumptuous building, and might 
pass for a cathedra! in any part of the world. The 
streets are wide, straight, and convenient, and the 
buildings are of good construction. It has four 
convents of the following religious orders, St. Do 
mingo, S. Francisco, La Merced, and S. Agustin ; 
a college which belonged to the regulars of the 
extinguished company of Jesuits, a monastery of 
nuns of La Conception, and an hospital. The ex 
terior of the town is adorned by different wards in 
habited by Indians. Its population amounts to 
12,000 souls, of both sexes and all ages. It is the 
native place of the Father Raymundo de Santa 
Cruz, of the extinguished company, a singular 
apostolical missionary in the province of Mainas. 
It is 42 miles . e. from Quito, and 75 s. w. from 
Pasto, in lat. 20 n. and long. 77 55 w. 

IBARUA, a settlement and real of the silver 
mines in the jurisdiction and alculdia mayor of 
Los Asientos, in Nueva Galicia, and bishopric of 
Guadalaxara, where some families of Spaniards, 
Muslees, and Indians reside, although in no great 
numbers, owing to the failure of the mines. These 
were first discovered by a malefactor who had re 
tired to the mountains, and who, endeavouring to 
strike a light by some pieces of stone, discovered 
to fly from them small particles of silver. A 
labourer called Aparicio, whilst pursuing some 
strayed cows, also discovered in another part, 
called Teitiqui, a rock completely set with silver. 
It is 118 miles to the n. e. of Guadalaxara, 36 from 
Aguas Calientes, and 27 from Zacatecas, in lat. 
22 32 30" n. and long. 101 24 w. 

1BATUCATU, SIERRA DE, mountains in the 
province and captainship of the Rio Janeiro in 
Brazil, which run to s.s.e. near the river Parana- 
pane, and following the course of this river. 

1BAY, IUIRAY or IBAXIBA, as some will have 
it, a river of the province and government of Para 
guay, which runs n.w, for many leagues, and en 
ters the Parana on the e. side. 

1BERA, LACUNA, a large lake or morass, of 
the province and government of Paraguay, be 
tween the river Paraguay to the n.w. and the 
Uruguay to the s. e. in the country of the Char- 
ruas Indians, who formerly dwelt upon its shores. 
In the middle it has some small islands, and two 
canals, the one to the s. e. which enters the Uru- 

VOL. ii. 



273 



guay, the other to the s. w. which runs to the Pa 
rana. Jl is in lat. 28 T s. 

1BERV1LLE, a river or canal of New France, 
which traversing in its course, for upwards of 160 
miles, the lakes MaurepasandPontchartain, enters 
the bay of Espiritu Santo. Its width does not ex 
ceed 40 or 50 yards, and at its origin its depth 
does not exceed two or three feet ; afterwards, 
however, it becomes a very large river. It takes 
its name from Mr. Iberville, who, at the begin 
ning of the year 1700, built a little fo;t near the 
bay of Bilcohi, where he left 50 men well pro 
vided with every necessary. The French, in en 
deavouring to avoid the danger and difficulty of 
navigating the principal mouth of the Mississippi, 
have found this the readiest and surest pass, and 
it is now some time since they first adopted it. It 
was on this account that the river became part of 
their frontier, for it was agreed in the peace of 
1762, that the confines between the dominions of 
the crowns of England and France should be 
thenceforward irrevocably fixed by a line drawn 
by the river Mississippi, from its source up to the 
river Iberville, and another through the middle of 
this, and through the lakes Maurepas and Pout- 
chartrain, as far as the sea. 

IBIA-PANA, a settlement or village of the 
Portuguese, in Brazil. 

1B1CAY-MINI, a river of the province and 
government of Paraguay. It runs n. n. w. and 
enters the Picazaru. 

IBICUACUI, a small river of the province 
and government of Paraguay, which enters the 
Ibacii. 

IBICUI, a river of the province and govern 
ment of Paraguay. It rises in the mountains of 
Brazil, runs nearly w. and enters the Uruguay, 
opposite the settlement of the mission of Yapeu or 
Yapeyu. 

II31CUTIMINI, a river of the same province 
and government as the former, forming the source 
and head of the same. 

IB1DA, a small river of the same province and 
government. It runs w. and enters the Parana, 
between those of Yangua and Quendi. 

I BIN, a settlement of the province and cor- 
rcg/micnto of Abancai in Peru ; annexed to the 
curacy of Pantipata. 

1I3INU, a small river of the province and go 
vernment of Paraguay. It runs e. and enters the 
Menday. 

IB1P1TA, a small river of the same province 
and government as the former. It enters the 
Ibicii. 

N N 



274 



I B O 



IBIQUARI, a river of the same province and 
government. It runs w. making many windings, 
and enters the Paraguay in a very large body, 
close to the fort of S. Fernando. 

IBIQUE1-GUAZU, or CAZIQUES, a river 
of the same province and government, which runs 
to the n. n. w. 

IBIRAP1TA-GUAZU, a river of the same 
province and government as the former. It runs 
n. n. w. and enters the Picaziiru. 

IBIRAPITA-MINI, a river of the same pro 
vince and government as the former. It runs s. 
and enters the former river, after turning its course 
to the w. 

IBIRATOS, a settlement of the missions which 
are held by the Portuguese Carmelite fathers, in 
the country of Las Amazonas ; situate on the shore 
of this river, near the mouth or entrance of the 
Yutay. 

IBIRAYUBA, a settlement of the province 
and captainship of Para in Brazil ; situate on the 
shore of the river of Las Amazonas, to the s. of 
the capital. 

IBIT/\S, a barbarous nation of Indians of Peru, 
who inhabit the woods to (lie e. of the province of 
Caxaraarquilla. Some of them, to about the 
amount of 2000, became reduced to a town or po 
pulation consisting of four different settlements, in 
1753, at the persuasion of the missionaries, the 
observers of San Francisco, who have a mis 
sion established amongst them. These Indians 
trade in honey, cacao, wax, incense, and other 
vegetable productions peculiar to those moun 
tains. 

IBITEGUEGAI, a river of the province and 
government of Buenos Ayres, which runs to the 
s. s. w. and then turns to the e. 

IBITEYARAI, a small river of the same pro 
vince and government as the former. It runs to 
the n. n. w. 

1B1TIRIZU, a small river of the province 
and government of Paraguay, which runs w. 

IBITUPOCA, or IBIMPOCA, a settlement of 
the province and captainship of the Rio Janeiro 
in Brazil ; situate on the shore and at the source of 
the river Parana. 

1BO, a small river of the colony of Surinam, 
in the part of Guayana possessed by the Dutch. 
It rises in the sierra of Rinocote, runs to. forming 
a curve, and enters the Caroni. 

1BOIG, a small river of the province and go 
vernment of Paraguay. It runs w. and enters the 
river of this name, between the rivers ipnigta and 
Tabata-guazu, 



I C A 

IBOPETUBA, a settlement of the province 
and captainship of Rey in Brazil; situate on the 
sea-shore, near the point Itapeba. 

IHOPETUBA, a bay on the coast of the former 
province and kingdom, on the side of the bay of 
Sagas uy. 

1BPETUBA, orlpETABA, a town of the pro 
vince and captainship of San Vicente in Brazil ; 
situate on the shore of a bay of the same name, 
the said bay being very convenient and capa 
cious. 

ICA, a province and corrcgtmiento of Peru, 
bounded e. by the provinces of Castro Vircyna and 
Lucanas, 5. e. and s. by that of Cnmana, and w. 
by the sea. It is in length 50 leagues from n. to 
s. and in width 24 from e. to w. at the broadest 
part. Its temperature is somewhat hotter than 
that of Lima, for the soil is sandy, and particularly 
so towards the coast ; here, therefore, it is found 
to have various desert tracts through the want of 
moisture : but the province may be said altogether 
to abound in every kind of fruit, grain, and pulse, 
most particularly in grapes, the vines yielding 
their fruits in many parts solely from the moisture 
they derive from the earth, since there is no more 
rain here than there is at Lima and the other pro 
vinces of the coast. In the parts where the mois 
ture is most prevalent, the natives are accustomed, 
with great industry, to make certain large holes or 
pits, in which they cultivate stocks of vines and 
other plants. The wines and brandies manufac 
tured here are carried to Lima, Panama, Guaya 
quil, and to some of the provinces of the Sierra. 
Here are many pastures used for the support of 
the beasts of burthen, and a great number of 
asses, by which animals they carry on their trade. 
Here are cultivated much pepper and cotton, 
which are sold to great advantage to the provinces 
of the Sierra ; and to the same provinces quantities 
of fish are conveyed from the coasts and ports. 
This province is watered by several rivers, which 
almost experience drought in the time of the dry 
season; the principal is that of Pisco and that 
called the Rio Grande, which passes through 
Palpa. In the/lanura or plain called Del Ingenio, 
are found many stones, which are the representation 
of trees, herbs, houses, and other figures. The 
oil of this province is in particular estimation fronjr 
its fine quality, and with it Guamanga and other 
provinces are supplied. Its population is com 
prised under 10 large settlements, and its corregi- 
dor had an assigned repartimiento or yearly tri 
bute of 100,000 dollars ; its afcavafa, or centage on 
goods sold, amounting to 800 dollars per annum. 



I C A 

The capital is the city of its name, with the 
dedicatory title of San Geronimo, founded by 
order of the viceroy, Count of Nieva, in 1563. 
It contains three parishes or curacies, one of Spa 
niards and two of Indians, called Of Yanaconns 
and Of J.Airin ; and in its church a very miracu 
lous image of Christ is venerated. Here are con 
vents of monks of the orders of San Francisco, 
San Agustin, La Merced, San Juan dc Dios, and 
a college which belonged to the regulars of the 
extinguished company of the Jesuits. Its popu 
lation is composed of 6000 souls. It has a glass 
foundery, by which many provinces are supplied 
wilh (his article. It is 25 miles s. by e. of Pisco. 
Lat. 14 9 s. Long. 74 58 w. 

ICA, another settlement, with the dedicatory 
title of San Juan, in the same province and corre- 
g-imiento. It is situate 1 1 miles e. by n. of the 
former capital. 

1CABAQUA, a river of the province and go 
vernment of Paraguay, which runs n. w. and 
caiters the Uruguay, close to the mission of San 
Borja, and opposite to that of Santo Tomas. 

1CABUCO, a settlement, in former times large 
and rich, of the province of Tunja in the Nuevo 
Reyno de Granada, but at the present day re 
duced to a miserable village of Indians. 

ICACOS, Point of, on the coast of the island 
of St. Domingo, at the entrance of the great bay 
of Samana, close to the cape of San Rafael. 

ICACOS, another point, on the n. coast of the 
island of Cuba, to the e. of the bay of Matanzas, 
opposite the mouth of the canal of Bahama. 

ICAHUATES, S. FRANCISCO XAVIUR DE, 
a settlement of the missions which were held by 
the regulars of the company of Jesuits, in the pro 
vince and government of Mainas, of the king 
dom of Quito; situate on the shore of the river 
Napo. 

ICAPACA, a settlement of the province of 
Amuzgos, and alcaldia mayor of Xicayan, in 
Nueva Espana. It contains 37 families of In 
dians. 

[ICAQUE Point, on the e. end of the island of 
St. Domingo. Lat. 19 2 .] 

1CARA, a settlement of "the province and go 
vernment of Venezuela ; situate on the shore of a 
.a river, to the e. of the town of San Felipe. 

1CARATE, a river of the province and country 
of Las Amazonas, in the part possessed by the 
Portuguese. It rises in the territory of Igemanais 
Indians, runs to the n, n. w. and enters the Utay 
in the arm thrown out on the right side, a little 
after its division. 



ICO 



275 



1CARN1ER, CAYO DE, an isle situate near 
the oj. coast of the island of St. Domingo, in the 
part possessed by the French, between the point of 
Pature and the bay of Pozo. 

ICHACACH1, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Omasnyos in Peru ; annexed to 
the curacy of Achacache. 

ICH1MAN1P1STICK, a large and abundant 
river of the province and country of Labrador in 
N. America. It runs s. and enters the St. Law 
rence. 

JCHO, SAN PEDRO DE, a settlement of the pro 
vince and corregimiento of Paucarcolla in Peru ; 
annexed to the curacy of its capital. 

1CI1OCA, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Cicasica in Peru ; annexed to the 
curacy of Yaco. 

ICHOCA, another settlement, in the province 
and corregimiento of Guailas; annexed to the 
curacy of Marca. 

ICHOCAN, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Caxamarca in Pern ; annexed to 
the curacy of the settlement of Amarcucho, where, 
in the year 1760, there were no less than 800 per 
sons, who were descended from. Christoval de 
Tnpia, native of Caxamarca, who in the aforesaid 
year had arrived at the advanced age of 140 
years, having a short time previous to his death 
married the third time, and seen seven genera 
tions. 

[ICHUA Town, in the Gerressee country, in 
the state of New York, is an Indian village at the 
mouth of Ichua creek, a n. e. head water of Alle- 
ghany river. It is 56 miles s. e. of Fort Erie, 70 
e. of La Boeuf, and 54 s. w. by s. of Hartford on 
Genessee river.] 

ICHUBAMBA, a large and abundant river of 
the kingdom of Quilo. It rises from the moun 
tain or paramo of Catopaxi on the n. and augments 
its stream by some other small rivers which flow 
down from the cordillera of Guarnani, and then 
running to the n. connects itself with the Ama- 
guaiia, at a small distance of the settlement of 
Conocoto. 

1CHUPAMPA, a settlement of the province 
and corregimiento of Yamparaes in Peru, and of 
the archbishopric of Charcas ; annexed to the 
curacy of its capital. 

ICOLIXTLA, a small settlement or ward of 
the alcaldia mayor of Guauchinango, of Nueva 
Espana ; annexed to the curacy of Tlaola. 

1COTEA, Lake of, in the island of St. Do 
mingo, close to the great lake of Enriquillo. It 
is small, and is near the s. coast, in the line 



276 



I G A 



which divides the possessions of the French and 
Spaniards. 

ICOT1TLAN, a small settlement or ward of 
the alcaldia mayor of Guanchinango in Nueva 
Espaiia ; annexed to the curacy of Naupan. 

ICULTAS, a river of the province of Bar 
celona, and government of Cumana. It rises in 
the valley of La Pasqua, runs s. and enters the 
Manapire. 

[ICUNADA DE BARRUGAN, a town on the 
river La Plata in S. America. See BUENOS 
AYIIES.] 

ICUPA, a large lake of the province and go 
vernment of Guayana, between the rivers Paragua 
and Caroni, but closest to the latter, on the w. 
side. 

ICUTU, a small river of the province and go 
vernment of Guayana or Nueva Andalticia. It 
rises at the foot of the sierra Maiguatida, runs e. 
and turning afterwards to the n. enters the Ini- 
quiari. 

[ICY Cape is the n. westernmost head-land of 
N. America, situated in the N. ocean. Between 
this cape and cape North in Asia, is the opening 
into Behring s straits, which lead from, the 
Northern into the Pacific ocean.] 

IDIA T, Bay of, on the n. coast of the island 
of San Juan in Nova Scotia or Acadia, between 
the bay of Buique and the island of Limbach. 

IDIBAES, a barbarous nation of Indians, of 
the kingdom of Tierra Finne, and government of 
Panama. They arc bounded by the Chocoes and 
the Tatabes. In the mountains which they in 
habit are found mines of gold. In 1632. the re 
duction of these Indians was attempted, but in 
vain, owing to their treachery and inconstancy. 

IGAllil, a river of the province and govern 
ment of Paraguay, which runs e. and enters the 
Pardo or Colorado. 

IGA11AES, a settlement of the province and 
captainship of Itamaraca in Brazil ; situate on the 
coast, and on the shore of the Pao Amarillo. 

1GARAPE, a river of the province and coun 
try of Las Arnazonas, or part of Guayana pos 
sessed by the Portuguese. It is small, rises in the 
territory of the Tuheres Indians, runs .9. s. e. and 
enters the river of Las Arnazonas, between those 
of Tuhere and Peru or Gonipape. 

IGARAPE-MIRI, a settlement of the province 
and captainship of Para in Brazil; situate on the 
shore of the river Maranon. 

IGAKASSU, a small river of the province 
and captainship of Seara in Brazil. It runs n, 
and enters the sea close to the river Paraguay. 



I G N 

IGAIIMOI, a settlement of the province and 
captainship of Para in Brazil ; situate on the shore 
of the river of Las Arnazonas, and to the n. of the 
town of Catnuta. 

IGATINI, a settlement of the same province 
and government as the former ; situate on the shore 
of the river Escupil, near the Parana. 

IGALJ, a small river of the province and go 
vernment of Paraguay. It runs .?. .. e. and 
enters the Uruguay, between the Becliay and Ibi- 
rapiti. 

1GAY, a small river of the same province and 
government as the former. It enters the Parana, 
near the settlement and mission of Santo Tomas. 

IG1II1PA, a small island of the N. sea, near 
the coast of Brazil, in the province and captain 
ship of Marafion, between the island of San Juan 
and the bny of Casapoeira. 

IGLES1A, LA, a settlement of the province 
and government of Venezuela ; situate at the source 
oi the river Gualque, almost to the n of the town 
of San Felipe. 

1GNACIO, S. a settlement of the missions that 
were held by the regulars of the company of Je 
suits, in the province of Topia and kingdom of 
Nueva Vizcaya; situate in the middle of the sierra 
of that name, on the shore of the river Piastla. 

IGNACIO, S. another settlement, of the pro 
vince and corregimienlo of Otavala in the king 
dom of Quito. 

IGNACIO, S. another, with the surname of Los 
Barbados, in the province and government of 
Mamas, of the kingdom of Quito; situate on an 
island of the great river Marafion, near the Pongo 
or Narrow pass. It was founded by the Father 
R;iymundo de Santa Cruz, of the extinguished 
company of Jesuits. 

IGNACIO, S. another, of the missions which 
were held by the same fathers, in (he Orinoco and 
Nuevo Ileyno de Granada, being a reduction of 
the Guamos Indians ; situate on the shore of that 
river, on the w. coa^t, and opposite the settle 
ment of S. Francisco Xavier. In 1735, it was en 
tirely destroyed and burnt by the Caribes. 

IGNACIO, S. another, of the province and go 
vernment of Jaen de Bracamoros in the kingdom 
of Quito. 

IGNACIO, S. another, of the province and go 
vernment of Mfinas in the same kingdom; situate 
on the shore of the river of S. Xavier, between this 
river and the Marmore Grande. 

IGNACIO, S. another, of the province and go 
vernment of the Chiquitos Indians in Peru, a re 
duction of the missions that were held by the re- 



I G N 

gulars of the company of Jesuits; situate at the 
source ofthe river Verde. 

IGNACIO, S. another, of the missions Hint were 
held by Ihe same regulars, in (he Orinoco, of the 
Nucvo Keyno dc Granada, distinct from that of 
which we have spoken above, and situate on the 
shore ofthe river Ca^anare. 

IGNACIO, S. another, ofthe province and go 
vernment of Sonora in Nneva Espaiia ; situate on 
the shore of a river, between the settlements of 
Ilimaresand Santa Maria Magdalena. 

IGNACIO, S. another, ofthe province and go 
vernment of Tucurnan in Peru ; situate on the 
shore of a river which enters that of Choromoros, 
to the zo. of tlie city of Santiago del Estcro. It is 
a reduction of (lie Tobas Indians, effected by the 
missions that were held here by the regulars ofthe 
company, and is at present under the charge of 
the religious order of Francisco. 

IGNACIO, S. another, ofthe missions that were 
held by the same regulars, in the province and 
government of Paraguay ; situate on the shore of 
tlie river Parana, between the settlements of Cor 
pus and Loreto. 

IGNACIO, S. another, of the same missions and 
province ; situate on the shore of a river, at a small 
distance from Paraguay. 

IGNACIO, S. another, of the missions that were 
held by the regulars ofthe company of Jesuits, in 
the province and government of the Chiquitos 
Indians ; sitmte at the foot of a serrania. 

IGVACIO, S. another, of the province and go 
vernment of Paraguay ; situate to the s. s. e. ofthe 
city of La Asuncion. 

IGNACIO, S. another, of the missions of the 
extinguished company of Jesuits, distinct from the 
former ; situate to the w. of tlie settlement of Santa 
Rosa. 

IGNACIO, S. another, of the missions of the 
same regulars, in California ; situate near the gulf, 
at the most interior part of it, and opposite the 
cape of Las Virgines. 

IGNACIO, S. another, .of the province and go 
vernment of Moxos, in the kingdom of Quito. 

IGNACIO, S. another, of the province and go 
vernment of Cinaloa in Nueva Espaila ; a reduc 
tion of the missions that were held here by the re 
gulars ofthe extinguished company of Jesuits. 

IGNACIO, S. another, of the province and cap 
tainship of Para in Brazil ; situate on the shore of 
the river Topayos, opposite the mouth ofthe river 
Yaguaricara. 

lc, NACIO, S. another, in New France or Canada, 
of Nicarages Indians, a reduction of the missions 
that were held by the French regulars ofthe cora- 



I G U 



277 



pany; situate in the strait of Michillimakiriach, 
where they had built a tort. 

IGNACIO, S, another, ofthe province and go 
vernment of La Sonora, a reduction of the mis 
sions ofthe regulars of the company of Jesuits, 
distinct from the other of which we have 
spoken. 

[IGNA( io-GuAZ.u, S. a settlement of Indians, 
ofthe province and government of Paraguay ; si 
tuate on the confines of Laguna Ybera, about five 
miles s. ze. from Sta. Maria Fe, in lat. 26 54 36" s. 
Long. 50 44 14" a&amp;gt;.J 

[IcNAcio-Mi in, S. a settlement of Indians, of 
the province and government of Paraguay ; situate 
on the e. bank of the Parana, about 17 miles n. e. 
from Candelario, in lat. 27 14 52"s. Long. 55 35 
14" s&amp;gt;.] 

IcNACio-MiRi, S. a small river of the province 
and government of Buenos Ayres. It runs K. and 
enters the Uruguay, between the Yacui and the 
Jesus Maria. 

IcNAcio-Mini, S. some islands situate near the 
n. coast of the lake Superior, in New France. 

loNACio-Miui, S. a cape or point of land of 
the n. coast of the river St. Lawrence, between the 
cape Pigeon and the bay of Papinachois. 

I(i NAcio-Mini, S. a fort of the province and 
government of Tucuman, in the district ofthe city 
of Jujui, on the shore of the river Negro, to re 
strain the infidel Indians. 

IGO1COI, a river of the district and territory 
of Cuyaba in the kingdom of Brazil. It rises in 
the mountains ofthe Cayapos Indians, runs s. and 
enters the grand river Parana. 

[IGOR NACHOJX, a bay in the island of 
Newfound land, s. of St. John s bay.] 

IGUACATES, SAN FRANCISCO XAVIER DE, 
a settlement of the province and government of 
Mainas in the kingdom of Quito. 

1GUACU, a river of the province and govern 
ment of Buenos Ayres. It enters with a large 
stream into the Parana. 

1GUALA, a district and alcaJdia mayor of 
Nueva Espafia. It is of a limited jurisdiction, 
for the greater part barren and mountainous, dif 
ficult of cultivation ; and for this reason the inha 
bitants give themselves rather to the raising of 
cotton, with which they make various woven ar 
ticles ; and in these as well as other vegetable pro 
ductions of a warm climate, and which are by no 
means largely supplied, they carry on a commerce. 
Moreover, although there are some breeds of large 
cattle and swine, yet there are no more than suf 
ficient to supply its own consumption and use, so 
great is the scarcity of water and pastures. Its po- 



278 



I G U 



pulation consists of six principal or head settle- 
ments. 

The capital is of the same name, with the dedi 
catory title of San Francisco. It is situate on the 
plain of a gloomy barranca or craggy defile, dis 
agreeable for its profundity, of a hot temperature, 
yet very shady, from the thickness of the trees. It 
contains 90 families of Mexican Indians, and is 35 
leagues to the s. e. of Mexico. The other settle 
ments are, 

Asuncion de Coacula, San Andres, 
Santa Maria, Tuxpan, 

M-jyanala, Santa Ana Tlaxamalac, 

Santiago Theguisnao, Tepeacuilco. 

leu A i. A, another settlement, of the head settle 
ment of the district of S. Martin, and alcaldia 
mai/orof Tlapa, in the same kingdom. It contains 
&amp;lt;o7 families of Indians, and is three leagues to the 
c. s. e. of its capital. 

IGUALAPA, or IGUAT,APAM, as others will 
have it, a district and alcaldia mayor of (he same 
kingdom as the former; bounded e. by the pro 
vince of Justlahuaca, w. by that of Tlapa, s. by 
that ofAcapulco, and n. by that of Xicayan. It 
is 60 leagues in length from n. to s. and somewhat 
more than 15 in width from e. to w. It is of a hot 
temperature, produces much maize, French beans, 
and garden herbs, these being the fruits of its com 
merce, not without some herds of large cattle, and 
fish caught at sea. It contains different rivers, 
which in the rainy seasons swell to such a degree 
as to inundate the territory, and even sometimes to 
extend their mischief as far as the settlements. 

The capital is of the same name, situate on a 
plain six miles distant from the sea, and watered by 
two rivers, which unite before they run into the sea. 
It contains 74 families of Spaniards, Mustecs, and 
Mulattoes, and 473 of Mexican Indians. It is 170 
miles to the s. s. e. of Mexico, in lat. 16 39 SO"?*. 
Long. 98 40 w. The other settlements of this 
district are, 

lluehuetlan, Acatepcque, 

Qnet/alapa, Alcamani, 

Popolopa, Cuilapa. 

Chacapalapa, 

IGUALICA, a settlement of the aha Idia mayor 
of Tampico in Nuevn Espafia. 

IGU/ALTKPEQLfi, a settlement of the head 
settlement of the district and alcaldia mayor of 
Tona a in Nueva Espaiia. 

1GTANA, a settlement of the province of Bar 
celona, an i government of Cumana ; situate to the 
n. of the Cindad Real, the river Orinoco running 
between them. Lat, 8 21 n. 

IGUANAS, Island of, in the S. sea, near the coast 

2 



I K E 

of the alcaldia mayor of Nani, at the back of the 
point Mala in the kingdom of Tierra Firrne. 

IGUAPE, a town of the province and captain* 
s//)ofSan Vicente in Brazil ; situate on the coast, 
at the mouth of the river of its name, or of LA Ri- 
BKRA. See this article. 

IGUAPE, a bay on the coast of the province and 
captainship of Seara of the same kingdom, between 
the point of La Pen a and the river Koko. 

lou APE, a sand -bank at the mouth or entrance of 
the aforesaid river. 

1GUAHA, a river of the province arid country 
of Las Amazonas, in the part possessed by the 
Portuguese. It runs c. and enters the river Negro. 

1GUARAZU, a small river of the province and 
captainship of Seara in Brazil. It runs n. and en 
ters the sea between the rivers Paranameriu and 
Topacuro. 

1GUARI, a settlement of the province and cor- 
regimiento of Chancay in Peru. 

IGUAR1PUCA, an arm of the river Urubii in 
the country of Las Amazonas, and in the part pos 
sessed by the Portuguese. It communicates with, 
the Maranon. 

IGUARU, a river of the province and govern 
ment of Paraguay, which runs to the s. w. through 
the country of the Itatinos Indians, and enters the 
river Paraguay on its c. side. 

IGUATZEO, SAN FRANCISCO nc, a small 
settlement of the head settlement of the district of 
Cocupao, and alcaldia mayor of Valladolid, in the 
province and bishopric of Mechoacan. It con 
tains 70 families of Indians, and is two leagues to 
the s. of its head settlement. 

IGUAUAI, a small river of the province and 
government of Paraguay. It runs to the s. s. w. 
and enters the river Ipane-gazu. 

IGUAY, an abundant river of the province and 
captainship of San Pablo in Brazil. It rises in the 
country of the Guaranis Indians of Paraguay, runs 
s. and alter turning its course to the e. enters the 
great river San Pedro. 

IGUAZU, a large river of the province and go 
vernment of Paraguay. It runs e. and enters the 
Parana, on the e. side, in lat. 24 35 s. 

1GUE1, SALVALEON DE, a town of Spanish 
Island or St. Domingo, founded by the Captain 
Juan de Esquibel, 28 leagues to the e. of the 
capital. 

IJEI, a river of the country of Las Amazonas, 
in the part possessed by the Portuguese. It rises 
parallel to the line, runs e. and enters the Negro, 
a little before this river is entered by the Iquiari. 

IKECH1POUTA, a settlement of Indians, in 
the province and colony of S. America, where the 



I L E 

English have a fort and establishment for their 
commerce. 

I LA, a settlement of the province and corrtgi- 
tniento of Quanta in Peru. 

ILABAYA, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Arica in Peru. 

ILAMATAN, SANTIAGO DC, a settlement and 
head settlement of the district of the alcaldia mayor 
of Guayacocotla in Nucva Espana. It contains 
388 families of Indians, in which are included 
those of the wards of its district. 

ILAPE, a settlement of the province and go 
vernment of Paraguay ; situate to the e. of the lake 
Ipoa. 

ILAPO, a settlement of the province and corre- 
gimtento of Riobnmba in the kingdom of Quito. 

JLATI, a river of the province and govern 
ment of Darien and kingdom of Tierra Finne. It 
rises in the mountains of the interior of the pro 
vince, runs w. and enters the grand river Chu- 
cunaqui. 

ILAY, Point of, on the coast of the province 
and corregimiento of Arica, and kingdom of Peru, 
one of those which form the port of Arica. 

ILDEFONSO, S. a settlement of the province 
and corregimiento of Conchucos in Peru ; annexed 
to the curacy of San Marcos. 

ILDJ FONSO, S. another settlement, in the pro 
vince and corregimiento of Chachapoyas in the 
same kingdom ; annexed to the curacy of Quillay. 

ILDEFONSO, S. another, of the missions that were 
held by the regulars of the company of Jesuits, in 
the province of Tepeguana, and kingdom of Nueva 
Vizcaya ; situate on the shore of the river Florido, 
near the settlement and the real of the mines of 
Parral. 

ILDEFONSO, S. another, of the missions that are 
held by the religious order of Sau Francisco in 
Nuevo Mexico. 

ILDEFOWSO, S. another, which is a garrison and 
fort for restraining the infidel Indians, in the pro 
vince and government of Paraguay. 

ILDEFONSO, S. a small island of the gulf of 
California or Mar Roxo de Cortes; situate near 
the coast, and in the centre of it, opposite the bay 
ofComandu, between the point San Miguel and 
the island of Carmen. 

I 1 DCFONSO, S. a point of land on the .. const of 
the straits of Magellan, near the entrance into the 
S. sea, and in the last of the islands in this direc 
tion. 

[ILEIGNES, or St. CHARLES, a town on the 
s. side of the island of St. Domingo, and 200 fa 
thoms from the city of St. Domingo. It is inha 
bited by emigrants from the Canary islands, and 



I L H 



279 



has a few streets, which run from the four cardinal 
points, and cut each other at right angles. The 
inhabitants are the most industrious people in the 
Spanish part of the island.] 

ILI1A, a town of the province and captainship 
of Espiritu Santo in Brazil ? situate on the shore of 
a bay, and six miles to the e. of the capital. 

1LHEOS, a province and captainship of the 
kingdom of BffStil, one of the four which Compose 
the captainship of Bahia; bounded n. by the river 
Serenim, which divides it from the province of 
Todos Santos ; s. by the river Grande, which se 
parates it from the PortSeguro ; e. by the sea ; and 
w. by the unknown country of the barbarous Qui- 
riguges, Maribuces, and Vairnores Indians. These 
have caused great mischief and destruction to this 
province, until the time that they were subdued by 
the Portuguese, who obliged them to retire from 
the frontiers, and to retreat to the mountains. It is 
very fertile, and produces much cotton and sugar 
cane, of which a certain portion of sugar is manu 
factured in the mills which it has; also Brazil 
wood; and these are the principal productions of 
its commerce. It is watered by the rivers Pati- 
pinga, Ilheos, Ipoche, Contas, Duna, and some 
other of inferior consequence. Its principal settle 
ments are Victoria, Santa Ana, and San Jorge. 
[For account of the llhcos Indians of Brazil, see ad 
ditional matter respecting the history, &amp;c. of 
BRAZIL.] 

The capital is the city of the same name, or Va. 
St. Jorge. It is rich, and situate in a beautiful and 
pleasant bay. It is small, but its climate is good, 
although rather hot. It has a convent of monks 
of San Francisco, another of Santo Domingo, and a 
college which belonged to the regulars of the com 
pany of Jesuits. Its territory abounds greatly in 
Brazil wood, cotton, sugar-canes, and all kinds of 
fruits, which are carried by sea to be sold at Per- 
nambuco. It abounds no less in salt and fresh 
water fish, which are caught in a lake in its vici 
nity, three leagues in length, and in which are 
found many manaiies or sea wolves. It has a fort to 
defend the entrance of the bay, and a small garrison 
with a governor. This city was entirely ruined in 
the last century [ITOOjby the Vaymores Indians. 
Near it passes the river of its name ; and its popu 
lation consists of 200 Portuguese families. It is 93 
miles to the n. of Puerto Seguro, and about 126 to 
the*, w. of the bay of Todos Santos, inlat. 14 J4 *. 
Long. 39 42 . 

II.IIKOS, a large and abundant river of the same 
province and kingdom. It rises in the sierra of 
the Quiriguges Indians, runs e. and enters the sea, 
forming at its mouth a great and beautiful port. 



280 



I L L 



[ILIIEOS, an island of the same kingdom situate 
nen r the mouth of the river Ilheos. Lat. 14 37 s. 
Long. 3927 o&amp;gt;.] 

IMIEOS, another, a small river of the province 
ji :u! captainship of P.ernarnbuco in the same kingdom. 
It rises near the coast, rims r. and enters the sea 
between the rivers Fcrmoso and Tuna. 

I t.H EOS, another, a small river of the province 
and government of Buenos Ayrcs, which runs n. 
and enters the (Ji!. 

ILIMANI, a very lofty mountain of the cor- 
dUlcra of Peru, in the province and corregimicnto 
&amp;lt;&amp;gt;i Cicasica and jurisdiction of La Paz. It abounds 
so greatly in gold mines that a piece of it having 
be-. -n rent by a stroke of* lightning in 1681, immense 
riches were extracted, and the value of the gold 
a; 1 ounted to eight dollars the ounce. Indeed, not- 
wiMistanding much gold has ever since been con 
tinually taken away, it is still productive of many 
marks. It is fourteen leagues from La Paz. 

ILLS, a settlement of the province and corregi- 
mlcnio of Pasto in the kingdom of Quito ; situate 
in the road which leads down from Popnyan. 

ILLAGUE, a river of the district of Guadalab- 
quen in the kingdom of Chile. It runs s. and enters 
the V r aldivia. 

ILL A PEL, a settlement and real of the gold 
mines of the province and corregimifnto of Co- 
quirnbo in the kingdom of Chile ; situate to the e. 
of the town of San Rafael de la Rosa. 

Ir.i.APEr, a river of this province and kingdom. 

1LLETRENA, or SOMBRETK, a settlement and 
real of the silver mines of the province of Nueva 
Vizcaya in N. America. It is of a mild and 
healthy temperature, contains nearly 500 families of 
Spaniards, Mustees, Mulattoes, and Indians, em 
ployed in the labour of the mines, which in former 
times caused it to be a rich town ; but at present, 
since the greater part of the mines are filled with 
water, it has fallen greatly to decay, although it still 
retains some commerce. It is the residence of two 
royal officers who preside over the marking of the 
silver. At eight leagues distance, in the royal road 
which leads to the capital, are two very large 
estates, which are rich in agricultural and grazing 
lands, called Los Muleros and El Cabazal. It is 
48 leagues to the .?. c. of Guadalaxara, in lat. 24 
JO . Lonar. 263 20 . 

ILLIMO, a settlement of the province and cor- 
reirhnienlo of Sana in Peru. 

ILLINHL a mountain of the Andes in Peru, 
to the zo. of Cotopaxi, the top of which is cleft in 
two places, and eternally covered with snow, 

ILLINOIS, a nation of Indians of New France 
or Canada in N. America, who dwell in the vici- 



I L L 

uities of the lake and of the river of its name, 
having also the nomination of Albinos, which sig 
nifies a man of large stature, this being the pecu 
liar characteristic of these Indians, in comparison 
with those by whom they are surrounded. They 
live in villages far separated from each other, in 
marshy plains or llanuras bordering upon the 
river,, and amongst woods and hills, which main 
tain their verdure at least nine months in the year. 
The territory has such an abundance of pasture, 
that it is covered with large and small cattle, and 
with every kind of animal of the chase. Their 
settlements are large, and their cabins constructed 
with some art, being of an oblong figure, covered 
with reeds so closely put together as to be proof 
against winds, rain, and snow. Each cabin con 
tains five or six habitations for so many families, 
who live united and pacifically together. The 
chief settlement may amount (o about .",00 houses ; 
its exterior is of ordinary appearance, but the in 
terior has greater si&amp;lt;jns of civilization, and under 
neath some of the cabins are cellars, in which they 
keep their maize, roots, and flesh of animals caught 
in the chase; this last article being their principal 
food. The French missionaries of the Jesuits re 
duced these Indians to the Catholic faith ; though 
before this time, according to the Father Charle- 
voix, there were not to be found in the whole of 
Canada savages more barbarous or of worse quali 
ties ; so great is the influence of Christianity over 
the mind, and such was the astonishing alteration 
it produced amongst these people. They were 
always of a tractable and docile nature, but at the 
same time cowardly, treacherous, inconstant, 
thievish, brutal, without honour, interested, aban 
doned to all kinds of excess, and the most shame 
less incontinence ; this last vice being, indeed, 
most common to all the other Indians of Canada. 
They are courteous and affable to those who have 
the government in their country, and testify great 
warmth of affection towards those for whom they 
have a friendship ; bjit they are extremely cunning 
and revengeful, of lofty stature, robust, and well 
made, very swarthy, extremely agile and dexter 
ous iii bodily exercises, and much given to the em 
ployment of the chase. They have many wives ; 
but in order to avoid dissensions, they prefer 
marrying their sisters and near relations ; and of 
these they are so jealous, that they put them to death 
at the mere suspicion of infidelity. This nation 
extends itself not only the whole length of the river 
of its name, but lor a great extent along the Mi- 
sispi o either shore. The Illinois and the Mia- 
mesis or Meames live mixed together in one spot, 
called the Fork ; which is formed by the conflux 



ILL 

of the river Meame with another running in a .?. 
direction fromthe Fifteen-miles pprtage.which is be 
tween this river and the river St. Joseph, running 
into the lake Michigan. At the conflux of the 
river St. Mary s -with the Meame, and near the said 
Forks, on the e. side of the Meame, stands Fort 
Meaine, now called Fort Wayme ; and on the w. 
side of the river stands the village of Meame or 
Miami, which at some distance has the appear 
ance of a fortress. It is surrounded by a palisade, 
a certain indication that it has been an entrench 
ment of the Illinois or Miamesis. At the foot of 
this village is an island in the middle of the river, 
surrounded by many other fertile and delightful 
islands ; and in the largest of these is a settlement, 
where the cacique or chief resides. Neither of 
these nations manifest any valour or discipline in 
their combats. They make an irregular attack, 
but with great impetuosity and dreadful shouts; 
but directly one of them falls, the rest fly in dis 
order, seeking security in flight. Their principal 
prowess is manifested in ambuscades, and they 
Lave the patience to remain in this manner for 
eight or nine days, that in the end they may have 
an opportunity of killing or making captive the 
passing enemy. When any of their combats 
against another nation has met with a successful 
termination, they order their march so that they 
may arrive at their settlement just before night 
fall, and forming themselves in order to make their 
entry, send before them a chief to give notice of 
their fortune, of the spoil, and the number of pri 
soners they have made; and after this they enter 
with great testimonies of joy, singing songs expres 
sive of victory, and dancing ; but if they may 
have been defeated, they enter in the day-time, 
and in place of joyful acclamations, they signify 
their misfortune by notes of sorrow and howlings ; 
and then retiring to their cabins brood in sullen 
silence over their disasters. 

[ILLINOIS, a large navigable river of the N. W. 
Territory, formed by the confluence of the rivers 
Plein and Theakiki, in lat. 4.1 43 n. Long. 86 
J5 a;. This noble branch of the Mississippi, alter 
running a serpentine s. w. course, through an ex 
tensive country of rich, fertile land, and receiving 
a vast number of rivers from 20 to 100 yards wide, 
which are navigable for boats from 15 to JSO 
miles, approaches within five miles of the Missis 
sippi; from thence running e. about 12 miles, it 
pays its tribute by a mouth 400 yards wide, in lat. 
38 40 n. and in long. 90 12 a&amp;gt;. ; opposite the large 
cave, 100 miles above the Ohio and 12 above the 
Missouri. The lands on the banks of the Illinois, 
particularly those on the s. e. side, are perhaps as 

VOL. II. 



I L U 



28! 



fertile as any part of N. America. They produce 
in the most luxuriant plenty wheat, rye, Indian 
corn, peas, beans, flax, hemp, tobacco, hops, grapes, 
apples, pears, peaches, dyeing roots, medicinal 
plants, &amp;c. Here also grow large forests of hic 
kory, oak, cedar, mulberry trees, &amp;c. Savannas, 
or natural meadows, are both numerous and exten 
sive. In the forests are great variety of animals, 
as buffaloes, deer, &amp;c. ; and in the rivers are plenty 
of fish, particularly cat, carp, and perch, of au 
enormous size. Such is the abundance of wild 
grapes in this country, that in the year 1769, the 
French planters upon this river made above 110 
hogsheatls of strong wine from these grapes. On 
the n. w. side of this river is a coal mine, which 
extends for half a mile along the middle of its 
banks; and about the same distance below the coal 
mine are two salt ponds, 100 yards in circumfe 
rence, and several feet in depth. The water is 
stagnant and of a yellowish colour ; but the French 
and natives make a good salt from it. The Illinois 
furnishes a communication with lake Michigan, by 
Chicago river, between which and the Illinois are 
two portages, the length of which do not exceed 
four miles. The whole length of the river from 
the source of Theakiki, which is but a short dis 
tance from the river St. Joseph, opposite to fort 
St. Joseph on the w. is 280 miles. The Indians 
have ceded to the United States, by the treaty of 
Greenville in 1795, a tract of land 12 miles square, 
at or near the mouth of the Illinois ; also a tract 
six miles square, at the Old Piarias fort and village 
near the s. end of Illinois lake. By the census of 
1810, the population of this territorial govern 
ment amounted to 12,282 souls. The aforesaid 
lake is only a dilatation of the river, and is situated 
iibout 140 miles below the source of Theakiki, and 
43 below the Salt ponds. It is 16 miles long, and 
five miles broad in the middle.] 

ILLOMAS, S. PEDRO DE, a settlement of the 
province and corregimienlo of Condcsuyos de 
Arepuipa in Peru, annexed to the curacy of its 
capital. 

1 LO, a settlement of the province and corregi- 
miento of Moqueheca in Peru. It has a small port, 
and is in lat. 17 35 s. 

I LO, a point of the coast of this province and 
kingdom; one of those which form the former 
port. 

ILO, a large and fertile valley of the same pro 
vince and corregimiento. 

1LUCI, a small river of the province and go 
vernment of Paraguay, which runs e. and enters 
the Parana, between those of Japeribuy and Gua 
na pay. 

o o 



I M I 



IMANURABA, a settlement of the province 
and government of Guayana orNueva Andalucia ; 
situate bet ween the rivers Caura and Aruy. 

IMA RE, PUNT A m;, a point on the n. e. 
coast of the island Trinidad, near its e, extremity. 

IMASSA, a river of the province and govern 
ment of Jaen de Bracamoros in the kingdom of 
Quito. It rises in the province of Luya and Chil- 
laos in Peru, and enters the Mnranon. 

IMATACA, SIERIIA DE, in the province and 
government of Cumana. It runs 5. e. between the 
rivers Orinoco and Cuyuni. 

1MATO, a small river of the province and 
country of Las Amazonas, in the part possessed 
by the Portuguese. It rises in the territory of the 
Naunas Indians, runs n. and enters the Maraiion, 
opposite the mouth of the Gran Caquela. 

IMATUCARA, a river of the province and go 
vernment of Moxos in the government of Quito. 
It rises in the country of the Pampas Indians, 
from a lake which lies between the rivers Ubay 
and Marmore Grande, runs n. arid enters the 
former. 

IMAYOSA, a small river of the same province 
and kingdom as the former. It rises in the moun 
tains which lie between the river Beni and Mar- 
more, runs e. and empties itself into a great lake 
which is near the last of the aforesaid rivers, and 
afterwards into another lake which is formed close 
by, issuing from this to join the last mentioned 
river. 

IMBABURA, a very lofty mountain of the 
province and corregirniento of Ibarra in the king 
dom of Quito, to the s. e. Its top is continually 
covered with snow, and it is thought to be a vol 
cano. It has upon its skirts some small lakes, and 
from the waters which run from these is formed 
the grand lake of San Pablo. This mountain is in 
lat/15 w. 

IMBAU, a small river of the province and 
captainship of Rey in Brazil. It runs e. and 
enters the sea opposite the island of Aboreda 
delS. 

IMERI, a large lake of the kingdom of Brazil, 
formed by an arm of the river San Pedro, on the 
sea-shore, very near to the extremity of that coast 
or cape Santa Maria, which forms the mouth of 
the rivr La Plata. 

1MERUCA, a lake of the province and govern 
ment of Cumana, near the shore of the river 
Orinoco, to the s. e. of the town of San Fer 
nando. 

IM1RATABA, a settlement of the island of 
Joanes or Marajo, on the coast and in the king 
dom of Brazil : situate at the point of Maguari, 



I N A 

at the mouth of the arm of the river of Las Ama 
zonas. 

IMPERIAL, a city of the kingdom of Chile, 
founded by Pedro de V aldivia, on the shore of the 
river Canten, which washes it on the s. part, on a 
shelving rock four leagues from the S. sea, in 1551. 
It is situate in a spot where it enjoys the most fer 
tile soil and best climate of any in the kingdom. 
It was once large, rich, and opulent, and a head 
of a bishopric erected by Pius IV. in 1564 ; its 
first bishop having been Don Fr. Antonio de San 
Miguel, a religious observer of San Francisco, but 
in 1620 its see was removed to the church of La 
Concepcion. In 1599 the city was taken and 
destroyed by the Araucarios Indians ; and since 
that time it has not been able to recover its former 
splendour, and remains reduced to a miserable 
village with very few inhabitants, notwithstanding 
that it is still notorious for its fine gold mines, though 
indeed these are never worked. It has two con 
vents of monks, one of San Francisco, the other 
of La Merced. Some geographers make mention 
of this city as no longer existing ; but these are 
mistaken. It is situate 327 miles s. s. e. from 
Santiago, 112 s. from Concepcion, and 521 s. 
from Coquimbo or La Serena, in long. 73 20 w. 
and lat. 38 42 s. [See index to additional 
matter respecting CHILI:, Chap. IV.] 

IMPERIAL,, a river in the same kingdom, which 
rises in the district of Moguega, runs many leagues 
w. collecting the waters of infinite other streams, 
and enters the sea between the Tiruha and the 
Budy. 

IMUES, a settlement of the province and cor* 
regiimento of Pasto in the kingdom of Quito. 

1MUNC1NA, a large and abundant river of 
the province and government of Paraguay. It 
rises in the mountains n. of Parana, runs in the 
vicinity of the ruins of the city of Xerez ; and 
eight leagues beyond, and five below the river 
Antembi, enters by the w. into the Parana, in 
lat. 12 40 5. 

1MURI, a settlement of the province and go 
vernment of Sonora in Nueva Espaiia ; situate to 
the s. of the settlement of Cocospera, on the shore 
of a river. 

1NACOREQUE, a settlement of the province 
and corregimienio of Carabaya in Peru ; annexed 
to the curacy of its capital. 

INAGUA, GRANDE, an island of the N. sea; 
situate to thew. of the island of St. Domingo. 

I.VAGUA, another island, called Pequcna or 
Small, to distinguish it from the former. It is close 
to the same ; and they are both 3 one and the other, 
well known by navigators. 



I N C 

INAGUA, a bay in the larger of the aforesaid 
islands, on the w. coast, and opposite the n. n. e. 
coast of Ihe island of Cuba. 

INAHUAYA, VALLE DE, a valley in the pro 
vince and corregimiento of Carabaya, between the 
rivers Auientata and Inambari. 

INAMBARI, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Carabaya in Peru ; annexed to the 
, curacy of Coaza. 

INAMBARI, a large river of Peru. It rises in 
the province of San Galan, near the settlement of 
Pelechuco, runs n. forming various curves, in 
which it collects the waters of several others, enters 
the Perene, in a very abundant stream, in the pro 
vince of Caxamarquilla, and according to Don 
Cosme Bueno, empties itself in the Veayale. 

JNAMBU, a river of the province and country 
of Las Amazonas, in the part possessed by the 
Portuguese. It russ s. in a tolerably large stream, 
and enters the Rio Negro, between the Abuara and 
the Maravia. 

1NAQU1TO. SeeANAQuixo. 

[INATTENDUE Island, (the Gower island 
ofCarteret), so named by Surville, lies on the w. 
side of the islands of Arsacides, 2 4 e. of port 
Praslin.J 

INAUABU, a lake of the province and country 
of Las Amazonas, in the part possessed by the 
Portuguese. It is formed by a desague or waste- 
water of the great river Caqueta, is large and near 
the shore of the same, and is also known by the 
name of Marahi. 

INAUBI, a small river of the province and 
government of Paraguay. It runs w. and enters 
the Parana, between the rivers Aguarau and Uru 
guay Chico. 

INCA, a settlement of the province and corre 
gimiento of Cuenca in the kingdom of Quito ; 
situate at the source of the river Naranjal. 

INCA, JARDINES DEL, another settlement, of 
the province and government of Chucuitoin Peru; 
situate on the shore of the great lake Titicaca. 

JNCA, a lake of the province and corregimiento 
of Cuyo in the kingdom of Chile, close to the 
source of the river Quillota. 

INCA, a bridge in Chile, which is nothing but 
a large mountain cut through by the river Men- 
doza. This mountain principally consists of 
gypsum ; and large clusters of beautiful stalactites, 
formed by the crystallization of that substance, are 
suspended from the arch of the bridge. 

1NCAHUASI, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Castro Vireyna in Peru; situate 
on the shore of the river La Sal. 

1NCASAMANCA, an island of the lake Uma- 



I N D 



283 



marca, in the province and corregimiento of Oma- 
suyosin Peru. 

INCH A, a settlement of the island of Hispa- 
niola or St. Domingo. 

INCOGNITA, TIERRA, a country of the 
coast of the straits of Magellan, extending from 
the island of Monmouth as far as the morro or 
mountain of Las Lomas. 

INCOGNITO, Rio, a river in the province 
and government of La Louisiana. It runs s. and 
enters the sea in the bay of Santa Rosa, and that of 
San Andres. 

INCOGNITO, Rio, another, a small river in the 
same province and government. It also runs $. 
to the sea, in the bay of San Andres and that of San 
Joseph. 

INCURIS, or INCURIES, a barbarous nation 
of Indians, who dwell in the woods to the s. of 
the river Maranon. It is in continual warfare 
with the nation of LasAguas, and is known also 
by the names of Inuris and Zapas. 

1NCUYACH1, a settlement and head settle 
ment of the district of the alculdia mayor of Tonala 
in Nueva Espana. 

INDAPARAPEO, a settlement of the head 
settlement of Tarimbaro, and alcaldia mayor of 
Valladolid, in the province and bishopric of Mc- 
choacan ; situate on an extensive lofty ground, 
which on the s. is bounded by the sierra del real of 
Ozumatian. It contains 56 families of Spaniards, 
MusteeS) and Mulattoes, and 82 Indians. It i* 
five leagues to the e. of its capital. 

1NDAQUIES, a settlement of the province and 
government of Popayan in the Nuevo Reyno de 
Granada; situate at the head and source of the 
great river of La Magdalena. 

1NDEHEE, a settlement of the province of 
Tepeguana, and kingdom of Nueva Vizcaya; 
situate between those of Tepeguana and Cerro 
Gordo. 

[INDEPENDENCE Mount is situated on the 
strait through which the waters of lake George 
and East bay flow into lake Champlain, in the 
n. w. part of the town of Orwell in Rutland coun 
ty, Vermont, and opposite to Ticonderoga.] 

[INDIAN Bay lies on the w. side of Bonavista 
bay, in Newfoundland island ] 

[INDIAN OLD TOWN, a town in Lincoln coun 
ty, in the district of Maine, situated on an island 
in Penobscot river, just above the Great falls, 
and about 30 miles below the Forks. Here are 
about 100 families, who are Roman Catholics, the 
remains of the Penobsrot Iribe, and the only In 
dians who reside in the district of Maine. They 
live together in a regular society, and are iu- 
o o 2 



284 



I N D 



creasing in number ; the sachems having laid an 
injunction on the young people to marry early. 
In a former war, this tribe had their lands taken 
from them ; but at the commencement of the Ame 
rican revolution, the provincial congress granted 
them a tract of land, 12 miles wide, intersected in 
the middle by the river. They have a right, in 
preference to any other tribe, to hunt and fish as 
far as the mouth of the bay of Penobscot extends. 
In their town is a decent church with a bell ; and 
a priest resides among them to administer the or 
dinances.] 

[INDIAN ORCHARD, a tract of land in North 
ampton county, Pennsylvania, on the w. side of 
Delaware river, on the river Lexawacsein.] 

[INDIAN River, or CYPRESS Swamp, lies partly 
in the states of Maryland and Delaware. This 
morass extends six miles from c. to w. and nearly 
12 from n. tos. including an area of nearly 50,000 
acres of land. The whole of this swamp is a high 
and level bason, very wet, though undoubtedly 
the highest land on that part of the coast. False 
cape, at the mouth of Indian river, and the n. e. 
part of Cedar neck, is in lat. 38 35 15 y n. and 
11-f miles s. of the light-house at cape Henlopen. 
Cedar swamp contains a great variety of plants, 
trees, wild beasts, birds, and reptiles.] 

[INDIAN River, on the e. coast of the peninsula 
of E. Florida, rises a short distance from the sea- 
coast, and runs from n. to s. forming a kind of 
inland passage for many miles along the coast. 
It is also called Rio Ays, and has on the n. side 
of its mouth the point El Palmer, on the s. that of 
the Leech. Lat. 27 30 n. Long. 80 40 a?.] 

[INDIAN River, district of Maine, a small 
arm of the sea, between Chandler s and Pleasant 
river. J 

[INDIAN Island. See PENOBSCOT River.] 

[!NIAN Town, in Maryland, a village situated 
on Indian creek, on the s. e. bank of Choptank 
river, and in Dorchester county, three miles s. w. 
of Newmarket.] 

[INDIAN Town, a small post-town of N. Caro 
lina, 10 miles from Sawyer s ferry, and 33 from 
Edenton.] 

[INDIANA, a territory in Virginia, lying be 
tween Ohio river and the Laurel mountain, con 
taining about 3{ millions of acres. It is nearly of 
a triangular form, and extends in length from the 
Pennsylvania line to the waters of the Little Kan- 
haway. It was granted to Samuel Wharton, Wil 
liam Trent, and George Morgan, Esquires, and a 
few other persons, in the year 176S, by the Sha- 
wanese, Delaware, and Huron tribes of Indians, 
as a compensation for losses to the amouut of 



I N D 

85,916/. 10s. 8rf. currency, which these people 
had sustained by the depredations of the Indians 
in the year 1763. It is a valuable tract of land ; 
but the title of the proprietors, though pronounced 
good by a committee of congress in 1782, is at 
present embarrassed in consequence of the revo 
lution. 

By the census of 1810, the population of this 
territorial government amounted to 24,520 souls.] 

[IND1ANE, a small harbour in the island of 
Cape Breton.] 

INDIANS, a general name given to all the 
aborigines of the Indies or America. They are 
scattered over an extent of two prodigious conti 
nents, and divided into an infinite number of na 
tions and tribes, differing very little irom each 
other in their customs and modes of life ; all form 
ing a lively picture of the most remote antiquity. 
The Indians are of a straight stature, and taller 
than the generality of other nations ; are robust, 
and of a constitution as well equal to temporary 
exertion, as to surmount the continuance of the 
greatest hardships and labours. They have the 
head a little flat, the features regular, the aspect 
ferocious, and the hair long, black, and strong, 
like a horse s tail. They have no beards, and 
their skin is of an obscure red. When the Euro 
peans discovered their countries, they found the na 
tives -quite naked, save in what the civilized na 
tions hold indispensable. They are all of an uni 
form appearance, muscular, but thin, whilst their 
education teaches them only to adapt their bodies 
to the modes of life they are to follow, and their 
minds to bear the weight of the greatest calamities. 
Their uniform occupation is the chase and war ; 
agriculture they leave to the care of the women, and 
commerce they despise. When the chase is over, 
and which they follow with consummate skill and 
ingenuity, and that they have heaped together their 
provisions, they pass their time in the greatest in 
dolence, sleep one half of the day, and the other 
sing and dance with little decency, and eat and 
drink beyond all limits. Before the arrival of the 
Europeans, they were not acquainted with any fer 
mented liquor ; but since that time, drunkenness 
has ever been the sole object of their ambition. In 
fact, they are scarcely ever sober, and will lie ex 
tended upon the ground, exposed to the incle 
mency of the weather and to the greatest disorders : 
such, however, as refrain from this pernicious 
practice live to an old age, enjoying a life full of 
health arid vigour. 

Their general character is to be ferocious, al 
ways serious and melancholy, respectful to those 
in their presence, and particularly so to elders. 



INDIANS. 



285 



They are of a cold temperament, and never speak 
without meditating much on what they have to 
say, and stopping till others have finished ; so that 
they find great fault with the vivacity of the Eu 
ropeans, who are ia the habit of interrupting each 
other, and speaking at the same time. In their 
juntas and councils they observe great silence and 
veneration for age, capacity, and merit ; and 
no one is move regardful of the laws of hospitality 
than the Indian : but with their enemies they are 
implacable and cruel, and dissemble their anger 
under the mask of friendship till they find an op 
portunity of executing their vengeance: nor will 
time deaden their animosity, for they will seek 
their enemy after the lapse of years, travelling to 
great distances, impeded neither by the asperity of 
the mountains and deserts, the dread of wild beasts, 
nor the impetuosity of torrents : they are in such 
a case alike insensible to the inclemency of the 
season, and the extremes of hunger and thirst, that 
they may glut themselves wilh his flesh. Notwith 
standing this, they are not captious, but will sub 
mit quietly to affronts and insults. Liberty, taken 
in its widest sense, is their ruling passion ; and for 
it they sacrifice all ; leading, upon the whole, a life 
replete with misery and wretchedness. Although 
the women bear the weight of domestic drudgery 
and labour in general, yet are they much re 
spected. Some nations tolerate polygamy, but this 
is not common to all. It is well worthy of re 
mark, that although some of them are so incre 
dibly stupid that they appear rather like brutes 
than rational beings, and even wanting at times 
the instinct of the former, others have been found to 
possess a nice and lively discrimination, and to 
have well formed ideas. 

If the total indifference of the Indian to temporal 
things were balanced by a corresponding regard to 
spiritual, they might well be called happy ; for 
they enjoy an undisturbed tranquillity in all the 
concerns of life, prosperous or unfortunate. Their 
vesture is humble ; if it is torn by accident, it 
concerns them not, nor do they even desire a better. 
They despise riches and authority, and it is equal to 
them whether they be a cacique or a vassal ; 
and for this reason there is no reciprocal esteem 
amongst them. Their food is not less simple than 
their vesture ; and, in short, nothing can move or 
excite them, nor can they be stimulated by fear, 
or obliged by force. So invincible is their stupidity, 
and so contented are they with their lot, tha^no en 
deavours can instruct them ; so slow, that it is com 
mon to say of a work which is of little moment, 
but which will take much time, that it is the labour 



of an Indian ; since they will, in making carpets, 
quilts, and other articles, actually count the threads 
one by one. They are naturally of a mechanical 
turn, and would, without instruction, make con 
siderable improvements in the arts. They marry, 
in order that they may have servants in their 
wives, to do whatever may be necessary ; namely, 
spinning, making shirts and shoes, dressing the 
food, preparing the maize, baking the rice, arid 
making chicha; whilst they squat down (this being 
their general posture) before the fire, without mov 
ing but to eat. If any traveller loses his way, and 
arrives at the cabin, they hide themselves, and tell 
their wives to say that they are not at home ; and 
although all that you might require of them were 
that they should attend you only for Half a quarter 
of a league, nothing can induce them to ac 
quiesce. 

Their habitations are small, the fire-place is in 
the middle, and they live with the animals which 
they keep, holding in great esteem the dogs, and 
seldom having less about them than three or four. 
The bed consists of two or three sheep-skins, with 
out any thing else whatever. They sleep huddled 
together, and always without undressing. Super 
stition is general amongst them ; it is from the most 
remote antiquity. They believe auguries and divi 
nations, and are so infatuated that it is difiicnlt to 
persuade them of their error, and to make them em 
brace the Catholic religion ; arid indeed, when this 
is the case, they are prompted to it by mere cere 
mony, or from fear of chastisement. 

Such is the general character of the Indians, al 
though in the settlements of the missions of Para- 
guaj , and amongst those who have been educated 
amongst the Spaniards in the province of Quito 
and other parts, there are some civilized, intelligent 
in the arts, and regular followers of their religion, 
these being called Ladinos. The disease of the 
small-pox, which was unknown to them before the 
arrival of the Spaniards, and which they have ex 
perienced every six or seven years, has destroyed 
millions ; and when it occurs, death is almost in 
evitable, and whole settlements are swept oft at 
once. As it is not possible to reduce under one 
article the whole history of the Indians, whoever 
wishes to be further instructed concerning them, 
may consult the chronologer Antonio de Herrera, 
Fr. Gregorio Garcia, Don Antonio de Ulloa, and 
the Father Laffiteau. [See also description of 
the natives of CUBA, and other islands, in this 
work.] 

[\Ve consider the account of the Indians, given 
by Alcedo, relating exclusively to-loose inhabiting 



286 



INDIANS. 



[S.America, or such parts as comprise the Spanish 
colonies. 

Some writers have conjectured the number of 
aboriginal inhabitants, or Indians, in America, 
to be under 2,500,000 ; but this we conceive 
to be egregiously under the mark ; and can 
only account for the falsity of the calculation from 
the little genuine intelligence those writers pos 
sessed of every thing respecting the s. continent. 
It is true that at the time of the discovery of Ame 
rica, the island of Hispaniola alone contained at 
least 1,000,000 of inhabitants; Bartholomew de 
las Casas estimated the number at 3,000,000 ; and 
millions were said to be buried in the mines, or 
limited to death by the Spaniards, both on the 
islands and continent. 

In the n. parts of America, numbers were doubt 
less destroyed in forming the English, Dutch, and 
French colonies ; but notwithstanding the ruptures 
between the colonists and the Indians, very few 
comparatively perished by war. Famine, and its 
companion the pestilence, frequently destroy whole 
tribes. The diseases also introduced by the Eu 
ropeans have made great havoc. The spirituous 
liquors, in the use of which they have been ini 
tiated by the whites, prove perhaps most of all re 
pugnant to population. They waste as the Euro 
peans advance, they moulder away, and disappear. 
The most numerous tribes are at the greatest dis 
tance from the settlements of the whites ; and it is 
very certain that in proportion to their distance 
they are unacquainted with the use of fire-arms. 
AH the nations n. of lake Superior, and those be 
yond the Mississippi, use only bows and arrows ; 
so that when their scattered situation is considered, 
the various customs and superstitions which it 
would be necessary to reconcile, in order to pro 
duce unity of action, and what a small proportion 
of them have the apparatus, or understand the use 
of musketry, or possess resources to enable them 
to carry on lasting hostilities against the power of 
the United States, it must be obvious, that even 
partial defeats of the federal troops will hasten their 
ruin, notwithstanding the wonderful dexterity and 
intrepidity which they exhibited in several actions 
with the regular troops in the late war. But this 
neither is nor ought to be the wish of the inhabi 
tants of the United States ; they ought to tench 
them the blessings of peace, and curb the exorbi 
tant lust of farther extent of territory. 

A li^t of Indian tribes, in Imlay s History of 
Kentucky, makes the aggregate number less than 
60,000 who inhabit the country from the gulf of 
Mexico, on both sides of the Mississippi, to the 



gulf of St. Lawrence, and as far w. as the country 
has been generally explored ; that is, to the head 
water of the Mississippi, and from thence a good 
way up the Missouri, and between that river and 
Santa Fe. 

The population of the Indian nations in the s. 
parts of the United States, somewhat different from 
Imlay, is, according to Mr. Purcell, who resided 
among them in 1780, as follows : 

Gun-men. Total. 
Muscogees, commonly called 

Creeks, - - 5,860 17,280 

Chactaws, - - 4,131 13,423 

Chickasaws, - 575 2,290 

Cherokees, - - 2,800 8,550 

Catabaws, - 150 490 

13,516 42,033 

The above Red nations have increased in a small 
degree since the general peace established among 
them in 1777. The whites incorporated among 
them are few in number, and lead a vagabond life, 
going from tribe to tribe as their restless disposition 
leads them. The increase of population is con 
siderably checked by the quantities of adulterated 
and poisonous spirituous liquors, and the vene 
real distemper, introduced among them by the 
whites. 

Major-general Anthony Wayne put an end to 
the destructive- war with the Indians, by a treaty 
of peace and friendship concluded at Greenville, 
Aug. 3, 1795, which was ratified by the president 
of the United States, Dec. 22, 1795. The Indian 
tribes signed the treaty in the following order : 
Wyandots, Delawares, Shawanoes, Ottawas, Chi- 
pawas, Ottawa, Patawatames of the river of St. 
Joseph, Patawatames of Huron, Miamies, Miamis 
and Eel River, Eel River tribe, Miamis, Kickapoos 
and Kaskaskias, Delawares of Sandusky, and some 
of the Six Nations living at Sandusky. These In 
dians ceded to the United States various tracts of 
land from two to 12 miles square, near the different 
posts in the N. W". Territory. The United States 
delivered to the Indian tribes above named goods 
to the value of 20,000 dollars ; and agreed to de 
liver in goods to the value of 9500 dollars annu 
ally, lor ever. The portion Avhich each tribe is 
to receive will be seen in the account of the parti 
cular nation or tribe. 

Little is yet known of the Indians in the interior 
parts of N. America. In 1792, Mr. Stewart, said 
to be in the employ of the British court, returned 
from four years travels through the hitherto unex 
plored regions to the w. Taking his course w. s. ty.J 



I N D 

[from the posts on the lakes, he penetrated to the 
head of Ihe Missouri, and from thence due w. to 
within 500 miles of the shores of the Pacific ocean. 
He joined the interior Indians in several battles 
against the Shore Indians : all which coming; short 
of his object, the. procuring a peace, so that he 
might exp ore the continent from sea to sea ; after 
some stay, he returned nearly by the same route 
lie had pursued in going out. Beyond the Mis 
souri, Mr. Stewart met with many powerful na 
tions, in general hospitable and courteous. The 
Indian nations he visited w. appeared to be a po 
lished and civilized people, having towns regu 
larly built, and being in a state of society not far 
removed from that of the Europeans, and only 
wanting the use of iron and steel to be perfectly so. 
They are always clad in skins cut in an elegant 
manner, and in many respects preferable to the 
garments in use among the whites. Adjacent to 
these nations is a vast ridge of mountains, which 
may be called the Alleghany of the w. parts of 
America, and serves as a barrier against the too 
frequent incursions of the Coast Indians, who enter 
tain a mortal antipathy to the nations and tribes in 
habiting the country e. of the mountains. See 
UNIT&amp;lt; :n STATES.] 

INDIAS, OCCIDENTALS, a name given to 
America, to distinguish it from the E. indies of 
Asia ; the former being to the w. the latter to the 
e. of Europe. Tli;s name owes its origin to the 
solicitude of the first discoverers of America, who 
united the one India with the other, although in 
fact they are at a distance from each other of half 
the circumterence of the terraqueous globe. See 
article AMERICA. 

[It is almost unnecessary to mention that the 
English acceptation of the term West Indies is to 
tally different from that of our author. With us 
it means only certain islands of the w. hemisphere. 
See WEST INDIES.] 

Series of the Patriarchs of the Indies. ._;-: 

This dignity was created at the solicitation of 
the Emperor Charles V. by his Holiness Clement 
VII. in 1524. 

1. Don Antonio de Roxas, bishop of Mallorca, 
tutor to the infant Don Fernando, who was after 
wards emperor, bishop of Granada, and president 
of the council of Castilla. 

2. Don 1 ernando Nino de Guevara, archbishop 
and president of Granada, and bishop of Si- 
guenza. 

3. Don Antonio de Fonseca, bishop of Pam 
plona, and president of Castilla. 

4. Don Juan de Guzman, archdeacon of Gua- 
dalaxara, canon of the holy church of Toledo, 



I N D 



principal religious attendant, almoner and head 
chaplain of the Kings Don Felipe II. and III. 

5. Don Juan Btptista de Acevedo, bishop of 
Valladolid, inquisitor-general, and president of 
Castilla. 

6. Don Pedro Manso, oidor of Pamplona and 
of Granada, alcalde of the court, president of 
Valladolid, and afterwards of the council of Cas- 
filla, archbishop of Cesarea; elected patriarch 
in 1609. 

7. Don Diego de Guzman, canon of the holy 
church of Toledo, of the supreme council of the 
inquisition, commissary-general of the crusade, 
chief chaplain and almoner to Don Felipe III. 
tutor of the infants Doiia Ana, queen of France, 
and Dona Maria, empress of Germany, arch 
bishop of Sevilla, and cardinal of the holy church, 
in 1610. 

8. Don Francisco Geronimo Pacheco, of the 
council of state, inquisitor-general, and elected 
patriarch in 1625. 

9. Don Alonzo Perez de Guzman, chief chap 
lain and almoner to King Don Felipe IV. canon 
of the holy church of Toledo, and in the same, 
chief chaplain to the new kings; elected patriarch 
in 1626 ; he died in 1655. 

10. Don Antonio Manrique de Guzman, arch 
bishop of Tiro ; nominated patriarch in 1655 ; he 
died in 1679. 

11. Don Antonio de Benavides y Bezan, arch 
bishop of Tiro, commissary-general of the cru 
sade ; nominated in the above year, 1679. 

12. Don Carlos de Borja, chief comendndor of 
Buey in the order of Alcantara, archbishop of 
Trebisonda, cardinal of the holy church ; elected 
in 1707; he died in 1733. 

13. Don Juan de Lancaster y Noroiia, Duke 
of Abrantes, bishop of Cuenca, patriarch, chap 
lain-major, and almoner to the king ; elected in 
the above year, 1733 ; he died in the same. 

14. Don Alvaro de Mendoza Camafio y Soto- 
mayor, principal religious attendant, canon and 
archdeacon of Trastamara in the holy church of 
Santiago, abbot of Alcala la Real and of Burgo 
Hondo, kniyht of the order of Santiago, chap 
lain-major of La Encarnacion, and cardinal of the 
holy church ; elected patriarch, almoner-major, 
and vicar-general of the army and armada in the 
aforesaid year, 1733; he died in 1761. 

J5. Don Ventura de Cordoba Espinola y la 
Cerda, canon and archdeacon of Talavera in the 
church of Toledo, abbot of Rute and Anate, car 
dinal of the holy church ; elected in 1761 ; he died 
in 1777. 

1C. Don Francisco Delgado, archbishop of Se- 



288 



I N D I A S. 



villa, vice-chaplain and chief almoner to the king, 
vicar-general to the armies and the armada, grand 
chancellor of the royal and distinguished order of 
Charles 111. and cardinal of the holy church; 
elected patriarch in 1777 ; he died in 1781. 

17. Don Cayetano Adzor, canon of Segovia, 
inquisitor of Cordoba and Valladolid, abbot of the 
collegiate church of San lldefonso, consecrated 
bishop of Scliinbria, and elected patriarch in 1781 ; 
he died six months after, in 1782. 

18. Don Manuel Ventura de Figucron, grand 
chancellor of the order of Charles 111. patriarch 
of the Indies, pro-chaplain and chief almoner to 
the king, vicar-general of the armies and the ar- 
nuida, "canon and archdeacon of Nendos in the 
church of Santiago, of the council and chamber 
ofCastilla, and governor of the council, commis 
sary-general of "the crusade, collector-general of 
the sp ils and vacant places, &amp;c. and archbishop 
of Luoclicca ; he died in 1783. 

19. Don Antonio Sentmanat, canon of the holy 
church of Barcelona, auditor of the Sacra Rot a 
in Rome, bishop of Avila, which he renounced 
when he was elected patriarch, almoner and chap 
lain-major to his Majesty s grand chancellor of the 
order of Charles 111. and vicar-general of his ar 
mies and armada, in 1784. 

Series of the Grand Chancellors of the Indies. 

1. The Count Mercuric de Gatinara, nominated 
first chancellor by the Emperor Charles V. in 
1528, and resigned the office by his death. 

2. Don Francisco de los Cobos, Marquis of Ca- 
marasa; elected many years afterwards. The 
possession of the two audiences of the Indies were 
sold to the several vice-chancellors whom he 
named ; and at his death the office became ex 
tinct. 

3. Don Caspar de Guzman, Count Duke of 
Olivares, in whom the office was renewed by King 
Don Felipe IV. in 1(323; he died in 1645, and 
the ritfht of inheritance was vested in his family. 

4. Don Ramiro Nunez Perez Felipe de Guzman, 
Marquis of Toral, and Duke of Medina de las 
Torres, Prince of Astillano ; he came to the 
ofiice from having married the eldest daughter of 
the Count Duke, and held it from the year l(i/7 
to 1629, when his wife died. 

5. Don Luis Mcndez de Haro, Count Duke of 
Olivares, Duke of Montoro, plenipotentiary in 
the peace of Portugal ; he died in 1661. 

6. Don Francisco Alvarez de Toledo, Duke of 
Montoro, Marquis of Carpio; and in him the of 
fice became again extinct by decree of the king, 
in 1706. 

7. Don Fernando de Silva Alvarez de Toledo, 



Duke of Alva, Marquis del Carpio, captain-gene 
ral of the royal armies, major-domo mayor of the 
king, knight of the illustrious order of Toisou, also 
of the orders of Sancti Spiritus, San Genaro, and 
Calatrava, great cross of the order of Charles III. 
ambassador to the court of Paris, and grand chan 
cellor of the Indies ; having returned to resign his 
ollice by the decree of King Ferdinand VI. in 
1575, he died in 1776; and by a subsequent de 
cree the office was entirely abolished. 
Series of the Presidents and Governors of the 

Royal and Supreme Council of the Indies. 
This tribunal was instituted by the Emperor 
Charles V. in 1524, upon the footing of a presi 
dent and grand chancellor (the same being a coun 
sellor and president in the vacancy of the former), 
a fiscal, two secretaries, a lieutenant of the grand 
chancellor, three relators, a chamber-secretary, 
four accountants, a secretary to the chamber pu 
nishments, condemnations, and deposits, a chief 
chronicler, a cosmographer, a professor of mathe 
matics, an alguazil-mayor, two fiscal agents, an 
advocate and procurator to the poor, an appraiser 
of processes, a chaplain, and four porters. Its ju 
risdiction extends for more than 4000 leagues, and 
no tribunal in the world, not even the Roman se 
nate, ever had so complete an authority as this ; 
since it took cognizance and had the unlimited 
controul of all affairs by sea and land, of con 
cerns political, military, civil, and criminal, to 
gether with unrestricted faculty over the viceroys, 
presidents, royal audiences, house of trade, the 
armadas, flotillas, and garrisons. It used, how 
ever, to consult the king in the making of vice 
roys, presidents, governors, judges, torrcgiSors, 
and commanders ; also in the appointment of the 
six bishops, their dignitaries, canons, and pre 
bends. It had the charge of the missions sent to 
instruct and convert the Indians, and in short of 
every thing that could relate to the government of 
and dispensation of justice in the Indies. The 
kings of Spain have at different times fnade some 
variations in its establishment; but the presidents 
and governors who have presided in it are as 
follows : 

J. Don Juan Rodriguez de Fonseca, brother of 
the Seiior de Alaejos, archbishop of Rosano, bishop 
of Burgos, being at the time of his appointment 
dean of Sevilla ; his government was confined to 
that which related to the fleets and armadas of the 
Indies, until that the King Don Fernando, the Ca 
tholic, railed him tothecourt, inorder that he might 
preside in the Indies. This he continued to do until 
the time that the Emperor Charles V. Dominated 
his prime chancellor Mercuric de Gatinara to be su- 



I N D I A S. 



28!) 



pcrintendant of all the councils. This person ac 
cordingly became a leading assistant in all the 
juntas that had been established. 

2. Don Fr. Garcia tic Louisa, general of the 
order of St. Domingo, confessor to the emperor, 
bishop of Osma and Siguenza, archbishop of 
Sevilla, and cardinal of the holy church, in 
1524. 

3. Don Garcia Fernandez Manrique, Count of 
Osorno ; he left Sevilla, where he was assistant for 
the presidency, through the absence of the cardi 
nal ; which office he filled two years, until the re 
turn of the latter, in 1536 ; and upon the death of 
the same he entered the office a second time, in 
1538, and held it till his death, in 1547. 

4. Don Luis Hurtado de Meridoza, Marquis of 
Mondeja, in 1547 ; afterwards removed to the 
presidency of the royal council of Castilla. 

5. The Licentiate Don Juan Sarrniento, of the 
council of the Indies, president of the chancery of 
Granada; he was made governor in 1563. 

6. The Licentiate Don Francisco Tello de San- 
doval, being counsellor of the Indies ; he was also 
sent to the presidency of the chancery of Granada, 
and from thence he returned to be governor of 
the council, in 1565. 

7. Luis Mendez dc Quixada, Senor de Villa 
Garcia, of the supreme council of war, tutor of 
the Senor Don Juan de Austria, in 1568. 

8. The Licentiate Don Juan de Ovando, of the 
council of the inquisition, governor in 1571. 

9. The Licentiate Don Antonio Padilla y Me- 
neses, of the royal council of Castilla ; he was 
made president of the orders, and afterwards of 
the Indies, in 1579. 

10. The Licentiate Hcrnando de VegayFonscca, 
of the council of the inquisition ; he carnelothe pre 
sidency of the royal estates, and then to that of the 
Indies, in 1583. 

11. The Licentiate Don Pedro Moya de Con- 
treras, the first inquisitor that ever arrived at Mex 
ico, archbishop of that metropolitan church, and 
who removed thence to the presidency of the 
council in 1591 : he died the same year. 

12. The Licentiate Pablo de Laguna, of the 
rouncil of Castilla and of the inquisition, presi 
dent of the council of the royal estates and tribu 
nals in that place, afterwards president of the 
council of the Indies, in 1593; in IMS time was 
established the camara or chamber ; he left this 
for the presidency of the council of Castilla. 

13. Don Pedro Fernandez de Castro and An- 
drade, Count of Lcmos, a chamberlain to his Ma 
jesty, viceroy of Naples, and president in 1603. 

VOL. II. 



14. Don Juan dc Acufia, Marquis of Valle; he 
passed from the presidency of the council of the 
royal estates to that of the Indies in 1609, arid 
afterwards to that of Castiila. 

15. Don Luis dc Vclusco, Marquis of Salinas, 
twice viceroy of Nueva Espafia, and once of 
Peru; nominated president in 1611, being at the 
time in Mexico. 

16. The Licentiate Don Fernando Carrillo, in 
1617. 

17. Don Garcia de Haroy Avellaneda, with the 
title of governor, in 1626. 

18. Don Juan de Mendoza, Marquis of Hino- 
jbsa, in the same year. 

19. Don Ramiro Nunez Perez Felipe de Guz 
man, Marquis of Toral, Duke of Medina of Las 
Torres ; he presided as grand chancellor from 
1627 to 1629. 

20. Don Lorenzo de Cardenas y Balda, Count 
of La Puebla del Maestre, and Marquis of Bacares, 
with the title of governor, in 1629. 

21. Don Garcia de Haro y Avellaneda, at that 
time Count of Castrillo ; he became governor in 
1632, and afterwards president. 

22. Don Gaspar de Bracamonte, Count of Pe- 
naranda, a chamberlain, ambassador plenipoten 
tiary at the peace of Munster, and president. 

23. The Licentiate Don Francisco Ramos del 
Monzano, Count of Los Francos, of the council 
and chamber of Castilla, master to the Kino- Doit 
Carlos II. ; nominated governor. 

24. Don Pedro Portocarrero, Count of Medcllin, 
chamberlain and president; he died in 1679. 

25. Don Luis de la Cerda, Duke of Medinaceli, 
president and afterwards prime minister of the 
monarchy. 

26. The Prince Don Vicente Gonzaga, go 
vernor. 

27. Don Joaquin Faxardo, Marquis of Los Ve- 
lez, adelantado mayor of the kingdom of Murcia 
president. 

28. Don Fernando de Aragon, Duke of Mon- 
talto, president. 

29. Don Joseph de Soils, Duke of Montcllano. 
chamberlain and afterwards president. 

30. Don Pedro Nunez de Prado, Count of Ada- 
nero, president 

31. The Duke de IJceda, president ; and in his 
absence, as intermediate president, the Duke de 
A trisco. 

32. Don Rodrigo Manriqucz de Lara, Couut of 
Frigiliana, viceroy of Valencia, admiral of the 
armada, of the council of state and war, of the junta 
of the government at the death of Charles II. me. 

p r 



290 



I N D 



sident of the council of Aragon, and afterwards of 
the Indies ; he died in 1717. 

33. Don Andres de Pez, lieutenant-general of 
the royal armada, secretary of the office entitled 
the Universal Dispatch of the Indies and of the 
Marine, governor of the council of the Indies ; he 
died in 1723. 

34. Don Baltasar de Zurliga Guzman Sotomayor 
y Mendoza, Duke of Arion, Marquis of Valero; 
nominated president in 1723. 

35. Don Christoval Portocarrero Guzman y 
Luna, Count of Montijo, grand equerry to the 
Dowager Queen Dona Isabel Farnesio, knight of 
the renowned order of Toison, and of those of San 
Genaro, Sancti Spiritus, and San Miguel, ambas 
sador in the courts of England and Vienna ; no 
minated president in 1737; lie renounced the of 
fice in 1747. 

36. Don Joseph deCarvajaly Lancaster, knight 
of the renowned order of Toison, secretary of the 
state dispaches ; nominated to the government 
through the vacancy made by the president, in 
1742; he died in 1754. 

37. Don Fernando de Silva Alvarez de Toledo, 
captain-general of the royal armies, knight of the 
orders of Toison, Sancti Spiritus, San Genaro, 
and Calatrava, mayor-domo mayor to the king, 
ambassador to the court of Paris ; declared grand 
chancellor of the Indies in 1757 ; he presided as 
such, in the failure of a president, until 1776, 
when he died. 

38. Don Juan Pizarro, Marquis of San Juan 
de Piedras Albas, knight of the order of San Ge 
naro, chamberlain to his Majesty; hisgrand equerry, 
belonging to the council and chamber of the Indies ; 
nominated president in 1763; he died in 1774. 

39. Don Joseph de Galviz Gallardo, Marquis 
of La Sonora, knight, grand cross of the order of 
Charles III. of the council and chamber of the 
Indies, secretary of the universal dispatch of the 
same, and governor of the council in 1775 ; he 
died in 17S7. 

40. Don Francisco Monino, knight-pensioner of 
the order of Carlos III. ambassador of his Majesty 
to the courts of Florence, Venice, and Portugal ; 
nominated governor of the council in 1787. 

Series of the Admirals of the Indies. 

1. Don Christoval Colon, viceroy, captain-ge 
neral, and firbt admiral of the Indies, discovered by 
him in 1492. 

2. Don Diego Colon, viceroy and captain-ge 
neral perpetual of the Indies, Duke of Veragua, 
grandee of Espaiia, Marquis of .Jamaica, alguazil- 
mnyor of the city of S. Domingo, eldest son of 



I N D 

the admiral, nnd the successor to the dignity, 
in 1506. 

3. Don Luis Colon de Toledo, Duke of Veragua 
and La Vega, Marquis of Jamaica, algvazil- 
mayor of S. Domingo, and third admiral, in 
1572. 

4. Don Diego Colon de Toledo, Duke of Ve 
ragua and La Vega, Marquis of Jamaica, &amp;c. 
fourth admiral. 

5. Don Christoval Colon de Cardona, Duke of 
Veragua, Marquis of La Vega and of Jamaica, 
&amp;c. admiral of Aragon, and fifth admiral of the 
Indies. 

6. Don Alvaro Colon of Portugal, Duke of Ve 
ragua, &amp;c. Count of Gelves, in 1602. 

7. Don Jorge Alberto of Portugal and Colon, 
Duke of Veragua, &amp;c. Count of Gelves. 

8. Don Nuiio Colon of Portugal, Duke of Ve 
ragua, &amp;c. 

9. Don Alvaro Colon of Portugal and Toledo, 
Duke of Veragua, &amp;c. 

10. Don Pedro Jacinto Colon of Portugal and 
Toledo, Duke of Veragua, &amp;c. 

11. Don Pedro Manuel Colon of Portugal and 
Toledo, Duke of Veragua, .c. 

12. Don Pedro Nuilo Manuel Florentin Colon 
of Portugal and Toledo, Duke of Veragua, Mar 
quis of Jamaica, &amp;c. 

13. Don Jacobo Stuard Colon of Portugal and 
Toledo, Duke of Veragua de Wernick, and lieu 
tenant-general of the royal armies, gentleman of 
the chamber to his Majesty ; he died in 1785. 

14. Don Carlos Stuard Colon of Portugal and 
Toledo, Duke of Toledo de Wernick and Liria, 
Count de Ayala, Marquis of Jamaica, &amp;c. mas 
ter of the chamber to his Majesty. 

15. Don Joseph Stuard Colon of Portugal, To 
ledo, and Stolver, Duke of Veragua, of Wernick, 
and of Leria, Count of Oyala, Marquis of Ja 
maica, &amp;c. 

IN DIGS. See INDIANS. 

I MHOS, Rio D!i, a river of the jurisdiction 
and alcaldia mayor of Penonome in the kingdom 
of Tierra Firme. It rises in the mountains of that 
settlement, and empties itself into the N. sea, be 
tween the rivers Code and Chagre. 

INUIOS, another, in the island of S. Domingo, 
which rises in the valley of Neiva, runs w. form 
ing a curve, then s.s. e. and enters the Arlibonito 
about mid-course. The Spaniards have on its 
shore a guard established, called La Hondura, to 
hinder the French from making any incursion in, 
that part. 

lNDios r a village of the province and captain* 



ING 

ship of Ilheos in Brazil, near the sea-coast, and 
on the shore of the river Ilheos. 

INDIOS, another, with the surname of A i mures, 
in the same province and captainship, on the shore 
and at the mouth of the river Camamu, on the 
coast. 

INKS, S. a settlement of the province and cor- 
regimiento of Guarochiri in Peru ; annexed to the 
curacy of S. Juan de Matacuna. 

INES, S. another settlement, of the province 
and correginrienlo of Rancagua in the kingdom 
of Chile ; annexed to the curacy of Peomo. 

INES, S. another, of the province and corregi- 
nricnto of Copiapo in the same kingdom ; situate 
on the shore of the river Juncal. 

LHES, S. another, of the province and govern 
ment of Guatemala. 

INES, S. a large and lofty mountain of the coast 
lying between the river La Plata and the straits of 
Magellan, between the cape of Las Barreras and 
the port of Santa Cruz. 

JNF.S, S. an island of the strait of Magellan, at 
the entrance of this strait by the S. sea, close to 
the coast at this rhumb, near the island of Vic 
toria. 

INCS, S. a cape or point of land on the coast of 
the Tierra del Fuego, between the capes Peiias 
and San Vicente. 

INES, S. ariveroftheprovinceand corrcgimiento 
of Copiapo in the kingdom of Chile. It runs n. 
and enters the Juncal. 

INFANTES, REAL BE T,OS, a valley of the 
province and government of Sierra Gorda, in the 
bay of Mexico ; one of the settlements founded 
by Don Joseph dc Escandon, colonel of militia of 
Queretaro, in 1748. 

1NFIERNO, a small river of the province 
And captains hip of Puerto Seguro in Brazil, runs 
n. n, zi). and enters that of Las Picdras, between 
the Santa Maria and the Caete. 

LVFIERNO, AGUJKIIO DEL, a small port of the 
n. coast and rt . head of the island S. Domingo, be 
tween the point of La Geiinga and that of Los 
Albaricoques. 

INGARA, a river of the province and govern 
ment of Antioqnia in the Nnevo Reyno de Gra 
nada. It rises in the valley of Zopin, and runs 
K. almost parallel with that of S. Agustin, with 
which it unites near the town of Novita, to enter 
the S. Juan. 

ING ATA BA, a settlement of the island of 
Joanesor Marajo, in the country of Las Amazonas, 
on the n. coast, between the settlement of Parana 
and the river Oytipoco. 

1NGAT1VA, a settlement of the province and 



I N G 



291 



correginu cnto of Bogota in the Nnevo Reyno de 
Granada ; of a very cold temperature, and with 
productions peculiar to its climate, with about 
100 housekeepers, and as many Indians : three 
leagues from Santa Fe. 

INGENIO, a settlement of the province and 
corrcgimiento of lea in Peru, in the district of 
which is a valley abounding in dentrites, a species 
of stone, on which are found, acccurately deli 
neated, the figures of trees. 

INGENIO, another settlement, in the province 
and corrcgimiento of Coquimbo in the kingdom 
of Chile ; situate on the coast of the bay Saiada. 

INGENIO, another, with the surname of De 
Oro, in the province and corrcgimiento of Chi- 
chas and Tarija in Peru, of the district of the 
former ; annexed to the curacy of Tatasi. 

INGENIOS, a settlement of the province and 
government of Pastes in the kingdom of Chile. 

INGEMOS, an island near the coast of the pro 
vince and captainship of the Rio Janeiro in Bra 
zil, between the islands Grande and Gebj ocders. 

[1NGLATERRA. See NEW ENGLAND.] 

INGLES, a port on the coast of the province 
and government of Costarica, and kingdom of Gua 
temala, and S. sea, between the gulf of Dulce and 
the river Estrella. 

INGLESES, a settlement and parish of the 
French, in the island of St. Domingo ; situate on 
the s. coast of the w. head, between the point of 
Los Chispas and the Three Rivers. 

INGLESKS, an island of the river La Plata, by 
the n. coa)t, close to the island of Antonio Lopez 
and that of Los Mulcqucs. 

INGLESES, a large shoal or sand-bank at the 
entrance and mouth of the same river, extending 
from n. w. to s. e. many leagues. 

INGLKSES, an isle, near the coast of the island 
St. Domingo, in the French possessions, between 
the bay of the Petit Goave and the Tapion. 

[IN GRAN AM, Port, on the w. side of Wash 
ington island, on the n. w. coast of N.America, .is 
divided into two parts by Young Frederick s 
island. It is a fine harbour for wintering in, being 
near the seu, and having deep water. Lat. 53 
37 n. Long. 133" 18 .] 

[INGJIAHAM Isles, in the S. Pacific ocean, lie 
n. n. w. of the Marquesas islands, from 35 to 50 
leagues distant, and are seven in number, viz. 
Oohoana. or Washington, Wooapao or Adams, 
Lincoln, Nooliccca or Federal, Tatoo-e-tcc, or 
Franklin, Hancock, and Knox. The names in 
Italic are those by which they are known to the 
natives. The others were given them by Captain 
Joseph Ingraham, of Boston in Massachusetts, com- 
p p 2 



292 



I N I 



mander of the brigantine Hope of Boston, -who 
discovered them on the 19th of April 1791, a day 
remarkable in the annals of America, the revolu 
tionary war having commenced on that day in 
1775, and the first discoveries made under the flag 
of the United States marked its 16th anniversary. 
These islands, lying between lat. 8 3 and 9 24 s. 
and between long. 140 19 and 141 IS e?. from 
Greenwich, are mostly inhabited, and appear to 
be generally variegated with hills and valleys, 
abounding with timber and very pleasant. Noo- 
heeva, or Federal island, is represented by the na 
tives to be the largest, most populous, and produc 
tive of the whole; which, they say, are 10 in 
number. The people resemble those of the Mar 
quesas islands ; as do their canoes, which are 
carved at each end. Cotton of a superior quality 
grows he; e. The natives were friendly. Before 
Ingraham s discovery was known, Captain Josiah 
Roberts, of Boston, sailed in the ship Jefferson for 
the n. w. coast, and likewise discovered these 
islands. He gave them different names ; but, to 
avoid confusion, the reader is referred to each island 
under the Indian name, when it is known. As 
these islands lie in that part of the Pacific ocean, 
through which vessels from Europe or America, 
bound to the n. w. coast, must pass, and are not 
far out of their usual track, they may be visited 
for refreshment in case of need. See NOOHEDVA, 
and MARQUESAS Islands, &amp;c.] 

ING RE, a valley in the province and corregi~ 
miento of Pelaya and Paspnya in Peru. It is large, 
fertile, and beautiful. 

INGUIO, SANTIAGO BE, a settlement of the 
head settlement of the district of Tarimbnro, and 
akaldia mayor of Valladolid, in the province and 
bishopric ofMechoacan, and kingdom of Nueva 
Espana. It contains 16 families of Indians, given 
to the cultivation of seeds in its district. Two 
leagues from its head settlement. 

INI ATE, a small river of the province and 
country of Las Amazonas, which runs n. 

[IN1ES, or TACHIES. From the latter name 
the name of the province of Tachus or Taxus is de 
rived. The Inies are Indians of N. America, who live 
about 25 miles w. of Natchitoches, on a small river, 
a branch of Sabine, called the Naches. They are, 
like all their neighbours, diminishing; but have 
now eighty men. Their ancestors, for a long time, 
lived where they now do. Their language is the 
same as that of the Caddos, with whom they are in 
great amity. These Indians have a good charac 
ter, live on excellent land, and raise corn to 
fell.] 

INIQUIARI, a small river of the province and 

5 



INS 

government of La Guayana in Nueva Andalucia, 
which rises in the sierra of Maiguatida from va 
rious streams, which unite and run n. and then turn 
to the e.; and forming many rapids, enter the 
Caura, near the violent stream of the Garapia. 

[INIRCHIA River, or CAGUELA, the name of 
Orinoco river, at its source in the mountains to the 
a\ between New Granada and Peru, not far from 
the S. sea.] 

JNIIiri A, a large and abundant river of the 
province and government of San Juan de los 
Llanos in the Nuevo Reyno de Granada. It rises 
near the centre of the province, in the sierra of 
Yaqucza,runs e. , and forming a curve inclining to 
the n. enters the Guabiare ; and these united run 
into the Orinoco, after taking up the waters of 
many others in their course. 

1NISP1R, a river of the province and govern 
ment of Buenos Ayres, which rises in the lake of 
Cristal, runs s. and enters the Parana. 

[INNA-QU1TO, one of the spacious plains 
upon the n. side of Quito in Peru.] 

1NO, an island of the province and corregi- 
iniento of Caxamarquilla in Peru ; situate in the 
middle of a river. 

1NOBU, a bay on the coast of the province and 
captainship of Seara in Brazil, between the port 
Aborroen and the river of La Sierra Saluda. 

INOCENICO, S. a small river of the province 
and captains/lip of Rey in Brazil, which runs s. 
and enters the Parana, in the province of Para 
guay. 

1NOJUELO, a valley in the island of S.Do- 
mingo, and part possessed by the French. It is 
large, fertile, and beautiful, and surrounded on the 
e. by the river Guatemu. 

1NQUIS1VE, a settlement of the province and 
correginiicnto of Cicasica in Peru ; annexed to the 
curacy of Cabari. 

INoA, a settlement of the province and go 
vernment of Popayan in the Nuevo Reyno do 
Granada. 

[liVSCUA River is laid down in some maps 
as the n. zv. and main branch of St. Croix river, an 
e. water of the Mississippi, rising between lat. 46 
and 47 ??.] 

1NSCUINTEPEC, SANTIAGO BE, a settle 
ment of the head settlement of the district of Coat- 
Ian, and alc.aldia mayor of Nexapa, in Nueva 
,Espaila ; of a cold temperature, and situate be 
tween some ridges of hills. It contains 1 15 fa 
milies of Indians, and is five leagues n. of its head 
settlement. 

INSOVAOUBM)EBA, a river of the province 
and government of Louisiana, rising between the 



I P A 

river S. Luis and the lake Misisagan, and running 
s. to enter the river Ovadeba. 

INTA, a settlement of the province and govern 
ment of Esmeraldas in the kingdom of Quito. 

INT1NUYO, ALTOS DE, a large and lofty 
sierra of the province and government of Santa 
Cruz dela Sierra in Peru, which runs froms*. to n. 
and serves as a division between this province and 
that of Cochabarnba, and extending from the lake 
or head of the river Esseneru to the settlement of 
Totora, of the province of Mizque. 

INVERNESS, NEW, a city of the province 
and colony of Georgia in N. America. It takes 
this name from being peopled with highlanders of 
the city and province of the same name in the n. 
of Scotland, led thither by Captain William 
Mackintosh in 1738, by order of the procurator of 
Georgia, Captain George Dunbar. It is situate 
in the s. part of the province, on the shore of the 
river Alatamha, nearly 20 miles from the city of 
Frederica. 

[IOWA, a river of Louisiana, which runs s, e. 
into the Mississippi, in lat. 41 5 n. 61 miles 
above the Iowa rapids, where on the e. side of the 
river is the Lower Iowa town, which 20 years 
ago could furnish 300 warriors. The Upper Iowa 
town is about 15 miles below the mouth of the 
liver, also on the e. side of the Mississippi, and 
could formerly furnish 400 warriors. See RIVIERE 
r&amp;gt;u MOINS.] 

IPACARAI, a lake of the province and govern 
ment of Paraguay. 

1PAMENA, a river of the province and cap 
tainship of Pernambuco in Brazil, which runs s. 
and enters the Grande cle San Francisco, near 
where this enters into the sea. 

1PANE, a settlement of the province and go 
vernment of Paraguay. 

IPANE, a river of this province and government, 
which runs n. and enters the Grande of the Por 
tuguese. 

IPANE, another, of the same province, distinct 
from the former, which enters the Picazura. 

IPANE-GAZU, a river of the same province and 
government as the former two. It runs w. and 
enters the Paraguay in the territory of the Monteses 
Indians. 

1PAPUISAS, or CORONADOS, a barbarous na 
tion of Indians of the kingdom of Quito, who 
dwell in the vicinities of the river Pastaza, s. and 
n. zo. of the Andcuis : bounded n. w. one fourth to 
the w. by the nation of the Chudavinas, and e. by 
that of Los Xibaros. 

1PARE-M1NI, a river of the province and go- 



I P O 



293 



vernment of Paraguay. It is small, runs s. s. e. 
and enters the Paraguay. 

IPAT1MI, a river of the same province and go 
vernment as the former. 

1PAU, a river of the same province and govern 
ment as the former. It enters the Uruguay between 
the Cabaguan and the Mbutuay. 

IPAVA, a lake of the province and government 
of Guayana or Nueva Andalucia, between the 
Comesianas and Carinacos Indians ; and, according 
to the map of Juan de la Cruz, it rises in the 
same place as the Orinoco, and is the source of that 
river. 

IPEBRA, a small river of the province and go 
vernment of Paraguay, which enters the Pucazuru 
between the Pinilli and the Bovi. 

IPEGUILA, a river of the province and go 
vernment of Darien, and kingdom of Tierra Firme, 
which rises in the mountains of the c . part, runs n. 
and enters the Tarena. 

1PENEQUE, a river of the province and go 
vernment of Choco in the Nuevo Reyno de Gra 
nada, which rises in the sierras of Abide, runs w. 
and enters the Paganagandi. 

IPENIN, a river of the province and captain 
ship of Seara in Brazil, called also Vcrmellas. It 
flows down from the mountains to the w. runs e. 
and enters the sea, to the 5. of the bay of San Lo 
renzo. 

IPETUBA, a town of the province and captain 
ship of Rey in Brazil; situate on the shore of the 
bay of its name. 

IPIALES, a settlement of the province of Pasto 
in the kingdom of Quito. It is to the s. e. of the 
settlement of Carlosama, and n. c. of Tulcan, near 
the w. shore of the river Rumichaca, and in the 
boundaries n. of the province of Ibarra, in lat. 
47 n. 

IPILLOS, abarbarous nation of Indians, dwell 
ing on the skirt of the Andes, in the province and 
corregimiento of Tarma, and kingdom of Peru. 
They are very robast and warlike, and friends of 
the Clmnchos. 

1PIRE, a river of the province of Barcelona, 
and government of Cumana, which rises in the 
serrania of Paraigua, runs n. and enters the 
Unare. 

IPLAGUI, a river of the district and territory 
of Cnyaba in the kingdom of Brazil ; which rises 
in the mountains, runs w. and unites itself with 
the Picuru to enter that of Los Porrudos. 

IPO A, a lake of the province and government of 
Paraguay ; situate on the side of the river of which 
it is formed, opposite the mouth of the Piscomayo. 



IPS 



1POBA, a small river of the province and cap 
tainship of Pernambuco in Brazil. It rises near 
the coast, runs ,&amp;lt;?. s. c. and enters the sea between 
the Grande of San Francisco and the causeway or 
ridsfc of rocks of its name. 

I POX I, a small river of the province and cap 
tainship of Sergipe in Brazil, which rises near the 
coast, runs e. and enters the mouth of the Grande 
of San Francisco. 

iPOYA, a small island of the N. sea; situate 
near the coast of Brazil, in the province and captain 
ship of the Kio Janeiro. It lies between the Isla 
Grande and the coast. 

[IPSWICH, the Agawam of the Indians, is a 
post-town and port of entry on both sides of Ips 
wich river, in Essex county, Massachusetts, seven 
auiles s. of Newburyport, nine n. of Beverly, 23 
H. c. by n. of Boston, and about a mile from the 
sea. The township of Ipswich is divided into 
five parishes, and contains GO I houses and 4502 
inhabitants. There is an excellent stone bridge 
across Ipswich river, composed of two arches, 
with one solid pier in the bed of the river, which 
connects the two parts of the town, executed under 
the direction of the late Hon. Judge Choate. This 
was heretofore a place of much more consideration 
than at present. Its decline is attributed to a 
barred harbour and shoals in the river. Its na 
tural situation is pleasant, and on all accounts ex 
ceedingly well calculated to be a large manufac 
turing town. The supreme judicial court, the 
courts of common pleas and sessions, are held here 
once a year, on the first Tuesday of April; and 
from its" central situation, it appears to be the most 
convenient place for all the courts and public of 
fices of the county. The inhabitants are chiefly 
farmers, except those in the compact part of the 
township. A few vessels are employed in the 
fishery, and a few trade to the W.Indies. Silk 
and thread lace of an elegant texture are manu 
factured here by women and children, in large 
quantities, and sold lor use and exportation in 
Boston,,and other mercantile towns. In 1790, no 
less than 41,979 yards were made here, and the 
manufacture is rather increasing. Ipswich town- 
s.hip was incorporated in 1634, and is 255 miles n. c. 
of Philadelphia. Lat. 4 C J J 39 n. Long. 70 

50 .] 

j IPSWICH, NEW, a township in IlilLsborongb. 
county, New Hampshire, containing 1311 inha 
bitants ; situate on the w. side of Souhcagan river, 
and separated from Whatohook mountain by the 
w. line of Massachusetts ; 50 miles n. w. of Boston, 
and about 54. w. of Portsmouth. It was iucor- 



I Q U 

porated in 1762, and has in it a flourishing aca 
demy.] 

IPUCATUI, a lake of the province and go 
vernment of Paraguay, formed by the river of its 
name, opposite the city of Asuncion. 

IPUIGH1, a river of the province and govern 
ment of Paraguay, which enters the Parana, be 
tween those of Piratini and Icabaqua. 

1PUIGTA, a small river of the same province 
and government as the former, which runs uo. and 
enters the Paraguay, between those of Iboig and 
Guaraporique. 

1PUYES, a barbarous nation of Indians of the 
Nuevo Reyno de Granada, i?i the province of 
Tunja: bounded by that of the Tarnes, and being 
descendants of the Laches. 

IQLJE1UE, a settlement of the province and 
corrcginricnto of Tarapaca in Peru, two leagues 
distant from lluantajaya, and annexed to the cu 
racy of Tarapaca. It has a good small port, fit 
for small vessels, which are used to carry on here a 
fishery for dog-fish and congers, the same being 
carried to the other provinces for sale. Lat. 20 
14 s. 

IQUEIQDE, an isle of the S. sea, near the coast of 
the same province and corregimienlo as that in which 
is the above port. Here there is found in great 
abundance huano, which is the excrement of a 
certain marine bird, and an excellent manure. 

IQUEN, a river of the province and captainship 
of Pernambuco in Brazil, which rises near the 
coast, runs s. s. e. and enters the sea between the 
Cururii and the Yaqueacu. 

IQU1, a river of the province and government 
of Darien in the kingdom of Tierra Firme, which 
rises in the mountains to the e. runs to this rhumb, 
and enters the Tarena. 

IQU1AUI, a river of the province and country 
of Las Amazonas, in the Portuguese possessions. 
It rises parallel to the line, runs c. between those of 
Yurubesch and Isie, and enters the Negro by the 
w. part, in lat. 2-1 n. 

IQUlItA, a settlement of the province and go 
vernment of Neiba in the Nuevo lieyno de Gra 
nada ; situate on an eminence, which causes it to be 
of a more healthy temperature than the other set 
tlements, and produces ail the fruits of a mild cli 
mate, such as papas, cabbages, cucumbers, and 
various kinds of pulse. It abounds in washing 
places of gold, from whence the natives, who are 
very few, derive .some vaiolument. 

1QU1TOS, a barbarous and numerous nation 
of Indians, dwelling in {he woods near the river 
Nunay, to the n. of the river Maranon ; bounded 



I R A 

by the nation of the Ayacores. Some of them have 
been reduced to the faith in the settlement of Santa 
Barbara of the mission near Mainas, which was 
held by the Jesuits. 

IRACA, a settlement of the province and go 
vernment of San J nan de los Llanos in the Nuevo 
Reyno de Granada. 

iRACUBA, a lake of Guayana, or part of the 
country of Las Amazonas possessed by the French, 
on the n. coast. 

IRACUBA, a river of this province. 

IRAIV1, a river of the province and govern 
ment of Quito, which rises between those of 
Guandes and Ubay, runs parallel to the former, 
and enters the second, close to the settlement of 
Concepcion. 

1RAMBJSA, a river of the province and go 
vernment of Jaen de Bracamoros in the kingdom 
of Quito, which rises close to the mine of Cagasa, 
runs nearly from to. to e. and enters the Santiago. 

1RANA, a large river of the kingdom of Peru, 
which rises in the cordillera of the Andes on the s. 
near Brazil, runs n. w. and enters the Maranon. 

1RAPA, a settlement of the province and go 
vernment of Cumana ; situate in the serrama, one 
of the missions that were held there by the Arago- 
nese Capuchins. 

IRAPA, a river of this province, which enters the 
sea in the gulf Triste. 

IRAPILATO, a settlement and head settlement 
of the district of the alcaldia mayor of Guana 
juato, in the province and bishopric of Mccho 
acan, and kingdom of Nueva Espana. It con 
tains 1000 families of Indians, 222 of Spaniards, 
MustceS) and Mulattoes ; and in its vicinity are 
many estates and farms where they cultivate 
wheat, maize, French beans, and chile, and pro 
vide with the same the royal establishments of the 
mines of the jurisdiction. Eight leagues w. s. w. 
of the capital. 

1 RAP UN, a small river of the province and go 
vernment of Guayana, one of those which enter 
the Cuyuni by the n. side. 

IRA III, a river of the province and country of 
Las Amazonas, or Guayana of the Portuguese. 
It rises in the territory of the Tuhercs Indians, 
runs s. s. e. and enters the Maranon between the 
rivers Tuhere and Cayari, near its mouth. 

I HART, a settlement of this province, on the 
shore of the former river. 

1RAR1NES, SAN FRANCISCO XAVIER DE, a 
settlement of the province and government of 
Mainas in the kingdom of Quito. 

IRARUROS, a barbarous nation of Indians, 
who dwell in the vicinities of the river Orinoco, to 



I R O 



295 



the n. and between the rivers Sinaruco and Apurc ; 
bounded s. e. by the nation of Los Paos, and s. by 
the Otomacos. In 1732, some missions were esta 
blished amongst them by the Jesuits, which ended 
at the abolition of this order, in 1767. 

[IRASBURG, a township in Orleans county, 
in Vermont; situated on Black river, 17 miles w. 
of Hazen block-house, and 12 s. of the Canada 
line.] 

[1REDELL County, in Salisbury district, N. 
Carolina, is surrounded by Surry, Rowan, and 
Burke. The climate is agreeable and healthy, the 
lands beautifully variegated with hills, and the soil 
is rich. It contains 5435 inhabitants, of whom 
858 are slaves. At Iredell court-house is a post- 
office. It is 22 miles from Salisbury, and 17 from 
Charlottesburg.] 

[IRELAND, NEW, a long narrow island in the 
Pacific ocean, n. of New Britain, extending from 
the n. w. to the s. e. about 190 miles, and in gene 
ral very narrow ; between lat. 3 40 and 5 s. and 
long. 150 30 and 153 5 e. The inhabitants are 
Negroes. The island is covered with wood, and 
abounds with pigeons, parrots, and other birds. 
West and n. w. of New Ireland, lie Sandwich, 
Portland, New Hanover, and Admiralty islands, 
discovered and named by Captain Carterct, in 
1767. The tracks of Le Maire and Schouten in 
1616, of Roggewin in 1722, and of Bougainville 
in 1768, pass these islands.] 

IRES, a river of the province and government 
of San Juan de los Llanos in the Nuevo Reyno 
de Granada, which runs e. and enters the Rio 
Negro. 

1 III JO, a river of the province and government 
of Cayena, and kingdom of Tierra Firnic, which 
rises in the mountains, and enters the sea before 
the bay of Vicente Pinzen . 

1R1MBO, a settlement and head settlement of 
the district of the alcaldia men/or of Mara vat io, 
and bishopric of Mcchoacan. It contains 1 13 fa 
milies of Spaniards, Mustecs, and Mulattoes, and 
is five leagues n. w. of its capital. 

1RINARI, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Chachnpoyns in Peru; annexed 
to the curacy of Soritor. 

IRIS, S. JUAN DE, a settlement of the province 
and corrrcgimictito of Guarochiri in Peru; annexed 
to the curacy of S. Pedro de Casta. 

IROCAMPATI, a small river of the province 
and government of Guayana, in the French posses 
sions, to the w. of the mouth of the river Maroni. 

1ROIS, a point on the w. coast of the island of 
S. Domingo, in the French possessions, between 
the point of Les Baleines and cape Tiburon. 



I R O 



I nois. a bay of this island, formed by the former 
point and cape Tiburon. 

[IRON Hanks, a tract of land on the c. side of 
the Mississippi, below the mouth of the Ohio.] 

fliioN Castle, one of the forts of Porto Bello in 
S. America, which Admiral Vernon took and de 
stroyed in 1739. The Spaniards call it Si. Philip 
de Todo Fierra.] 

[[RON Mountains, GREAT, in the state of Ten 
nessee, extend from the river Tennessee to that of 
French Broad, from s. w. to n. c. Farther to the 
. (\ the range has the name of Bald Mountain, 
and beyond the Nolachncky, that of Iron Moun 
tains. The Iron Mountains seems to be the name 
generally applied to the whole range. It consti 
tutes the boundary between the state of Tennessee 
and that of N. Carolina, and extends from near the 
lead mines, on the Kanhaway, through the Chero 
kee country to the s. of Chota, and terminates 
near the sources of the Mobile. The caverns and 
cascades in these mountains are innumerable.] 

[1HONDEQUAT, called in some maps GE 
RUNDEGUT, a gulf or bay on the s. side of lake 
Ontario, four miles e. of Walker s, at the mouth 
of Genessee river.] 

1ROQUESES, or I ROQUETS, a nation of In 
dians of N. America, and of the most numerous 
and powerful. The country which they inhabit 
lies between lat. 41 and 41 n. and extends about 
80 leagues from e. to w. from the mouth of the 
river of the same name to that of the Richelieu 
and Sorrel, and from the lake of the Sacrament to 
the falls of Niagara ; and 40 leagues from n. to s. 
from the source of the river Agnes to the Ohio ; 
this, Avith Pennsylvania, forming its .v. frontier: 
bounded is. by the lake Ontario, s. n\ by the Erie, 
n. by lake George and the river S. Lawrence, and 
;/. e. by New York. The Iroquecs are divided 
into several cantons, the five principal of which 
;sve, Tsonantovans, Goyogoans, Ounotagues, Ou- 
nogoats, and Agnies. All of these have a settle 
ment composed of barracks, are 30 leagues distant 
from each other, and the greater part of them are 
on the s. coast of the lake Ontario. All these In 
dians speak- the same idiom, and are united under 
a species of democracy similar to that of the Swiss 
r.nntons. Many of them have been converted to 
Hie Catholic faith, and have formed other settle 
ments; a very handsome one of which is one 
league from Montreal, situate at the foot of a 
mountain ; and frrxn thence towards the river, 
within two leagues, are many others. 

IROQTJESES, a river of the former province, 
which rises and runs between the rivers Thea- 
Jiiki and Wabache, and enters the former. 



ISA 

IROQUESES, a lake of this province. See 
CHAMPLAIN. 

1ROU, a small river of the kingdom of Brazil, 
which rises in the territory of the Guayazas In 
dians, runs n. n. e. and enters the head of the To- 
cantines. 

1RU1NE, a small river of the province of Vir 
ginia, and county of Lunenburgh, in N.America, 
which runs e. then turns w. and enters the Dan. 

1RUMA, a settlement of the province and cor- 
rcgimicnto of Oruro in Peru, 13 leagues from its 
capital. 

IRUPANA, a settlement of the province and 
corregimie.nto of Cicasica in Peru ; annexed to the 
curacy of Laza. 

IRUQUIA, an abundant river of the kingdom 
of Brazil, which rises in the interior of the moun 
tains, runs s. e. and enters the San Francisco. 

IRUT1BA, a small river of the province and 
captainship of Rio Janeiro in Brazil, which runs 
e. and enters the sea opposite the Vermejas isles. 

1RUYA, a settlement of the province and go 
vernment of Tucumiin in Peru, of the jurisdiction 
of Xuxuy ; annexed to the curacy of Huma- 
hisaca. 

IRUYANE, a river of the province and go 
vernment of Moxos in the kingdom of Quito. It 
rises from some mountains between the rivers Beni 
and Marmore, runs w. and enters a great lake 
which is on the shore of the latter, and into which 
it runs. 

JSA, a settlement of the province and corregi- 
micnto of Ttmja in theNuevo Reyno de Granada ; 
situate in the llano of Sogamoso; of a mild, healthy, 
and delightful temperature, but of small popula 
tion, containing only GO housekeepers, and as 
many Indians. Seven leagues n. of Tunja. 

ISAAC, a settlement of the island of Barbadoes, 
in the district and parish of S. Thomas. 

ISAAC, a port of the N. sea, on the coast of 
Nova Scotia, at the entrance of the strait of 
Canseau. 

ISAAC, some isles or rocky shoals of the Lu- 
cayas isles, to the s. of the island Bahama. 

ISABEL, S. a city of the island S.Domingo, 
founded by Admiral Christoval Colon in 1493, on 
a fertile, pleasant, and healthy spot: he yave it 
this name in honour of Queen Isabel the CatLolic. 

ISAIJKL,, a settlement of the head settlement of 
the district of Nopaluca, nnd alculdia mayor of 
Tepeaca, in Nueva Espafia, with 58 Indian fa 
milies. 

ISABEL,, another, the head settlement of the dis 
trict of the alculdia men/or of Cholula in the same 
kingdom ; containing ^9 families of Indians, and 



ISA 

distant two leagues s. of the capital. Ifs district 
is composed of nine other settlements. 

ISABCL, another, of the head settlement of the 
district of Tecali in the same kingdom ; containing 
S2 families of Indians. 

ISABUL, another, of the missions which were 
held by the religious order of San Francisco, in 
the province of Taraumara, and kingdom of 
Nueva Vizcaya, 11 leagues between the s. e. and 
s. of the real of the mines of San Felipe de Chi- 
guagua. 

ISABEL, another, of the province of Californias; 
situate on the sea-coast, and the most interior part 
of the gulf of San Felipe de la Visitacion. 

ISABEL, another, of the province and captain 
ship of Sergipe in Brazil ; situate on the sea-coast, 
at the mouth of the river Guaparati. 

ISABEL, another, a parish of the English, in the 
n. part of the island Jamaica. 

ISABEL, a large island of the S. sea, and the 
greatest of those called Of Solomon ; discovered, to 
gether with the rest, by Alvaro de Mendana, in 
1568. In the e. part is the cape Quenado, and to 
the w. the best port, called De Estrella. Its cir 
cumference is 228 leagues ; it is fertile and full of 
mountains, covered with thick woods. To the s. &amp;gt;. 
it has the islands of S. Mark and S. Nicholas, and 
to the 5. that of Arecifes. 

ISABEL, another island, of the straits of Magel 
lan, one of the Pinguinas. 

ISABEL, a bay on the coast of the straits of Ma 
gellan. 

ISABEL, another, on the s. coast of the island of 
Cuba, near the cape of Corrientes. 

ISABEL, a cape or point of the 5. coast of the 
straits of Magellan, entering by the S. sea ; one of 
those which form the entrance with the cape of 
Pilares. 

ISABEL, another cape, of the w. coast of the 
same straits, between the river Fiances and cape 
Redondo. 

ISABEL, some shoals or rocks of the coast of the 
island of Cuba, in the w. extremity, near the cape 
San Antonio, and opposite the bay of its name. 

ISABELA, a river of the island S. Domingo, 
which rises in the mountains to the n. of the capi 
tal, runs s. and enters the Ozarna a little before 
this falls into the sea. 

1SABEL1CA, a point on the n. coast of the 
island of S. Domingo, between the Petit Trou and 
the point Brisev;il. 

I SAMBA, a settlement of the asiento and juris 
diction of Anibato in the kingdom of Quito, and 
correct rnienfo of Riobamba. 

1SARA, a small river of the province and go- 

VOL. II. 



I S I 



297 



vernment of Guayana or Nueva Andalucia, which 
rises in the country of the Armacotos Indians, runs 
n. and enters the Caura. 

ISATIS. See Sioux. 

1SCALIANI, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Paucarcolla in Peru, annexed to 
the curacy of Capachica. 

1SCANCE, a settlement of the province arid 
government of Popayan in the Nuevo Reyno de 
Granada, called San Juan de Truxillo ; situate in 
the ancient province of Mocoa, on the shore of the 
river of its name. It was formerly very rich and 
populous, having fine gold mines, which were 
worked by the inhabitants. It is at present re 
duced to great wretchedness. Thirty leagues s. e* 
of Popayan, in lat. l47 n. 

ISCANCE. The aforesaid river rises near the ruins 
of the city of Truxillo, arid not far from the head 
of the Magdalena, and joins the Rodriguez to enter 
the Caqueta. In it is found a fish called by the 
natives dog-fish, and which follows vessels, utter 
ing cries. 

1SCARA, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Carangas in Peru, of the arch 
bishopric of Charcas ; annexed to the curacy of 
Huachazalla. 

ISCATLAN, a settlement of the head settle- 
ment of the district and alcaldia mayor of Cuguio 
in Nueva Espaiia. Five leagues to e. s. e. of its 
head settlement. 

ISCHILIN, a settlement of the province and 
government ofTucnman, and jurisdiction of the 
city of Cordoba in Peru. 

1SCUCFIACA, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Angaraes in Peru ; annexed to the 
curacy of Conaica. 

ISCUCHACA, another settlement, in the province 
and corregimiento of Xauja. 

ISCUCHACA, a river of the same province as 
the above settlement, having at its origin the name 
of Pari, which it afterwards changes to this. Over 
it is a good bridge for the accommodation of 
traders of the different provinces. 

ISEGUEI-GUAZU, a river of the province 
and government of Paraguay. 

ISllUA, a settlement of the province and cor- 
regimicnfo of Lucunas in Peru ; annexed to the 
curacy of Abr.cara. 

IS1ANA, a river of the province and govern 
ment of San Juan de los Llanos, of the Nuevo 
Reyno de Granada. It rises to the w. of the city 
of Santiago, and .&amp;lt;?. of lake Totta, and enters the 
Meta ; but, according to tlie mnp and description 
of Mr. Bellin, it is called Isanac, and enters the 
Negro. 



298 



I S L 



I S L 



ISIDRO, S. a settlement of the province and 
government of Buenos Ay res, on the shore of the 
river La Plata, and at the mouth of that of Las 
Conchas, near the capital. 

ISIDRO, S. another settlement, in the province 
and corregimiento of Coquimbo, and kingdom of 
Chile ; situate near the coast. 

ISIDRO, S. a canal or narrow pass on the s. coast 
of the strait of Magellan, which communicates with 
the sea, being formed by the last of the islands 
lying by that side. 

ISIDIIO, S. a point of land of the s. coast of the 
strait of Magellan, one of those which form the 
second narrow pass, and called De la Barranca de 
San Simon. 

ISIDRO, S. another point or cape, of the n. 
coast, in the same strait of Magellan, called by 
others De Cana, or Forward. 

IS1LIMBI, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Latacunga, and kingdom of 
Quito ; the natives of which maintain themselves 
by making vats, pitchers, and other vessels of clay, 
of great neatness, and with which they supply the 
whole province. 

1SIMENA, a settlement of the jurisdiction of 
Santiago de las Atalayas, in the province and go 
vernment of San Juan de los Llanos, of the Nuevo 
Reyno de Granada. 

ISIPOTJ, a river of the province of the Chi- 
quitos Indians in Peru. It runs e. through the 
territory of the Guarayos Indians, and enters by 
the w. into the Paraguay. 

ISLA, SAN JOSKPH DE LA, a settlement of the 
head settlement of the district and alcaldia mayor 
of Aguas Calientes in Nueva Espaiia ; annexed to 
the curacy of its head settlement ; from whence it 
lies 10 leagues to the n. w. 

ISLA, another settlement, of the province and 
government of Tucurnan, on the shore of the river 
Dulce, between the settlements of Lopez and La 
Dormida. 

ISLA, or ISLAND, the generic term of a tract of 
land surrounded by sea or water. The principal 
islands in America are the following ; each of 
which are properly noticed under their respective 
articles. 

In the Pacific sea. 
Amortajado, Ciories, 

Amsterdam, Cocos, 

Apostles, Corales, 

Aviquirina, Evangelistas, 

Chapira, S. Gabriel, 

Chepillo, S. Roque, 

Chiloe, Taboga, 

De Chucas, Farallones, 



Juan Fernandez, 

Galapagos, 

Galera, 

Gallo, 

Gorirona, 

Gorgon ilia, 

Guadalupe, 

Guanos, 

Iqueique, 

Lobos, 

Malpelo, 

S. Lorenzo, 

Santa Catalina, 

Taboquilla, 

Mancera, 



Mocha, 

Nonura, 

Pacheca, 

Palma, 

Perico, 

Perros, 

Perlas, 

Plata, 

Puna, 

Del Key, 

De Salamon, 

De S. Felix, 

S. Martin, 

Showten, 

Tumaco, 



In the N. sea. 

Anguila, Marigalante, 

Antigua, Monges, 

Aruba, Orchilla, 

Aves, Palomas, 

Barbadoes, Rosario, 

Barbudos, Sarnballas, 

Baru, S. Bartolome, 

Baslimentos, S. Bernard, 

Buen Ayre, S. Christoval, 

Coche, S. Lucia, 

Comagre, S. Martin, 

Cnbagua, S. Eustaquio, 

Curazao, Santa Cruz, 

Deseada, S. Thomas, 

Dominica, Sonda, 

Goldren, Springer, 

Granada, Tabago, 

Margarita, Tortuga, 

Monserrate, Trinidad. 

In the Brazilian sea. 

Ascencion, Machiana, 

Cananea, Martin Vaz, 

Cayenne, Norona, 

Caviana, De Picos, 

Flora, S. Salvador, 

Gallo, Santa Barbara, 

Goare, Santa Catalina, 

Grande, Solimoes, 

Inglesa, Espiritu Santo, 

Marajo, Taparica, 

Isleos, Trinidad. 

In the sea of Magellan. 

Barneweldt, Falkland, 

Buena Justicia, Del Fuego, 

Buena Esperanza, Heremitens, 

Dawaert, Maire, 

Dtego Ramirez, Sebald, 

Diego Rodriguez, De los Estados, or 
Diego Ruiz, Statenland. 



I S L 

ISLA FUERTE, a small island of the N. sea, near 
the coast of the province and government of Car 
tagena, opposite Sinu, and at the entrance of the 
gulf of Uraba. 

ISLA REAL, or Cape BRETON. [See SYDNEY.] 

ISLAS, SIETE, or SEVEN, the name of so many 
islands of the river Essequebo, of the province and 
government of Guayana, in the part possessed by 
the Dutch. 

ISLAS DEL REY, or DE LAS PERLAS, a portion 
of islands of the S. sea ; situate in the gulf of Pa 
nama, near the coast. They are filled with Negro 
slaves belonging to the inhabitants of the capital, 
employed in the pearl fisheries, the pearls here 
being esteemed for a size and beauty not to be 
found in other parts. Near the largest of these 
islands, and in which there is a moderate-sized port, 
is the spot where a battle was fought between the 
armada of the S. and the English pirate Edward 
David, who was conquered, in 1685. 

[ISLE OF WIGHT, a county of A r irginia, on 
the s. side of James s river, w. of Norfolk county, 
being about 40 miles long, and 15 broad, and con 
tains 9028 inhabitants, including 3867 slaves. A 
mineral spring has been discovered near the head 
of the w. branch of Nansemond river, about 10 
miles from Smithfield, and 12 from Suffolk. It is 
much resorted to, and famed for its medicinal qua 
lities.] 

[ISLE ROYAL, on the n.w. side of lake Supe 
rior, lies within the territory of the United States, 
n. w. of the Ohio, is about 38 miles long, and in 
many places about 10 broad. The natives sup 
pose that this and the other islands in the lake are 
the residence of the Great Spirit.] 

ISLEOS, Roc A DE LOS, a small island of the 
N. sea, near the coast of the province and govern 
ment of Venezuela. It is to the w. of the island 
Orchilla, of a very hot climate, and desert, in lat. 
ll50 n. 

ISLES, a point on the coast of Nova Scotia or 
gulf of St. Lawrence ; one of those which form 
the entrance of the great bay of Chalcurs. 

ISLES, a bay on the to. coast of the island of 
Newfoundland ; large and sheltered, arid in the 
middle of George s and Dead-man s bays. 

ISLF^, another, a very large bay on the coast of 
Nova Scotia or Acadia, between port Frankland 
and the city of Halifax. 

ISLES, a port on the s. coast of the same pro 
vince as the former bay, to the zv. of Torbay. 

[ISLESBOUOUGir, a township in Hancock 
county, Maine, formed by Long island, in the 
centre of Pcnobscot bay, 15 miles in length, and 
from two to three in breadth. It was incorporated 



I S Q 



299 



in 1789, contains 382 inhabitants, and is 214 
miles n. e. by n. of Boston.] 

[ISLES DE MADAME lie at the s. end of Syd 
ney or Cape Breton island, on which they are de 
pendent. The largest of these, with cape Canso, 
the e. point of Nova Scotia, form the entrance of 
the gut of Canso from the Atlantic ocean. See 

SYDNEY.] 

ISLE1A, a settlement of Nuevo Mexico; si 
tuate on the shore of the Rio Grande del N. op 
posite the settlement of Socorro. 

ISLET A, another settlement, with the dedicatory 
title of San Agustin, in the same kingdom, dis 
tinct from the former, on the shore of a river 
which enters the Grande del Norte. 

ISLETA, another, culled also QUART DE L !SLE, 
being a parish of the French, in the part which 
they possess in the island of S. Domingo, on the 
s. coast and at the w. head, between the settlement 
of Los Cayos arid Mesle bay. 

ISLETA, another, with the addition of Paso, 
being of the missions which are held by religious 
order of S. Francisco in Nuevo Mexico, distinct 
from the former. 

1SLETAS, three small isles lying close to the 
coast of Martinique, at the entrance of the port 
Cul de Sac Royal, and opposite the fort which 
defends this coast. 

ISLETAS, two other islands, in the S. sea, near 
the coast of the province and corregimiento of 
Truxillo in Peru, opposite the port of Guar- 
mey. 

[1SLIP, a township of New York ; situate in 
Suffolk county, Long island, e. of Huntington, 
and contains 609 inhabitants : of these 93 are 
electors, and 35 slaves.] 

1SLLAMAS, S. ANTONIO DE, a settlement of 
the province and corrcgimicm o of Pomabamba in 
Peru; one of the missions which are held by the 
religious order of San Francisco; situate on the 
shore of the river Iruna, between that of the Beni 
and the Cordillera of the Andes of Cuchoa. 

1SLOTE, a small isle or rock of the N. sea, 
close to the c. coast of the island Inagua Grande, 
to the/;, of the island S. Domingo. 

ISLOTE, another, in the S. sea, near the coast of 
the province and corregimento ofArica in Peru, 
opposite the point of Cales. 

ISLOTE, another, in the river of Valdivia, be 
tween the island of Hey and that of Las Animas. 

1SLOTES, five small islands ; situate at the 
mouth of the Orinoco, opposite the island of Can- 
grejos. 

ISQUANDE, a small and poor settlement of 
the province and government of Esmeraldas, and 
Q Q 2 



SCO 



I T A 



kingdom of Quito, with a small port in the S. sea, 
which is shallow, arid fit only for small vessels. 

1SSER, a small island of the gulf of S. Law 
rence, in the province of Nova Scotia, close to 
the e. coast of the great island of Anticosti. 

1STAPA, BAR u A DE, a point of land, nearly 
disjoined from the mainland, on the coast of the 
S. sea, in the province and ahaldia mayor of 
Suchitepec in the kingdom of Guatemala. 

ISTMO DE PANAMA, or DEL DARIEN. [See 
PANAMA.] 

ISTULANA, a settlement of the province and 
government of Tucuman in Peru, and jurisdic 
tion of the city of Santiago del Estero. It has 
bfcen destroyed and laid waste by the infidel In 
dians. 

ITA, a settlement of the province and govern 
ment of Paraguay ; situate on the shore of a river 
of the same name, and s. of the city of La 
Asuncion. 

1TABAGUA, a small river of the province and 
captainship of Para in Brazil. It runs n. and 
enters the Xingn. 

ITABERABA, a town of the province and 
captainship of Pernarabuco in Brazil; situate 
near the coast. 

1TABOCA, orArcoBACA, a settlement of the 
province and captainship of Para in Brazil, on the 
zo. shore of the river Tocantines. 

ITABOCA, a fall of the above river; the same 
which impeded the Portuguese from ascending 
the river further, when about to investigate the 
country which is filled with Tocantines Indians. 
This fall is in hit. 3 49 s. 

ITABUCU, a large river of the province and 
government of Paraguay, to the e. of the nation 
of the Guaranies Indians. It runs e. and enters 
the Atlantic. 

1TACAMBIRA, a settlement or village of the 
Portuguese, in the province and captainship of 
Puerto Seguro in Brazil, on the shore and at the 
source of the river Verde. 

ITACEROM1N, a small island near the coast 
of the province and captainship of Maranan in 
Brazil, between the river Maranan and the bar of 
Cuma. 

ITACORUSA, a settlement of the province 
and captainship of Para in Brazil ; situate on the 
shore of the river Xingu, near where this enters 
the Maranon. 

ITACUAT1ARA, BARRA DE, a shoa! of rock 

at the entrance or mouth of the river of this name, 

in the province and captainship of San Vicente 

and kingdom of Brazil. 

ITAJSMBE, a river of the province and govern- 



I T A 

ment of Paraguay, which runs e. and enters the 
Parana. 

1TAGUAR1, IGARI, or MHNICI, a river of the 
province and government of Paraguay, which 
runs s. s. e. and enters the Ivineyma. 

ITAI, a river of the same province and govern 
ment as the former. It enters the Uruguay be 
tween the Paraguay and the Naumby. 

ITALAQUE, a settlement of the province and 
c or regim lento of Larecaxa in Peru. 

ITAMAN, a river of the province and captain 
ship of San V r icente in Brazil, which runs e. and 
turning afterwards to s. enters the sea. 

ITAMARACA, a province and captainship of 
the kingdom of Brazil ; bounded n. by the province 
ofParaiba, s. by that of Pcrnambuco, e. by the 
sea, and zo. by the country of the Tapuyos In 
dians. It is irrigated by the river of Los Marcos, 
and is very fertile in tobacco, cotton, Brazil 
wood, and more particularly in sugar-caries, from 
which a very considerable quantity of sugar is 
made. The climate is very hot. This captain 
ship was founded by Pedro Lopez de Sousa, who, 
having obtained, as a reward for his services per 
formed in America, 50 leagues of territory from 
the king of Portugal Don Juan III. took this cap 
tainship as a part of the same. It afterwards, by 
female succession, descended to the house of the 
Marquises of Cascaes. 

ITAMARACA, the capital, is of the same name, 
with the dedicatory title of Nuestra Senora de la 
Concepcion ; situate on the top of a mountain in 
the island. It is small, and contains 200 house 
keepers, with a port, which makes its commerce 
respectable, a parish church, three large sugar 
mills, and many cultivated estates ; so that it 
abounds in the necessaries of life. In the city are 
two companies of Portuguese troops, which serve 
as a garrison. The French made themselves mas 
ters of it, and kept it till 16";5. It is 13 miles n. of 
Olinda. Lat. 8 s. Long. 35 6 w. 

ITAMARACA, an island, which is a part of the 
above province, and in which the capital is situate, 
at the entrance of the river of Los Marcos; three 
leagues long, one wide, and eight in circumfe 
rence, and having a good fort, which was built by 
the Dutch, with the name of Orange, in 1640, 
when they made themselves masters of the island. 
ITAMBEI, a settlement of the province and 
government of Buenos Ayres; situate on the shore 
of the river Treviana. 

1TAMBIRA, a settlement of the province and 
captainship of Espiritn Santo in Brazil ; situate on 
the shore of the river Dulce. 

ITAMHAEN, or TUNHAM, a river of the pro- 



1 T A 

vince and captainship of Puerto Seguro in Brazil, 
which runs e. and enters the sea between the rivers 
Caravclas and Sarnabitiva. 

1TAMUGAS, a river of the province and cap 
tainship of San Vicente in Brazil, which runs e. 
and turning s. enters the sea. 

1TAN, a small river of the kingdom of Chile. 

IT APE, a settlement of the province and go 
vernment of Paraguay. 

ITAPEBA, a river of the province and captain 
ship of San Pablo iti Brazil, which rises in the 
mountains near the coast, runs n. w. and unites 
itself with the Rio Negro to enter the Grande of 
Curituba or Iguazu. 

ITAPEBA, a point of land on the coast of the 
province and captainship of Rey in Brazil, which 
runs into the sea, forming a gulf or port. 

1TAPO, a settlement of the province and go 
vernment of Buenos Ayres in Peru ; situate on 
the shore of the river Guaraparnbi. 

ITAPUA, a small river of the province and go 
vernment of Paraguay, which enters the Uruguay 
opposite the settlement of the mission of Los Mar- 
tires. 

ITAPUA, a settlement of the missions which 
were held by the regulars of the Jesuits in the pro 
vince and government of Paraguay ; situate on the 
shore of the Parana, on a peninsula formed by two 
other small rivers, which run into the Parana. 

ITAPUA MA, a town of the province and cap 
tainship of Sergipe in Brazil. 

ITAPUCA-GUAZU, a river of the province 
and government of Paraguay, which runs w. be 
tween the Itapuca-mini and the sierra of Los 
Quince Puntos, and enters the Paraguay. 

ITAPICA-MINI, a river of the same province 
and government as the former, which also runs w. 
and enters the Paraguay. 

1TAKA, a river of the province and govern 
ment of Guayana or Nueva Andalucia, which 
rises in the country of the Paraparucotas Indians, 
runs n. and turning w. enters, much increased 
with the waters it collects, into the Orinoco, to 
the w. of Ciudad Real. 

ITASARI, a river of the province of Xibaros 
in the kingdom of Quito, which runs s. w. to the 
e. of the river Maraiion, and enters the same in 
lat. 3 5 s. 

ITATA, a province and corregimiento of the 
kingdom of Chile; bounded s. by the province of 
Puchacay, and n. by that of Maule, being divided 
from the same by the river of this name. It is 
very fertile, and covered with estates. 

ITATA, a river of the same kingdom, which rises 
in the mountains of its cvrdillera, and runs e. to 



I T O 



SOI 



the n. of the city of Concepcion, near to Imperial 
through a deep ravine. Although it may be 
waded, it is generally crossed by ratts. After re 
ceiving the waters of another river, called Nubbe? 
it enters the sea in lat. 36 s. [On the shores of 
this river are the best grapes to be found in Chile.] 

ITATA, a settlement of the province of Gaira 
and government of Paraguay ; situate on the shore 
of the river Yaguari. 

ITAT1, a settlement of the province and go 
vernment of Paraguay; situate at the mouth of 
the river Parana, to the e. of the city of Corrientes. 

ITAT1N, a settlement of the province and go 
vernment of Paraguay ; once situate on the shore 
of the river of its name, but destroyed by the in 
fidel Indians. 

1TATINES, a barbarous nation of Indians, 
dwelling on the borders of the river Paraguay 
towards the e. between the river Iguaru to the s. 
and the Mbotetey to the n. The Jesuits esta 
blished amongst them a mission, and founded the 
settlements of Igaripe and Nuestra Senora tie la 
Esperanza ; but a short time afterwards they were 
abandoned by the natives, who fled to their woods 
and former haunts. 

ITAYA, a lake of the province and govern 
ment of Quixos and Macas in the kingdom of 
Quito, on the shore of the river Napo, and n. n. e. 
of the other lake, called Capuan. 

ITAZU, or ITATU. See PEQUERT. 

ITENES, a large and abundant river of the 
province and government of Moxos in the king 
dom of Quito, which rises in the territory of Ma- 
togroso, possessed by the Portuguese, runs s. and 
forming a semicircle, follows its course to n. n. w. 
and after running many leagues, collects the Ava- 
ters of the Ubay and Baure, incorporating itself 
with the Marmore, in lat. 11 55 s. It then re 
ceives the waters of the Castela, and with the 
name of Madera enters the Maranon or Amazons, 
by the s. part, in lat. 3 13 18" s. On the e. 
shore is the settlement of La Reduccion de Santa 
Rosa de la Estacada, which was invaded by the 
Portuguese in 1761, who fortified it with two re 
doubts. 

ITIQU1RA, a small river of the district of 
Cuyab.i in the kingdom, of Brazil, which rises 
in the mountains, runs n, w. and enters that of 
Los Porrudos about its mid-course, to run into 
the great lake of Los Xareyes. The geographer 
Don Juan de la Cruz calls it Itucura, and gives 
it a w. course. 

1TOCO, a settlement of the jurisdiction of 
Muzo, in the corregimiento and province of Tunja, 
of ihe Nuevo Rey no de Granada. It is very poor 
2 



IXC 



and reduced ; but celebrated for its fine emerald- 
mine of its name, from whence have been ex 
tracted these precious stones, admirable alike for 
(heir size and quality, though at present it yields 
nothing of consideration. The population of this 
settlement consists of 50 housekeepers and a very 
few Indians. Near it, on a mountain of the same 
name, is a stone-slab, on which is the print of 
an human foot, and which they say was of that 
of St. Thomas. It is about eight miles in a 
s. w. direction from Tunja. Lat. 5 24 w. 
Long. 7349 o&amp;gt;. 

ITOTOS, a barbarous and numerous nation 
of Indians, of the province and government of 
Santa Marta in the Nuevo lieyno de Granada, 
who dwell in the mountains to the w. of the valley 
of Upar. They are but little known. 

{TU, a settlement of the missions which were 
held by the Jesuits in the province and govern 
ment of Paraguay, on the shore of the river 
Uruguay, near where this joins the river La 
Plata. 

IT DATA, a settlement of the province and cor- 
rcgimierno of Carabaya in Peru ; annexed to the 
curacy of Ayapata. 

1TUCALES, a barbarous nation of Indians, in 
habiting the woods to the n. of the Maranon. 
These savages are few, and bounded by the nation 
of the Urarinas, from whom they are thought to 
have descended. 

1TUCAHA, a small river of the province and 
government of Paraguay, which enters the Pica- 
zuru. 

ITUZA1NGO, a river of the province and go 
vernment of Paraguay, which runs s. and enters 
the Ibiquei-guazu. 

[IWANEE, a little town near St. Jago dc 
Cuba, where a small remnant of the ancient In 
dians live, who have adopted the manners and 
language of the Spaniards.] 

IXCALPAN, a settlement and head settlement 
of the district of Cotaztla, and alcaldia mayor of 
Tuxtla, in Nueva Espana; containing 35 families 
of Indians, and being close to the settlement of 
Rinconada. 

1XCANTEPEC, a settlement of the head settle 
ment of the district of Juquila, and alcaldia mayor 
of Xicnyan, in the same kingdom. It contains 33 
families of Indians, and is 28 leagues e. with a 
slight inclination to n. of the capital. 

1XCAPA, a settlement of the head settlement of 
the district of Atoyaque, and alcaldia mayor of 
Xicayan. It contains 40 families of Indians, who 
occupy themselves in the cultivation and com- 
rnerce of cochineal, tobacco, seeds, and cotton. 



I X L 

Eleven leagues a&amp;gt;. with a slight inclination to n. of 
its head settlement. 

IXCATEQPAN, a settlement of the head settle 
ment of the district of the ulculdia mayor of Tlapa 
in the same kingdom. It contains 150 families of 
Indians, whose commerce consists in making loaf- 
sugar, the soil abounding in sugar-canes. Two 
leagues n. e. of its capital. 

iXCATLAN, a settlement of the head settle 
ment of the district and alcaldia mayor tf Iluejtitla 
in the same kingdom ; situate on a dry and barren 
eminence : of a warm temperature, and containing 
170 families of Mexican Indians, who cultivate 
greatly maguey es, from which they extract pulque 
and honey, tive leagues from its capital. 

IXCATLAN, another settlement, which is the 
head settlement of the district of the alcaklia mayor 
of Teutila in the same kingdom : of a warm and 
moist temperature, and containing 500 families of 
Indians, including those of the wards of its dis 
trict^ who employ themselves in the cultivation 
and commerce of cochineal and baynilla. Nine 
leagues s. of its capital. 

iXCUNTLA, a settlement and head settlement 
of the district of the alcaldia mayor of Sentipac in 
the same kingdom. It contains 30 families of 
Indians, and a convent of the religious orderof San 
Francisco : of a warm temperature, and eight 
leagues from its capital. 

1XHUATLA, SAN CHRISTOVAL J&amp;gt;E, a settle 
ment of the head settlement of the district of Mo- 
loacan, and alcaldia mayor of Acayuca, in Nueva 
Espafia : of an hot temperature, and containing 47 
families of Indians. Eighteen leagues n. e. of the 
capital. 

1XHUATLAN, SAN Pi; DUO L&amp;gt;E, a settlement 
and head settlement of the district of the alcaldia 
mayor and jurisdiction of Cordoba in Nueva 
Espana. In its neighbourhood passes a river 
which fertilizes its territory, and is full of trout and 
other fine, though small fish : of a mild tempera 
ture, and inhabited by 210 families of Indians. 
Five leagues n. w. of its capital. 

IXHTJ AT TAN, another settlement, in the alcaldia 
mayor of Orizaba of the same kingdom : of a cold 
temperature, and containing 161 families of In 
dians, who trade by cutting of wood, fuel, and 
making charcoal, the only production of the place. 
One league n. w. of its capital. 

IXHUATLAN, another, of the head settlement of 
the district of Chapala, and alcaldia mayor of 
Zayula, in the same kingdom. It contains 75 fa 
milies of Indians, and is two leagues n. of its head 
settlement. 

IXLAI1UACAN DE LOS REYES, a settlement 



I X M 

and head settlement of the district of the alcaldia 
mayor of Xalapa in Nueva Espana ; situate on a 
rough and broken territory, watered by three large 
rivers, which flow from a mountain called Cof re de 
Perote, to the n.w. The name of this settlement is 
taken from a stream which intersects it, and which 
runs only in the rainy season. The population 
consists of four families of Spaniards, 40 of Mus- 
tees and Mulattoes, and 62 of Indians. Its prin 
cipal trade consists in the purgative medicine called 
jalap, which grows here in great abundance, and 
is carried for sale to Vera Cruz, to be conveyed to 
Europe. Nine leagues w. s. w. of its capital. 

1XMALHUACAN, SANTIAGO DE, a settlement 
of the head settlement of the district and alcaldia 
mayor of Cozarnaloapan in Nueva Espana ; situate 
in the centre of the top of an elevated mountain, 
on the side of which is a large Hano or plain, scant 
of water, the want of which the inhabitants supply 
by wells, although this water is thick and urnvhole- 
sorne. It contains 192 families of Indians, and is 
two leagues w. of its head settlement. 

IXM1QUILPAN, an alcaldia mayor and juris 
diction of the kingdom of Nueva Espana; bounded 
e. by the jurisdiction of Mextitlan, s. w. by that of 
Tula, w. by that of lluachipa, and n. by that of 
Zinapan. It is 14 leagues in length from e. to w. 
and 11 in width from n. to s. Its temperature is, 
for the most part, mild, although it is riot without 
some settlements where the heat and cold are in the 
extremes. Its principal productions are hemp 
and cotton ; of the first is made rigging for ships, 
and of the latter many kinds of woven stuffs : these, 
together with the cattle, of which there are large 
breeds, affording a very considerable commerce. 
The inhabitants also sow seed arid grain ; but the 
harvests, from drought, are but small, and only in 
the head settlement of Orizaba arc they abundant, 
being there fertilized by the river Mextitlan, the 
only river of this province. Its population con 
sists of the following settlements. 
Santa Maria, Cardonal, 

San Agustin, Orizaba, 

Ixtlatlaxco, Espinas, 

Tepexic, Sotota, 

San Agustin Ixtlatlaxco, Cerritos, 
San Miguel Xonacapa, Palma Gorda, 
San Juan, Deguedo, 

Tlazintla, Capuxa, 

Alberto, Canxa, 

Tepctizqui, Debodee. 

Dado, 

The capital is of the same name; of a dry and 
hot temperature; of extreme heat in the summer, 
and cold in the winter ; scanty in vegetable pro- 



1 X T 



303 



ductions, as it is in water. It has in its territory 
three small settlements or wards, and a sumptuous 
temple of the religious August ins, the same being 
the priory of the province. The population con 
sists of 600 families of Spaniard*) mustectj and 
Mulattoes, employed in making rigging and cotton 
garments, and in breeding cattle. Seventy-five 
miles n. e. of Mexico, in hit. 20 26 n. Long. 
98 20 w. 

IXPALTEPEC, a settlement of the head set 
tlement of the district and alcaldia mayor of Juxta- 
huaca in Nueva Espaila. It contains 118 families 
of Indians. 

1XQUINTANONOYAC, a settlement of the 
jurisdiction and alcaldia mayor of Tlapa in Nueva 
Espana, containing 40 families of Indians. 

IXQU1NTEPEC PENOLES, an alcaldia mayor 
and jurisdiction of the kingdom of Nueva Kspana ; 
much reduced ; of a rough, mountainous, and 
barren soil, and cold temperature, producing no 
thing but maize, which ailbrds the only article of 
trade to the natives, except that of cutting wood, 
the country being covered with fir and other tim 
ber, with which they supply the other jurisdic 
tions. 

The capital is the settlement of the same name : 
Its population consists of 50 families of Miztecos 
Indians and 12 of Muslees : 185 miles to the s. e. 
of Mexico, in lat. 1 7 45 and in long. 98. The 
other settlements of this aladdia mayor are, 
S. Juan Elotepec, S. Pedro Chilapa, 

Santiago Tlazoyaltepec, Sta. Catalina Estetla, 
S. Pedro Totomachapa, S. Mateo Tepantepec. 
Sta. Maria Ilnitepec, 

IXTAC,SAN FRANCISCO DE, a settlement and 
head settlement of the district of the alcaldia mayor 
of San Juan de los Llanos in Nueva Espana. It 
contains 480 families of Indians, including those of 
Maztalan. Six leagues n. e. of its capital. 

IXTACALCO, SAN MATIAS DE, a settlement 
of the province and alcaldia mayor of Mexilcal- 
zinco in Nueva Espana ; situate in the great lake 
of Chalco. It has a convent of the religious order 
of San Francisco. It is very fertile and pleasant, 
and serves as a place of recreation in the spring to 
the people of Mexico, who go to it by the lake in 
canoes covered with flowers, and with bands of 
music. This settlement is between Mexico and 
Mexilcatzinco, a little more than a league from 
each. 

1XTACAYOTLA, SAN LORENZO DK, a set 
tlement of the head settlement of the district of 
Tepehuacan, and alcaldia mayor of Mextitlan, in 
Nueva Espana; containing 245 families of Indians, 
and very close at the e. of the capital. 



304 



I X T 



1XTALUTLA, a settlement of the alcaldia 
mayor of Teozaqualco in Nueva Espafia ; contain 
ing 48 families of Indians, who cultivate cochineal 
and some maize. Seven leagues s. of its head set 
tlement. 

1XTAPA, a settlement of the head settlement 
of the district of Palmar, and alcaldia mayor of 
Tepeaca, in Nueva Espafia. It contains four fa 
milies of Spaniards, as many of Muslecs, and 18 
of Indians. At the distance of four leagues is a 
water-mill for grinding wheat, and near to it is a 
farm of small cattle, and three cultivated estates. 
Four leagues from its head settlement. 

IXTAPA, another settlement, with the dedicatory 
title of San Miguel, in the head settlement of San 
Francisco del Valle, and alcaldia mayor of Zulte- 
pec, in the same kingdom. It contains 102 fa- 
miles of Indians, who trade in salt; and is situate 
on a plain of a very hot temperature, being an 
nexed to the curacy of Texupilco, from whence it 
is three leagues distant to the s. 

IXTAPA ^another, of the head settlement of Ju- 
quila, and alcaldia mayor of Xicayan. in the same 
kingdom. Jt contains 62 families, and is 30 leagues 
n. of its capital. 

IXTAPA, another, of the head settlement of 
Escateopan, and alcaldia mayor of Mexilcaltzinco, 
in Nueva Espafia; half a league to the e. of 
Mexico, and containing ISO families of Indians. 

1XTAPALUCAN, a settlement of the alcaldia 
mayor of Chalco in Nueva Espafia. It contains 
125 families of Indians, and a convent of the re 
ligious order of S. Domingo. Two leagues n. of 
its capital. 

1XTAPAS, SAN MIGUEL DE, a settlement of 
the head settlement of San Francisco del Valle, and 
alcaldia mayor of Zultepec, in Nueva Espafia ; si 
tuate on an extensive llano or plain of a mild tem 
perature, and annexed to the curacy of its capital, 
from whence it is seven leagues distant. It con 
tains 59 families of Indians, dedicated to the cul 
tivation of sugar-canes, of which they make much 
sugar and honey. 

IXTATEPEC, SANTIAGO DK, a settlement of 
the head settlement of Teutalpau, and alcaldia 
mayor of Zacatlan, in Nueva Espafia; distant two 
leagues and an half from its head settlement. 

IXTATEPEC, another settlement, with the dedi 
catory title of Santa Cruz ; the head settlement of 
the district of the alcaldia mayor of Antequera in 
Nueva Espana : of a cold temperature. It con 
tains a con vent of the religious order of S. Domingo, 
and 700 families of Indians, who live by the culti 
vating and trading in cochineal, and making cotton 
st ufts. Seven leagues from its capital. 



IXTEPEX1, a jurisdiction and alcaldia mayor 
of Nueva Espafia, in the province and bishopric 
of Oaxaca. Although it is very extensive, it 
contains no more than three settlements, which 
are head settlements of districts, and small wards, 
where the natives cultivate cochineal and cotton, 
of which they make various kinds of woven stuffs. 

The capital is of the same name, with the dedi 
catory title of Santa Catalina ; of an hot tempera 
ture. It contains 550 families of Indians, includ 
ing those of the wards or small settlements in its 
district, who are occupied in the cultivation of 
cochineal, in which they trade. One hundred arid 
ninety-two miles s. e. of Mexico, and 26 from the 
city of Oaxaca, in lat. 17. Long. 96 53 . The 
other settlements are San Juan de Chicomesuchil 
and San Mateo Calpulalpa. 

IXTLA, a settlement of the head settlement of 
Xoxutla, and alcaldia mayor of Cnernavaca, in 
Nueva Espana. 

IXTLAHUACA, a settlement and head settle- 
ment of the district of the alcaldia mayor of Mete- 
pec in Nueva Espana. It contains 1740 families 
of Indians, and is seven leagues n. e. of its capital. 

IXTLAHUACA, another settlement, the head set 
tlement of the district of the alcaldia mayor of Co- 
lima in the same kingdom ; situate between two 
lofty mountains, from whence flow down many 
streams, which irrigate and render fertile the coun 
try. It produces various vegetable productions, 
and abundance of rnaize, in the cultivation of 
which the inhabitants are employed. The popu 
lation amounts to 132 families of Indians, and it is 
nine leagues e. of its capital. 

IXTLA HUA CAN, SAN MATEO DE, a settle 
ment of the head settlement and alcaldia mayor of 
Tezcoco in Nueva Espafia. It is of a cold tem 
perature, annexed to the curacy of Tezcontepec, 
and contains 114 families of Indians. Eight 
leagues n. of its capital. 

IXTLAHUACAN, another settlement, in the head 
settlement and alcaldia mayor of Autlan, of the 
same kingdom. It contains 15 families of In 
dians, and jis very close to the settlement of Exutla. 

1XTLAPA, n settlement of the alcaldia mayor 
and jurisdiction of Tula in Nueva Espana ; an 
nexed to the curacy of its capital, a league and an 
half from the same, and containing 130 Indian 
families. 

1XTLAN, a settlement and head settlement of 
the district of the alcaldiamayor of Xala in Nueva 
Espafia. It contains 84 families of Indians, and 
some Mustees and Mulattoes ; is of a cold tempe 
rature ; and in its district are various mills, in 
which are made sugar and honey, in which the 



I Z A 

trade of the place consists, besides some seeds and 
fruits. Four leagues e. of the capital. 

IXTLAN, another settlement, with the dedicatory 
title of Santo Tomas, the head settlement of the 
district of the alcaldia mayor of Anlcquera in the 
same kingdom, and of the province and bishopric 
of Oaxaca. It is of a mild temperature, and con 
tains 500 families of Indians, used to the cultiva 
tion of cochineal, in which their commerce con 
sists. Eight leagues e. of the capital. 

IXTLAN, another, of the head settlement of 
Zanguio, and alcaldia mayor of Zamora, in the 
same kingdom ; situate on a plain, bounded s. by 
the great saline grounds and fountains of warm water 
of Seventy-two springs, e. by the Great Chapalicas 
swamps, n. by a lofty mountain, and ZD. by the 
river Grande. It contains 50 families of Indians, 
whose trade consists in salt fish and maize, which 
they sow. Six leagues e. of its head settle 
ment. 

1XTLATLASCO, SAN AGUSTIN DE, a settle 
ment of the head settlement of the district and 
alcaldia mayor of Ixmiquilpan in Nueva Espana. 
Ten leagues from its capital. 

IXTOLUCAN, a settlement of the head settle 
ment of the district of Yautepec, and alcaldia 
mayor of Cuernavaca, in Nueva Espafia. One 
league to the s. of Ticoman. 

1XUTLAN, a settlement and head settlement 
of the district of the alcaldia mat/or of Autlan in 
Nueva Espana. It contains 160 families of In 
dians. 

1ZA, a territory and country of the nation of 
the Moscas, in the Nuevo Reyno de Granada, e. 
of Bogota and s. w. of Tundama. It was dis 
covered and entered in a pacific manner by Juan 
de San Martin, in 1537. In it are many settle 
ments of Indians. 

IZANGUITI, a small river of the province 
and government of Paraguay, which enters the 
head of the Uruguay. 

IZANNA, a river of the province and country 
of Las Arnazonas, in the Portuguese possessions. 
It runs s. s. e. collecting the waters of several other 
lesser rivers, and enters the Negro. 

IZAPAUANA, an abundant river of the same 
province and country as the former. It is the 
same as that which runs from Peru with the name 
ofPuiUMAYo; see this article. 

1ZATLAN, or AcuALULcos,an alcaldia may 
or and jurisdiction of Nueva Galicia, and bishopric 
of Guadalaxara ; of limited extent, mild tempe- 
ture, and abounding in all kinds of grain and 
fruit, as well as in large and small cattle, the latter 

VOL. II. 



I Z T 



303 



being a subject which particularly calls the atten 
tion of the persons living in the estates of Miva- 
flores and La Laxa, where there are 100 families 
of Indians, and 20 of Spaniards, Muslecs, and Mu- 
lattoes. This alcaldia has only three settlements, 
which are head settlements of districts, and some 
other small settlements. The capital is Agualulco, 
and the others, 

Magdalena, Amatlan, 

Oconahua, Jzatllan, 

San Juan, San Marcos. 

IZATLAN, a settlement and head settlement of 
the district of this jurisdiction and alcaldia mayor ; 
situate on the shore of a lake or swamp. It has a 
convent of the religious order of San Francisco. 

1ZCATLAN, a settlement of the head settle 
ment of the district of the alcaldia mayor of Cui- 
catlan in Nueva Espana, of a cold and dry tem 
perature. It contains 83 families of Indians, and 
belongs to the curacy of Cuistlahuaca, in the juris 
diction of Yanguitlan. It produces a tolerable 
quantity of cochineal and cotton, of which the na 
tives make fabrics and mantles called oaxaca, 
and both the one and the other afford a good com 
merce. Twelve leagues n. of its capital. 

IZHUATLAN, S. CHRISTOVAL ur,, a settle 
ment and head settlement of the alcaldia mayor of 
Guayacocotla in Nueva Espana. It contains 466 
families of Otomics Indians, including those of 
the wards or farms of its district. 

I /HUATLAN, another settlement, which is a 
small ward, annexed to the curacy of Tamapachi, 
in the alcaldia mayor of fjuachinango of the same 
kingdom. 

IZQU1NTENANGO, a town of the province 
and alcaldia mayor of Chiapa in the kingdom ol 
Guatemala. 

JZQUINT1A, a settlement of the province and 
alcaldia mayor of Suchitepec in the kingdom of 
Guatemala ; situate on the coast of the S. sea. 

IZQUINTLAP1LCO, a settlement of the 
alcaldia mayor of Octupam in Nueva Espana. 

IZTACOMIT LAN, a settlement of the pro 
vince and alcaldia mayor of Los Zoqties in the 
kingdom of Guatemala. 

1ZTACOSTE, a settlement of the province and 
alcaldia mayor of Chiapa, in the same kingdom as 
the former. 

1ZTAHUACAN, a settlement of the head set 
tlement of the district and alcaldia mayor of Caxi- 
titlan in Nueva Espana. Four leagues e. of its 
capital. 

IZTAPA, a settlement of the same province and 
alcaldia mayor as the former, 



R R 



306 



J A C 



J A C 



IZTAPA, another, in the province and alcaldia 
mayor of Capabanastla in the same kingdom. 

IZTEPEC, a settlement of the province and 
alcaldia mayor of S. Salvador, in the same king 
dom as the former settlements. 

IZUCAR, a jurisdiction and alcaldia mayor of 
Nueva Espana. It is for the most part of a moun 
tainous territory, barren and rough, and produc 
ing- nothing but scanty crops of grain and seeds. 
It was formerly much reduced, and on this ac 
count were added to its jurisdiction those of Aguat- 
lan and Teopantlan, both which are very poor. 
There is, however, a considerable population in 
the following settlements : 

San Lucas de Culucan, San Martin de Alchi- 
Santa Maria de la Asun- chica, 

cion, S. Juan de Epatlanj 



Tepexoxuma r 

Tepapayeca, 

Chietln:&amp;gt;, 

S. Nicolas Tenexcalo, 

Aguatlan, 



Telipan, 
Ahuatelco, 
Ahuehuezirigo, 
Santiago Azalan, 
Teopantlan. 



_ i 

The capital of this jurisdiction is of the same 
name ; situate on the skirt of a volcano. It is of 
an hot and dry temperature, contains two parishes, 
one of Spaniards and another of Indians; in the 
former are 210 families of the former, and some 
of Alustees and Mulattoes: the charge of the se 
cond is vested in the religious order of S. Domingo, 
and it consists of 94 families of Indians, whom they 
call forasteros or strangers, and 850 of Mexicanos 
in the wards of its district ; these wards amount to 
16. Thirty-one leagues s. of Mexico. 



ll AAYA, a river of the province and country of 
Las Amazonas, which runs in a large body to the 
s. and enters the Putumayo, in the territory of the 
Araucanos Indians. 

JABARABA, a town of the province and cap 
tainship of Rio Janeiro in Brazil ; situate at the 
source of the river Paraibuna. 

JACABIRA, a river of the same province and 
country as the former, which rises in the territory 
of Cumayaris Indians, between the rivers Cuchi- 
vara and Mndera, runs e. and enters the latter. 

JACAIBAMBA, a large lake of the kingdom 
of Peru, in the province and government of Canta, 
formed from the river Carabaillo, which runs w. 
and empties itself into the S. sea, to the n. of 
Lima. 

JACAPATOS, a settlement of the province 
and corregimiento of Luya and Chillaos in Peru ; 
annexed to the curacy of its capital. 

JACARAI, a settlement of the province and 
captainship of San Vicente in Brazil ; situate w. s. w. 
of the town of lambute. 

JAGARE, a small river of the province and 
country of Las Amazonas, which runs n. n. w. 
and enters the Madera, between those of Macacipa 
and Giparana. 

JACINTO, S. a settlement of the province and 
government of Cartagena ; situate in the moun 



tains of the district of Maria, one of the towns 
formed, in 1776, by the governor Don Francisco 
Pimienta. 

JACINTO, S. another settlement, in the pro 
vince and government of Maracaibo ; situate on 
the shore of a small river which enters the Ma- 
tazan. 

JACINTO, S. another, of the head settlement of 
the district of the town of the Marquesadodel Valle, 
and alcaldia mayor of Quatro Villas, in Nueva 
Espana. It contains 58 families of Indians, who 
trade in cochineal, maize, fruit, woods, lime, coal, 
and fuel, these being its productions. It is one 
league n, n. w. of its capital. 

JACINTO, S. another, of the province and cap 
tainship of Para in Brazil ; situate on the w. shore 
of the river Topayas, near its mouth or entrance 
into the Amazonas. 

JACHAL, a small town of the province and 
corregimiento of Cuyo in the kingdom of Chile ; 
situate n. of the city of S. Juan. 

JACHAL, a river of this province and kingdom, 
which rises towards the n. in the cordittera, runs e. 
and loses itself in certain lakes from a want of in 
clination in the territory. 

JACKMAN, a settlement of the island of Bar- 
badoes ; situate on the s. coast. 

JACKSOMBURG, a settlement of the pro. 



J A C 

vince and colony of Georgia, on the shores of the 
river Pompon, near its entrance into the sea. 

[JACKSON S River, a head water of James s 
river in Virginia, rises in the Warm Spring 
mountains, about 20 miles s, w. of the Warm 
Spring mountains, and runs s. w. through the 
valley, until Carpenter s creek joins it from that 
quarter, when the river assumes the name of Flu- 
vanna, and flows s. e. About three quarters of a 
mile from its source it falls over a rock 200 feet 
into the valley below. The sheet of water is 
l&amp;gt;roken in its breadth by the rock in two or three 
places, but not in its height. Between the sheet 
and the rock, at the bottom, you may walk across 
dry. It is near half as high again as Niagara, but 
is only 12 or ]5 feet wide.] 

[JACKSON, a new county of Georgia.] 
[JACKSONSBOROUGII, a small post-town 
of S. Carolina, on the w. side of Edisto river, 
about 23 miles w. of Charlestown.] 

[JACMEL, a jurisdiction and sea-port town 
on the s. side of the island of St. Domingo. This 
jurisdiction, in the French part of the island, con 
tains three parishes, is remarkable for the goodness 
of its soil, and the abundant crops of coffee, and is 
susceptible of a great augmentation. Its exports 
from January 1, 1789, to December 31, of the 
same year, were 27,350 Ibs. white sugar ; 55,624 
Ibs. brown sugar, 4,072,702 Ibs. coffee, 406,832 
Ibs. cotton, and 10,046 Ibs. indigo. The duties 
on exportation of the above amounted to 15,619 
dollars, 26 cents. The town is situated on the s. 
side of the neck of the s. peninsula. The town is 
six leagues w. of Caycs de Jacmel, 1\ e. of the 
bay and town of Baynet, as far s. of Leogane on 
the n. side of the peninsula, 13 s. w. of Port an 
Prince, and 53 e. of cape Tiburon. Lat. 18 
21 n. Long. 75 2 w. from Paris.] 

[JACMEL, CAYES DE, a town and parish on 
the e. side of the stream of its name, six leagues e. 
of the above town of Jacmel. This parish is 
bounded e. by the plain on the Spanish part, at the 
foot of the mountains of Bahoruco, 80 leagues 
square, fit for any kind of cultivation. On the 
neighbouring mountains coffee would succeed 
well.] 

JACO, a small river of the province and cap 
tainship of Puerto Seguro in Brazil. It rises near 
the const, runs e. and enters the sea between the 
river of Los Fraylesand the mountain Pasqual. 

JACO, a bay on the coast of the province and 
captainship of Scara, of the same kingdom, be 
tween the river Guarahu and the rock of Porce- 
lados. 



J A D 



307 



[JACOB S Creek, an e. water of Youghiogany 
river in Westmoreland county, Pennsylvania. 
There is a carrying place six miles w. to Monon- 
gahela river, from the Youghiogany, opposite the 
mouth of this creek.] 

JACOBINS, River of the, or DB LOS DOMI- 
NICOS, iii the island of Guadalupe. It rises in the 
mountains, runs w. and enters the sea between the 
rivers Bailiff and Herbs. 

JACOBO, S. a settlement of the province and 
government of Cinaloa in Nueva Espana ; situate 
near the town of Rosario. 

JACOBO, S. another settlement, in the island 
of Trinidad ; situate on the n. coast, with a fort 
for its defence. 

JACOME, a river of the province of Barcelona, 
and government of Cumana. It rises s. of the 
valley of La Pasqua, and unites itself with the 
Santiago to enter the Marapiri. 

JACORE, a small river of the province and 
country of Las Amazonas. It runs n. n. w. and 
enters the Madera, by the side of the Aripuana. 

JACQUES, S. Islands of, near the coast of the 
country of Labrador, in the gulf of St. Law 
rence, between the islands of Channel and Esqui- 
males. 

JACQUES, S. a river of Canada, which runs w. 
and enters lake Superior. 

JACQUES, S. a bay of the n. coast, in the island 
of Martinique, between the settlement ofS. Marie 
and the Pain du Sucre. 

[JACQUES, S. See ST. JAMES.] 
JACUADA, a river of the country of the To- 
cantines Indians, in the province and captainship 
of Para, and kingdom of Brazil. It runs n. and 
by the s. part enters the Guanapu, after having 
united itself with a branch of the Maranon or 
Amazon, called Tagipure. Its mouth is in lat. 
2 31 s. 

JACUNDA, a river of the province and coun 
try of Las Amazonas, which runs n. in the ter 
ritory of the Portuguese, between the Tocantines 
and Pacajas, and enters the Maranon or Amazon, 
in the arm formed by the island of Joaues or Ma- 
rajo. 

JACUARON, a river of the province and cap- 
tainship of Rey in Brazil, which runs s. turns e. 
and empties itself into the lake Mini. 

JACURA, a settlement of the province and 
government of Venezuela ; situate on the shore 
of the river Guaique, to the e. of the city of 
Coro. 

[JADAGHQUE. See CIIATAUGHQUE.] 
JADAN, a settlement of the province and ror- 

R A 2 



308 



J A E 



regimiento of Cuenca in the kingdom of Quito; 
situate on the mountains to the e. of that capi 
tal. 

JAECES, a barbarous nation of Indians, de 
scended from the Scirnigacs, who dwell in the 
woods of the rivers Tigre and Curaray. 

JAEN DE BUACAMOROS, a province and go 
vernment of the kingdom of Quito, bounded n. by 
the territory of Zamora of &amp;lt;he province of Loxa, 
w. by that of Piura, s. by the river Mararion, and 
e. by the woods and country of Los Xivaros. It 
was discovered by Pedro de Vergara, who was 
sent by Gonzalo Pizarro in 1538, and was shortly 
afterwards subjected by Juan de Salinas, who was 
its first governor. It was at that time called Silla, 
and Chacaigna or Igualsongo, and Pacamoras, 
the latter of which titles it preserved for many 
years, until that the Indians making an insurrec 
tion, destroyed the principal towns : the inhabi 
tants, after the lapse of half a century, again be 
coming settled in the city of Jaen, which gave the 
name to the province, and the former titles being 
entirely lost, it added to this name that of Ya- 
guarsingo and Bracamoros. It is of a very mild 
temperature, abounding in cotton, of which arc 
made good woven stuffs, also in cacao of an ex 
cellent quality, wild wax, and tobacco ; these 
productions being carried to Lima and to the 
kingdom of Chile, through the province ofPiura 
and its valleys, and being sold there at a high 
price. It has pastures wherein are bred a suffi 
cient number of mules and horses; rich mines of 
gold, although not of the finest quality, and wash, 
ing places, where the Indians collect this metal in 
considerable quantities. In its woods are abun 
dance of wild beasts and animals, such as tigers, 
leopards, bears, and dantas, called here the great 
beast, and inhabiting the cold parts of the cordil- 
lera. This province is watered by the rivers 
Guancobamba, Chinchipe, Paracassa, Tururn- 
basa, Numballe, Palanda, Simanchi, Sangalla, 
and San Francisco, which divides the bishopric 
of Quito from that of Truxillo. Its population is 
very small, and reduced to the cities of Jaen, 
Loyola, Valladolid, and Santiago de las Mon- 
lanas ; but improperly so called, as they are in 
fact nothing but poor settlements, in a state of 
ruin and wretchedness, as indeed are the follow 
ing : 

San Joseph, Chinchipe, 

Chito, Chirinos, 

Sander, Posnaca, 

Charape, Tomepcnda, 

Pucara, Chucchunga. 



J A I 

The which have become thus reduced from the 
constant invasions of the infidel Indians. 

The capital, which bears the same name as the 
province, was founded on a plain surrounded by 
mountains, called De Clachimayo, by the Captain 
Diego Palomino, in 1549, and on the shore of the 
river Chinchipe or Guancabamba on the e. side. 
It is of a good temperature, abounds in vegetable 
productions, and has a fair trade, as being in the 
direct road of the post in its way from the sierra 
to Piura, to pass through the valleys to Lima. It 
is nevertheless so destitute that its inhabitants 
scarcely amount to 4000, the greater part of them 
people of colour, or at least very few of them 
Spaniards: 314 miles s. from Quito, and 96*. e. 
from the city of Loxa, in lat. 5 25 s. and long. 
78 33 w. 

[JAFFREY, a township in Cheshire county, 
New Hampshire, on the s. side of the Great Mo- 
nadnock, six miles . of the Massachusetts line, 
19 e. of Connecticut river, and about 56 w. s. w. 
of Portsmouth. It was incorporated in 1773, and 
contains 1235 inhabitants. Here are found red 
and yellow ochre, alum, vitriol, and black lead in 
great quantities : the buck-bean, (menijanthes)^ 
said to be a rare plant in New Hampshire, and of 
singular use in medicine, is found at Jaifrey, near 
the Great Monadnock.] 

[JAGO. See SANTIAGO. ~\ 

JAGUA, GRANDE, a settlement of the island 
of Cuba ; situate on the n. coast, near the settle 
ment of Nizao. 

JAGUA, CHICA, a settlement of the same island 
and coast ; situate between the former settlement 
of this name and the bay of Matanzas. 

JAGUA III BE, a river of the province and 
captainship of Seara in Brazil, which rises near 
the coast, runs n. and enters the sea close to the bay 
of Ubarana. 

JAGUEYES, a bay of the coast of Peru, in 
the province and cor regimiento of Truxillo, close 
to the port Malabrigo. 

JAliUYAY, a small river of the province and 
country of Las Amazonas, which rises in the ter 
ritory of the Cocamas Indians with flat heads, 
runs n. and enters the Maranon, opposite the 
settlement of San Joaquin de los Omaguas. 

JAIBA, a lake ol the province and government 
of Paraguay, which is formed from a waste- water 
of this river, on its w. shore. 

JAIBA, another lake, on the w. coast of the 
island of Puna, in the province and government of 
Guayaquil. 

JAIME, S. an island of the straits of Magellan, 



JAM 

very close upon the s. const, between the island 
of Kuperts anil the mountain of the Pan de 
Azucar. 

JAIME, S. a settlement of the province and go 
vernment of Venezuela ; situate on the shore of the 
river Guanapalo, near the mouth where this enters 
the Apure. 

JAINA, a settlement of the island of St. Do 
mingo ; situate on the s. coast, on the shore of the 
river of its name. 

JAINA. This river rises in the mountains of 
the S. runs to the same rhumb, and enters the sea 
between the river Nigua and the capital. 

JAINA, another, in the province and country 
of Las Amnzonas, which rises in the territory of 
the Abacaris Indians, runs e. and turning to 
n. n. e. after an extended course, enters the Ju- 
raena. 

JALAHU1, a settlement of the head settlement 
of the district of Latani, and alcaldia mayor of 
Villalta, in Nueva Espafia. It contains 113 fami 
lies of Indians, and is 22 leagues from its capi 
tal. 

JALAPA, a settlement of the province and go 
vernment of Cartagena ; situate opposite the settle 
ment of Sabanilla. 

JALCA, a settlement of the province and cor 
regimiento of Luya and Chillaos in Peru, of a very 
cold temperature. 

JALOMBO, a small settlement of the province 
and corregimiento of Tunja in the Nuevo Reyno 
de Granada. 

JALOSTOTITLAN, a settlement of the head 
settlement of the district and alcaldia mayor of 
Lagos in the kingdom of Nueva Galicia. Twelve 
leagues w. | to s. w. of its capital. 

JALTEPEC, a settlement of the head settle 
ment of the district of Jahuibe, and alcaldia mayor 
of Villalta, in Nueva Espana. It is of an hot 
temperature, and contains 18 families of Indians, 
and is 23 leagues from the capital. 

JAMA, a large river of the province and go 
vernment of Esmeraldas in the kingdom of Quito. 
It runs w. and not far from the sea turns its course 
to n. w. and enters the Pacific, forming the bay of 
Cara, in lat. 7 30 s. 

JAMA, another, a small river in the province 
and government of Guayaquil, and district of 
Puerto Viejo, which runs forming a semicircle, 
and enters the sea behind the point of Hallena. 

JAMAICA, a large island of the N. sea, one 
of the Greater Antilles, discovered by Admiral 
Christopher Columbus, in 1494, in his second 
voyage, when he changed its name to that of 
Santiago, which it preserved as long as it was in 



JAM 



309 



the power of the Spaniards, but which it lost in 
1655, when it was taken by certain English sent out 
in a powerful squadron by the Protector Cromwell, 
and commanded by Admiral Penn ; Colonel Ve- 
nables directing the disembarkation of the troops, 
who met with a severe repulse on their landing. 
The island was, however, afterwards ceded by the 
Spaniards to the English, having at that time no 
more than 3000 inhabitants, including Negro 
slaves, and no other commerce than that done by 
the pirates. After the restoration of King Charles 
II. to the English throne, its population became 
increased to 18,000 inhabitants, and these began 
to cultivate cacno and sugar-cane, and to collect 
salt ; so that it has become, at the present day, one 
of the most commercial, fertile, and rich provinces 
of all America. 

It is the largest island of the Antilles, excepting 
those of Cuba and S. Domingo, and lies between 
lat. 17 44 and 18 32 . and between long. 76 
6 and 78 18 zo. ; is 124 geographical miles long 
from the point of Negrillo to the w. to the point of 
Morante to the e. and 44 at its widest part, namely, 
from the point of Gallina to the n. to the point of 
Portland to the s. and is of an oval figure. It is 
extremely well situate for commerce, being 170 
miles s. of the island of Cuba, and 196 ay. of the 
island of S. Domingo, with the advantages of J6 
large bays and 30 ports, or places where there is 
secure anchorage for vessels. Jt is intersected by 
a chain of mountains which run through nearly 
the whole island from e. to w. ; the w. part of the 
same being called the Blue Mountains ; and from 
these flow innumerable rivers abounding in every 
species offish, and many of them being navigable 
in canoes, so that the sugar-canes of the different 
plantations are thus brought down to the coast. 
These mountains are covered with trees of different 
kinds, particularly the cedar, lignum-vitae, and 
caob, and exhibit a constant verdure. Some of 
the woods rise higher than the rest ; and this varia 
tion, together with the different colours of the 
foliage, combined with the plantations, form at a 
distance a delightful prospect. Some of the 
rivers have, after a violent tempest, changed both 
their course and their name, and many run for 
leagues underground. The celebrated Dr. Sloano 
enumerates more than 100 rivers, which would 
more properly be called torrents ; for their course 
being generally but for a few miles before they 
enter the sea, they carry down with them large 
stones, pieces of timber, and sand or earth, so that 
the stream becomes quite choked in many places, 
and at others precipitates itself down a fall of 50 or 
CO feet. The water of the fountains distant from 



310 



JAMAICA. 



(he sea is preferred to the river-water, and parti 
cularly to that in the vicinity of Port Royal, where 
it is thick, and occasions flux and other disorders 
to those who drink it. Here are various fountains 
and rivers, the waters of which are accustomed 
so to petrify the aqueducts as to impede their 
course. 

The river the most worthy of those to be noted 
is that of Abraham s Plantation, in the n. of the 
island. Near the point of Morante, in the e. part, 
there is in a wood a bath of warm water, which 
being taken internally and bathed in, cures the 
cholic, an infirmity very common here. Nearly 
two miles from the sea there rises from the moun 
tains certain salt streams, which united form the 
river De la Sal. This river forms pools where the 
sea-water meets it, and the moisture being exhaled 
from these by the heat of the sun, a great quantity 
of salt is deposited, which, although not very white, 
is often found in large lumps. Here are various 
lakes ; and that called liio-boa receives an abun 
dant supply of water from a river of an invisible 
course. 

The climate of Jamaica is mild, and more vary 
ing vhan that of the other islands; nor is there a 
country under the tropics where the heat is less 
troublesome ; for the wind, which regularly blows 
from the e. and which is called briza, brings with 
it often such refreshing showers, as to render the 
nights delightful. Towards the e. and ze. of the 
island, the temperature is not so good as to the s. 
and n. owing to the thick woods which are in the 
former, rendering those parts more subject to tem 
pests of wind arid rain. In the mountainous parts 
the air is much colder. Although it generally 
rains in January, yet are May, October, and No 
vember, looked upon as the winter months, on ac 
count of the tempests of thunder and lightning 
which then prevail, arid which will frequently last 
for days together without intermission, inundating 
the territory, and leaving the roads impassable. 
The whole year round there is a regular intense 
heat in the morning, from eight o clock till the 
briza springs up. This wind the common people 
have christened the Doctor, and whilst it lasts the 
Negroes labour in the fields, and every one en 
gages himself in li is respective occupation. This 
wind comes from the sea, and has the appearance 
of smoke: it continues increasing in power till 
twelve o clock, when it is at the highest; and then 
dying gradually away, it ceases at five till the 
next morning. At eight at night the land-breeze 
springs up, and blows four leagues from the coast, 
and continues increasing until twelve o clock, 
when it begins to die away,, and at four in the 



morning is entirely gone. The former of these 
winds is stronger at some times than at others, par 
ticularly during the full moons, and in December, 
January, and February, when the n. winds pre 
vail, so as to become confounded with it ; though 
it is always less felt near the sea, except in Port 
Royal and fort Del Paso, where it is stronger and 
lasts longer. The land-breeze is felt later in the 
city than in the above-mentioned places. As the 
tropical winds do not blow directly from the e. 
but vary from n. e. to s. e. according to the posi 
tion of the sun ; so the sea-breeze varies in the 
same proportion, not always blowing from the same 
point ; this not being the case with the land-breeze, 
which comes regularly from the mountains of the 
s. and n. parts. Sometimes the sea-breeze blows 
in the winter months for 14 days and nights suc 
cessively ; and then there is not a cloud to be seen, 
but a dew falls, though not evea this, when the 
n. winds prevail. These breezes have no influence 
in the valleys amidst the mountains, but the n. 
winds root up the trees. As the land-breeze springs 
up at night, and the sea-breeze in the day, it is 
according to them that vessels can either enter or 
leave the port, namely, entering it in the day-time 
and leaving it at night. The n. winds are more 
frequent when the sun is nearest to the tropic of 
Capricorn, and consequently furthest s. : it is then 
that the nights are cold and unsalutary ; for these 
winds being joined by the land-breeze become so 
powerful as to dry up the sugar plantations and 
the vegetables in the parts lying towards the n. ; 
but in the part towards the s. its violence is miti 
gated by the interposition of the mountains. It- 
should be observed, that this Avind is seldom at 
tended with rain. Tempests were scarcely known 
in this island until 70 or 80 [100 or 110] years 
ago, when occurred those terrible hurricanes and 
earthquakes which caused such infinite mischief, 
arid particularly to the shipping. The nights are 
very fresh, and in them falls a dew which is 
esteemed noxious, and more particularly to new 
comers. In the llanuras and plains the rains are 
violent. The ebb and the flow of the tides are 
scarcely to be distinguished, being so much de 
pendent on the winds. During the whole year the 
days and nights are equal or nearly so, the longest 
day being 13 hours and the night 11 ; the twilight 
not lasting more than three-quarters of an hour. 
The months of July, August, and September, are 
called the hurricane months ; arid there is, in fact, 
scarcely a year that passes but some hurricanes are 
experienced. The strong n, winds bring some 
times tempests, with hail and flashes of lightning, 
which last the whole night, but without thunder, 



JAMAICA. 



311 



though, when this docs occur, the peals are dread 
ful. Earthquakes are as common here as in the 
island of S. Domingo ; and they have done infinite 
mischief, as was the case in the years 1687 and 
1692. Shortly after the latter period, the city of 
Port Royal was burnt, and has not since been re 
built. Hurricanes, in short, are what are most to 
be dreaded in this island : one of the most dread 
ful happened in 1712; and this was followed by 
another equally distressing in 1722, accompanied 
by an earthquake. 

The mountains are steep, and some inaccessible, 
from being surrounded by great chasms, and tor 
rents formed by the rains. The valleys are very 
level, and the soil without stones. Only one part 
of the island is cultivated; and, indeed, were it 
entirely so, it would produce three times as much 
as it does at present. There are plantations on all 
the coast, but not far in-Iand. There are certain 
meadows and llanuras where the Indians sow 
maize ; but the grass is so high, and pasturage in 
such quantities, that the Spaniards, who although 
rather devoted to breeding cattle than to agricul 
ture, were under the necessity of burning it. 

The native productions of this island are sugar, 
rum, ginger, cotton, coffee, indigo, pepper, cacao, 
several sorts of woods and medicinal herbs, and to 
bacco ; although this not of a very good quality, 
nor esteemed by others than the Negroes. No 
kind of European grain grows here save maize, 
Guinea wheat, and pease of different sorts. The 
fruits which are most abundant are China oranges, 
sweet and sour limes, citrons, pomegranates, ma- 
meyes, papas, pines, guavas, melons, water-melons, 
and various kinds of apples and pears, though the 
latter are only found here and there, and are dis 
similar to those of Europe. Besides the above, 
we must add wild cinnamon, very useful in medi 
cine, manzanilla^ a tree of beautiful appearance 
and excellent wood for ornaments, but of a fruit 
and juice very poisonous ; the caob used so much 
by the English, as that it was exported to them in 
1770 to the value of 50,000^. ; the palm, from 
which is extracted much oil, greatly esteemed by 
the Negroes, as well for food as medicine ; the 
white /two, used for building ships, as being imper 
vious to the worm ; the soap-tree, the fruit of 
which answers the purpose of that article for wash 
ing; the pah Colorado (red wood) and wood of 
Campeche for dyeing, the guayacan, zarzaparilla, 
China^ casca, tamarind, aloe, and cochineal. Of 
these productions there used to be exported yearly, 
of sugar 1000 arrobas^ 50,000 azitmbres of rum, 
as many of molasses, 3,000,000 of pounds of 
pepper, 500 bags of ginger of 500 Ibs. each, 1000 



bags of cotton of 180 Ibs. each, 800 chests of 
coffee of 300 Ibs. each, and with all these an 
immense quantity of the drugs above enume 
rated. But the principal commerce is th;it which 
it does with the Spaniards of Tierra Firrne and 
Nueva Espana, in the sale of Negroes and Euro 
pean effects to the amount of 5,000,000 dollars an 
nually. Few islands abound so much in cattle as 
does this : horses, mules, arid asses, are very cheap 
here, and the cows and oxen, although large, 
might be larger, did not the natives entirely give 
themselves up to their plantations ; supplying 
themselves with flesh-meat from the n. colonies. 
The sheep are well-sized, and their flesh is good, 
but their wool is inferior: here are plenty of gum s, 
kids, rabbits, and swine. In the bays, ports, and 
rivers, are abundance of fish of all sorts; amongst 
which the tortoise is most esteemed. Here are 
many kinds of fowl, wild and domestic, more par 
rots than in any other island, woodcocks, Guinea 
fowl, pigeons, geese, ducks, pelicans, and fra- 
gataSj the fat of which is used medicinally. Mere 
are also fire-flies, which are a species of cantha- 
rides, are luminous, and appear green in thed.iy and 
brilliant at night, and this even after they are dead. 

[Jamaica is divided into three counties, Mid 
dlesex, Surry, and Cornwall ; subdivided into 20 
parishes, as follows : Middlesex contains those of 
St. Mary, St. Ann, St. John, St. Dorothy, St. 
Thomas in the Vale, Clarendon, Vere, St. Cathe 
rine, the town of Santiago de la Vega, the capital, 
and 13 villages ; 244 sugar plantations, and 43,626 
Negroes. Surry contains the parishes of St. An 
drew, St. George, Portland, Port Royal, St. David, 
St. Thomas in the East, Kingston, the towns of 
Kingston and Port Royal, eight villages, 159 sugar 
plantations, and 27,357 Negroes. Cornwall con 
tains the parishes of Trelawney, St. James, Han 
over, Westmoreland, St. Elizabeth, the towns of 
Savannah-la-Mar, Montego Bay, and Falrnouth, 
309 sugar plantations, and 57,835 Negroes. The 
whole 20 parishes contain 18 churches and chapels, 
and each parish has a rector and other church offi 
cers. Presentations to livings are made by the 
commander-in-chief.] 

In 1736, this island had six fortresses, with the 
names of Fort Charles or Carlos, in Port Royal; 
Port de la Roca, at the entrance of Kingston, Fort 
of Port Antonio, Fort William, Fort Morante, and 
Fort of the bay of Carlisle. The troops consist of 
nine regiments of militia, infantry, and horse, 
which contain about 3000 men, also eight compa 
nies independent of king s pay. By the law of the 
island, every male between the age of 16 and GO is 
obliged (o enlist into the militia. In its ecclesias- 



JAMAICA. 



tical jurisdiction it is, like all the other colonial 
churches, dependent on the bishop of London ; 
and in what relates to the political and military de 
partments, it is ruled by a governor nominated by 
the king of England, who is always a person of 
the first rank and pretensions, with the title of 
captain-general, admiral, and grand-chancellor of 
the island, with a faculty of appointing to all 
kinds of commissions, of convening and dissolving 
the assembly (the which is composed of 12 per 
sons of the first distinction, nominated by the king, 
and who form the privy-council ; and 43 repre 
sentatives of the people, elected by the parishes), 
and of pardoning all crimes, excepting those of 
felony and homicide. In short, he possesses a most 
complete authorty ; and his salary being 2500/. 
per annum, independently of the magnificent pre 
sents offered on his arrival, the allowances made 
him by the assembly, and what is contributed by 
the Jews, as well as other emoluments, may be 
put down at 10,000/. annually; so that this ap 
pointment is looked upon as the best under the 
crown, after the viceroyship of Ireland. 

In 1778, this island had 17,949 white inhabi 
tants, including 8000 Jews, 166,904 Negroes, slaves, 
bondmen, and Mulattoes, 680 sugar plantations, J 10 
cotton manufactories, 1 00 plantations of pepper, 30 
of ginger, 150 of coffee, and eight indigo manufacto 
ries. In 1735, there was an insurrection amongst the 
Negro slaves, who, retiring to the mountains, made 
war against the English ; and although they were 
generally subdued, there still remain some maintain 
ing the stronger positions, and frequently making 
sallies, in which they do considerable mischief. 
Whilst this island was in the power of the Spa 
niards, after it was conquered and settled by Juan 
de Esquibel in 1509, it was under the jurisdiction 
of an abbacy, erected in 1514, and was given as a 
property to Admiral Christopher Columbus, and 
made amarquisate, entailed on the first-born of the 
Dukes of Veragr.a, who maintain the title to the 
present day. It is 140 leagues from the coast of 
Ticrra Firme. The capital was Santiago de la 
Vega, and now Kingston. 

[After the particular and faithful account of this 



island delivered by Alcedo, our observations will 
be chiefly confined to such circumstances as may 
relate to it in a statistical point of view subse 
quently to the time he wrote ; namely, to its po 
pulation and productions. 

Jamaica is said to contain 4,080,000 acres ; of 
which 900,000 acres were planted in 1675; and 
in November 1789, there were no more than 
1,907,589 acres located or taken up by grants 
from the crown. The number of white inhabi 
tants, in 1787, was 30,000; freed Negroes 10,000; 
Maroons 1400 ; and slaves 250,000 ; in all, 
304,000. The value of this island as British pro 
perty, at the above period, was estimated as fol 
lows : 250,000 Negroes, at 50/. sterling each, 
12y millions; the landed and personal property 
and buildings to which they are appurtenant, 25 
millions more ; the houses and property in the 
towns, and the vessels employed in trade, l mil 
lions; in all 39 millions. 

From the report of the committee of legislature 
in Jamaica, December 20, 1799, there were then, 

Acres. 

In coffee plantations, - - 15,343 

In sugar plantations, ... 105,232 
In provison grounds, ... 7,771 

These are the only plantations enumerated by 
acres in this report. Mr. Bryan Edwards, in 
1792, states there were then worked by Negroes, 

Negroes. 

Sugar plantations, - 767, - 140,000 

Coffee plantations, 607, - 21,000 

Breeding pens, and pastures, 1017, - 31,000 
On pimento and cotton plantations, and 

Negroes in towns, - 58,000 

In all, 250,000 

Since Mr. Edwards wrote, the coffee planta 
tions have increased tenfold in produce, and 
greatly, of course, in number; and the Negroes, 
in 1805, in Jamaica, may be taken at 280,000. 

Jamaica is an island of so great importance, 
that it is matter of interest to consider its produce 
distinctively. 



Exports 



JAMAICA. 



313 



[Exports from Jamaica. 
Report House of Commons, May 5, 1806. 



-._!_ 


Rep. House of Com. 1785 


Bryan Edwards. 


H. C. 1806. 


1773. 


1787. 


1805. 




To Great 
Britain. 


America. 


To Great 
Britain. 


America. 


To Great 
Britain. 




Sugar, hogsh. 13cwt. of 112lb. 
* Rum, punch, of 110 gallons, 
Melasses, .......... ^aliens, 


93,400 
17,280 
4,140 
3,684 
131,100 
404,400 
137,970 


2400 
8700 
5700 
2863 
300 
8800 
55,200 


64,000 
18,145 
2,316 
3,716 
27,623 
1,905,000 
609,794 


700 
3000 
4100 
2676 

1000 
6650 


130,000 
18,000 

189,161 
35,000 
2,300,000 
2,257,045 


1 America, no return. 


Coffee, .............. cwt. 


Indigo, .............. Ibs. 


Cotton, .............. Ibs. 


Pimento,... Ibs. 



* Jamaica, laying deep in the bay of Mexico, to w. does not supply the American colonies 
most to the n. e. and who in those latitudes use most of rum, proportionally with the Windward 
islands. 

Produce of Jamaica, comparative with the total produce of the British West Indies. 
Return to House of Commons, May 6, 1806, of imports to Great Britain of Coffee and Sugar. 





Coffee. 


Sugar. 




Cwt. 


Hogsh. 1 3 cwt. of 112 Ib. 


Years. 


Jamaica. 


Other 
Islands. 


Total 
Coffee. 


Jamaica. 


Other 
Islands. 


Total 
Sugar. 


1793 


28,928 


61,619 


90,547 


80,300 


83,200 


163,500 


1794 


35,307 


101,034 


136,341 


89,800 


73,500 


163,300 


1795 


42,169 


80,101 


122,270 


83,200 


45,100 


128,300 


1796 


33,870 


68,357 


102,227 


83,400 


47,800 


131,200 


1797 


58,741 


42,851 


101,592 


80,030 


41,044 


121,074 


1798 


70,823 


74,029 


145,042 


83,350 


67,350 


150,700 


1799 


82,527 


40,539 


123,066 


95,000 


98,000 


193,000 


1800 


106,223 


66,251 


172,474 


110,300 


67,530 


177,830 


1801 


121,368 


64,460 


185,828 


143,200 


79,950 


223,150 


1802 


155,661 


59,323 


214,984 


144,100 


117,350 


261,450 


1803 


117,936 


34,674 


152,610 


125,000 


87,300 


212,300 


1804 


176,531 


No return. 





120,000 


109,000 


239,000 


1805 


189,161 


No return. 





132,000 


92,700 


224,700 



From the above table appear the following re 
sults : 

First, That Jamaica alone returns above one- 
half of the sugar produced by the whole of the 
British colonies. 

Secondly, That Jamaica produces above three- 
fourths of the total coffee. 

Thirdly, (and it is the most important result in 
VOL. n. 



compilations of this nature), That Jamaica is yet 
a growing and improving colony ; and that its 
cultivation appearing progressive, and especially 
of coffee, a further increase of produce may yet 
be expected, and a further market in Europe be 
come necessary, arid to be provided. 

Jamaica exports, and sends to Great Britain 
yearly, about 20,000 puncheons of rum, being] 
s s 



314 



JAMAICA. 



[about two-thirds of the total rum freighted home 
from the British colonies. 

From a table relating to sugar imported to 
Great Britain, and from Jamaica, in proportion 
to the importation from all the other British W. 
Indies, it is to be noticed, that from 1795 to 1798, 
a more than ordinary disproportion occurs, by a 
falling off in the produce of the Windward 
isles, occasioned by ravage of the plantations in 
Granada from insurrection, and in St. Vincent s 
by the Charibes. 

For six years to 1798, Jamaica returned a 
steady average of about 84,000 hogsheads of 
sugar. 

The very high prices of sugar in the European 
market for four years preceding, and highest in 
1798, excited speculations of extending the sugar 
plantations in Jamaica and other islands; and this, 
aided with the new and more productive Bourbon 
cane, accounts for the increase of sugar from Ja 
maica, progressive, to 1803 ; whilst (with the 
exception of St. Vincent s and Granada, and above 
all, Tobago) the Windward islands, having no 
extra, spare, and fertile lands, to do the same, yet 
in some degree profited by planting the superior 
species of cane. 

The following statement, whilst it corroborates 
what we have above observed relative to the grow 
ing importance of Jamaica, will shew the won 
derful increase which took place in the produce 
of coffee in that island from the moment the du 
ties were reduced. 



In the year 1752, the total export of coffee from 
Jamaica was rated at 60,0001bs. In 1775, it was 
49,398lbs. Until 1783,it never exceeded 350,000lbs 
when a reduction of the heavy duty upon it took 
place. In the year 1790, the quantity was trebled, 
exceeding two millions and a quarter. In the year 
1795, it rose to 5,902, llSlbs. and the following is 
a statement of its progress since ; the exports be 
ing given as returned each year in the house of 
assembly by the naval office. 

Lbs. Coffee. 
From 30 Sept. 1800, to 30 Sept. 1801, 9,992,859 



1801, 
1802, 
1803, 
1804, 
1805, 
1806, 
1807, 
1808, 



1802, 17,961,923 

1803, 15,866,291 

1804, 22,063,980 

1805, 24,137,398 

1806, 29,298,036 

1807, 26,761,183 

1808, 29,528,273 

1809, 25,586,668 



The exports of Jamaica for one year, ending 
the 5th of January 1788, amounted in sterling 
money to 2, 136,4427. 17.?. 3d. In 1787, the ex 
ports to the United States amounted to 60,095/. 18s. 
and importations from the United States to the 
value of 90,000/. 

The official value of the imports and exports 
were, in 

Imports. Exports. 

1809, j.4,068,897 ,.3,033,234 

1810, 4,303,337 2,303,579 



And the quantities of the principal articles imported into Great Britain were, in 



Coffee. 


Sugar. 


Pimento. 


Rum. 


Cotton Wool. 


Brit. Plant. 


For. Plant. 


Brit. Plant. 


For. Plant. 


Cwt. 

1809, 214,415 
11810, 2:52, SOB 


Cwt. 

1C35 
4186 


Cwt. 

1,504,612 
1,611,422 


Cwt. 
19 
6 


Lbs. 
2,219,367 
2,392,964 


Galls. 
3,470,250 
3,4?3,452 


Lbs. 

1,886,748 
1,798,172 



Admiral Rodney enriched this beautiful island 
with many of the rare productions of the east, 
which fell into his hands by the fortune of war ; 
particularly the bread-fruit tree, the true Ceylon 
cinnamon tree, and the mango tree. Jamaica can 
boast of a botanical garden containing the rarest 
collection of curious trees and plants perhaps in 
the world ; of which a catalogue has been pub 
lished. The botanical garden contains, among 
other valuable productions, the Chinese hemp, 
palm, Otaheite plum, tallow-tree, gum-arabic, 
paper-mulberry, from which paper and cloth are 
made, tea plant, and Chinese olive. The other 



productions, both animal and vegetable, arc such 
as are common to the other islands in the W. In 
dies ; and have been, for the most part, detailed 
by our author; but mahogany is now become 
scarce. In many parts of Jamaica there is a great 
appearance of metals; and it is believed that the 
Spaniards had mines both of silver and copper. 
A lead mine was indeed opened some years ago, 
near to the Hope estate, in St. Andrew s parish ; 
but the possessors find more profit in cultivating 
the surface of the earth than by digging for what 
may be contained in its bowels. See WEST IN 
DIES, and COLD SPRING.") 
1 



J A M A / C A. 



315 



English Governors who have presided in .Jamaica. 

1. Colonel Doyley ; nominated first governor 
when the English became possessed of the island, 
in 1655 ; he left off persecuting the Spaniards who 
remained, and established the colony ; governing 
with address, when there arrived, nominated by 
Oliver Cromwell, 

2. Major Sedgwick, whose power lasted but a 
few months, since he died from the novelty of the 
food and climate. 

3. The same Colonel Doyley ; who took the go 
vernment with the general acclamation of the in 
habitants ; but as soon as the death of the right 
owner was known in England, a successor was no 
minated in, 

4. Colonel Brayne, an Irishman and partizan of 
the protector ; but he also had the misfortune to 
die a few days after his arrival at Jamaica with a 
force of 1000 men, in 1658. 

5. The aforesaid Colonel Doyley, for the third 
time ; when he was confirmed in his office by par 
liament, after the death of Oliver Cromwell ; but 
separated from it at the restoration of Charles II. 
to the English throne, in 1661. 

6. Lord Windsor ; who established the laws 
and civil government, and evinced the best dispo 
sitions ; but he governed only two years ; for hav 
ing permitted the Flibustiers to settle in the island, 
a complaint was made by the court of Spain of 
the piracies and robberies they committed under 
the protection of his government, and he was con 
sequently separated from it, in 1663. 

7. Thomas Moddyford, a rich inhabitant of 
the island of Barbadoes, and who had established 
himself at Jamaica during the government of the 
the former. In his time the colony underwent a 
better organization, and the abolition of the afore 
said piracies tended greatly to increase its wealth. 

8. Thomas Lynch, who followed in the foot 
steps of the former, giving a commission to the 
pirate Morgan, in the expeditions made against 
the Spaniards, at Maracaibo, Granada, Panama, 
Portobelo, and Chagre ; he was separated from the 
government by the strong representations made by 
the Spanish court to England, in 1773. 

9. The Duke of Albemarle ; sent with a parti 
cular commission to extirpate the pirates ; he issued 
an order that all such as were apprehended should 
be hung; and this did not fail soon to remove the 
evil complained of; he was much venerated in 
the Spanish parts, and died regretted, in 1689. 

10. Lord Jusquin; in whose time the French, 
commanded by Mr. Daviot, invaded the island ; 
also there occurred in his time the great earth 



quake, in which upwards of 10,000 persons per 
ished, in 1692. 

11. Lord Bcllemont ; in his time, the Scotch 
under his protection established themselves in the 
province of Darien, but were routed by the go 
vernor of Cartagena ; he governed until 1708. 

12. Count of Peterbourg ; sent out to renew 
the hostilities respecting the establishment of 
Darien, with an authority of impressing for his 
service all the British vessels that might be in 
America. 

13. The Duke of Portland ; who was nominated 
governor in 1721 ; he died in 1726. 

14. The Count Stayrs ; nominated in the same 
year of 1726 ; he governed until 1737, when was 
nominated, 

15. Sir Edward Trelawney ; whose reign was 
the longest and most satisfactory to the court and 
to the inhabitants of the island ; he suppressed the 
insurrection of the Indians; leaving the govern 
ment for England, in 1752. 

16. Admiral Charles Knowles ; whose merits had 
rendered him conspicuous, and who was chosen as 
successor; he governed until 1761, when he re 
turned to England, and then went to Russia, to ar 
range some maritime affairs relative to that em 
pire. 

17. William Henry Littleton; governor in 1762; 
and in 1766, promoted to be ambassador at the 
court of Lisbon. 

18. General Edward W ortley Montague ; no 
minated in the above year, and the next sent as 
ambassador to Russia. 

19. General William Monckton ; nominated 
in 1767. 

20. Sir C. Dalyng. 

21. Lord William Campbell, general engineer 
of America, governor of S. Carolina; nominated 
in 1780. 

[22.Lieutenant-governor Alured Clarke, in 1789. 

23. Captain Sir T. Shirley, Bart, in 1790 and 
governed till 1791. 

24. Captain-general William Woodley, from 
the above year to 1794. 

25. Major-general Charles Leigh, from 1795 
to 1799. 

26. Captain-general, governor in chief, and 
vice-admiral Lord Lavington, K. B. from 1800 
to 1807. 

27. Lieutenant-governor Duke of Manchester, 
the present governor.] 

[JAMAICA, a township in Windham county, 
Vermont, watered by several branches of W. 
river, and containing 263 inhabitants."] 
ss2 



316 



JAM 



[JAMAICA, a post and chief town of Queen s 
county, New York, in the w. part of Long island, 
and contains a Presbyterian, an Episcopalian, and 
a Dutch church, an academy, and nearly 100 
dwelling-houses. It is 12 miles &amp;lt;?. of New York 
city. The whole township contains 1657 inhabi 
tants, of whom 237 are electors, and 222 slaves] 

JAMALCA, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Luya and Chillaos in Peru ; an 
nexed to the curacy of Ron. 

JAMBUTE, a town of the province and cap- 
tainsip of San Vicente in Brazil, 5. of the town of 
Pinhanga. 

JAMES, S. a county of the province and co 
lony of Virginia ; bounded e. by Charles county, 
and extending along both sides of the river of its 
name. It contains 108,362 acres, and is divided 
into five parishes or districts, which are Wallings- 
ford, Wilmington, James town, Merchant s hun 
dred, on the n. of the river, and Brunton on the 5. 

JAMES, S. a city of the former province and 
county, and formerly the capital of it ; situate on 
a peninsula on the n. shore of the river James or 
Ponbatan, 26 miles from the entrance. It now 
contains only 70 scattered houses, inhabited, for 
the most part, by mariners. It has become very 
poor, since that the offices were transferred to Wil- 
liamsburgh, eight miles distant, a place superior 
in situation, and without those sea-marshes which 
are found here, producing tertian fevers. Lat. 
37 10 n. Long. 76 51 w. 

JAMES, S. another city, in the province and 
colony of N. Carolina. 

JAMES, S. a settlement in the same island, in 
the n. extremity. 

JAMES, S. another, in the same island, of the 
district and parish of Todos Santos. 

[JAMES S Bay lies at the bottom or most s. part 
of Hudson s bay, with which it communicates, 
and divides New Britain from S. Wales. It con 
tains several islands, among which are Bear, Vi- 
Mers, Charleton, and Agomisca islands. Michipi- 
caton river, which falls into lake Superior, has 
its source towards this bay, from whence there is 
said to be but a short portage to Moose river, which 
falls into James s bay.] 

[JAMES, Cape ST. is the southernmost extremity 
of Washington isles, on the n. w. coast of N. 
America.] 

[JAMES S Island lies on the 5. side of Charles- 
town harbour, in S. Carolina, opposite to Charles- 
town, and contains about 50 families. It is sepa 
rated from John s island on the w. by Stono 
river.] 



J A M 

[JAMES, a navigable river of Virginia, called 
anciently Powhatan by the Indians, affords har 
bour for vessels of any sixc in Hampton road, but 
not in safety through the whole winter ; and there 
is navigable water for them as far as Mulberry 
island. A 40-gun ship goes to James town, and 
lightening herself, may pass to Harrison s bar, on 
which there is only 15 feet water. Vessels of 250 
tons may go to Warwick ; those of 125 go to 
Rockets s, a rnile below Richmond ; from thence 
is about seven feet water to Richmond, and about 
the centre of the town 4| feet, where the navi 
gation is interrupted by falls, which in a course of 
six miles descend about 80 feet perpendicular. 
A canal is nearly or quite completed for the pass 
ing of boats by these falls. Above these the river 
is navigable for batteaux and canoes to within 10 
miles of the Blue ridge, and even through the 
Blue ridge a ton weight has been brought ; and 
the expence would not be great, when compared 
with its object, to open a tolerable navigation up 
Jackson s river and Carpenter s creek, to within 
25 miles of Howard s creek of Green Briar, both of 
which have then water enough to float vessels into 
the Great Kanhaway. In some future state of po 
pulation, it is possible that its navigation may also 
be made to interlock with that of the Patowmac ; 
and through that to communicate, by a short 
portage, with the Ohio.] 

[JAMES City, a county of Virginia, 50 miles 
long and 12 broad, lying hetwcen Chickahominy 
and James s rivers. It contains 4070 inhabitants, 
including 2405 slaves.] 

[JAMES, a fort on the n. side of Loblollo bay, 
in the island of Antigua, in the head of which is 
St. John s harbour.] 

[JAMES, a creek in Delaware, which empties into 
Delaware bdy, 11 miles below Hook island. Do 
ver, the seat of government, stands on this creek, 
five miles from its mouth.] 

[JAMES DARTMOUTH Fort, a fortress at the 
confluence of Broad with Savannah river. It was 
erected under the British government, and de 
signed as a defence of a commercial and political 
intercourse with the Indians.] 

[JAMES S, ST. a town of Maryland ; situated in 
Kent county, tour miles s. w. of the town of 
Chester.] 

[JAMES fioosE CREEK, ST. a parish in 
Charlestown district, S. Carolina, containing 2787 
inhabitants; of whom 2333 are slaves.] 

[JAMES SANTEE, ST. a parish in the above dis 
trict, containing 3797 inhabitants ; of whom 437 
are whites, and 3345 slaves.] 
2 



JAN 

[JAMES, GREAT and LITTLE, ST. two of the 
Smaller Virgin isles ; situated in the King s chan 
nel, e. of Tortula, and w. of St. Thomas, between 
which and them is St. James s passage.] 

[JAMES S Town, in the island of Barbadoes, in 
the W. Indies, is situated in St. James s parish, 
on the w. side of the island.] 

[JAMES ST. See JAQUES.] 

JAMON, a settlement of the province and cor- 
regimi&amp;lt;n!o of Luya and Chillaos in Peru ; an 
nexed to the curacy of Colcamar. 

JAMUNDA, PIKDAD DE, a settlement of the 
province and country of Las Amazonns, in the part 
possessed by the Portuguese ; on the shore of the 
river its name, and not far from a lake of the same 
denomination. 

JAMUNDA. This river runs many leagues 
5. s. e. and enters the above lake. 

JAMUNDA. This lake is formed by the waters 
of that river, by those of the river Trombetas and 
others, in the territory of the Samundases Indians ; 
is large, and empties itself, by two arms, into the 
grand river Maranon, forming the large island of 

Vr &amp; to 

Maravia. 

JAMUNDA, another, a small river in the pro 
vince and government of Antioquia of the Nuevo 
lleyno de Granada. It runs n. n. e. and enters 
the Cauca. 

JANEIRO, a province and captainship of the 
kingdom of Brazil ; one of the 14 which compose 
the same : bounded n. by the province of Espiritu 
Santo, e. by the Atlantic or Brazilian sea, w. by 
the unknown country of the infidel Indians, and s. 
by the captainship of San Vicente. This province 
is one of the three governments into which the Por 
tuguese have divided Brazil ; and that which is 
most lucrative, as being extremely fertile, espe 
cially in sugar-canes, one of the principal branches 
of its commerce. It has many mines of the richest 
gold, which are worked to great profit. It is 
watered by the river of its name, which is the 
largest, and by 17 others, which are as follows : 
Carahi, Goaxindiba, 

Guarahi, Guapemerin, 

Magemerin, Suruhi, 

Magoa, Mereti, 

Iraja, Macacu, 

Boassu , Magegasu , 

Guapeguasu, Neuinerin, 

Eriri, Saracuhi. 

Goaguasu, 

On its coast are the islands of Ancora, Santa 
Ana, and Isla Grande. The principal towns are 
the cities of Angra del Rev, San Salvador, Cabo 
Frio, and the towns of Concepcion and Ubaruba. 



JAN 



317 



The capital is the city of the same name, with 
the dedicatory title of San Sebastian ; founded by 
the governor, General Men do de Sa, after the se 
cond time that the French were routed from that 
bay, in 1561. It is the head of a bishopric, erected 
by Pope Innocent XI. in 1676. Its first bishop 
was Don Fr. Manuel Percy ra, of the order of S. 
Domingo, who renounced the office as soon as 
consecrated ; when there was nominated in his 
place D. Joseph de Barros y Alarcon, who was 
the first that resided here. It has magnificent 
buildings ; amongst the most conspicuous of which 
are the cathedral, the college which belonged to 
the Jesuits, for 50 persons, and founded by Don 
Sebastian, and the monastery of the monks of St. 
Benedict. There are in this city two parishes, en 
titled S. Joseph and Nuestra Senora de la Cande- 
laria, a house of Misericordia, a convent of the 
Carmelites, the churches of Santa Cruz, of Nuestra 
Senora del llosario, of La Gloria, of El Parto, and 
of La Concepcion, which was an house of enter 
tainment of the French, and which is close to the 
Episcopal palace. The streets are wide, clean, 
and handsome. It abounds in garden herbs, 
pulse, plants, fruits, and flowers of Portugal ; and 
with these the markets are filled daily. In the 
vicinities are numerous gardens and orchards, and 
in its district are numbered upwards of 100 sugar- 
engines, whilst there are others which are made no 
use of, and are abandoned for the more profitable 
speculations of the gold mines. In the fields is an 
incredible multitude of large and small cattle, 
especially in the part called Itacaces ; where they 
make delicate cheese, very similar to that of the 
province of Alentejo in Portugal. The water by 
which the city is provided comes from the river 
called Carioca, which, running from between the 
mountains and rocks, passes at about a league s 
distance ; from whence it is brought by an 
aqueduct, made by Governor Aires de Saldanhua 
y Alburquerque, in 1718. It is the city of the 
greatest commerce of any in Brazil ; and every 
year a fleet richly laden leaves its port for Por 
tugal ; [but which has now discontiued to sail.] 
It has a mint, the money coined in which is much 
esteemed in Europe for the purity and quality of 
the gold. The bay or port has at its entrance a 
bar ; at the extremes of which rise two rocks. 
This bay is 24 leagues in length, and eight in 
width : in it are many islands, some cultivated 
and having sugar-engines, and the most celebrated 
of them being that called De Cobras, off which the 
ships cast anchor. 

On the opposite side of the city, a natural wall 
of rocks extends itself as far as the sea, which 



318 



J A N E I R O. 



rocks they call Los Organos, and they arc of dif 
ferent heights, forming a perfect line of defence, 
independently of the fortresses, which are arranged 
as follows. At the beginning and point of the bar 
is the fort of San Teodosio, which defends the shore 
in that part ; the next is the fortress of San Juan, 
which is an half-hexagon on the sea side, and 
having a wall along the land side, well furnished 
with artillery, also being one of the beacons which 
narrow the mouth of the bay. By the city is the 
castle of Santiago, of a circular figure, with a great 
tower in the middle. On the opposite side, which 
is that towards the n. there is, at the extremity of 
the bar, the fort of Nuestra Seilora de Guia, which 
defends the strand of the said bar. In the interior 
is the fortress of Santa Cruz, which is the other 
beacon at the entrance, and stands fronting the fort 
San Juan, with which it commands the narrow 
pass : this latter fortress is also of a round figure, 
with much heavy artillery ; commanded by a cor 
poral, and garrisoned by a company of soldiers. 
Within the bay, and opposite the mouth of the 
bar, in the island of Villagagnon, thus called by 
Nicolas Villagagnon, a Frenchman, is another fort 
of the same name ; and in another island fronting 
this, called De las Cobras, is the fort of Gravata. 
At the narrow part of the entrance, upon a rock of 
50 yards long and 25 wide, another fortress was 
begun to be erected by General Francisco de Ta- 
vora. At the foot of the castle of Santiago runs a 
line of wall, terminating at the gates of the city : 
also, on an eminence which commands the city, are 
the castle of the glorious martyr S. Sebastian, and 
the powder magazine ; and the fortification ter 
minates with another fort behind the monastery of 
San Benito. 

The population of this capital consists of 10,000 
inhabitants, and two regiments of infantry, who 
garrison it. The French, commanded by Nicolas 
de Villagagnon, took possession of, and established 
themselves in it in 1555, but were dislodged by 
the Portuguese in 1558 ; and although they, in 
1581, attempted for the second time its conquest, 
they did not succeed. 

[INDEX TO ADDITIONAL INFORMATION RE 
SPECTING THf, CAPTAINSHIP AND CITY OF 
THE RIODI: J AN -i no. 

1. Present stale, inhabitants, manners and cus 
toms. 2. Population. 3. Commerce and agri 
culture. 4. Mines, diamond and olfiers. 5. 
Military establishment and defence. 6. Obser 
vations on winds and currents in crossing the 
Atlantic: island of Frio ; harbour of Rio de Ja 
neiro. 
1. Present state, inhabitants, manners and cus 



toms. The captainship of Rio de Janeiro includes 
at present the districts St. Esprit, Cabofrio, and 
S. Paraiba, originally granted to different indivi 
duals, but which have been since re-annexed to 
the lands belonging to the crown. Owing to the 
late revolutions in the parent country, the seat of 
the Portuguese government has been transferred to 
this place. It should appear too that its court 
forms the most prominent feature on the political 
canvas of the New World ; and it is even asserted 
in those parts, that the object of this court was to 
enlarge its own dominions by the annexation of the 
whole territory n. of the river La Plata. 

Some of the houses of Janeiro are built of hewn 
stone, and others of brick, all of them being co 
vered with tolerably fine slate, and furnished with 
a balcony, surrounded with lattices. The streets 
are generally straight, well paved, and have ex 
cellent foot-paths. Most of them are terminated 
by a chapel, whither the people flock every even 
ing to offer up their devotions. The ceremonies 
of religion are multiplied beyond example in this 
city, where, throughout the day, bells and some 
times sky-rockets announce, at every hour, the per 
formance of some ceremony in the churches ; and 
after sun-set the streets of this capital are constantly 
crowded with religious processions. 

There are no public buildings in this city par 
ticularly deserving of attention, except the mint. 
The churches are all gloomy, and loaded with or 
naments executed without taste. 

An aqueduct of considerable length supplies the 
inhabitants with water. It is carried over the 
valleys by a double row of arches, one placed above 
another, and proves highly ornamental to the city. 
In the squares and public places fountains are 
erected, which are attended by a guard to regulate 
the distribution of the water, as it is not sufficiently 
abundant for the wants of the inhabitants ; and 
people frequently are seen waiting a long time with 
buckets before they receive their allotted quantity. 
A certain portion of the water from the fountain 
on the quay, opposite the palace, is appropriated 
to the use of the shipping, and is conveyed to the 
casks, which remain in the boats, by means of a 
woollen or canvas tube, called a hose, stretching 
from the fountain to the cask. 

Captain Cook found this water did not remain 
long sweet at sea ; but his opinion probably re 
sulted from some extraneous matters having been 
accidentally suffered to remain in the casks, or 
from some other circumstance, as other mariners 
affirm that it keeps better during long voyages 
than any other. The quay above mentioned is 
extremely spacious, and, as well as several of the] 



JANEIRO. 



[houses, built of granite, a material which is found 
in abundance on the spot. The high conical rocks 
at the entrance of the harbour are all of granite, 
and contain a large proportion of feldspar. On 
the s. w. side of the harbour, a very high rock par 
ticularly attracts the attention of strangers. Jt is 
composed of columnar masses, resembling basaltes, 
resting on a clayey bottom ; and indeed all the 
granitic quarries in this neighbourhood are incum 
bent on clay and sand. 

As this city, previous to the late political 
changes in Europe, was the principal depot of 
the riches which flowed from Brazil to Portugal, 
and the harbour to which the fleets destined to 
supply this part of the New World with Euro 
pean commodities proceeded, it may easily be 
conceived that the morals of the inhabitants of this 
commercial city must be similar to those of other 
opulent capitals ; and in fact, indolence, dis 
honesty, a spirit of revenge, and excesses of every 
kind, are not unfrequent among the great body of 
the people, while the higher orders indulge in 
every luxury which wealth can procure. The 
men are accused of yielding to the indulgence of 
depraved and unnatural appetites, and the ladies 
of abandoning that modesty and reserve which 
prove the chief ornament of the female character. 
This censure may perhaps in some degree originate 
from the singular custom which prevails among 
the ladies in this city, of exchanging bunches of 
flowers, which they carry in their hands, with 
those gentlemen, though total strangers, whom 
they chance to meet in the streets. They arc also 
in the habit, when seated in the balconies sur 
rounding their houses, either alone or attended by 
their slaves, to throw flowers on any one passing 
beneath, whom caprice or a transient liking lead 
them to distinguish. Doubtless more intimate 
connections frequently result from this custom ; 
yet it would be unfair to conclude from it, that a 
spirit of intrigue is universal among the Portuguese 
ladies of Janeiro. It is well known that in Lisbon 
the ladies amuse themselves on particular days, 
termed days of intrusion, by throwing nosegays 
from their balconies at the passengers ; and it has 
been probably in imitation of their manners, that 
tli is practice has been adopted by the females in 
this New World. 

Many of these females have fine dark eyes, and 
animated countenances. They generally have 
the head uncovered, and wear their hair hanging 
down in tresses, tied with ribbands, and orna 
mented with flowers. They are regular in their 
attendance in the churches both at matins and ves 



pers ; and during the rest of the day they generally 
remain seated at their windows. In the evening 
they amuse themselves by playing on the harpsi 
chord or guitar, when the doors and windows are 
thrown open to admit the fresh breeze; and if a 
stranger happen to pass at this time, and stop to 
listen to the music, it is not unusual for (he father, 
husband, or brother of the fair musician, politely 
to invite him to enter the house. 

The men, even of the lowest order, are usually 
covered with cloaks when they go abroad ; and 
the middling and higher ranks never appear in 
public without swords. Doth sexes are fond of 
operas, plays, and masquerades. They also fre 
quent a public garden, situated by the sea-side, 
near the extremity of the city. This garden is 
laid out in grass-plots, shrubberries,and parterres, 
interspersed with, trees, whose luxuriant foliage 
affords a refreshing shade from the rays of the 
sun. In alcoves or bo\vers of wooden frame-work, 
painted green, and adorned with a profusion of the 
most beautiful and odoriferous plants of tropical 
climates, the fashionable parties of Janeiro repose 
after the fatigue of their evening Avalks. During 
the dry season these alcoves are generally filled 
with company, who partake of an elegant supper, 
according to the Portuguese fashion, during which 
they are entertained with music, and sometimes 
fire-works; and they often protract their amuse 
ments to an early hour on the following morning. 
In the middle of this garden stands a large foun 
tain of artificial rock-work, adorned with figures 
of two alligators of tolerable sculpture, which 
throw water from their mouths into a marble bason. 
In this reservoir aquatic birds, well executed in 
bronze, appear to be sporting on the surface of 
the water. 

At a short distance from this fountain the eye is 
disgusted with a representation, in copper, painted 
green, of the papaye tree, which is indigenous to 
the climate, and of the mobt rapid growth. Yet 
this absurd caricature of one of nature s most beau 
tiful productions, was constructed at considerable 
expence and labour. 

On the side of this garden, towards the sea, there 
is a handsome terrace of granite, near the middle 
of which another fountain has been constructed. 
It is surmounted by the statue of a little boy, 
holding in one hand a bird, from whose bill the 
water gushes into a basin underneath, while with 
his other hand he displays a label with the follow 
ing incription : Sou it til ainda brincando I am 
useful even in my sport. 

At the extremities of this terrace stand two neat] 




320 



JANEIRO. 



[square buildings, similar to our English summer- 
houses. The walls of the one are covered with 
paintings, representing views of the harbour, and 
of the whale fishery, which was carried on within 
it till the increased number of ships annually re 
sorting thither, so terrified these animals, that they 
have at length wholly forsaken it. The ceiling is 
of shell-work, forming various designs, and the 
cornice, which is of the same material, exhibits 
several species of fish peculiar to the coast of Bra 
zil, well executed, and displaying their natural 
shades and colours. 

The ceiling of the other building is composed 
of devices wrought in feathers, and the cornices are 
decorated with representations of some of the most 
beautiful tropical birds, elegantly arrayed in their 
natural plumage. The walls are covered with se 
veral large paintings, which, though extremely 
ill executed, yet display the chief productions, 
from which the country derives its opulence. 
They include views of the gold and diamond mines, 
of the method in which they are wrought, and in 
which the precious materials are separated from 
the earth in which they were originally imbedded. 
They likewise represent the culture of the sugar 
cane, with the various processes for extracting its 
juice, and granulating it into sugar ; the mode of 
collecting the small animals which produce the 
cochineal, and from which the rich and brilliant dye 
is prepared ; the culture of the manioc, with the 
means employed in making cassava and tapioca; 
they also depict the culture and preparation of 
coffee, rice, and indigo. In this garden, which 
is termed the passao publico, are exhibited spec 
tacles for the entertainment of the people ; and its 
object to promote the health and pleasure of the 
inhabitants is expressed on two granitic columns, 
on one of which is engraven the words, A saude do 
Jiio ; and on the other, O amor dopublico. 

The profit to the Portuguese at Janeiro, from 
the cochineal, is inconsiderable, owing to an error 
in the preparation. Twice or thrice a week, the 
slaves appropriated to this employment go among 
the cactus plants, and pick off carefully, with a 
bamboo twig shaped somewhat into the form of a 
pen, every full-grown insect they can find, with 
many not yet arrived to their perfect state ; the 
consequence of which is, that the plants are never 
half stocked with insects, many of the females be 
ing destroyed before they had deposited their 
young. The natives of Mexico pursue a method 
very different. As soon as the periodical rains are 
over, and the weather is warmer, as well as drier, 
they fix, on the prickles of the cactus leaves, small 



parcels of the finest moss, serving as nests to con 
tain, each, ten or a dozen full-grown female insects : 
these, in the course of a few days, bring forth an 
innumerable tribe of young, spreading themselves 
over the leaves and branches of the plant, till they 
become attached to those spots which they find 
most favourable for supplying nutritious juice ; 
where, soon acquiring their full growth, they re 
main motionless, and then are gathered off for use; 
a sufficient number being always left for the pro 
duction of new broods. The insects are soon con 
verted into cochineal by a process which, though 
simple, seems extremely cruel. The insects, 
which were coveted in a wooden bowl, are 
thickly spread upon a flat dish of earthenware, 
and placed alive over a charcoal fire, where they aro 
slowly roasted until the downy covering disappears, 
and the aqueous juices of the animal are totally 
evaporated. During this operation the insects are 
constantly stirred about with a tin ladle ; and 
sometimes water is sprinkled upon them, to pre 
vent absolute torrefaction, which would destroy 
the colour, and reduce them to a coal ; but a little 
habit teaches when to remove them from the fire. 
They then appear like so many dark round red 
dish grains, and take the name of cochineal, pre 
serving so little of the original form of the insect, 
that this precious dye was long known and sought 
in Europe, before naturalists had determined 
whether it was an animal, vegetable, or mineral 
substance. The garden at Janeiro does not an 
nually produce above thirty pounds weight of this 
commodity; though by proper treatment, from 
the same number of plants, ten times the quantity 
might be obtained. At Marica and Saquarima, 
both places contiguous to cape Frio, are consider 
able plantations of the cactus, which are propa 
gated easily from cuttings set into the earth during 
the cold and rainy season, though they afterwards 
thrive least where excluded from the sun. The 
insects breed and are collected in dry weather, 
from October until March. The preparation of 
cochineal is encouraged by the trade being laid 
open, which had formerly been a monopoly of the 
crown. 

In Janeiro, not only science, but literature of 
every kind, is neglected ; as a proof of which, it 
is only necessary to mention, that in this large and 
opulent city there are but two or three booksellers* 
shops, and that these contain little besides a few 
obsolete works on theology and medicine. Nei 
ther do we meet with any cabinds of natural his 
tory. There is, however, a professed collector of 
birds and insects ; but among his collection, arej 



JANEIRO. 



321 



[few articles that may not be found in the cabinets 
of Europe. Though literature and science are 
jet in their infancy in this extensive country, the 
native powers of the human mind have of late be 
gun to unfold themselves. 

2. Population. The population of Janeiro is 
computed at 43,000 souls, of which 40,000 are 
blacks, including such as have been emancipated, 
and the remaining 3000, whites. Few of the native 
Brazilians arc to be found in this city ; some of 
their children have been taken into Portuguese 
families, but they constantly evince a desire to 
return to the habits of savage life. These people 
are seldom employed except as boat-rowers, in 
which capacity they display uncommon dexterity. 
They appear to entertain an hereditary antipathy 
to the conquerors of their country, and shun, as 
much as possible, the settlements of the Portuguese. 
A considerable part of the coast, between Janeiro 
and Bahia, is still inhabited by them, which pre 
vents a regular communication, by land, between 
these districts, since they attack individuals with 
out remorse, whenever they find them scattered or 
unprotected. 

Ease and comfort are displayed in the external 
appearance of the inhabitants of Janeiro ; their 
Louses are large, commodious, and some of them 
superbly furnished. 

Most of the menial offices are performed by 
slaves, who, in this capital, have little appearance 
of wretchedness, when compared with those upon 
the plantations, who suffer under cruel and severe 
task-masters. They appear to possess a gay and 
lively temper, and are extremely fond of dancing 
and music. It is very common to see the black 
drivers of hackney carriages at Janeiro, in the in 
tervals of employment, amusing themselves by 
playing on some musical instrument, most com 
monly a guitar. All classes of society, indeed, in 
this city, display an unbounded propensity to 
mirth and pleasure; nor doestlieir religion, though 
abounding in ceremonies, impart any thing like 
gloom or austerity to their manners. 

There are at this period three religious establish 
ments for men, and two for women, in this capital ; 
but neither the holy fathers, nor the nuns, manifest 
the smallest tendency to run into any self-denying 
excess of devotion. The ladies, in particular, 
appear without hesitation, or restraint, at the 
grates, and converse freely with those strangers 
whom curiosity may lead to visit their convents. 

3. Commerce and agriculture. Janeiro, as 
might be expected from its commercial under 
takings, has been greatly improved and enlarged 
within these last few years. Jts population has 

VOL. II. 



also proportionally increased, and every thing in 
dicates the thriving condition of the place. The 
shops are filled not only with such British manu 
factures as contribute to the comfort of the inhabi 
tants, but also with those that administer to their 
luxury or pride. The markets are well stored with 
provisions, and the magazines with merchandise 
of every kind. The city is gradually extending, 
by the erection of public and private buildings ; 
and the merchants and tradesmen of every de 
scription appear to be busily employed. 

Besides the manufacture of cochineal, which we 
mentioned, when speaking of the botanical gar 
den, there is a very considerable one, of a diffe 
rent kind, carried on within the harbour, belong 
ing to an exclusive company, which pays one- 
fifth of its profits to the crown. The fat or 
blubber of the large black whale, (bttltttctpfty solus), 
which formerly frequented this harbour, but 
which is now caught near the island of St. Ca 
therine, and on other parts of the coast, is here 
converted into oil. The whalebone, which is 
prepared from the cartilages of the jaw of this 
animal, is also cleansed and separated here, before 
being shipped for Europe. The whale-fishery, as 
well as that of the cazelote, (physetercotodon), which 
is at present chiefly confined to the bar of the island 
of St. Catherine, and the bay of All Saints, might 
be extended with much profit and advantage to all 
the coast, as well as to the high seas of Brazil and 
cape Verde. The Dutch found the whale-fishery 
extremely profitable. In 1697, they gained by it 
more than 2,000,000 of florins ; and though, in 
other years, it was not equally productive, yet 
on the whole it yielded them a very large re 
venue. 

Other nations also avail themselves of the whales 
of those seas. The white whale (physetcr ma- 
crocephalm ) a fiords a still more lucrative branch 
of commerce. It is no unusual thing for an Eng 
lish whaler, from the S. seas, to put in at Janeiro 
for refreshments, having on board 69 whales, each 
worth at an average 200/. Sometimes a single 
whale is of such an enormous size as to fetch 
10001. 

Other species offish, frequenting the shores of 
Brazil, might likewise be converted to use, such 
as the hippopotamus, or sea-horse of Angola, 
From the mermaid, (trichechus manatus)^ might 
be extracted great quantities of a coarse kind of 
oil, fit for burning and other purposes. The dis 
agreeable smell ot this oil might be corrected at a 
small expence, by repeated washing. 

Were the Portuguese government in Brazil to 
extend their fisheries on the coasts of the Azores" 

T.T 



JANEIRO. 



[and Madeira, and to establish a regular fishery at 
cape Verde, similar to those of" other nations, they 
might not only supply a sufficiency of dry fish for 
internal consumption, but likewise have large 
quantities to exchange with their neighbours for 
articles of which they stand in need. 

Notwithstanding the discouragements, jealou 
sies, and exactions of the mother country, a spirit 
of enterprise appears to have been gradually gain 
ing ground for these few last years in Brazil. 
Even the inveterate prejudices of the Portuguese 
nobles against trade have, in a great measure, 
yielded to the increasing liberality of the times ; 
and several of them are now concerned in the dif 
ferent manufactures lately established in Janeiro. 
One gentleman of high rank has erected a rice- 
work in this city, in which he employs near 100 
slaves, in preparing the grain for use. There is 
nothing in the method employed in this work par 
ticularly deserving of attention, except the use of 
siliceous sand, the small sharp angles of which 
materially assist in freeing the grain from the husks 
which adhere to it. The sand is afterwards se 
parated from the grain by means of sieves, suffi 
ciently wide to suffer it to pass through, while they 
retain the rice. 

The mechanical arts have not yet attained much 
perfection in Janeiro, though more attention daily 
begins to be paid to suck pursuits. The corn- 
mill, in general use here, is of a very simple con 
struction. One which is erected on a stream near 
the town consists of a wheel, only a few feet in 
diameter, placed horizontally below the current of 
the water, which falls from a considerable height 
into hollows, obliquely cut out in the superior rim 
of the wheel, and impel it to a rapid rotatory mo 
tion, while its upright shaft, passing through the 
centre of an immoveable mill-stone above the 
wheel, but of a narrow diameter, is fixed to a 
smaller mill-stone, which being forced round with 
the motion of the wheel and dependent shaft, 
bruises between it and the stone underneath the 
grain, which is insinuated between them from a 
hopper. 

But whatever may be the rising prosperity, or 
increasing riches of Janeiro, it is with pain that we 
behold this city disgraced by an establishment 
originating in the sufferings and misfortunes of an 
unoffending race of our fellow-men. We speak 
of the warehouses erected at Val Longo, not far 
from the town, for the reception of slaves, who are 
imported chiefly from Angola and Bengucla, on 
the African coast. Here these unfortunate beings 
are prepared for market, like so many herds of 
cattle. Every art is employed that cupidity can 



invent to conceal their defects, and render them 
sleek and saleable: they are washed, anointed, 
and fattened like stalled bullocks. About 5000 of 
these wretched beings, amounting to nearly a 
fourth of the number annually imported into 
Brazil, are every year sold in the market of 
Janeiro. 

Agriculture, as might have been expected, has 
made little progress in this country. In the 
vicinity of Janeiro, the soil is chiefly cultivated 
for raising vegetables for the whites, and rice, 
manioc, maize, &amp;c. for the blacks. The roads 
are so extremely bad as only to be passable for 
carriages a few miles beyond the city. The neigh 
bouring forests abound in trees, many of which 
are unknown to botanists, and which might prove 
of great value in the construction of ships, houses, 
and for other purposes. Palms and mastic wood, 
as well as mango and guoi/ava trees, are here 
also extremely common ; and besides the dyeing 
woods already known, there are many others, 
which, on being submitted to a chemical exami 
nation, yield lakes of different colours : from one 
was extracted, in the chemical laboratory of Ajuda, 
near Lisbon, a beautiful rose colour that is more 
permanentthan that of the Brazil wood. To the w. 
of the city, at the extremity of an extensive forest, is 
situated the rich and fertile valley of Tijouca. It 
is surrounded on all sides by lofty mountains, ex 
cepting towards the s. where, through a small 
opening, is admitted a branch or arm of the sea. 
But the principal ornament of this delightful spot 
is a clear stream, which, falling down a sleep and 
broad granite rock, forms a magnificent cascade, 
whence it meanders through the valley beneath. 
The temperature, on account of its confined situa 
tion, is extremely hot and oppressive ; and the 
heat is augmented by the reflection of the sun s 
rays from the sides of the mountains, which are in 
many places bare and rocky. In the plantations 
of Tijouca we meet with indigo, manioc, coffee, 
cocoa, or chocolate trees, sugar-canes, plantains, 
and orange and lime trees, all growing promis 
cuously in the greatest luxuriance, though coffee 
and indigo appear to be the chief objects of atten 
tion. 

Several districts in the government of Janeiro 
produce cotton, sugar, coffee, cocoa, rice, pepper, 
and tobacco, in great abundance. That of Hio 
Grande yields plenty of excellent wheat, which is 
also found to grow in other parts of Brazil, with 
an increase far beyond what is known in Europe. 
The vine likewise attains to great perfection in 
this climate; but the grape is not suffered to be 
pressed, lest it might interfere with the sale of. the] 



JANEIRO. 



323 



[Portugal wines. The ipecacuanha plant, the 
root of which has been so long used as a valuable 
article in medicine, grows in great profusion near 
St. Catharine s, in the government of Rio, as well 
as ft variety of other medicinal plants, some of 
which have been exported to Europe, while others 
are but very little known. 

The commodities from the captainships of St. 
Vicente, Espiritu Santo, and Porto Seguro, are 
transmitted to Janeiro, and thence shipped for 
Europe. These exports consist chiefly of gold, 
diamonds, precious stones of various kinds, to 
bacco, indigo, coffee, rice, cocoa, maize, sugar, 
Loncy, wax, balsam capivi, ipecacuanha, cinna 
mon, long pepper, ginger, dyeing woods, cochi 
neal, ambergris, wood for inlaying and other pur 
poses, various rich drugs, and perfumes. Besides 
these, they also export hides, train-oil, and whale 
bone. 

Among the articles sent from Portugal in return, 
the following are the principal ; woollens, linens, 
stuffs, gold and silver lace, dried fish, hams, sau 
sages, haggesses, pilchards, cheese, butter, bis 
cuits, cakes, wine, oil, vinegar, vermicelli, maca 
roni, bay leaves, walnuts, peeled chesnuts, dried 
plumbs, olives, onions, garlic, rosemary, and 
glass ware of every kind, manufactured at Ma- 
rinha. The duties which the agents of the Portu 
guese government levied on the importation of 
goods from Lisbon and Oporto, at Rio de Janeiro, 
were 12 per cent, upon the value of each article. 
The chief duties paid at Lisbon on the commo 
dities of the Brazils were as follows : on gold, one 
per cent. ; coffee, eight per cent. ; sugar, rice, and 
skins, ten per cent. ; indigo, 12 per cent. ; and on 
rum, four dollars on every pipe of 180 gallons. 
Brazil wood and timber fit for ship-building were 
claimed as the property of the crown. One-fifth 
of the gold extracted from the mines was also ex 
acted by the government; and when any diamonds 
happen to be ibund in a gold mine, it was no 
longer suffered to be wrought for that metal, all 
diamond mines being seized as exclusively be 
longing to the crown. 

4. Mines, diamond and others. Formerly 
Bahia dc Todos Santos, or the bay of All Saints, 
was the principal seat of the government, and 
chief mart of the commerce of Brazil ; but the 
discovery of the gold and diamond mines, within 
a short distance of Rio de Janeiro, and communi 
cating directly with it, has given a decided supe 
riority to the latter. The manner in which the 
former of these were discovered, is differently re 
lated ; but the most common account is, that the 
Indians on the back of the Portuguese settlements 



were observed to make use of gold for their fish 
hooks ; and inquiry being made as to their man 
ner of procuring this metal, it appeared that con 
siderable quantities of it were annually washed 
from the mountains, and left among the gravel and 
sand that remained in the valleys, after the run 
ning off or evaporation of the water. 

From the time of this discovery, considerable 
quantities of gold were imported into Europe from 
Brazil ; and these imports have gradually aug 
mented, since new mines Lave been wrought in 
many of the other provinces. 

The extraction of this precious metal is neither 
very laborious, nor attended with the smallest 
danger, in this part of the New World. The purest 
sort is generally found near the surface of the soil, 
though it is sometimes necessary to dig for it to the 
depth of three or four fathoms. It is usually in 
cumbent on a bed of sandy earth, termed by the 
natives saibro. 

Though for the most part the veins that are re 
gular, and run in the same direction, are the 
richest, it has been observed that those spaces, 
the surface of which was most spangled with crys 
tals, were those which furnished the greatest plenty 
of gold. It is found in larger pieces on the moun 
tains and barren or stony rocks than in the valleys 
or on the banks of rivers. But in whatever place 
it may have been gathered, it is of 23^ carats on 
coming out of the mine, unless it be mixed with 
sulphur, silver, iron, or mercury ; a circumstance 
that rarely occurs, except at Goyas and Araes. 

Every man who discovered a mine was obliged to 
give notice of it to the government. If it was con 
ceived to be of little consequence by those persons 
appointed to examine into its value, it was always 
given up to the public : but if, on the contrary, it 
was found to be a rich vein, the government never 
failed to reserve a portion of it for themselves. 
Another share was given to the commandant ; a 
third to the intentlarit ; and two shares were 
awarded to the discoverers : the remainder was 
divided amongst the miners of the district, in pro 
portion to their circumstances, which were deter 
mined by the number of their slaves. The dis 
putes to which this species of property gave rise, 
fell under the cognizance of the intendant, with the 
right of appeal from his decrees to the supreme 
court established at Lisbon, under the title of 
Council d Outremer. 

It is said that a slender vein of this metal runs 
through the whole country, at about 24 feet from 
the surface j but it is too thin and poor to answer 
the expence of digging. Gold is always however 
to be collected in the beds of rivers which have 
T T % 



324 



JANEIRO. 



[pursued the same course for a considerable time ; 
and therefore to be able to divert a stream from its 
usual channel is esteemed an infallible source of 
gain. 

The employment of searching the bottoms of 
rivers and torrents, and washing the gold from the 
mud and sand, is principally performed by slaves, 
who are chiefly Negroes, of whom the Portuguese 
keep great numbers for that purpose. By a par 
ticular regulation, these slaves are obliged to fur 
nish their master every day with the eighth part 
of an ounce of gold ; and if by their industry or 
good fortune they collect a larger quantity, the sur 
plus is considered as their own property, and they 
are allowed to dispose of it as they think fit : by 
which means some Negroes have, it is said, pur 
chased slaves of their own, and lived in great 
splendour; their original master having no other 
demand upon them than the daily supply of nn 
eighth of an ounce, which amounts to about nine 
shillings sterling ; the Portuguese ounce being 
somewhat lighter than our troy ounce. 

The proprietors of the mines paid to the king of 
Portugal, as above-mentioned, a fifth part of the 
gold which they extracted by operations more or 
less successful ; and this fifth of the gold obtained 
from all the mines in Brazil was estimated, at an 
average, to amount annually to about 300,000/. 
sterling: consequently the whole capital must be 
nearly 1,500,000/. sterling. If we add to this the 
gold exchanged with the Spaniards for silver, and 
what was privately brought to Europe without 
paying the duty, which amounted to 500,000/. 
more, the annual produce of the Brazilian mines 
was about 2,000,000/. sterling ; an immense sum 
to be found in a country which a few years ago 
was not known to produce a single grain. 

Among the many impediments thrown in the 
way of trade, may be ranked the prohibition 
which prevented the people of Brazil from work 
ing up the gold of their own mines. Even the 
tools and instruments used by the artificers for such 
purposes, were seized and confiscated by the strong 
hand of arbitrary power. 

It was only about the beginning of the last cen 
tury that diamonds made a part of the exports 
from Brazil to Europe. These valuable stones are, 
like the gold, found frequently in the beds of ri 
vers and torrents. Before they were supposed to 
be of any value, they were often perceived in wash 
ing the gold, and were consequently thrown away 
with the sand and gravel ; and numbers of large 
stones, that would have enriched the possessors, 
passed unregarded through the hands of several 
persons wholly ignorant of their nature. Antouio 



Rodrigues Banha suspected the value of them, and 
communicated his idea to Pedro d Almeida, the 
governor of the country. Some of these brilliant 
pebbles were sent to the court of Lisbon, which, 
in 1730, commissioned D Acunha, their minister in 
Holland, to have them examined. After repeated 
experiments, the artists pronounced them to be 
verj r fine diamonds. 

The diamonds found in the different districts of 
Brazil are naturally set in a matrix of iron mineral, 
like those brought from the mines of Golconda and 
Visapour. Those found in the rivers appear to 
have been forced thither by currents from the ad 
jacent mountains, where veins of thorn have been 
traced, and where they might be obtained at less 
trouble and expence than in the rivers. 

The value of these precious stones having been 
ascertained, the Portuguese were eager to collect 
them ; and in 1731, 1146 ounces were brought to 
the mother country by the fleet from Rio de Ja 
neiro. This immense influx considerably lessened 
the price of diamonds in the European market, 
and induced the Portuguese government to take 
such measures as they deemed adequate to restore 
them to their original value. With this view, 
they conferred the exclusive right of searching for 
diamonds on a few wealthy associates ; and in 
order even to restrain the avidity of the company 
itself, it was stipulated that it should employ no 
more than 600 slaves in that business. It lias since 
been permitted to increase their number at plea 
sure, paying 4s. &amp;lt;2d. per day for each miner. 

In order to ensure (he business of the chartered 
company, the gold mines which were worked in 
the neighbourhood were in general shut up ; and 
those who had founded their expectations of for 
tune upon this frequently deceitful basis, were com 
pelled to turn their activity into some other chan 
nel. The other citizens were allowed to remain 
on their estates ; but capital punishments were 
decreed by the law against those persons who 
should encroach upon the exclusive rights granted 
to the company. Since the sovereign has suc 
ceeded to the company, all the citizens are suffered 
to search for diamonds, but under the restriction of 
delivering them to the agents of the crown, at the 
price which it has stipulated, and on paying 20 
per cent, upon this sum. 

The diamonds sent from the New to the Old 
World were inclosed in a casket with three locks, 
the keys of which were separately put into the 
hands of the chief members of administration; and 
those keys were deposited in another casket, to 
which was affixed the viceroy s seal. While the 
exclusive privilege subsisted, this precious deposit,] 



JANEIRO. 



325 



[on it s arrival in Europe, was remitted to govern 
ment, which, .according to a settled regulation, re 
tained the very scarce diamonds, "which exceeded 
20 carats, and delivered every year, for the profit 
of the company, to one, or to several contractors 
united, 40,000 carats, at prices which have suc 
cessively varied. An engagement was made on 
one hand to receive that quantity ; and on the 
other, not to distribute any more; and whatever 
might be the produce of the mines, which neces 
sarily varied, the contract was faithfully ad 
hered to. 

Before the recent changes in the Portuguese 
government, that court threw 60,000 carats of 
diamonds into trade, which was monopolized by a 
single merchant, who paid for them at the rate of 
about II. lls.Gd. per carat, amounting in the 
whole to 130,000/. sterling. The contraband trade 
in this article is said, by persons competent to 
form a just estimate on the subject, to have 
amounted to a tenth more ; so that the produce of 
these mines, the riches of which have been so 
much boasted of, did not exceed annually 143,000/. 
The rough diamonds used to be purchased from 
the merchants in Lisbon, and other places in Por 
tugal, by the English and Dutch, who, after cut 
ting and polishing them with more or less perfec 
tion, disposed of what remained, after supplying 
the demand of their own countries, to other nations 
of Europe. 

In the diamond and mine districts are found, 
between the parasitic stones, some very imperfect 
amethysts and topazes ; as also sapphires and 
emeralds, and some fine chrysolites. Jacinths or 
granites are sometimes discovered in the inter 
stices of talc or micaceous stones : these, as well as 
some other precious stones, never having been sub 
jected to a monopoly like diamonds; those who 
discovered them were at perfect liberty to dispose 
of them in the manner they deemed most condu 
cive to their interest. 

The annual exportation of these stones from 
Janeiro, and some of the other ports, seldom ex 
ceeded 6250/. for which the government received 
a duty of one per cent, amounting in the whole to 
the trifling sum of 62J. 10s. sterling. Mines of 
iron, sulphur, antimony, tin, lead, and quick 
silver, are likewise found in this and other pro 
vinces of Brazil; but the pursuit of gold has too 
much diverted the attention of the colonists from 
more useful speculations. It was long supposed 
that copper had been withheld by nature from this 
vast and fruitful region of the new hemisphere ; 
but later researches have shown this to be an un 
founded suspicion. In Rio de Janeiro there exists 



a rich and copious mine of cupreous pyrites 
(pyrites cupri) : one cwt. of this mineral yields 
25 pounds of pure copper. Similar mines of this 
metal have also been discovered in Minas Geraes, 
and other districts. 

5. Military establishment and defence. The 
military establishment, even before the Portuguese 
sought a refuge in Brazil, was considered sulli- 
ciently respectable to oppose any hostile attempt in 
the field, and consisted of two squadrons of ca 
valry, two regiments of artillery, six regiments of 
infantry, two battalions of well-trained militia, be 
sides above 200 disciplined free Negroes ; amount 
ing^ in the whole to a body of at least 10,000 men, 
exclusive of a numerous registered, but undisci 
plined militia, of whom a great proportion belongs 
to the city and immediate neighbourhood. 

The entrance of the harbour, which does not ex 
ceed a mile from point to point, is intersected in 
every direction with heavy batteries. Beside 1 -, 
ships, in returning their tire, would labour under 
the disadvantage of a swell occasioned by the bar, 
which runs across the outside of the mouth of the 
harbour. 

The fort of Santa Cruz, which is a work of con 
siderable strength, and forms the principal defence 
of the harbour, is in its general height from 21 to 
30 feet. It mounts 23 guns towards the sea, and 
33 to the w. and e. It is situated on the low point 
of a smooth rock, from the body of which it is se 
parated by a fissure, 10 or 12 feet in width, it is 
flanked by batteries to the e. and w. and is over 
looked and protected by a regular front for mus 
ketry, which runs between the hills. The weight 
of the guns is carefully concealed, but from the re 
port they are judged to be heavy pieces. 

The defence of the city of Janeiro is supposed, 
however, by military men, to depend chiefly 
on the works erected on Serpent island ; the 
highest part of which, looking towards the town, 
is nearly 80 feet above the water. Here a small 
square fort is constructed. This island lowers 
gradually on the e. side to the water s edge, and is 
occupied by an irregular stone-line, having occa 
sional flanks. It has no ditch, and in some parts 
the stone-line is low, not being more than eight 
feet above the rocks. Serpent island does not ex 
ceed 300 yards in length. There are mounted on 
it 46" guns, 20 facing the s. and s. e. and the re 
mainder facing the opposite points. The parapet- 
wall, lately built along the front of the town, af 
fords a good line for musketry and light guns. 

Ships leaving Rio de Janeiro seldom find it 
practicable to work out of the harbour against the 
wind blowing from the sea j but, in general, take j 



326 



JANEIRO. 



[advantage of the land-breeze prevailing in the 
morning 1 , at which time the harbour empties itself 
of the accumulation of water forced into it by the 
sea-wind during the night. This reflux is fre 
quently more powerful than the wind. Its course 
is along the bays on the e. side of the shore, and it 
afterwards sets upon the point of Santa Cruz. 
Ships are sometimes carried into that part of the 
stream, where it runs with the greatest impetu 
osity, and carried directly towards the rock, which 
is an occurrence attended with much danger, since 
this rock being nearly perpendicular, ships may 
strike against it without their keels touching any 
bottom. 

6. Observations on winds and currents in cross 
ing the Atlantic Island of Frio Harbour of 
Rio de Janeiro. Jn proceeding from Europe to 
Brazil, navigators must be determined, in what de 
gree of longitude it may be proper to pass the 
line, by the winds which prevail at different sea 
sons of the year. When the sun is far to the s. 
of the line, the s. e. winds begin to blow in about 
seven degrees of n. latitude, and sometimes force 
ships to the 27th degree, or more, ot w. longitude, 
before they have passed the equator. When, on 
the contrary, the sun is to the n. the line may be 
crossed in a much more e. longitude, as the winds 
then generally blow from the n. e. ; but on arriv 
ing at the 17th degree of latitude s. of the equa 
tor, the winds become influenced by the land of 
Brazil, which appears in lat. 22 40 s. 

This land, which lies to the n. of the island of 
Frio, is extremely high and irregular ; its peaked 
hills are interspersed with white vertical streaks, 
which give to them, when viewed from a distance, 
the appearance of cascades of water. Steering in 
a s. direction toAvards Frio, a small island is very 
soon perceived. It is of a moderate height, and 
about three miles distant from the mainland of 
Brazil, between which and it there is a free pas 
sage. 

The island of Frio lies about s. w. eight leagues 
from the former ; and the shore between them ap 
pears perfectly free from danger. The land of 
Frio is high, and from having a hollow in the 
middle, has the appearance of two separate islands. 
The strait between Frio and the continent of Brazil 
is nearly a mile in breadth, and seems clear from 
shoals. The latitude is 32 2 s. ; the longitude, 
by observation, 41 31 45" w. In sailing ic. to 
wards Rio de Janeiro, the shore is perceived to be 
covered with white sand ; the land is high and ir 
regular, with two or three small islands situated 
near it. 
Some of our most experienced navigators, and 



among others Captain Mackintosh, in the service 
of the East-India company, recommend that ships 
bound to Rio de Janeiro should, after falling in 
with cape Frio, instead of steering along shore, 
shape their course between s. a\ and s. w. by iff. 
for 12 or 14 leagues, as to this distance the land- 
wind extends. The forenoons are in general calm, 
but almost every afternoon a fresh sea-breeze sets 
in from the s. w. It is proper to steer, in a di 
rect course, from hence to the small islands lying 
under the great inclining Sugar-loaf, on the w. 
side of the entrance into Rio harbour. 

From these small islands the wind will carry the 
ship to the opposite side of the harbour s mouth, 
where the fort of Santa Cruz is situated, and 
which may be approached within 50 yards, and 
thence safely anil quickly into harbour. Captain 
Mackintosh adds, that in his first voyage to this 
place, by keeping in-shore, he spent five days of 
very unpleasant and troublesome navigation, before 
he could get into the harbour ; whereas, by the 
method now laid down, he came the same dis 
tance in much less than 24 hours, and with great 
ease and satisfaction. 

Sir Erasmus Gower, who commanded the expe 
dition to China, in 1792, observes, " that the 
entrance of the harbour of Rio de Janeiro will 
shew itself by discovering the castle or fort of 
Santa Cruz, and a small fortified island, called 
Fort Lucia, nearly abreast of it. Between these 
is the channel into the harbour, near a mile wide ; 
both shores are steep ; that of Santa Cruz is per 
pendicular, there being six fathoms in the wash 
of the sea. The narrowness of the channel causes 
strong tides; but as the sea-breeze blows fresh, they 
do not impede vessels entering into the harbour. 
In going in, it is best to keep mid-channel, or 
even nearer to Santa Cruz. About four miles outside 
the harbour s mouth, the depth of water is 18 
or 19 fathoms, which decreases gradually to eight 
or seven ; and this being the shallowest part, may 
be called the bar, which is about two miles out 
side the fort. The water again deepens, on ap 
proaching Santa Cruz, to 17 and 18 fathoms, nor 
will less be found in the fair way of the great road. 
Large ships may moor in shoaler water ; but that 
depth or thereabouts is more advisable, as such a 
situation affords the full advantage of the sea- 
breeze, as well as that of avoiding the insects, 
which are very troublesome when nearer to the 
shore." The Lion, which carried Erasmus Gow- 
er s flag, we are informed, anchored in 18 fathoms, 
the Sugar-loaf bearing s. by e. half e. the castle 
of Santa Cruz s. e. by s. ; a convent on an emi 
nence over the s. part of the city s. w. by w, one] 



JAN 

[mile and a half from the landing-place opposite 
the viceroy s palace. 

In no part of the world, China and Japan ex- 
cepted, is there so much jealousy evinced on the 
approach of foreign ships, or are there so many 
obstacles to overcome before permission can be ob 
tained to land, as at Brazil. The difficulties ex 
perienced in this way by Lord Anson, and some 
of our more early circumnavigators, appear in no 
respect tohavediminished in later times ; sinceevery 
vessel, before attempting to enter the harlx&amp;gt;ur, must 
send a boat with an officer on board to the castle of 
Santa Crux, who is thence conducted to the palace 
of the viceroy, in order to -inform his excellency 
of the arrival of the ship or fleet, and the reason 
of its touching at this port. It is also necessary 
that the ship s colours should be hoisted as early as 
possible, unless the pratique, or visiting boat from 
shore, has been already on board. So strictly in 
deed are these regulations enforced, that even a 
Portuguese vessel, attempting to pass the fort, will 
be hailed and forced to anchor, till such time as 
permission be obtained for her entering the har 
bour. The condition, force, destination, and 
wants of the ship must be minutely certified by 
the captain ; and if these appear satisfactory, or 
ders are issued to afford him the necessary aid ; 
but no part of the crew is suffered to land except 
at the stairs opposite the palace, and even there 
not without express permission. A military of 
ficer or soldier attends each person while he re 
mains on shore ; guard-boats likewise surround 
the vessel ; and these regulations are, if possible, 
more rigorously executed with regard to mercan 
tile vessels than even ships of war. In the inner 
harbour there is every conveniency for heaving 
down ships ; and it is here that all those vessels 
anchor that require repair, as well as those which 
are receiving or delivering out cargoes ; but the 
outer harbour is justly considered as the most 
healthy situation. This city is in lat. 22 56 s. 
Long. 42 1 30" w. Variation of the compass 
4 C 55 to the w. of the pole. The tide flows seven 
hours and a half, and rises about five feet and a 
half perpendicular. Fahrenheit s thermometer 
usually stands between 70 and 86. 

The harbour of Rio de Janeiro is one of the 
finest known, and indeed can scarcely be excelled 
for capaciousness, and the security which it af 
fords to vessels of every description. The entrance 
into it from the sea is bounded, on one side, by 
the lofty inclining cone already mentioned, and on 
the other by the huge mass of granite which sup 
ports the castle of Santa Cruz ; near the middle 
lies the small island on which fort Lucia is built. 



J A Q 

Though at first narrow, it gradually widens to 
about three or four miles, and has an excellent 
muddy bottom. In several directions it branches 
farther than the eye can reach, and is interspersed 
with numerous little islands, some of which are 
clothed with vegetation alone, while others are co 
vered with batteries and habitations of different 
kinds. Numerous villages, farms, and planta 
tions, divided from each other by little sandy 
bays, rivulets, and forests, diversify and adorn the 
shores of this spacious harbour; while, in the 
distance, the eye rests on a lofty ridge of mountains 
rising in various fantastic forms, and clothed with 
wood to their very summits.] 

JANEIRO, a large and abundant river, which 
gives its name to the former province and city ; 
discovered by the Spanish pilot Juan Diaz de 
Sol is, on the first day of the year 1516 ; on which 
account he called it De Enero (Of January), and 
the Portuguese, who soon after became possessed 
of it, retained the meaning of the name in their 
own language. It rises in the mountains, and emp 
ties itself into the sea, forming a large and conve 
nient bay ; at the entrance of which are two forte, 
of which will be found a description in the pre 
ceding article. 

JANOSj a settlement and garrison of the pro 
vince of Taraumara, and kingdom of Nueva 
Vizcaya ; founded to restrain the incursions of the 
infidel Apaches Indians, in a spacious llanura six 
leagues in extent every way ; the soil of it being 
fertile, and producing plenty of wheat. This set 
tlement contains 100 families, a captain who re 
sides here, a lieutenant, a corporal, and a serjeant, 
with 47 soldiers ; there being good barracks for 
the same, as well as a house for the commandant, 
chaplain, &amp;c. ; also a good chapel, which is 
flanked with four towers, for its defence. It is in 
the extremity of the kingdom, in lat. 49 20 . 

JAPERIBUI, a river of the province and go 
vernment of Paraguay, which runs e. and enters 
the Parana, between the lluci and Roy. 

JAPOA, a town of the province and captainship 
of Paraiba in Brazil, on the shore of the river Pa- 
raiba, near its entrance into the sea. 

JAQUE, a river of the island of St. Domingo, 
which rises in the mountains of Ciboo, runs s. s. w. 
and enters the Neiba. 

JAQUEIIUA, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Lipcs, and archbishopric of 
Charcas, in Peru ; annexed to the curacy of its 
capital. 

JAQUEI DE LA ZORRA, a very lofty moun 
tain of the province and corregimiento of Caxatambo 
in Peru. 



328 



JAR 



JAQUEMEL, a town of the French, in their 
possessions of the island of S. Domingo, on the s. 
coast ; on the shore of a great bay, between the 
cape of its name and cape Marechal. 

JAQUEMKL. The aforesaid point or cape is on 
the same coast, between the cape Marechal and 
point Moral. 

["JAQUET, a river on the s. side of Chaleur 
bay, called by the Indians Boocmnkick, is about 
three leagues w. of Billi-down. Mere is a small 
salmon fishery.] 

JAQUi, a settlement of the province and cor- 
regimienio of Camana in Peru ; situate in an ex 
tensive valley, from whence it takes its name ; an 
nexed to the curacy of Acari. 

JAQUIN, a small island of the N. sea, near the 
s. coast of the island S. Domingo, in the part pos 
sessed by the French, between the point Pasqual 
and that of Diamante. 

JAQU1PEI, or COSTA DEL TOBACO, a pieceof 
the coast of the province and government of Buenos 
Ayres, on the shore of the river La Plata, between 
those of San Lorenzo and Santa Lucia. 

JAQUI RE, a small river of the province and 
captainship of San Vicente in Brazil ; which runs 
nearly due a?, and enters the source of the river 
Tiete. 

JARAGUAl, a settlement of barbarian In 
dians, of the province and government of Darien, 
and kingdom of Tierra Firme ; situate on the con 
fines of Cartagena, in a mountainous part, on the 
shore of the channel or arm of the river Gua- 
nare. * 

JARD1NES DE LA REYNA, some isles or 
shoals of rock near the s. coast of the island of 
Cuba, to the e. of the bay of Jagua. On these 
many vessels have been lost, and amongst the rest 
two ships of war, commanded by Mr. du Rochet, 
in 1727. 

JARDINES, some other shoals, with the name 
of Jardincs del Rey, to distinguish them from the 
ibrmer ; on the opposite coast of the same island. 

JARETA, a settlement of the head settlement of 
the district of Ocotopec, and alcaldia mayor of 
Villalta, in Nueva Espana, containing 39 families 
of Indians. Six leagues from its capital. 

JARIAPU, TRINIDAD DE, a settlement of the 
missions which were held by the Jesuits in the 
province of Apolabamba. 

JARRIA, a settlement of the province and 
cwregimiento ofTarma in Peru; annexed to the 
curacy of Parianchara. 

J ARUM A, a small river of the province and 
government of Paraguay, which runs into the 
Mend ay. 



JAY 

JASPE, a settlement of the province and king 
dom of Nueva Galicia ; situate near the capital 
Dnrango. 

JASKEGI, a settlement of Indians of the pro 
vince and colony of S. Carolina; on the shore of 
the river Albania. 

JASK1G1S, a settlement of Indians of the pro 
vince and colony of Georgia, on the shore of the 
river Apalachicola. 

JATEBO, a settlement of the missions which 
were held by the Jesuits in the province and go 
vernment of Cinaloa. 

[JAUFTIONI, a river in Louisiana, which 
runs a s. e. course, and empties into the Mississippi, 
in lat. 48 55 n. about 16 miles s. of the mouth of 
Fabiani river, and 7 n. of that of Oahaha river.] . 

JAUL1A, a river of the province and corregi- 
miento of Chachapoyas in the kingdom of Peru. 
It rises e. of the capital, and, turning its course a 
little, proceeds to s. e. 

JAUMAVE, SAN JUAN BAPTISTA DE, a set 
tlement and reduction of Indians of the missions 
which were held by the religious order of S. Fran 
cisco, in the district of the alcaldia mayor of 
Guadalcazar. It contains 15 families of Indians, 
besides those who dwell in a glen in its vicinity. 
It is 30 leagues from the head settlement of Tula. 

JAUMAVE, another settlement, in the province 
and government of Sierra Gorda, in the bay of 
Mexico and kingdom of Nueva Espana ; one of. 
the settlements which were founded by the Count 
of Sierra, Don Joseph de Escandon, colonel of mi 
litia of Queretaro, in 1748. 

JAURU, a river of the territory of Matogroso, 
in the province and country of Las Amazonas. It 
rises s. of the Villa-bella of Matagroso, runs e. 
and turning its course n. enters the Paraguay. 

JAUXA. See XAUXA. 

[JAY, a township in Cumberland county, dis 
trict of Maine, lately incorporated ; and thus 
named in honour of John Jay, governor of the 
state of New York.] 

[JAY S VALLEY, a settlement in the town of 
Katts-kill, state of New York, formerly called 
Minor-kill. . This name was changed in honour 
of the present governor of New York.l 

JAYACATEPEC, a settlement of the head 
settlement of the district of Ocotcpec, and alcaldia 
mayor of Nueva Espana. It contains 78 families 
of Indians, and is nine leagues e. of its capital. 

JAYAN, a small river of the island S. Domin 
go, on the coast of the c. head. It enters the sea 
in the great bay of Samana, between the river 
Guayabo and that of Culebras. 

JAYANCA, a settlement of the province and 



JAY 

corregimiento of Sana in Peru ; situate in a valley 
very beautiful and fertile in vine-stocks, from 
whence are gathered grapes annually to make 600 
jars of wine, at 23 fiascos (flasks) each. 

JAYAZA-YEUPETIRA, a small river of the 
province and government of Paraguay, which 
runs iff. and enters the Parana. 

JAYENA, a point on the peninsula Paraguana, 
of the province and government of Venezuela. 
It is that which looks to the coast, and forms one 
of the points of the entrance of the Little gulf. 

[JAYME, SAN, a city of the province of Va- 
rinas and captainship of Caracas. It is but a 
very short time that San Jayme has had the quali 
fication of a city, and consequently a cabildo. 
Its situation is more remarkable than agreeable, on 
aecount of its being near the conflux of many 
rivers. It stands on the s. shore of the river Gua- 
napola, about 17 miles from its confluence with 
the A pure. It has nothing to defend it from the 
annual inundations but a sand-hill, on which it is 
built. The inhabitants during three or four 
months in the year are so surrounded with water 
that they can neither enter or quit their houses but 
in boats. The ground is sandy and dry, and of 
fers to the cultivator no very tempting prospect. 
Pasture for cattle is all they obtain from it. The 
church is the only public building in the city, 
and this is perfectly in unison with the feeble re 
sources of the inhabitants of a soil so little fa 
voured by nature. The city of San Jayme is in 
lat. 7 49 . Long. 68 10 w. It is 180 miles 
s. by w. of Caracas.] 

[JAYNA, a canton, parish, and river, on the 
.?. side of the island of St. Domingo. The rivers 
Nigua and Jayna are about four leagues apart ; 
and between them lies an extensive and fertile 
plain, which was originally an abundant source 
of riches to the colonists. The quantity of pure 
gold that was dug from its cavities, its sugar, 
cocoa, indigo, and other plantations, paid duties 
to a greater amount than those now paid by all 
the Spanish part of the island put together. It 
was in this territory, and on the river Jayna, that 
the famous lump of gold was found, which the Spa 
nish writers say weighed 3600 Spanish dollars ; 
without mentioning many others of a remarkable size. 
The settlements Gamboa, Guayabal, Bonaventura, 
and Cagnabola, which last was formerly called 
the Whale, arc very inconsiderable. The whole 
employment of the people is breeding of cattle, or 
the washing of gold sand. Indigo grows wild 
here. The river Jayna is not fordable : it is crossed 
in canoes and skins at 250 fathoms from its mouth ; 
and the animals are obliged to swim across it. 

VOL. II. 



J E A 



329 



The coast lying between Jayna and St. Domingo 
is of rock, almost perpendicular, in general from 
six to 15 feet high. Opposite this coast are a 
number of shoals, each of about 40 fathoms wide. 
Towards the source of this river were the cele 
brated gold mines of St. Christopher s, near which 
Columbus erected the fort of that name. There 
are also rich silver mines on this river. The esta 
blishments in the plain of St. Rose, and those on 
the Jayna, ought to be looked upon as depending 
on the city of St. Domingo. They are reckoned 
to contain 2000 persons ; for the most part people 
of colour, free and slaves.! 

JAZEGUA, a river of the province and go 
vernment of Buenos Ayres in Peru ; which rises 
in the lake of its name, runs w. s.w. and enters 
the river Negro. 

JAZEGUA, a lake of the same province and go 
vernment as the former. 

JEAN, S. or S. JOHN, a lake of New France, 
or Canada, in the country of the Reckon^amiens 
Indians ; formed from the great river Decliarge. 

JEAN, S. a French fort in the province and 
country of the Iroquees Indians: on the shore of 
the channel or river which runs from the lake of 
these Indians into the river S. Lawrence. 

JEAN, S. a large river of the country or land of 
Labrador, which runs s. and enters the S. Law 
rence. 

JEAN, S. a large island, near the coast of Nova 
Scotia, and gulfofS. Lawrence, between that island 
and Royal island or Cape Britain. See ST. JOHN. 

JEAN, S. another, a small island in the same 
gulf, near the a&amp;gt;. coast of Newfoundland. 

JEAN, S. two others, small islands, near the 
shore of the river Demerary, in the province and 
government of Guayana. 

JEAN, S. a cape or point of land on the e. coast 
of the island of Newfoundland ; one of those 
which form the entrance of the bay of Notre 
Dame. 

JEAN, S. another cape or point of the e. coast 
of the island of Guadalupe, between the port of 
L Enfer and the isle of Corona. 

JEAN, S. another small island, near the coast of 
Georgia, between the rivers Ashley and Pompon. 

tip AN, S. a port of the 5. coast of the island of 
Newfoundland, between the bays of Despair and 
Fortune. 

[.JEAN RAIJET,, a town on the . w. part of the 
n. peninsula of the island of Domingo, in lat. 
19 55 n. Long. 75 42 w. from Paris. It is 
four leagues e. of the Mole, and 32 w. of cape 
Francois. Jean Rabel point forms the anchorage 
of that name, Avhich is good, safe, and easy to 
u u 



330 



J E K 



fetch. You can anchor in 15 fathoms. You 
may go farther in as far as eight fathoms ; but it 
is not safe, as the water shoals suddenly, and the 
ground is not so clean inside. The debarcadaire 
or lauding place is a very good one, even if there 
should be a swell ; it is under the fort, which is 
exceedingly well placed, and makes it a very 
good retreat from an enemy. The grounds hold 
well, and the only winds to fear are the n. and 
n. w.1 

JEDAKNE, a settlement of Indians of the 
province and colony of Pennsylvania, between 
the two arms of the Susquehannah. 

[JEFFERSON, Fort, in the N. W. Territory ; 
situate on the e. side of White river, 25 miles 
n. w. effort Knox, and 19 s. e. of fort Recovery ; 
it contains about 100 men. Lat. 39 50 n. Long. 
85 4 .] 

[JEFFERSON, a fort on the e. bank of the Mis 
sissippi, in Kentucky, near the mouth of the river 
Ohio.] 

[JEFFERSON, a town of Virginia; situate on the 
. side of Roanoke river, 19 miles below the Oeco- 
neachey islands. Lat 36 32 n.~] 

[JEFFEHSON, a county of Kentucky, bounded 
n. and w. by Ohio river, s. by Nelson county, and 
s. e. and e. by Shelby. It contains 4565 inhabi 
tants ; of whom 876 are slaves. Chief town, 
Louisville, at the rapids of the Ohio. Drinnon s 
lick, in this county, lies on the s. w. side of Ken 
tucky river, about 15 miles from its mouth ; and 
is separated from the famous medicinal spring by 
a small rivulet.] 

[JEFFERSON, a county in Tennessee, and in 
Hamilton district, which contained by the state 
census of 1795, 7840 inhabitants, of whom 776 
were slaves.] 

[JEFFERSON, anew county of Georgia; erected 
in 1796 from the counties of Burke and Warren, 
bordering on Ogeechec river, and Briar and Big 
creeks. Courts and elections are held at Louis 
ville for this county, a court-house not being yet 
erected.] 

JEFtEY S Ledge, a large sand-bank, near the 
coast of New England, in the district of the pro 
vince of Massachusetts, [between cape Ann and 
Casco bay, extending from the n. e. to the s. w. 
between lat. 43 10 and 43 37 30* n. and be 
tween long. 67 52 30" and 69 a).] 

JEKYL, Strait of, a small bay of the island of 
S. Simon, in the province and colony of Georgia, 
at the mouth of the rivjV Alatarnha, capable of 
containing 10 or 12 ships ; and for its defence a 
castle and battery have been built by General Ogle- 
thorpe. 



J E R 

JELOUZELL, a strait, which communicate* 
between the strait of Magellan and the S. sea, 
though but little known. 

JEMKEG, a fort, built by the English, in Nova 
Scotia or Acadia, on the shore of the river S. 
John and lake Freneus. 

[JENEYRO. See JANEIRO.] 
[JENKINTOWN, a village in Montgomcrj 
county, Pennsylvania, 10 miles n. of Philadel 
phia.] 

[JENUCHSHADEGA, an Indian village in 
Pennsylvania ; situate on the w. bank of Allo- 
ghany river, eight miles s. s. w. from that of Teu- 
shanushsong-goghta, and 14 s. e. from the outlet 
of Chataughque lake.] 

JEONA, a small river of the province and 
captainship of Seara in Brazil, which runs n. n. e. 
and enters the Xingu. 

[JEREMIE, a jurisdiction, town, and cape, 
within the bite or bay of Leogane, and on the .9. 
peninsula of the island of St. Domingo. This is 
the westernmost jurisdiction of the island, con 
tains two parishes, and is celebrated for the excel 
lency of its soil, but particularly for the culture 
of coffee. Its exports from Jan. 1, 1789, to Dec. 
31, of the same year, were as follow : 14201b. 
white sugar; 247,7601b. brown sugar; 5,440,6461b. 
coffee; ^4,786lb. cotton; 5981b. indigo; and va 
rious articles to the value of 297 livres. The ex 
portation duty on these productions amounted to 
13,328 dollars six cents. The town stands on the 
w. side of the bay and at the mouth of a brook, m. 
league s. by w. of point Jerernie, 1 1 due n. of Port - 
a-Piement on the s. side of the peninsula, and 
nearly eight leagues e. of cape Dame Marie. 
Point Jeremie lies in lat. 18 42 30" w. Long. 
76 32 w. from Paris.] 

[JEREMYSQUAM, an island in Lincoln 
county, district of Maine, which, with Folly 
island, form the mouth of Sheepscott river in Wis- 
casset bay.] 

JEREVIANA, a small river of the province 
and government of Buenos Ayres, which enters 
the Cavacuan. 

JEREUNGA, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Caxamarquilla in Peru ; situate 
in the peninsula formed by the rivers Ucayale 
and Perene. 

[JER1CO, a township in Chittenden county, 
Vermont, lies s. e. of Essex, and n. e. of Willis- 
ton, and separated from the latter by Onion river, 
and contains 381 inhabitants.] 

[JEIUCO, a post-town of New York; situated 
in Tioga county, between Chenengo river and the 
e. branch of Susquehannah.] 

2 



J E S 

JERICO-ACOARA. See CERICUNCUA. 

[JEROM, Fort ST. a fort on the s. side of the 
island of St. Domingo, on the sea-side, and near 
the road from the city of St. Domingo, and in the 
canton of Jayna. It is not more than a forti 
fied redoubt in masonry; but it is constructed 
with art."] 

[JERSEY" FIELD, a settlement iu Norway 
township, in Herkemer county, New York, on the 
f. e. side of Canada creek.] 

[JEKSEY. See NEW JERSEY.] 

[JERUSALEM, a township in Ontario county, 
New York. Of its inhabitants, 113 are electors. 
The compact part of it forms a handsome town ; 
situated on the w. side of Seneca lake, and con 
tains about 50 families, the followers of Jemima 
Wilkinson. Tt is 30 miles n. e. by n. of Bath, 
and 16 s. s. w. of Geneva.] 

[JERUSALEM, or FUNK S Town, a town of Ma 
ryland ; situated in Washington county, on An- 
IJetam creek, about 2{ miles s. w. of Elizabeth 
town. It contains about 50 dwellings and a Ger 
man church.] 

[JERUSALEM, OLD. See FALLEN City.] 

[JERUYO, a mountain, situated in the valley 
of Urecho, in Mexico or New Spain, is a great 
curiosity. Before the year 1760, there was no 
thing of it but a small hill, where there was a 
sugar plantation. But on the 29th of September, 
1760, it burst with furious shocks, and entirely 
ruined the sugar works and the neighbouring village 
of Guacana ; and from that time has continued to 
f mit fire and burning rocks, which have formed 
themselves into three high mountains, whose cir 
cumference was nearly six miles in 1766. The 
ashes at the irruption were forced to the distance 
of J50 miles. In the city of Valladolid, 60 miles 
distant, it rained ashes in such abundance that 
they were obliged to sweep the yards of their houses 
two or three times during the day.] 

JESUS, EL NOMBRE DE, a settlement of the 
province and government of Mainas in the king 
dom of Quito ; situate on the shore of the river 
Napo. 

JESUS, another settlement, in the province and 
eorregimiento of Guamalies and kingdom of Peru. 

JESUS, another, of the province and corregi- 
miento of Caxamarquilla in Peru. 

JESUS, another, with the additional title of 
Maria, in the head settlement of the district and 
ulcaldia mayor of Aguas Calientes in Nueva 
Espana; annexed to the curacy of its capital, 
from whence it lies two leagues and a half n. w. 

JESUS, another, of the missions which were held 
by the Jesuits in the province of Nayarith, and 



331 

kingdom of Nueva Galicia, four leagues e. of La 
Mesa. 

JESUS, another, a reduction of Indians of the 
province of Coaguila ; founded in the time of the 
archbishop and viceroy of Mexico, D. Juan An 
tonio Vizarron, on an arm of the river called S. 
Domingo, 2 &amp;gt; leagues n. w. of the garrison of San 
Juan del Rio Grande. 

JESUS, another, with the surname of Los Coro- 
nados, of the missions which were held by the 
Jesuits in the province and government of Mai 
nas. of the kingdom of Quito. 

JESUS, another, of the island of Joanes or 
Marajo, on the coast of Brazil, on the e. part, at 
the entrance of the arm of the river Maranon. 

JESUS, another, of the missions which were held 
by the Jesuits in the province and government of 
Paraguay ; on the shore of the river Parana, about 
24 miles n. from Candelario, in lat. 27 2 36" s. and 
long. 56 5 6" w. 

JESUS, another, called San Felipe de Jesus, in 
the province of California ; on a long strip of land 
in the interior of the gulf, near the mouth of the 
river Colorado or Del Norte. 

JESUS, another, with the addition of Marca, in 
the kingdom of Brazil ; on the shore of a river 
which enters the Iguay, between the settlements of 
Sari Joaquin and San Christoval. 

JESUS, another, with the same surname as the 
former, in the province and government of Tucu- 
rmin, of the district of the jurisdiction of Cordoba, 
on the shore of the former river. 

JESUS, another, with the same surname, in the 
province and correzimiento of Caxamarquilla in 
Peru. 

JESUS, a town of the head settlement of the dis 
trict of the river Verde, in the alcaldia mayor of 
San Luis de Potosi, and kingdom of Nueva 
Espana. It contains 1845 families of Indians, 
Spaniards, Muslecs, and Mulattoes, divided into 
the town and the many cultivated estates and farms 
in its district. It has a convent of the religious 
order of San Agustin, and is half a league from 
its head settlement. 

JESUS, another town, of the province and corre- 
gimiento of Itata in the kingdom of Chile, between 
the rivers Itata and the lake of Lonquen. 

[JESUS, a small island lying eight deg. due n. of 
the New Hebrides island, and 1450 leagues w. of 
the coast of Peru, in lat. 6 50 s. Long. 165 
e. from Paris. Disco vered by Mendana, Jan. 10th, 
1567, inhabited by a copper-coloured and Mu 
latto race of men.] 

JESUS, a fort, called De Jesus, Maria, and 
Joseph, of the province and captainship of Rey in 
u u 2 



332 



J I R 



Brazil ; situate on tlie sea-coast, close to the settle 
ment of San Pedro, and near the mouth of the river 
of this name. 

JESUS, a river of the province and government 
of Buenos Ayres, with the surname of Maria. It 
runs n. and enters the Uruguay, on the side of the 
river San Ignacio. 

JESUS, a cape or extremity of the s. coast of the 
strait of Magellan ; one of those which form its en 
trance by theN. sea. It is also called Del Espiritu 
Santo. The savages who inhabit it have a cus 
tom of making fires, which are always to be seen by 
vessels at sea. 

JEVAU, a settlement of Indians of the province 
and corrtgimtetito of Maule in the kingdom of 
Chile, on the shore and at the mouth of the river 
Mataquino. 

JIBAROS, CONCEPCION DE LOS, a settlement 
of the province and government of Mainas in the 
kingdom of Quito; a reduction of Indians of this 
nation made by the missions of the Jesuits. 

JICIIINALE, a settlement of Indians of the 
kingdom of Chile; situate in the interior of the 
same, on the shore of the river Como-Leuvu. 

JIPIJAPA, a settlement of the district of Puerto 
Viejo, in the province and government of Guaya 
quil and kingdom of Quito ; situate in a llanura 
very fertile in fruit and tobacco. 

JIRAMENA, a settlement of the province and 
ffovernrnent of San Juan de los Llanos in the 
Nuevo Reyno de Granada ; situate between two 
rivers, which unite to enter the Meta. 

JIRARAS, a barbarous nation of Indians of the 
Nuevo Hey no de Granada; e. of the mountains of 
Bogota. Some of them have been reduced to the 
faith, and to a settlement in the missions of the 
Orinoco established by the Jesuits. 

J1RON, SAN JUAN, or DEL Rio DEL Ono, a 
city, the capital of the government, in the Nuevo 
Reyno de Granada ; founded by its governor, 
Captain D. Francisco Montilla de los Rios. It is 
of a very hot temperature, as being on a sandy 
spot on the shore of the river Oro, and close to a 
mountain. It is small, but the houses arc very 
good, particularly the parish-church, which con 
tains two separate chapels, which are chapels of 
ease, called Nuestra Senora de las Nievas, and El 
IJurnilladero. It produces much tobacco, cco, 
cotton, sugar-cane, woven stuffs of various kinds, 
fruits, and the richest gold in its rivers ; but it is 
much infested with the venereal disease, a curse 
with which even the brutes are afflicted. It con 
tains 500 housekeepers, who arc for the most part 
well looking ; the women are very handsome, and, 
together with the men, are affable and docile., though 



J O A 

of a litigious disposition; and thus on the slightest 
grounds broils and divisions will arise betwixt one 
family and another. Fourteen leagues n. w. of 
Santa Fc. 

JIRON, a settlement of the province and corrr- 
gimiento of Cuenea in the kingdom of Quito; to 
the n. of it is a very luxuriant estate, called El 
Portete. 

JIRON, a river of the same province and king 
dom as the former settlement. It rises s. of the 
city, and runs w. towards the S. sea, entering it in 
the gulf of Guayaquil. 

JOACHIN, S. a settlement of the province of 
Barcelona, and government of Cumana ; one of 
those under the charge of the religious observers of 
S. Francisco of the missions of Piritu, to the n. of 
the Mesa of Guanipa. 

JOACHIN, S. another settlement, of the missions 
which were held by the Jesuits in the province of 
Topia, and kingdom of Nueva Vizcaya ; situate in 
the middle of the sierra of that name, on the shore 
of the river Piastla. 

JOACHIN, S. another, of the province and go 
vernment of Mainas in the kingdom of Quito ; one 
of those established by the missions of the Jesuits. 

JOACHIN, S. another, of the missions which 
were held by the Jesuits in the Rio Orinoco, and 
Nuevo Reyno de Granada, on the shore of the 
river Meta, on the w. side, and 25 leagues from. 
Santa Teresa. 

JOACIIIN, S. another, of the province and go 
vernment of Moxos, on the shore of the river of its 
name, in the part where it enters the Guanapiare. 

JOACHIN, S. another, of the province and 
country of Las Amazonas, in the part possessed by 
the Portuguese ; a reduction of Indians of the mis 
sions held by the Carmelites ; situate on the shore 
of a large lake or pool formed by different arms of 
the river Madera. 

JOACHTN, S. another, of the province and go 
vernment of Paraguay, on the shore of the river 
Ibiquey-guazu. 

JOACHIN, S. another, of the same province and 
government as the former ; a reduction of Tobas 
Indians, made by the missions of the Jesuits. It 
also bears the surname of Tobas, and stands on the 
shore of the river Yaruma. 

JOACHIN, S. another, of the province and go 
vernment of Tucuman, in the jurisdiction and dis 
trict of the capital ; founded by D. Joaquin de 
Espinosa, governor of the same province. 

JOACHIN, S. another, in the kingdom of Brazil; 
situate amidst some mountains, on the shore of a 
river which enters the Iguay. 

JOACHIN, S. another, of the French, in Canada, 



J O H 

on the shore of the river S. Lawrence, between the 
Chateau and cape Tourmente. 

JOACHIN, S. another, with the surname of Santa 
Ana, a reduction of Indians of tlie missions which 
were held by the Jesuits in the province of Naya- 
rith, and kingdom of Nucva Galicia. Ten leagues 
e. n. e. of the settlement of La Mesa. 

JOACHIN, S.a river of the province and govern 
ment of Moxos in the kingdom of Quito, which 
runs n. n. w. and enters the Baures or Guaznmiri. 

JOANA, a small river of the province and cap 
tainship of Todos Santos in Brazil. It rises near 
the coast, runs s. s. e. and enters the sea through 
the rivers Paroque and Ponica. 

JOANES, a settlement of the island of this 
name, or De Marajo, as it is also called, on the 
coast of Brazil ; situate to the e. between the settle 
ments of Gasa and La Concepcion. See MA 
RAJO. 

JOBO, a settlement of the jurisdiction and go 
vernment of Neiba in the Nuevo Key no de Gra 
nada ; on the shore of the river Bache, near the 
Grande de la Magdalena. 

JOCOL1, a settlement of the province and cor- 
regimientoof Cnyo in the kingdom of Chile; n. of 
the city of Mendoza, on the skirt of the Sierra 
Blanca. 

JOCOTEPEC, a settlement of the head settle 
ment of the district of Tututepec, and alcaldia 
mayor of Xicayan, in Nueva Espana. It is of a 
mild temperature, contains 62 families of Indians, 
and is 14 leagues s. w. of its head settlement. 

JOCOTEPEC, another settlement, in the head set 
tlement of the district and alcaldia mayor of Tlajo- 
mulco in the same kingdom ; situate in a fertile 
and beautiful valley, abounding in all vegetable 
productions and cattle ; on the shore of the great 
lake or sea of Chapala. It has a convent of the 
religions order of S. Francisco, and is to the s. of 
its capital. 

JODO, a small river of the province and go 
vernment of Mainas in the kingdom of Quito. 
According to Bellin, in his description of Guayana, 
it is an arm of the Coquera, which communicates 
with the Orinoco and the Iza or Putumayo. 

JOGG1N, a small river of Nova Scotia or Aca- 
dia, which runs n. and enters the port of Anna 
polis. 

JOHN, S. an island of the gulf of St. Lawrence, 
at the entrance of the river of this name. It has 
Nova Scotia to the s. and to the w. and Cape Bre 
ton to the e. Its extent is considered more than 
100 miles from e. to w. and its width 26 from n. 
to s. It has in it various convenient ports for 
fishing, abounds in timber, and is so fertile in 



J O H 



333 



every thing that the French, when they possessed 
it, called it the granary of Canada; supplying 
themselves from thence not only with wheat, but 
neat cattle and pigs. When it was taken by the 
English, there were in it upwards of 10,000 head 
of cattle, and some of the farmers used to gather 
12,000 bushels of wheat annually. It has several 
rivers, in which are caught salmon and other sorts 
of fish ; and on its coasts is fine shell-fish. It is 
divided into three counties or districts, which are 
named King s, Queen s, and Prince s, in the which 
are 14 parishes, containing 27 townships, which in 
all make 1,363,400 acres, the contents of the 
island. The chief towns besides the capital are, 
Charlotte-town, George-town, Princes-town, Hil- 
lisborongh-town, Poumal-town, and Maryborough- 
town, &amp;c. 

This island is annexed to the government of 
NOVA SCOTIA, which see. It lies between hit. 45 
46 and 47 10 n. and between lone;. 44 22 and 
46 32 w. 

JOHN, S. another island, one of the Virgins ; 12 
leagues e. of that of Puertorico, and t\vo 5. of 
S.Thomas . It is five miles long and one wide; 
is that which has the best water of all ; and even 
its port is reputed to be better than that of 
S.Thomas . The English call it Crawl-bay. As 
it has very little good soil, its cultivation and pro 
ductions are inconsiderable. 

JOHN, S. a city, the capital of the island An 
tigua, on the w. coast. It is of a regular figure, 
with a good port, the entrance of which is de 
fended by fort James. It is the residence of the 
governor-general of the Leeward Caribee islands, 
and the place where the assembly meets. It carries 
on a good trade with the other islands, and was 
most rich and flourishing when it suffered much 
by an hurricane in 1772 ; its loss being estimated 
at 400,000/. 

[By way of accession to this calamity, it must be 
recorded, that this unfortunate capital was nearly 
destroyed by fire on the 17th of August 1769 ; 
upwards of 260 houses being consumed, besides 
wharfs, cranes, &amp;c.] 

JOHN, S. another city, of the island of Barba- 
does, one of the Windward isles ; and situate in 
one of the extremities of it. 

[JoiiN, BAYOUK OF, ST. a little creek which 
furnishes a very easy communication from New 
Orleans to W. Florida. It is navigable for vessels 
drawing about four feet water six miles. up from 
the lake Ponchartrain, where there is a landing 
place, at which vessels load and unload : this is 
about two miles from the town. The entrance of 
the Bayouk of St. John is defended by a battery oi 



334 



J O II 



five or six cannon. There are some plantations on 
the Bayouk, and on the road from thence to New 
Orleans.] 

[JOHN S Island, in S. Carolina, lies s. w. of 
Charlestown harbour, divided from James island 
by Stono river, which forms a convenient and safe 
harbour.] 

[JOHN s College, ST. in Maryland, is situated 
in the city of Annapolis; was instituted in 1784, to 
have 24 trustees, with power to keep up the suc 
cession by supplying vacancies, and to receive an 
annual income of 9000/. It has a permanent fund 
of 1750/. a year, out of the moneys arising from 
marriage licences, fines, and forfeitures on the 
w. shore. This college, with Washington col 
lege at Chestertown, constitute one university, 
named " The University of Maryland." The 
convocation of the university of Maryland, who 
are to frame the laws, preserve uniformity of man 
ners and literature in the colleges, confer the higher 
degrees, determine appeals, &amp;c.] 

[JOHN S, ST. one of the chief towns of New 
foundland island ; situated on the e. coast, six 
miles n. w. of cape Spear, and 18 s. e. of cape St. 
Francis. Lat. 47 32 n. Long. 52 21 w. It 
lies on the bay of the same name. Its harbour is 
one of the best in the island, and has from 10 to 
17 fathoms water up to King s wharf, which is a 
little to the n. w. of the Old fort, at the bottom of 
the town, and is a mile from the mouth of the har 
bour. A mile further is the mouth of Castor river, 
in which distance there is from 14 to four fathoms 
of water. On the s. side of the river is King s 
tvharf, an hospital, and a watering place. Near 
these are the hills called the High Lands of St. 
John s.] 

[JOHN S, ST. a bay and island on the w. coast of 
Newfoundland island, in the gulf of St. Lawrence, 
at the s. w. end of the straits of Belleisle.] 

[JOHN S River, ST. in E.Florida, rises in or near 
a large swamp in the heart of E. Florida, and pur 
sues a n. course, in a broad navigable stream, which 
in several places spreads into broad bays or lakes ; 
of which lake George is the chief. Vessels that 
draw nine or ten feet water may navigate safely 
through the w. channel into St. John s river as far 
as Lake GEORGE; which see. The bar at the 
mouth is liable to shift. It is 10 j leagues n. of St. 
Augustine.] 

[JOHN S River, LITTLE ST. in\V. Flordia, falls 
into Apalache bay, about 10 miles c. of Apalache 
river. It is said to be the clearest and purest of 
any in America, is about 200 yards broad, and 
about 15 or 20 feet deep at the town of Tala- 
hasochte. The swamp called Ouaquaphenogaw 



J O H 

is said to be its source, which is 100 miles by land 
from Talahasochte, and following its windings, 
from the sea 200 miles. The Indians and traders 
say it has no branches or tributaries, which fall 
into it ; but that it is fed by great springs which 
break out through the banks.] 

[JOHN S, ST. is the largest river in the British 
province of New Brunswick. From its mouth on 
the n. side of the bay of Fundy, to its main source, 
in a straight direction, is about 195 miles. The 
tide flows 80 or 90 miles up this river. It is navi 
gable for sloops of 50 tons 60 miles, and for boats 
200. Its general course from its source is e. s. e. 
It furnishes the greatest plenty of salmon, bass, 
and sturgeon ; and is the common route to Quebec. 
About a mile above the city of St. John s is the 
only entrance into this river. It is about 80 or 
100 yards wide, and about 400 yards in length ; 
called the Falls of the river. It being narrow, and 
a ridge of rocks running across the bottom of the 
channel, on which are not above 17 feet of water, 
it is not sufficiently spacious to discharge the fresh 
waters of the river above. The common tides 
flowing here about 20 feet, the waters of the river, 
at low water, are about 12 feet higher than the 
waters of the sea ; at high water, the waters of the 
sea are about five feet higher than those of the 
river ; so that in every tide there are two lalls, one 
outwards and one inwards. The only time of pass 
ing with safety is at the time when the waters of 
the river are level with the waters of the sea, which 
is twice in a tide, and continues not more than 20 
minutes each time. At other times it is either im 
passable or extremely dangerous ; resembling the 
passage of Hell-gate near New York. The banks 
of this river, enriched by the annual freshets, are 
excellent land. About 30 miles from its mouth 
commences a fine level country of rich intervale 
and meadow lands, well clothed with timber and 
wood, such as pine, beech, elm, maple, and wal 
nut. It has many tributary streams, which fall 
into it on each side, among which are the Oro- 
mocto river, by which the Indians have a com 
munication with Passamaquoddy; the Nashwach 
and Madamkiswick, on which are rich intervales 
that produce all kinds of grain in the highest per 
fection. This noble river, in its numerous and 
extensive branches, waters and enriches a large 
tract of excellent country, a great part of which is 
settled and under improvement. The up-lands, 
in general, are covered with a fine growth of tim 
ber, sucli as pine and spruce, hemlock, and hard 
wood, principally beech, birch, maple, and some 
ash. The pines on this river are the largest to be 
met with in British America, and afford a consi- 



J O H 

derable supply of masts, some from 20 to 30 inches 
in diameter, for the British navy.] 

[JOHN S, Sr. then, westernmost town in Sussex 
county, Delaware, is situated at the head of the 
middle branch of Nanticoke river, about 23 miles 
n. e. of Vienna in Maryland, and 22 s. by w. of 
Dover.] 

[JOHN S, ST. a town and fort in Lower Ca 
nada, situated on the w. bank of Chambly river, 
about 18 miles to the n. of lake Cham plain, a few 
miles s. of Chamblee, 20 miles s. e. of Montreal. 
It has been established as the sole port of entry and 
clearance for all goods imported from the interior 
of the United States into Canada, by an ordinance 
published by the executive council of Lower Ca 
nada, the 7th of July 1796. It is 97 miles n. of 
Ticonderoga, and was taken by General Mont 
gomery, in November 1775. Lat. 45 19 n. 
Long. 72 59 a&amp;gt;.] 

[JOHN, ST. a lake in Lower Canada, which 
receives rivers from every direction, and sends its 
waters through Saguenai river into the St. Law 
rence, at T adousac. It is about 25 miles wide and 
34 long.] 

[JOHN S, ST. a small island in the W. Indies, 
belonging to Denmark, n. of St. Croix, and s. of 
Tortola, to which last it is very near. It is noted 
only for its fine harbour, which is said to be suf 
ficient to contain in safety the whole British navy. 
It has a number of salt ponds, which, however, 
are no evidence of its fertility.] 

[JOHN, ST. or JUAN DE PUERTO Rico, the 
capital of the island of Puerto Rico, in the W. 
Indies. See PUERTO Rico.] 

[JOHN, ST. See JUAN, SAN.] 

[JOHN S BERKLEY, ST. a parish of S. Carolina, 
in Charlestown district, containing 5922 inhabi 
tants, of whom 692 are whites, and 5170 ure 
slaves.] 

[JOHN S COLLETON, ST. a parish of S. Caro 
lina, in Charlestown district, containing 5312 in 
habitants, of whom 585 are whites, and 4705 
slaves.] 

[JOHNSBURY, ST. a township in Caledonia 
county, in Vermont, bounded s. no. by Danville, 
and has 143 inhabitants.] 

[JOHNSON Fort, in S.Carolina, lies on the 
n. e. side of James s island, and s. of the city of 
Charlestown. It stands at the entrance of the 
harbour, and by it no vessel can pass unless the 
master or mate make oath that no malignant dis 
temper is on board. It is guarded by 120 men.] 

[JOHNSON S Landing Place is on O-yong- 
wongyeh creek, about four miles e. of fort Nia 
gara.] 



J O L 



335 



[JOHNSON, a county of N. Carolina, in New- 
bcrn district, bounded s. e. by Glasgow, . by 
Franklin and Wayne counties, and s. by Sampson. 
It contains 5634 inhabitants, of whom 1329 are 
slaves.] 

[JOHNSONSBOROUGH, a post-town of 
New Jersey, JO miles from Sussex court 
house.] 

[JOHNSTON, a township in Providence coun 
ty, Rhode island, w. of the town of Providence, 
having 1320 inhabitants.] 

[JOHNSTON Fort, or JOHNSON Fort, in N. 
Carolina, stands on the w. bank of cape Fear 
river, opposite to the island on the sea-coast whose 
s. point is cape Fear.] 

[JOHNSTON, a township in Franklin county, in 
Vermont. It contains 93 inhabitants.] 

[JOHNSTOWN, a post-town and the capital 
of Montgomery county, New York, situated on 
the n. bank of Mohawk river, 24 miles n. w. of 
Schenectady. The compact part of the town is a 
little back from the river, and contains about 70 
houses, a Presbyterian and an Episcopal church, 
a court-house and gaol. In the township 593 of 
the inhabitants are electors. Caghnawaga is a 
parish or district of Johnstown, 26 miles above 
Schenectady on the river. Settlements have been 
made here for about 80 years. Here stand the 
dwelling-house, barn, and out-houses (all of stone) 
formerly occupied by Sir William Johnson. 
This settlement was mostly destroyed by the 
British in the year 1780, who were joined by a 
party of Indians and others, under the command 
of Sir William Johnson. In this action it is as 
serted, that Sir William evinced a want of feeling 
which would have disgraced a savage. The peo 
ple destroyed in this expedition were his old neigh 
bours, with whom he had formerly lived in the 
habits of friendship. His estate was among them, 
and the inhabitants had always considered him as 
their friend. These unfortunate people, after see 
ing their houses and property consumed, were 
hurried, such as could walk, into cruel captivity ; 
those who could not, fell victims to the tomahawk 
and scalping knife.] 

JOLOJOLO, a settlement of the province and 
government of Cartagena ; situate in the moun 
tains of the district of the town of Maria; one of 
the new populations founded in 1776, by Go 
vernor Don Francisco Pimienta, situate on the 
side of the swamp of Maria. 

JOLLY, a very lofty mountain of the land or 
country of Labrador, on the shore of the gulf of 
S. Lawrence, opposite the island of Anticosti, be 
tween the rivers Natachoven and Nasquirou. 



336 



J O R 



JOLLY, another mountain, in the island of Cay 
enne, on the skirts of which the French have a 
settlement. 

JOLLY, a small port of the coast of Nova Scotia, 
fit only for small vessels, as being diflicult of en 
trance. 

JOMGOBITO, a settlement of the province 
and government of Pastes, in the jurisdiction and 
district of the presidency of Quito. 

[JONAS S Sound, the most n. inlet on the w. 
coast of Sir Thomas Smith s bay, lying near the 
arctic circle, in lat. 76.] 

JONES, a city of the county of Lancaster in 
the province and colony of Pennsylvania ; situate 
on the shore of the river Swatawro Creek, which 
enters the Susquehanriah. Nine miles zo. of the 
city of Tuspehocken, five n. of Lebanon, and 21 
&amp;lt;?. of Esther. 

Jo NES, a settlement of the island of Barbadoes ; 
situate on the coast of the t. part. 

JONES, a river of the province and colony of 
Delaware, which runs n. and then turning KJ. 
enters the sea in the bay of this name, making a 
bend by which it forms an island. 

[JONES S Town, in Pennsylvania. See WIL- 

L1AMSBURGH.] 

[JONES, Cape. See LOOKOUT Cape.] 
[JONES S PLANTATION, in Lincoln county, 
Maine, was incorporated by the name of Harlem, 
in February 1796. It is 19 miles n. e. of Hallo- 
well, 47 from Pownalborough, and 213 n. e. by 
n. of Boston. It contains 262 inhabitants.] 

[JONES S Ford, on Brandywine creek, is five 
six miles above Chad s ford, in Pennsylvania.] 

[JONESBOROUGH, a post-town, and chief 
town of Washington district in Tennessee, is the 
seat of the district and county courts. It has but few 
houses, having been but lately established. It is 
26 miles from Greenville, 101 from Knoxville, 40 
from Abingdon in Virginia, and 627 from Phila 
delphia.] 

[JoNESBORouoii, the cliit f town of Cam- 
tlen county in Edenton district, North Carolina. 
It contains a court-house and a tew dwelling- 
houses.] 

JOPA, a settlement arid head settlement of the 
district and alcaldia mayor of Villalta in Nueva 
Espana ; of a cold temperature, containing 117 
families of Indians, and being 10 leagues from its 
capital. 

JOPA, another settlement, of the county of 
Baltimore, of the province arid colony of Mary 
land ; situate on the shore of the bay of Chesa- 
peak, at the mouth of u small river which runs 
into the said bay. 



or 



J O R 

JOPEHUE, a settlement of Indians of the 
kingdom of Chile ; situate near the coast, on the 
shore of the river Imperial. 

JOQUEL, a port of the coast of the province 
and government of Yucatan. 

JORADA, a small river of the province and 
government of Guayana. It enters the Orinoco 
by the e. side, close to the settlement and rapid 
stream of Carichana. 

JORDAN, a river of the province and govern 
ment of Florida, which runs s. and enters the sea 
between the river of Las Animas and the bay of 
Panzacola. 

[JORE, a village and mountain in the Che 
rokee country. The mountain is said to be the 
highest in the Cherokee country, and through 
which the Tennessee river forces its waters. The 
Indian village called Jore is situated in a beauti 
ful lawn, many thousand feet higher than the ad 
jacent country. Here is a little grove of the 
casine ?/apon, called by the Indians the beloved 
tree. They are very careful to keep this tree 
pruned and cultivated, and drink very strong 
infusions of the leaves, buds, and tender branches 
of this plant. It is venerated by the Creeks, and 
all the s. maritime nations of Indians.] 

JORGE, S. a head settlement of the district 
and parish of the island of Barbadoes. 

JOKGE, S. a bay on the s. coast and w. head 
of the island of S. Domingo, on the side of the bay 
of S. Luis. 

JORGE, S. a bayou the coast which lies be 
tween the river La Plata and the strait of Magel 
lan. It is in the middle of the cape of its name 
and of that of Matas. Lat. 46 s. 

JORGE, S. another settlement, of the province 
and corregimiento of Caxarnarca in Peru ; annex 
ed to the curacy of Asuncion. 

JORGE, S. another, of the province and cap 
tainship of Los Ilheos in Brazil ; situate on the 
shore of the river and port of Los Ilheos. 

JORGE, S. another, with the surname of Pinto, 
in the province and captainship of Paraiba in the 
same kingdom ; situate on the coast, between the 
river Morgangape and the Carnaratuba. 

JORGE, S. a river of the province and govern 
ment of Popayan in the Nuevo Key no do Gra 
nada, which rises in the valley of Bochicono, runs 
w. and enters the Patia. 

JORGE, S. another, in (lie province and colony 
of Maryland. [See GEORGE S River, ST.] 

JORGE, S. another, in the province and corre- 
gimiento of Coquimbo, and kingdom of Chile, 
by the side of the river Limari, where it runs into 
the sea. 



JOS 

JORGE, S. an island, with the surname of 
Grcgo, near the coast of the province and cap 
tainship of San Vicente in Brazil, between the 
island of Los Ingenios and that of Groeders. 

JORGE, S. another, of the N. sea, one of the 
Bermudas, and the principal of them. 

JORGE, S. an abundant river of the province 
and government of Cartagena in the Nuevo Reyno 
de Granada, which rises from an arm of the 
Grande de la Magdalena, and encircling in its 
course (he whole province, enters the sea near the 
port of Tolu. 

JORGE, S. a cape or point of land on the coast 
which lies between the river La Plata and the 
strait of Magellan ; one of those which form the 
bay of its name. 

JORGE, S. another, on the n. coast of the island 
Jamaica, between that of Morante and the Puerto 
Nuevo. 

JORGE, S. a mountain, called the Morro, on 
the coast of the province and corregimiento of 
Atacama and S. sea, in Peru. 

[JORGE, S. See St. GEORGE.] 

JOR1S, S. a port of the Dutch, in the island of 
Curazao. 

JOROCOBAS, a town of the province and 
captainship of San Vicente in Brazil; situate at 
the source of the river Tiete or Aiicmbi. 

JOSARI, or SOSARI, as others have it, a 
small river of the province and captainship of 
Seara in Brazil, which runs n. and enters the 
sea between the Guasipuna and the Topacuro. 

JOSEF, or S. JOSEPH, a settlement of the 
province and government of Guayana, one of 
those under the care of the Capuchins of Cataluna ; 
situate on the shore of the river Caroni. 

JOSEF, S. another, of the missions which were 
held by the Jesuits in California ; situate on the 
coast at the cape of S. Lucas. Here, in 1734, 
Father Nicolas Tamarel, a Jesuit and native of 
Sevilla, suffered martyrdom. 

JOSEF, S. another, of the missions which were 
held by the Jesuits in the province ofGuaira, and 
government of Paraguay ; situate on the shore of 
the river Ibay. It was destroyed by the Portu 
guese of San Pablo, so that nothing but the ruins 
remain. 

JOSEF, S. another, of the province and corre 
gimiento of Lipes in Peru ; annexed to the curacy 
called Yanaconas, in the capital. 

JOSEF, S. another, of the province and corre 
gimiento of Jaen de Bracamoros in the kingdom 
of Quito. 

JOSEF, S. another, of the province and cor- 

VOL. II. 



JOS 



337 



rcgimiento of Sana in Peru ; annexed to the curacy 
of Xequetepeque. 

JOSEF, S. another, of the province and corre 
gimiento of Canta in the same kingdom; an 
nexed to the curacy of San Buenaventura. 

JOSEF, S. another, of the head settlement of the 
district and alcaldia mayor of Periban in Nueva 
Espaiia ; annexed to the curacy of Petabamba. 
It contains 22 families of Indians, and is distant 
half a league to the n. of the latter curacy. 

JOSEF, S. another, of the head settlement of the 
district of Atoyaque, and alcaldia mayor of Xi- 
cayan, in the same kingdom. It contains 100 
families of Indians, who occupy themselves in 
cultivating cochineal, tobacco, cotton, and seeds, 
and is 10 leagues w. with an inclination to n. of 
its head settlement. 

JOSEF, S. another, of the head settlement and 
alcaldia mayor of Analco in the same kingdom. 
It contains 25 families of Indians, who live by sell 
ing wheat, maize, fruit, and seeds, at the city of 
Guadalaxara. It is one league n. of its capital. 

JOSEF, S. another, of the head settlement and 
alcaldia mayor of Acaponcta in the same kingdom. 
Haifa league w, of its capital. 

JOSEF, S. another, of the head settlement and 
alcaldia mayor of Tepalitlan in the kingdom of 
Nueva Galicia. Two leagues n. of its capital. 

JOSEF, S. another, of the missions which were 
held by the Jesuits, in the province of Tepcguana 
and kingdom of NuevaVizcaya, on the shore of the 
river Las Nasas. 

JOSEF, S. another, of the missions which were 
held by the Jesuits, in the province of Taraumara 
and kingdom of Nueva Vizcaya. Three leagues 
s. of the settlement and real of the mines of S. 
Agustin. 

JOSEF, S. another, of the province and govern 
ment of Venezuela ; situate n. e. of the mountains 
of the Guajiros Indians, and near to them. 

JOSEF, S. another, of the province and govern 
ment of Cumana, on the coast of the gulf of Ca- 
riaco, on the e. 

JOSEF, S. another, of the province and govern 
ment of Quixos and Macas in the kingdom of 
Quito : a reduccion of the Sucumbios Indians, 
made by the missions held there by the Jesuits. 

JOSEF, S. another, of the jurisdiction of the 
town of San Gil, in the Nuevo Reyno de Gra 
nada. 

JOSEF, S. another, with the surname of Atagua- 
tes ; a reduccion of Indians of this nation by the 
Jesuits, in the province and government of Mainas 
of the kingdom of Quito; 
x x 



338 



JOS 



JOSEF, S. another, of the province and govern 
ment of Santa Marta. 

JOSEF, S. another, with the surname of Oto- 
macos ; a reduction of Indians of this nation by 
the missions of the Jesuits, in the Orinoco, on the 
shore of this river, and five leagues from the settle 
ment of Nnestra Senora de los Angeles. In 1733, 
its destruction was attempted by the Caribos In 
dians ; but it was bravely defended by Don Felix 
Sardo de Almazan, native of San Clemente in La 
Mancha. 

JOSEF, S. another, of the same missions as the 
former ; situate near the settlement of San Xavier, 
and on the shore of the river Panuissi. 

JOSEF, S. another, of the province and go 
vernment of Moxos in the kingdom of Quito ; si 
tuate on the shore of the river Itenes, close to 
the mouth of San Miguel, now desert and aban 
doned. 

JOSEF, S. another, of Indians, of the district of 
Guadalabquen in the kingdom of Chile, and on 
the shore of the river Valdivia, where a fort has 
been built for its defence. 

JOSEF, S. another, of the province and corre- 
giniienlo of Colchagua, in the same kingdom as the 
former, on the shore of the river Rapel. 

JOSEF, S. another, which is the real of mines, 
of the province of Ostimuri in Nueva Espana. 
Twenty-six leagnes n. w. of the real of Rio 
Chico. 

JOSEF, S. another, of the province of Gtiayana, 
in the part possessed by the French ; on the coast, 
at the mouth or entrance of the river Cayenne. 

JOSEF, S. another, of the missions which were 
held by the Jesuits in the country of the Chiquitos 
Indians, and kingdom of Peru ; at the foot of a 
serrania^ to the s. of the three small lakes. 

JOSEF, S. another, oflhe province and country 
of Las Amazonas, and territory of the Guayazas 
Indians ; situate between two small rivers, which 
enter the Tocantines. 

JOKF, S. another, of the province and captain* 
fJtip of Para in Brazil, on the shore of the river 
Topayos, near its mouth to enter the Maranon. 

JOSEF, S. another, of the island of Joanes or Ma- 
rajo, on the Brazil coast, at the mouth of the river 
Marafion. 

JOSEF, S. another, of the province and corregi- 
miento of Cuenca in the kingdom of Quito; an 
nexed to the curacy of Azogues. 

JOSEF, S. another, of the missions which were 
held by the Jesuits in the province and govern 
ment of Paraguay ; situate on the hills which sepa 
rate the rivers running into the Uruguay and 



JOS 

Parana. Lat. 27 45 52" s. Long. 55 48 
57" w. 

JOSEF, S. another, of the province and captain 
ship of the Rio Janeiro in Brazil ; on the shore of 
the river Muertes, and n. of the town of Sun Juan 
del Real. 

JOSEF, S. another, of the province and govern 
ment of Maracaibo in the Nuevo Reyno de Gra 
nada ; on the shore of the river S.Domingo, s. of 
the city of Marinas Nueva; one of the missions of 
this province. 

JOSEF, S. another, of the province and govern 
ment of Santa Cruz de la Sierra of Peru ; on the 
shore of the river Palometa. 

JOSEF, S. another, of the province and govern 
ment of Venezuela, on the shore of the Maria, noar 
where this is entered by the Portuguesa, and n. of 
the city of Guanare. 

JOSEF, S. another, of the same province and 
government as the former, on the shore of the river 
Agnirre, and e. of the town of A ran re. 

JOSI.F, S. another of the province and govern 
ment of Moxos in the kingdom of Quito, on the 
shore of the river Cobite. 

JOSEF, S. another, of the province and country 
of Las Amazonas, in the territory of Mato Groso, 
on the shore of the river Itenes ; a mission of the 
Portuguese clergy. 

JOSEF, S. another, of the Nuevo Reyno de 
Granada. 

JOSEF, S. a town of the province and govern 
ment of Buenos Ayres ; situate on a river of the 
same name, nearly to the n. w. of Monte Video, 
in lat. 34 22 1 7". Long. 56 53 22". 

[JOSEF, S. DEL PARRAL, a town of the in- 
tendancy of Durango, the residence of a diputacion 
de minus. This real, as well as the town of Parras, 
received its name from the great number of wild 
vine shoots with which the country was covered 
on the first arrival of the Spaniards. Population 
5000.] 

JOSEF, S. a river of the province and govern 
ment of Buenos Ayres, which runs s. and enters 
the Caneloles, near where this runs into the river 
La Plata. 

JOSEF, S. another river, of the island ofBarba- 
does, which runs e. in the district of the parish of 
its name, and enters the sea. 

JOSEF, S. another, with the surname of Diaz, in 
the province and government of Buenos Ayres. 
It runs w. and enters the Jacegua, between the li 
vers Ventura and Pablo Paeces. 

JOSEF, S. another river, of the same province 
and government as the former. It runs $. and in- 



JOS 

corporates itself with the Santa Luei a to enter the 
Plata. 

JOSEF, S. another, of the province and country 
of Las Amazonas, in the territory of Mato Groso, 
formed of three small rivers. It enters the Itenes. 

JOSKF, S. another, a small river, with the sur 
name of Ignacio, in the province and government 
of Buenos Ayres. It runs s. and enters the sea 
close to the bay of Maldonado. 

JOSEPH, ST. a bay of the coast of Florida, 
convenient, large, and handsome. The French 
established themselves in it in 1719, but were dis 
lodged by the Admiral Don Francisco Cornejo, by 
order of the viceroy of Nueva Espana, the Mar 
quis de Valero, giving it the name of New Prin 
cipality of Asturias. In its vicinity are many 
isles and banks inhabited by Indians. Forty 
leagues from the bay ofApalache, in lat. 29 50 . 
Long. 290. [It is of the figure of a horse-shoe, 
being about 12 miles in length, and seven across 
where broadest. The bar is narrow, and imme 
diately within it there is from four to 6} fathoms 
soft ground. The best place to anchor is just 
within the peninsula, opposite to some ruins that 
still remain of the village of St. Joseph. The pen 
insula between St. Joseph s and cape Blaize is a 
narrow slip of land, in some places not above a 
quarter of a mile broad. A very good establish 
ment might be made here for a fishery, as the set 
tlers might make salt on the spot to cure the bass, 
rock, cod, grouper, red mullet, &amp;c. \vhich are here 
in abundance/] 

[JOSEPH, ST. a water which runs n. w. into the 
s. c . part of lake Michigan. It springs from a 
number of small lakes, a little to the n. w. of the 
Miami village. The Pawlewatemie Indians reside 
or; this river, opposite fort St. Joseph. They can 
raise 200 warriors. At or near the confluence of 
the rivers St. Mary s and St. Joseph s, where fort 
Wayne now stands, the Indians have ceded to the 
United States a tract of six miles square.] 

JOSEPH, ST. a large bay on the n. coast of the 
Nuevo Reyno de Leon, between the bay of San 
Bernardo and the mouth of the river Bravo or 
Del Norte. 

JOSEPH, ST. another, on 4he coast of the strait 
of Magellan, and at the third narrow pass, called 
the Pasage. 

JOSEPH, ST, a port on the a\ coast of the king 
dom of Tierra Firme, near the mouth of the river 
Orinoco. In it is a small settlement, in lat. 10 
38 . Long. 60 27 . 

JOSEPH, ST. another bay, on the same coast, 
distinct from the former, according to the descrip 
tion of Los Nodales. 



JOS 



33!) 



JOSEPH, ST. an island of Canada; situate in the 
lake Ontario, very near the s. coast. 

JOSEPH, ST. another island, of the gulf of Cali 
fornia or Mar Roxo de Cortes ; situate very near 
the coast, between the islands of Santa Cruz aiid S. 
Francisco. 

JOSEPH, ST. a cordillera of mountains of the 
province and government of Paraguay. It runs 
from n. to s. on the side of the river of this name, 
along the e. bank, and from thence extending it 
self from the territory of the Nambicas Indians to 
that of Los Xarayes. 

JOSEPH, ST. another island, of the river of Las 
Amazonas, at its mouth or entrance into the sea, 
close to the e. coast, opposite the town of Ma- 
recaba. 

Josnprr., ST. a canal, called Caiio de San Jo 
seph, in the province and government of Vene 
zuela. It runs from the lake of Comas, and enters 
that of Caicara. 

JOSEPH, ST. a fort and garrison of the province 
and government of Paraguay, to restrain the infidel 
Indians. 

JOSEPH, ST. another, of Canada, on the shore 
of the river of its name. 

[JOSEPH, Fort ST. is situated on the e. side of 
the river of this name, in lat. 42 2 n. Long. 85 8 
w. It is about 104 miles s. w. by t. of Detroit, (o 
which place there is a straight road.] 

[JOSEPH, ST. a port on the w. side of the island 
of Trinidad, near the coast of Tierra Firme.] 

[JOSEPH, ST. a small town and port on the w. 
point of the n. peninsula of the island of Trinidad, 
in the W. Indies.] 

[JOSEPH, ST. a bay on the w. side of the island 
of Trinidad, defended by a small battery. It has 
a few houses on it, and lies a. e. of Port of Spain, 
the capital of the island. Near it is a mountain 
having mineral pitch.] 

[JOSEPH, Lake ST. in N. America, lies e. of 
lake Sal, and sends its waters by Cat Lake river 
into Cat lake, and afterwards forms the A-. e. branch 
of Severn river. The lake is 35 rnilcs long, and 
15 broad. OSNABURG House is on the w. e. part 
of the lake ; which see.] 

[JOSEPH, I LET A PIERRE, a village on the 
westernmost coast of the island of St. Domingo; 
about three leagues w. to. of the village of Ti- 
buron.] 

[JOSEPH, ST. in the province of California is 
Mexico, N. America. Lat. 23 3 .] 

[JOSEPH, ST. See S. JOSEF.] 

JOSEPL1S, a settlement of the province and 
colony of Georgia, on the shore of the river Savan 
nah, to the n. of the city of this nurne, 
x x 2 



540 



J U A 



[JOSQU1N, SAN, a settlement of Indians, of 
the province and government of Paraguay ; situate 
on the river Cuicui, on the road from Asuncion to 
Villa de Curuguaty, about 33 miles from the latter, 
in lat. 25 1 47" s. Long. 56 13 20" a&amp;gt;.J 

JO YE, a port of the s. coast of the island S. 
John, and colony of Nova Scotia, in the strait 
formed between the one and the other. 

JUAN, S. a settlement of the jurisdiction of 
Ibague, and government of Mariquita, in the 
Nuevo Reyno de Granada ; annexed to the curacy 
of Ibague : of an hot temperature, abounding in 
the vegetable productions of this climate, and in 
cattle. It has mines of gold and copper, and 400 
housekeepers, who are much infested by the 
plague of mosquitoes and venomous insects. 

JUAN, S. another settlement, in the province 
and corregimiento of Lucanas in Peru, celebrated 
for its rich silver mines : the veins at present 
known and worked are 10 ; some at the depth of 
50, and others at 60 to 80 fathom. The metals 
are worked by quicksilver, salt, and copper, called 
there coJpa; this being a method discovered by 
Don Lorenzo de la Torre, who was master of the 
principal mines ; and it is now practised in other 
provinces. 

JUAN, S. another, with the addition of Evange- 
lista, in the corrregimiento of the district of Las 
Cinco Leguas r of the city of Quito in Peru. 

JUAN, S. another, of the head settlement of the 
district of Orizava, and alcaldia mayor of I.xmi- 
quilpan, in Nueva Espana. It is of a mild rather 
than hot temperature, contains 108 families of In 
dians, and is three leagues from its capital. 

JUAN, S. another, with the addition of Evange- 
lista, in the head settlement of the district and 
alcaldia mtiyor of Teotihuacan in the same king 
dom ; a quarter of a league w. of its capital. 

JUAN, S. another, a small settlement or ward 
of the head settlement of the district of Ocuila, 
and afcaldia mayor of Marinalco. in INuevaEspaiia. 
In its vicinity is a rancheria of Indian shepherds, 
in which dwell 100 Mustees and Mulattoes, who 
have the charge of upwards of 50,000 sheep, 
which formerly belonged to the Jesuits. 

JUAN, S. another, of the head settlement of the 
district of Clacayac, and alcaldia mayor of Zulte- 
pec, in the same kingdom. It contains 39 families 
of Indians, who maintain themselves by breeding 
large cattle and cultivating fruit and maize, and is 
of an hot temperature ; one league e. of its head 
settlement. 

JUAN, S. another, of the head settlement of 
the district and alcaldia mayor of Toluca in the 
same kingdom. It contains 227 families of In- 



J U A 

dians, and is at a small distance from its capi 
tal. 

JUAN, S. another, of the head settlement of the 
district and alcaldia mayor of Marinalco in the 
same kingdom ; one short league from that ca 
pital. 

JUAN, S. another, a ward of the head settle 
ment of Zumpahuacan, and same alcaldia mayor 
and kingdom as the former. 

JUAN, S. another, with the surname of La Brea, 
in the head settlement of Xocutla, and alcaldia 
mayor of Chilapa, in the same kingdom. Two 
leagues s. of its head settlement. 

JUAN, S. another, of the head settlement of 
Yautepec, and alcaldia mayor of Cuernavaca, in 
the same kingdom. 

JUAN, S. another, of the head settlement of 
Tepoxtlan, in the same alcaldia mayor and king 
dom as the former. 

JUAN, S. another, called San Juan Francisco 
Uegis, of the missions held there by the Jesuits, in 
the province of Cinaloa. 

JUAN, S. another, of the government and juris 
diction of Merida in the Nuevo Reyno de Gra 
nada; of a hot temperature, producing cacao, sugar 
canes, much cotton, yucas, plantains, &amp;c. It also 
abounds in goats, contains upwards of JOO Indians 
and 40 whites, and is very near the settlement of 
Lagunillas. 

JUAN, S. another, with the addition of Lopez, 
in the province and government of Quixos and 
Macas, of the kingdom of Quito. 

JUAN, S. another, of the head settlement of 
Teutalpan, and alcaldia mayor of Zacatlan, in 
Nueva Espafia. Four leagues from its head settle 
ment. 

JUAN,S. another, a small settlement of the alcal 
dia mayor of Juxtlahuaca in the same kingdom. 

JUAN, S. another, also small, of the head settle 
ment of Mistepec, in the same alcaldia mayor and 
kingdom as the former. 

JUAN, S. another, of the head settlement of 
Zuchiquilatzan, in the same alculdia mayor and 
kingdom as the former. 

JUAN, S. another, with the surname of Evangc- 
lista, of the province and corregimiento of Anda- 
huailas in Peru ; annexed to the curacy of Huan- 
caray. 

JUAN, S. another, the head settlement of the 
district of the alcaldia mayor of Teposcoluca in 
Nueva Espafia, of the province and bishopric of 
Oaxaca. It is of a cold temperature, and inha 
bited by 98 families of Indians, applied to the cul 
ture of cochineal and seeds ; very close to the e. 
of its head settlement. 



J U A 

JUAN, S. another, of the province and corre- 
gimiento of Canta in Peru ; annexed to the curacy 
of Alnbillos Baxos. 

JUAN, S. another, of the head settlement of the 
district and akaldia mayor of Cuiceo in Nueva 
Espaiia. Jt is of a mild temperature, contains 42 
families of Indians, exercised in the cultivation of 
the land ; and in some of its immediate ranches are 
18 families of Spaniards, Mustees t and Mulattoes. 
Two leagues w. of its capital. 

JUAN, S. another, of the head settlement of 
Huehuetlan, and alcaldia mayor of Cucatlan, in the 
same kingdom. It is of a warm temperature ; 
situate on the skirt of a mountain, with 73 fami 
lies of Indians, who live by a commerce in salt 
petre and cochineal. Eight leagues e. of its head 
settlement. 

JUAN, S. another, of the head settlement of the 
district of Mistepcque, and alcaldia mayor of Ne- 
japa, in the same kingdom. It is of a cold and 
moist temperature ; situate on a lofty plain, with 
80 families of Indians. One league from its head 
settlement. 

JUAN, S. another, of the same head settlement, 
alcaldia mayor, and kingdom as the former; si 
tuate on a short plain, surrounded with barrancas 
or chasms. It contains 48 families of Indians, 
who commerce in seeds and cochineal, and is four 
leagues from its head settlement. 

JUAN, S. another, of the same alcaldia mayor 
and kingdom as the former. It contains 25 fami 
lies of Indians, and is little more than two leagues 
s. w. of its head settlement, Histotepec. 

JUAN, S. another, with the surname of Evan- 
gelista, of the missions which were held by the 
Jesuits in the province of Cinaloa. 

JUAN, S. another, of the head settlement of the 
district of Qnieguelani, and alcaldia mayor of Ne- 
japa, in Nueva Espana. It contains 18 families 
of Indians, and is four leagues n. e. of its head 
settlement. It is fertilized by a river running in 
its vicinity, and maintains itself by its gardens and 
orchards. 

JUAN, S. another, of the head settlement of 
Atoyaque, and a culdia mayor of Xicayan, in 
the same kingdom. It contains 34 Indian fa 
milies, and is 10 leagues n. w. of its head settle 
ment. 

JUAN S. another, of the head settlement of 
MUla, and alcaldia mayor of Teutitlan, in the same 
kingdom ; of a mild temperature, and containing 
24 Indian families. Four leagues from its head 
settlement. 

JUAN, S. another, of the head settlement of 
Magdalena, and alcadia mayor of Izatlan, in the 



J U A 

same kingdom ; on the e. shore of a lake which 
lies between that head settlement and the capital, 
Agualulco. 

JUAN, S. another, called Nuestra Senora de 
San Juan, of the head settlement of the alcaldia 
mayor of Lagos, in the kingdom and bishopric of 
Nueva Galicia. Although its population be small, 
there is a vast concourse of people who come 
hither to visit the sanctuary of a miraculous image, 
held in particular devotion throughout the whole 
district. Nine leagues s. w. of its capital, on the 
side of the river. 

JUAN, S. another, which is a real of silver 
mines, of the province and government of Sonora, 
distinct from the capital. 

JUAN, S. another, with the addition of San 
Pedro, of the missions which were held by the 
Jesuits in the province of Nayaith, and kingdom 
of Nueva Galicia. Twenty leagues s.s.e. of the 
settlement of La Mesa. 

JUAN, S. another, of the head settlement of the 
district of Tuzcacuesco, and alcaldia mayor of 
Amola, in Nueva Espana. It contains 19 fami 
lies of Indians, who live by making mats from the 
palm-tree. Seven leagues n. w. of its head settle 
ment. 

JUAN, S. another, with the surname of Rio, in 
the province of Tepeguana and kingdom of Nueva 
Vizcaya ; a large town, inhabited by Spaniards, 
MusteeS) Mulattoes, and Indians. Fifteen leagues 
n. of the capital, Guadiana. 

JUAN, S. another, of the province and govern 
ment of Cumaiui. 

JUAN, S. another, of the government and juris 
diction of Portobelo, in the province and king 
dom of Tierra Firme ; between the rivers Chagre 
and Pequeni. 

JUAN, S. another, with the surname of Nepo- 
muceno, of the missions which were held by the 
Jesuits, in the province and government of Mainas 
of the kingdom of Quito; on the shore of the 
Nepo. 

JUAN, S. another, of the province and govern 
ment of Popayan, in the Nuevo Reyno de 
Granada. 

JUAN, S. another, of Nuevo Mexico; on the 
shore of a river which enters the Grande del 
Norte, between the settlements of Acomas and 
Galiste. 

JUAN, S. another, of the province of Tarau- 
mara, and kingdom of Nueva Vizcaya ; on the 
shore of the river Conchos, near the settlement of 
Alamo. 

JUAN, S. another, a village of the province and 
captainship of Espiritu Santo in Brazil. 



342 



J U A 



JUAN, S. another, of the kingdom of Nueva 
Espafia : on the sea-coast. 

JUAN, S. another, of the province and captain 
ship of San Vicente in Brazil ; situate on the 
shore, and at the head of the river Uruguay. 

JUAN, S. another, of the province and govern 
ment of Buenos Ayres, at the source of the river 
Ibiquey-guaza. 

JUAN, S. another, of the province and alcaldia 
mayor of Zacatepeques in the kingdom of Gua 
temala. 

JUAN, S. another, of the province and alcaldia 
mayor of Verapaz, in the same kingdom as the 
former. 

JUAN, S. another, a parish of the English, in 
the 5. part of the island Jamaica. 

JUAN, S. another, of the province and govern 
ment of Neiba in the Nuevo Reyno de Granada ; 
on the shore of the river Bache. 

JUAN, S. another, of the district and jurisdic 
tion of the government of San Juan Jiron in the 
same kingdom ; on the shore of the Rio Grande 
de la Magdalena, between the mouth of the river 
Sogiimoso and the port Villareal. 

JUAN, S. another, of the province and govern 
ment of Cartagena ; situate s. s. w. of the town 
San Benito Abaci . 

JUAN, S. another, of the missions which were 
helJ by the Jesuits, in the province and govern 
ment of Mainas and kingdom of Quito ; on the 
shore of the Napo, opposite the settlement of the 
Nombre de Maria. 

JUAN, S. another, called San Juan Francisco 
Regis, a reduction of Indians of the Sinaruca na 
tion, of the Jesuits, in the Orinoco, and Nuevo 
Reyno de Granada ; founded in 1739, on the shore 
of the Met a. 

JUAN, S. another, a parish of the English, the 
head settlement of the district of the island of Bar- 
badoes, on the e. coast. 

JUAN, S. another, of the province and alcaldia 
mayor of Zacapula in the kingdom of Guate 
mala. 

JUAN, S. another, in the same province and 
kingdom. 

JUAN, S. another, with the surname of Cabal- 
leros, of the missions which were held by the Je 
suits in Nuevo Mexico. 

JUAN, S. another, of the province and govern 
ment of Tucuman, with the surname of Baptista, 
in the jurisdiction of Salta ; on the shore of the 
river Pasage or Salado. 

JUAN, S. another, of the province and colony 
of Georgia, where the English have a fort ; on the 
skorc of the river Apalachi, near the sea-coast. 



J U A 

JOAN, S. another, of the province and corregi 
miento of Santiago in the kingdom of Chile ; at the 
source of the river Maipo. 

JUAN, S. another, of the island of S. Domingo, 
in the vulley of its name, and on the shore of a 
river. 

JUAN, S. another, of the province and captain 
ship of Pernambuco in Brazil ; on the shore of the 
river Tapacnro. 

JUAN, S. another, of the missions which were 
held by the Jesuits in the province and govern 
ment of Buenos A yres ; situate near the river 
Yvuy Grande, about 10 miles n. e. of San Miguel. 
Lat. 28 26 5b" s. Long. 54 28 40" w. 

JUAN, S. another, of the same missions of the 
Chiquitos Indians, and kingdom of Peru, at the 
foot of a scrrania. 

JUAN, S. another, with the surname of Nepo- 
muceno, in the province and government of 
Mainas, of the kingdom of Quito, distinct from 
another there of the same name; at the source of 
the river Nanay. 

JUAN, S. another, of the missions which were 
held by the Jesuits in the province and kingdom 
of the former settlement, near that of San Andres. 

JUAN, S. another, with the surname of Bap- 
tista, in the province and government of the Chi 
quitos Indians, near the lakes. 

JUAN, S. another, with the surname of Nepo- 
muceno, in the province and government of Car 
tagena, of the Nuevo Reyno de Granada ; in the 
mountainous part of the district of the town of 
Maria ; one of the new settlements founded by the 
Governor Don Juan Pimienta, in 1776. 

JUAN, S. another, with the surname of Sahagun, 
in the same province and government as the 
former ; founded in the Sabanas, by the same go 
vernor, in the above year. 

JUAN, S. another, of the missions which were 
held by the Jesuits in the province of California, 
on the sea-coast ; two leagues from the bay of 
San Christoval, with the surname of Baptista. 

JUAN, S, another, of Indians, of the same pro 
vince, near the coast of the gulf, fronting the island 
of Catalina. 

JUAN, S. another, with the addition of San, 
Pablo, of Indians, of the same province as the 
former ; on the coast of the gulf, opposite the 
island of the Angel de la Guardia, and on the side 
of the bay of San Luis Gonzaga. 

JUAN, S. a city of the province and corregimi- 
enlo ot Cuyo in the kingdom of Chile, n. of the 
city of Mendoza. It has a parish church and 
three chapels ; namely, those of San Clementc, 
San Miguel, and La Concepcion, in the old settle- 



J U A 

ment, and serving as chapels of ease ; also the con- 
venls of the orders of S. Domingo, San Agustin, 
an house of entertainment of the monks of Nuestra 
Senora de la Merced, an hospital of San Juan de 
Dios, and a college which belonged to the Jesuits. 
In its district are some good mines of alum. 

JUAN, S. a town of the province and corrcgimi- 
ento of Puchacay, in the same kingdom as the 
former city ; on the shore of the river Biobio, w. 
of the town of San Rafael. 

JUAN, S. another, with the surname of Baptista, 
a capital and real of silver mines, of the province 
and government of Sonora ; situate between the 
sources of the two rivers Hiaqui and SONOH A. See 
the latter article. 

JUAN, S. another town, of the Portuguese, in 
Brazil ; situate on the shore, and at the source of 
the river Parana-iba. 

JUAN, S. another, of the province and captain 
ship of Seara in Brazil, on the coast of cape 
Blanco. 

JUAN, S. another, of the province and captain 
ship of Paraiba in Brazil ; situate on the shore of 
the Paraiba. 

JUAN, S. another, with the surname of Del 
Rey, in the province and captainship of Rio Ja 
neiro in Brazil ; on the shore of the river of Las 
Mucrtes. 

[JuAN, S. DEL Rio, a town of the intendancy 
of Durango, to the s. w. of the lake of Parras. 
We must not confound this town with the place 
"which bears the same name in the intendancy of 
Mexico, which is situated to the e. of Queretaro. 
Population 10,200.1 

[JuAN, S. DEL Rio, a town of the intendancy 
of Mexico, surrounded with gardens, adorned with 
vines and anona. Height 1978 metres, or 6489 
feet.] 

JUAN S. an island of the river La Plata, in the 
province and government of Buenos Ayres, in the 
territory of the Abipones Indians. 

JUAN, S. another, near the coast of Brazil, in 
the province and captainship of Para, at the en 
trance of the river T urirana. 

JUAN, S. another island, of the N. sea, one 
of the Lesser Antilles ; between those of Puertorico 
and La Virgen Gorda, to the e. of the former. 

JUAN, S. another, a small island, with the sur 
name of Baptista, in the gulf of California and 
Mar Roxo de Cor^s, in the interior of the gulf, 
between its coast and that of Nueva Espann, and 
nearest to the latter, opposite the river Sonora. 

JUAN, S. some small isles near the coast of 
Newfoundland, in the province and government 
of Venezuela. 



J U A 



343 



JUAN , S. a point of land or extremity, of the 
coast of the province and government of Nicara 
gua, and kingdom of Guatemala, in the S. sea; 
one of those which form the gulf of Papagayo. 

JUAN, S. another, on the coast of the province 
and government of Venezuela, and Nuevo Reyno 
de Granada ; between the islands Piragua and 
Maracaro. 

JUAN,S. another, on the coast of the province 
and government of Nicaragua, of the kingdom of 
Guatemala, in the N. sea ; one of those which form 
the entrance of the river of its name. 

JUAN, S. another, on the coast of the Nuevo 
Reyno de Grariada, in the province of Venezuela, 
to the e. of La Colorada. 

JUAN, S. another, in the e. head of the island 
of Puertorico, in lat. 18 45 . Long.311 . 

JUAN, S. a bay on the coast of the S. sea, of 
the province and government of Choco ; large r 
convenient, and sheltered, and in the midst of it 
are the islands of Chirambira, and into it runs a 
river of the same name. 

JUAN, S. a large and convenient bay of the 
province and government of Sonora in Nueva Es- 
pana, and gulf of California. 

JUAN, S. a port of the coast of Peru, in the 
province and corregimiento of Pisco ; in the vici 
nity of which are seen many pieces of stone, or 
ruins of two fortresses, put there by the Incas. 

JUAN, S. a large and abundant river of the pro 
vince and government of Nicaragua in the king 
dom of Guatemala ; the waste water of the Great 
lake running into the N. sea. The whole of it is 
navigable for large vessels ; and on its shore a fort 
has been built to defend its entrance. 

JUAN, S. another, of the province and govern 
ment of Cartagena, in the Nuevo Reyno de Gra 
nada, which rises in the mountains, and enters the 
sea opposite the island of Tortuguilla, serving as 
limits which divide this jurisdiction from that of 
Darien. 

JUAN, S. another, of the province and govern 
ment of Veragua in the kingdom of Tierra Finne, 
which rises in the sierras of Guanico, and, run 
ning s. enters the Pacific. 

JUAN, S. another, very abundant river, of the 
province and government of Darien, of the same 
kingdom as the former, dividing its jurisdiction 
from that of Panama. 

JUAN, S. another, of the province and govern 
ment of Choco, which rises in the province of An- 
tioquia, and, after a long and circuitous course, 
empties itself into the S. sea in a large body. On 
its shore, and on the top of a mountain, is a watch- 
tower. 



344 



J U A 



JUAN, S. another, of the same province and 
government as the former. It rises in the sierra 
of Sindagua, and, making a bend, enters by 
the w. into the S. sea, opposite the island of 
Gorgona. 

JUAN, S. another, of the province and govern 
ment of Venezuela, which rises s. of the lake Ta- 
carigua, and enters the Coxede. 

JUAN, S. another, of the province and govern 
ment of Buenos Ayres. It is small, runs 5. and 
enters the Plata at its month, between the river 
De Vacas and the colony of Sacramento. 

JUAN, S. another, also small, of the island of 
S. Domingo. It rises in the sierra of the mines 
of Ciboo, runs s. s. w. and unites itself with the 
Mixo to enter the Artibonito. 

JUAN, S. another, a small river, of the same 
island, rising in the mountains of the w. coast. It 
runs n. and enters the sea, between the bay of Bal- 
samo and the cape of La Pciia. 

JUAN, S. another, also small, of the province 
and government of Tucuman in Peru, which runs 
n. and enters the Pilcomayo. 

JUAN, S. another, large and abundant, of the 
province of Florida; which runs n.n.e. and 
enters the sea on the e. coast, by the Bahama 
channel. 

JUAN, S. another, called De Juan, in the island 
of Cuba. It runs s. and enters the sea at the coast 
of this rhumb, between the port of Trinidad and 
the bay of Xagua. 

JUAN, S. another, of the province and captain- 
ship of liio Janeiro in Brazil, which runs s. s. e. 
and enters the sea, close to cape Frio, between the 
rivers Hermoso and De la Aldea. 

JUAN, S. another, of the province and corregi- 
miento of Chichas and Tarija in Peru. 

JUAN, S. another, large and abundant, of Ca 
nada, which rises from a lake near the river S. 
Lawrence, runs n. e. then s. and enters the sea in 
the bay of Fundy, of the province of Nova Scotia 
or Acadia. 

JUAN, S. another, with the surname of Posses 
sion, in the strait of Magellan. It runs e. and en 
ters the sea, in the bay of La Gente or People. 

JUAN, S. a canal, in the same strait as the 
former river, which communicates with the S. sea, 
and extending from the point of Tinquechisgua to 
that of San Martin. 

JUAN, S. a fort of the English, in the province 
and colony of Nova Scotia or Acadia ; on the 
shore of the river of its name, and near where this 
river enters the sea. 

JUAN, S. a large, fertile, and beautiful valley of 
the island of S. Domingo ; bounded by the valleys 



J U A 

of Banica and Neiba, and surrounded and watered 
by the rivers Neiba and Artibonito. 

JUAN, S. a lake of the province and govern 
ment of the Rio del Hacha in the Nucvo ileyno 
de Granada ; of an oval figure, and situate on the 
coast, between the capital and the cape of La 
V r ela. This lake empties itself into the sea by a 
mouth which bears the same name. 

[JUAN, S. See St. JOHN.] 

JUAN FERNANDEZ, some islands of the S. sea, 
thus called from having been discovered by a 
Spaniard of this name, in 1563. They are two, 
the largest being nearest the coast and four leagues 
long; the other, called Mas Afuera, to distinguish 
it, being small. The territory of the first, towards 
the n. part, is composed of mountains covered with 
trees, and amongst others, wilh pepper trees 
similar to those of Chiapa. In the &amp;gt;?. part, 
which is most barren, on account of the strong 
winds that prevail, there are no trees, save in some 
glens formed by the hills ; but there is found a 
species of reed or straw of an height exceeding a 
man s stature. There are numberless streams 
which rush down from the mountains, and form 
ing various cascades, fall into the sea. The tem 
perature is very cold. In the n. part is a port, 
which is the best, although not very secure, as 
being exposed to the n. and n. e. winds. It is 50 
fathoms deep, and is in the winter almost useless, 
through the great risk which vessels encounter in 
it. Besides this there are two other smaller ports, 
the one to the e. the other to the w. ; but these are 
only to be made by small vessels. These islands 
are desert, and have nothing upon them but moun 
tain goats, and on the strands sea- wolves in abun 
dance. In the aforesaid port, however, is abun 
dance of delicate fish of different sorts, and amongst 
the rest, cod very similar to that found off New 
foundland ; another fish called the tollo, having on. 
its back a spur like ivory, which is an antidote 
against the tooth-ache ; also here arc found lob 
sters of half a yard long, of delicate flavour. The 
islands of Juan Fernandez have ever been a place 
of resort for pirates of the S. sea, where they might 
take in water and fuel, and provide themselves 
with the flesh of the goats; and to prevent this 
latter accommodation, the president of Chile sent 
hither a number of mastiff-dogs, to devour and 
extirpate the above animals, nor without success, 
for these are now scarcely to be seen, whilst the 
dogs are found in immense packs, and have the 
peculiarity of never barking. A Scotchman 
named Alexander Selkirk, who must have been 
left there by some pirate, lived for five years OH 
one of these islands, when he was taken off by a 



J U C 

British ship. The same also happened to a Mos 
quito Indian. The English admiral George 
Anson staid some days in the port of this island, 
o-ivinsr it the name of Cumberland, after that he 
and all his crew had undergone great hardships 
in doubling cape Horn, in 1741 ; and it was 
shortly afterwards visited by Don Jorge Juan, and 
Don Antonio de Ulloa, with two frigates. The 
aforesaid admiral sowed in the island various fruits 
and herbs for the advantage of such as might after 
wards visit it. These islands are 100 leagues from 
the continent of Chile, and 440 . of the cape of 
Hornos, in hit. 32 40 s. 

JUANA, S. an island of the kingdom of Chile, 
in the river Biobio, formed by an arm which this 
river throws out, and which runs back into itself. 
In this island is a fortress of the same name, a 
frontier of the Araucanos Indians, who burnt and 
destroyed it in the war of 1601. 

JUANAMBU. See GUANAMBU. 

JUANICO, S. a small island of the gulf of 
California, very close to the coast, between the 
gulf of Pulpito and the island of Carmen. 

JUBONES, a river in the province and corre 
gimiento of Piura, and kingdom of Peru, which 
runs w. and enters the sea in the bay of Tumbez. 

JUCAROENE, a small river of the province 
and captainship of Todos Santos in Brazil. It 
rises near the coast, runs s. s. e. and enters the 
sea between the Longoribo and the Yapitingo. 

[JUCATAN. See YUCATAN.] 

JUCH1PILA, a province and alcaldia mayor 
of the kingdom of Nueva Galicia, and bishopric 
of Guadalaxara. Its jurisdiction is not very ex 
tensive, although fertile in grain, and abounding 
in cattle. It has some mines of gold of a quality 
much esteemed for its value and ductility. The 
capital is the settlement of the same name, situate 
on the shore of a river. It has a convent of the 
order of San Francisco, with an acting curate, and 
is inhabited by many families of Indians, Mustees^ 
and Mulattoes, and some Spaniards ; and these 
more particularly in the estates of its district. It 
is 20 leagues n. of Guadalaxara ; in long. 267 45 . 
Lat. 92 48 . The other settlements are, 
Aposol, Mesquitula, 

S. Miguel, Cospala, 

S. Pedro, Mczquital, 

Santa Maria, Atemanica, 

Santiago, S. Pedro Analco, 

Talucon, S. Lucas, 

Movajjiia, Arnatlan. 

.fUCHlQUE, a settlement of the head settle 
ment -of the district of Naulinga, and alcaldia 
mayor of Xalapa, in Nueva Espaiia. 

VOL. II. 



J U L 



345 



JUCHITEPEC, a settlement and head settle 
ment of the district of the alcaldia mayor of Villalta 
in Nueva Espana. It contains 26 families of 
Indians, and is four leagues and a half s. of its 
capital. 

JUCOTACATO, a settlement of the head 
settlement of the district of Uruapan, and alcaldia 
mayor of Valladolid, in the province and bishopric 
of Mechoacan. It contains 30 families of Indians, 
and is two leagues s. of its head settlement. 

JUDAC, a settlement of Indians, of the pro 
vince and government of Sonora in Nueva Es- 
pana. 

JUDAS, a cape or point of the s. coast of the 
island Newfoundland, within the bay of Plai- 
sance. 

JUDERA, a small river of the island S. Do 
mingo, which rises in the valley of Banica, runs 
w. and turning to the n. w. enters the Artibonito. 

JUDIO, a river of the province and govern 
ment of Maracaibo in Nueva Espaiia. It rises in 
the settlement of Timotes, between Truxillo and 
Merida, runs to that rhumb, and enters the lake of 
Maracaibo by the s. side. 

JUDIO, a bay on the s. coast of the island S. 
Domingo, of the w. head, and territory of the 
French, on the side of Dry bay. 

JUDIOS, Los, a settlement of the province and 
government of Quay ana, in the part possessed by 
the Dutch, or in the colony of Surinam, on the 
skirt of a mountain, and by the side, and at the 
source of the river Surinam, on an extensive 
llanura called Sabarade Judios. 

[JUDITH Point, the s. eastermost point of 
Rhode Island state, situated on the sea-coast of 
Washington county, in South Kingston town 
ship.] 

[JuDOSA Bay, in Louisiana, lies in the n. w. 
corner of the gulf of Mexico. A chain of islands 
form a communication between it s. w. of St. Ber 
nard s bay.] 

JUDOSA, a settlement of Indians, of the pro 
vince and government of Sonora in Nueva Es- 
pana. 

JUITO, a settlement of the head settlement of 
the district and alcaldia mayor of Ostotipac in 
Nueva Espaiia ; situate near the coast of the S. 
sea. 

JULCA, a settlement of the province and cor- 
regimienlo of Xauxa in Peru. 

JULGAMARA, a settlement of the province 
and corregimiento of Angaraes in Pern. In its dis 
trict are some silver mines, which are worked, 
though to little profit 

JUL1, a large, beautiful, and well-peopled 
y Y 



346 



J U N 



settlement of the province and rorreginu ento of 
La Paz in Peru, near thelakeof Chucuito, and on 
this account of an unhealthy climate. The na 
tives suffer much from bad sight. It has four 
very good churches, which are, Jerusalem, San 
Pedro, San Juan de Lclran, and Santa Maria la 
Mayor : the second of these is the principal, and 
to it is contiguous a beautiful college which be 
longed to the Jesuits, the parish priests of the 
settlement, with an hospital provided with all ne 
cessaries. 

JUL1ACA, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiealo of Lampa in Peru. 

JULIAN, S. a large and commodious bay on 
the coast lying between the river Plata and the 
straits of Magellan ; in lat. 49 s. between the 
capes Lookout and Barreras. 

JULIAN, S. a point of the above coast, which 
is also called Cape Fourchu. 

JULIAN, S. a port on the e. coast of Newfound 
land, between the bay of Liebres and the island of 
Tichot. 

[JULIENNE. See NEYBE.] 
[JULIET Mount, in N. America, lies on the 
n. side of Illinois river, opposite the place where 
that river is formed by the junction of Thcakiki 
and Plein rivers. The middle of mount Juliet is 
in lat. 42 5 n. Long. 88 44 w. from London.] 
JULINES, a settlement and garrison of the 
province and government of Coaguila in the king 
dom of Nueva Vizcaya, on the shore of the river 
Conchos. 

JULQUILLA, a settlement of the province 
and corregimiento of Caxatambo in Peru ; an 
nexed to the curacy of Pativilca in the province 
of Santa. 

JULUMITO Y CHUCMI, a settlement of the 
province and government of Popayan in the 
Nuevo Reyno de Granada. 

JUMATA, a small river of the province and 



colony of Pennsylvania, which runs e. 

[JUMPING Point. See NAVESINK Har 
bour.] 

JUNCAL, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Copiapo in the kingdom of 
Chile; situate near the coast, oa the shore of the 
river of its name. 

JUNCAL, another settlement, with the distinctive 
title of Alto, in the same province and kingdom as 
the former, and 1 at the source of the above river. 
On the opposite side, not far from the shore, are 
some large pastures of vicunas. 

JUKCAL. The aforesaid river runs w* and en 
ters the sea, although frequently so dry as not to 
reach it.. 

5 



J U N 

JTTNCAL, a port on the coast of the same pro- 

vince, in lat. 25 42 . 

JUNCAL, a lake of the province and govern,- 

merit of Venezuela, near the river Guarico, and n. 

of the sierra of Carrizal. 

J UNCOS, a barbarous and ferocious nation of 

Indians, of the kingdom of Chile, allies of the 

Araucanos. They live in the territory which has 

to the n. the river Bueno, and to the s. the island 

of Chiloe. They infest the country, and render a 

voyage to Chiloe impracticable. 

JUNDABE, a settlement of the province and 

government of Antioquia in the Nuevo Rcyno de 

Granada ; situate at the foot of a mountain, on 

the shore of the river of its name, in the part 

Avhich enters the Cauca. 

J UNI) A BE. The aforesaid river rises in the 

valley of Curume, runs e. inclining a little to s. 

and enters the Cauca. 

JUND1AYO, or JUNDIAI, a small river of the 

province and captainship of S. Vicente in Brazil. It 

rises in the mountains near the coast, runs w. and 

enters the Harihambu or Tiete, between those of 

Juquiri and Capivari. 

JUNIPER, a small river of the province and 

colony of Virginia, in the county of Halifax, 

which runs e. and enters the Meherin. 

[JUNIUS, a military township in New York 

state, bounded n. by Galen, and s. by Romulus.] 
[JuNius Creek, a n. branch of the Little Kan- 

haway, which interlocks with the w. waters of 
Monongahela river, and which may one day admit 
a shorter passage from the latter into the Ohio. 
See LITTLE KANIIAVVAY.] 

JUNTA, or JUNCTION of the Rivers of Salt 
Pedro and of Mdipilla, a settlement of the mis 
sions held by the monks of S. Francisco, in the 
akaldia mayor of Acaponeta, and kingdom of 
Nueva Espana. 

JUNTAS, SAN ONOFRE DE LAS, a settlement 
of the province and government of Antioquia in 
the Nuevo Reyno de Granada ; situate on the 
shore of the river S. Agustin. 

JUNTAS, another, with the addition De los 
Rios, in the missions held by the order of S. Fran 
cisco in Nuevo Mexico. Founded in 1600. 

JUNTAS, another, in the province and bishop 
ric of Ostimuri. 

JUNTAS, a river in the province and govern 
ment of Jaen de Bracamoros, and kingdom of 
Quito. It rises n. of the city of Loxa, and runs 
e. collecting the waters of several others, through 
a great space of territory, and then, changing its 
name to Santiago, enters the Maranon, opposite 
the city of Santiago de las Montanas. 



K A A 

JUNUILLA, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Chachapoyas in Peru ; annexed 
to the curacy of Chisquilla. 

JUQUILA, a settlement and head settlement of 
the district of the alcaldia mayor of Xicayan in 
Nueva Espana. It is of a cold and moist tempe 
rature, contains five families of Spaniards, and 
120 of Indians, and is 20 leagues w. of its capi 
tal. 

JUQUILA, another settlement and head settle 
ment, of the district of the same kingdom, in the 
alcaldia mayor of Villalta. It contains 100 fami 
lies of Indians, and is seven leagues from its 
capital. 

JUQUIRI, a small river of the province and 
captainship of San Vicente in Brazil, which rises 
in the mountains near the coast, runs nearly due 
w. and enters the Harihambu or Tiete. 

JURA, a settlement of the province and cor 
regimiento of Porco in Peru. 

JURAENA, a river of the province and coun 
try of Las Amazonas. It rises in the territory of 
the Portuguese, n. of the road leading to Villaboa, 
runs e. and then turns its course to n. which it fol 
lows for many leagues. 

JURBO, a river of the province and govern 
ment of Cartagena, in the district of Sinu, which 
runs w. and enters the sea in the gulf of Darien. 

JURIES, a barbarous nation of Indians of the 
province of its name, the same being part of Tu- 
cuman in Peru ; bounded w. s. w. by the province 
ofChicas. See TUCUMAN. 

JURUBAMBA, a settlement of the province 
and corregimiento of Guamachuco in Peru, one of 
the four districts into which the curacy of Estan- 
cias is divided. 

[JURUYO. See MEXICO.] 

JUSTLAHUACA, a jurisdiction and alcaldia 



K A A 



347 



mayor of Nueva Espana, producing nothing but 
wheat, maize, seed, fruits, and some goats, in 
the flesh of which the trade consists. It has seven 
settlements, which are head settlements of dis 
tricts. 

The capital is the settlement of its name, of an 
hot temperature, containing 175 families of In 
dians, including those of five small settlements or 
wards of its district. It is 40 leagues s. e. of 
Mexico, in long. 275 40 . Lat. 18. The set 
tlements of its jurisdiction arc reduced to the fol 
lowing : 

San Miguel, Santa Maria, 

San Juan, Santiago, 2, 

Santiago, San Juan, 2, 

Santa Catalina, Tecomaztlahuaca, 

San Martin, San Francisco, 

Ixpaltepec, San Martin, 2, 

Tepexillo, San Mateo, 

Tlacotepec, Santiago, 3, 

Chavico, Zuchiquilatzan, 

Mistepec, San Juan, 3, 

Tepletatongo, Tilapan. 

San Lucas, 

JUYACAL, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Truxillo in Peru, founded in a 
ravine of the valley of Virn, six leagues from the 
settlement of San Pedro. 

JUZANTLA, a settlement and head settlement 
of the district of the alcaldia mayor of Maravatio 
in Nueva Espana. It contains 24 families of In 
dians, and is 13 leagues e. of its head settle 
ment. 

JUZIA, a small river of the province and cap 
tainship of llheos in Brazil. It rises near the coast, 
runs e. and enters the sea between the rivers Duua 
and Patiba. 



K 



[jVAATS BAAN, in New York state, lies on 
the w. bank of Hudson s river, seven miles s. 
from Kaats Kill, and 15 n. of Kingston.] 

[KAATS KILL, or CATSKILL, a small village 
of 30 or 40 houses and stores, in the state of New 
York ; situated on the w. side of Katskill river, 
eight miles s. w. of Hudson city, and 94 n. of New 
York. It has the appearance of a thriving place, 



and it is in contemplation to erect buildings on a 
marshy point on the margin of the river, for the 
advantage of deeper water; the creek on which the 
stores now stand being too shallow. The town 
ship of this name contains 1980 inhabitants, of 
whom 343 are electors, and 305 slaves.] 

[KAATS KILL, a creek on which stands the 
above town.] 

Y Y 2 



348 



KAN 



[KAATS KILL Mountains, in the vicinity of 
the above town, on the w. bank of Hudson s river; 
which make a majestic appearance. These are 
the first part of the chain of mountains called the 
Alleo-hany or Appalachian Mountains.] 

[KAHNONWOLOHALE, the principal vil 
lage of the Oneida Indians, in which is Oneida 
castle, about 20 miles s. ofw. from Whitestown, 
and 12 w. of Paris. There is but one framed 
house in this village. Their habitations are but a 
small improvement upon the ancient &amp;igwarns ; 
and are scattered sparsely throughout an enclo 
sure of several miles in circumference, within 
which they keep their cattle, horses, and swine, 
and without, plant their corn and sow their 
grain. 1 

[KAHOKTA. See CAIIOKIA.] 

KALL1, a settlement of the island of Barba- 
does, in the parish and district of Santiago, near 
the w. coast. 

[KAMTSCHATKA Sea lies between the con 
tinents of Asia and America. Jn Lat. 66 ti. they 
are separated by a strait only 18 miles wide. Cap 
tain Cook, in his last voyage, has established the 
certainty of this near approximation of the con 
tinents beyond a doubt ; and that the inhabitants 
of each continent are similar, and frequently pass 
and repass in canoes from one continent to the 
other. From these and other circumstances it is 
rendered highly probably that America was first 
peopled from the n. e. parts of Asia. But since 
the Esquimaux Indians are manifestly a separate 
species of men, and bear a near resemblance to 
the n. Europeans, it is believed that the Esqui 
maux Indians emigrated from the n. w. parts of 
Europe.] 

KANATINOS, a settlement of Indians of the 
province and government of Louisiana; on the 
shore of the river Trinidad, in the road which 
leads to Nuevo Mexico, 

[KANAWA, or KANHAWA, a large mountain 
ous county on the w. line of Virginia, having the 
Ohio river on then. w. and Kentucky w. The 
population of this county is included in Green 
Briar, being 60 15 inhabitants, including 319 slaves. 
About seven miles from the mouth of Elk river 
in this county, is a burning spring, capacious 
enough to hold 40 gallons. A bituminous vapour 
constantly issues from it, which agitating the sand 
around it, gives it the appearance of a boiling 
Spring. On presenting a torch within 18 or 20 
inches of the mouth, it flames up in a column, 
four or five feet in height, and about 18 inches 
diameter, and which sometimes burns 20 minutes, 
and at other times has continued three days. Ge 



lt A N 

neral Clarke kindled the vapour, staid about it an 
hour, and left it burning.] 

[KANAWAGERES, an Indian village outhe 
w. side of Genessee river, four miles w. s. w. of 
Hartford, in the Genessee country, in New 
York.] 

[KANHAWAY, GREAT, a river of Virginia, 
of considerable note for the fettility of its lands, 
and still more as leading towards the head waters 
of James s river. But it is doubtful whether its 
great and numerous rapids will admit a navigation, 
but at an expence to which it will require ages to 
render its inhabitants equal. The great obstacles 
begin at what are called the Great falls, 90 miles 
above the mouth, below which are only five or six 
rapids, and these passable with some difficulty 
even at low water. From the falls to the mouth 
of Green Briar is 100 miles. It is 280 yards wide 
at its mouth. The head waters of this river arc 
in the w. part of N. Carolina, in the most e. ridge 
of the Alleghany or Appalachian mountains, and n. 
of the 36th deg. of lat. Its head branches encircle 
those of the Holston, from which they are sepa 
rated by the Iron mountain, through which it 
passes 10 miles above the lead mines. About 60 
miles from Little river it receives Green Briar 
river from the e. which is the only considerable 
tributary stream in all that distance. About 40 
miles below the mouth of Green Briar river, in 
Virginia, in the Kanhaway, is a remarkable cata 
ract. A large rock, a little elevated in the mid 
dle, crosses the bed of the river, over which the 
water shoots, and falls about 50 feet perpendicu 
larly, except at one side, where the descent is more 
gradual. The Great Kanhaway is 196 miles be 
low Pittsburgh, and is navigable most of the year; 
and a waggon road may be made through the 
mountain which occasions the falls, and by a port 
age of a few miles only, a communication may be 
had between the waters of Great Kanhaway and 
Ohio, and those of James s river in Virginia. 
Down this river great quantities of goods are con 
veyed up the Kentucky river, others on horseback 
or in waggons to the settled part, and sold, on an 
average, at 100 percent, advance. See SULPHUR 
Spring.] 

[KANHAWAY, LITTLE, a small navigable river 
of Virginia, which is 150 yards wide at its 
mouth, and is navigable 10 miles only. Perhaps 
its n. branch, called Junius Creek, which inter 
locks with the w. waters of Monongahela, may one 
day admit a shorter passage from the latter into the 
Ohio.] 

[KANZAS. The limits of the country these In 
dians claim is not known. The country in which 



K A S 

they reside, and from tlience to the Missouri, is a 
delightful one, and generally well watered, and 
covered with excellent timber. They hunt to the 
upper part of Kanzas and Arkansas rivers. Their 
trade may be expected to increase with proper ma 
nagement. At present they are a dissolute, law 
less banditti ; frequently plunder their traders, and 
commit depredations on persons ascending and de 
scending the Missouri river : population rather in 
creasing. These people, as well as the Great and 
Little Osages, are stationary at their villages, 
from about the 15th of March to the 15th of May, 
and again from the 15th of August to the 15th of 
October : the rest of the year is appropriated to 
hunting. They cultivate corn, &amp;c.] 

KANZAS, a river of the same province and go 
vernment as the former settlements. It runs e. and 
enters the Missouri. 

KAQV1NOGAM1CH, alake of Canada, form 
ed of a river which runs s. zo. and enters that of 
Utanas. 

KAOY1S, a small island of the river S. Law 
rence in Canada ; between the rivers S. Margarite 
and Trinidad. 

KAPPAS, a tribe of savage Indians of the na 
tion of the Illinois, in the province and government 
of Louisiana. Before the discovery of the Mis 
sissippi they were very numerous ; and their set 
tlement is opposite the possessions conceded to 
Mr. Law, and belonging to the French company. 
To this establishment 9000 Palatines were destined ; 
and it must be confessed that there is not in all 
Louisiana a tract of country more advantageous 
for the production of all kinds of grain and pas 
tures for breeding cattle, although the aforesaid 
Law, and the rest of the colonists, had not the as 
sistance necessary to put their settlement in a flou 
rishing condition. 

[KARATUNK, or CARYTUNK, a plantation in 
Lincoln county, district of Maine ; consisting of 
about 20 families, or 103 inhabitants. It is the 
uppermost on Kennebeck river, 14 miles . of 
Brookfield.] 

KAROVi, a river of the province of Guayana, 
in the part possessed by the French. It is small, 
and enters the Oyapoco. 

[KASKASKIAS Village lies on the w. bank of 
the river of the same name, at its junction with 
the Mississippi, in the N. W. Territory, opposite 
Old fort. It contains 80 houses, many of them 
well built ; several of stone, with gardens, and 
large lots adjoining. About 20 years ago it con 
tained about 500 whites, and between 4 and 500 
Negroes. The former have large stocks of black 
cattle, swine, &amp;c.] 



KAY 



549 



[KASKASKIAS, an Indian nation, near the river 
of that name in the N. W. Territory. They can 
furnish 250 warriors. Three miles n. of Kaskas- 
kias is a village of Illinois Indians, of the Kaskas- 
kias tribe, containing about 210 persons, and 60 
warriors. They were formerly brave and warlike, 
but arc now degenerated and debauched. At the 
late peace the United States granted them a sum of 
money in hand, and became bound to pay them 
500 dollars a year for ever.] 

[KASKASKIAS, a river in the N.W. Territory, 
which is navigable for boats 130 miles. Its course 
is s. s. w. and near its mouth it turns to the 5. s. e. 
and flows into the Mississippi river, 46 miles from 
the Illinois. It runs through a rich country, 
abounding in extensive natural meadows, and num 
berless herds of buffalo, deer, &amp;c. High grounds 
lie along the e. side of the river, the banks being 
composed of lime-stone and free-stone, and are 
from 100 to 130 feet high, divided in many places 
by deep cavities, through which many small rivu 
lets pass before they fall into the Mississippi. The 
sides of these hills, fronting the river, are in many 
places perpendicular, and appear like solid pieces 
of masonry, of various colours, figures, and sizes. 1 

[KASKASKUNK, a town of the Delawares, be 
tween Great Bever creek and Alleghany river, in 
Pennsylvania. Here the Moravian missionaries 
had a settlement. It is 40 miles n. of Pittsburgh.] 

[KASK1NOMPA, a small river which runs w. 
into the Mississippi, from the state of Tennessee, 
in hit. 36 45 n. On the n. side of its mouth is 
an iron mine. See REELFOOT.] 

[KATERS KILL, a w. branch of Kaats 
Kill, in New York state.] 

[KATHT1PPACAMUNCK, an Indian village, 
situated on the n. side of Wabash river, at the 
mouth of Rippacanoe creek, and about 20 miles 
above the Lower Weau towns. In 1791, before its 
destruction by Generals Scott and Wilkinson, it 
contained 120 houses, 80 of which were shingle- 
roofed. The best houses belonged to the French 
traders. The gardens and improvements round 
were delightful. There was a tavern with cellars, 
bar, public and private rooms ; and the whole 
marked no small degree of order and civilization.] 

KATSKILL, a small river of the province 
and colony of New York, which runs s. e. and 
enters the Hudson. 

[KA WAKUSICA, or KOWSAKI, a lake in the 
district of Maine ; laid down in late maps as the 
head of Passamaquoddy river.] 

[KAYADAROSSORA Creek, in New York 
state, about 12 miles w. of the confluence of Fish 
creek and Hudson s river. The celebrated springs 



350 



KEN 



of Saratoga, eight or nine in number, are situated 
on the margin of a marsh formed by a branch of 
this creek. See SARATOGA. Also the name of a 
tract of land in Saratoga county, New York, 
bounded by the town of Shenectacly.] 

[KAY S Island, on the n. w. coast of America, 
lies in lat. 59 49 n. Long. 216 58 e. In the 
neighbourhood of this island Captain Cook dis 
covered several other islands. ] 

KECOWI, a settlement of Indians of S. Caro 
lina, where the English have a fort and establish 
ment for their commerce, on the shore of the river 
Chunacansti. 

KEDASKEEG, a settlement of Indians of the 
province of Sugadahock, where the English have 
a fort and establishment for their commerce on the 
shore of the river Pedi. 

[KEENE, a post.toun of New Hampshire, and 
one of the most flourishing in Cheshire county. 
It was incorporated in 1753, and contained in 
1775, 756, and in 1790, 1314 inhabitants. It is 
14 miles from Walpole, 65 w. of Portsmouth, and 
C6 n. w. from Boston. Lat. 42 55 .] 

KEIS, a small island of the Lucayas ; one of 
those which form the channel of Bahama ; s. of 
the island of Bimini. 

KELLEY, a settlement of the island of Bar- 
badoes. 

KEN, NEW, a county of the province and colo 
ny of Virginia. 

KENASTEGUNE, a settlement of the pro 
vince and colony of New York ; situate on the 
shore of the river Mohawks. 

KENDERHOOK, a river of the same province 
and colony as the former settlement. It rises in the 
province of Massachusetts, runs 5. a), and enters 
the Hudson. 

KcNiMiruiooK, a settlement in the same pro 
vince, one mile e. of the river Hudson, 4 n. e. of 
Luncnburg, 10 n. of Livington, and 35 of 
Kingston. 

KENDRICK, a small river of N. Carolina, in 
the district of Hyde. It runs n. and enters the sea 
in the strait of Albermarle. 

[Ki:Nn KICK S Island forms the a,\ side of Nootka 
sound, into which you may enter from the &amp;&amp;amp;gt;. by 
Massachusetts sound, along the n. side of the 
island.] 

[KENNEBECK, next to Penobscot, is the 
finest river in the district of Maine. Three rnilcs 
from the chops, Swan island, seven miles long, 
divides the waters of the river. The waters on 
both sides of it are navigable ; but the channel on 
the c. side of it is mostly used. Thirty-eight miles 
from the sea is the island Nahunkeag, which sig- 



KEN 

nifics the land where eels are taken. Within three 
miles of this island, a small river, coming w. from 
ponds which are in the town of Wintbrop, runs 
into the Kennebeck, and is known by the name of 
Cobbeseconte, called by the Indians Cobbissecon- 
teag, which in their language signifies the place 
where sturgeon are taken. Six miles further up 
the river we find the head of the navigable waters. 
This is a bason 46 miles from the sea, and very 
commodious for the anchoring of vessels. On the 
e. bank of the small fall which terminates the na 
vigation of the Kennebeck, is fort Western, which 
was erected in the year 1752. From that fort to 
Taconnet fall is 18 miles. This is a great fall of 
water, and on the bank of it, on the e. side of the 
river, is fort Halifax, erected in 1754, and situated 
on the point of land formed by the confluence of 
the Sebastacook with the Kennebeck, by which 
the latter is increased one-third in size. The Se 
bastacook comes from lakes nearly n. from its 
mouth ; and in its windings receives brooks and 
small rivers, for the space of 150 miles. Thirty 
miles above fort Halifax, as the river runs, the 
stream called Sandy river flows into the Kenne 
beck, at the point where the ancient town of Nor- 
ridgewock stood : 40 miles or somewhat further up, 
the Kennebeck takes a s. w. course. The Kennebeck 
turning again w. receives the c. branch 50 miles 
from Norridgewock. The main branch of the 
Kennebeck, winding into the wilderness, forms se 
veral carrying-places, one of which, called the 
Great Carrying-place, is five miles across, and the 
river s course gives a distance of 35 miles, for that 
which is gained by five on the dry land. At about 
100 miles distance from the mouth of the e. branch, 
the source of the main or w. branch of the Kenne 
beck is found extended a great distance along the 
side of the Chandierc, which carries the waters 
from the high lands into the St. Lawrence. There 
are no lakes, but a few small ponds and morasses 
at the source of this branch. The carrying-place 
from boatable waters in it to beatable waters in the 
river Chaudiere, is only five miles over. The e. 
branch oftheKenriebeck, which unites with theother 
above Norridgewock, issues from a body of waters 
which lie n. about 20 miles from the confluence of 
the two branches. These waters are called Moose 
Pond or Moose Lake. The sides of the lake are so 
crooked that the body of waters has an irregular 
figure ; but the lake contains three times as much 
water as is found in lake George. There are very 
high mountains to the n. and w. of the lake, 
and from these the waters run by many channels 
to the St.- Lawrence, The Kennebeck affords 
great quantities of lumber, and is inhabited at dif- 



KEN 

ferent seasons by several species of valuable fish. 
Salmon and sturgeon are taken here in great 
abundance, and shad and alewivcs relieve the 
wants of the necessitous part of the inhabitants. 
This river forms the nearest sea-port for the people 
on the upper part of the river Connecticut. From 
the Upper Cohos or Coos, on the latter river to 
the tide-water in Kennebeck, is 90 measured 
miles.] 

[KENNEBUNK, the Indian name of the place 
since called Wells, district of Maine, about 17 
miles n. e. of Portsmouth, New Hampshire.] 

[KENNEBUNK, a river of the district of Maine, 
having a good harbour at its mouth, from whence 
great quantities of lumber are shipped for a market. 
There the lumber of Mousom is shipped at pre 
sent. This river divides the townships of Wells 
and Arundel. It runs a short course, and empties 
into the sea between cape Porpoise and cape Ned- 
dick. See KENNEBUNK, and WELLS.]] 

[KENNET, a township in Chester county, 
Pennsylvania.] 

[KENNOMICK, GREAT, a navigable river 
of the N. W. Territory, emptying into the s. end 
of lake Michigan, about lat. 42 "8 . The wa 
ters of this river communicate, by a portage of 30 
yards, with Little Kennomick, a short river which 
runs n. e. into the lake.] 

[KENSINGTON, a township in Ilockingham 
county, New Hampshire, about three miles .s\ of 
Exeter, nine n. of Newbury-port, and 14 from Ports 
mouth. It was incorporated in 1737. In 1775 
it contained 797, and in 1790, 800 inhabitants.] 

[KENT, a county of Maryland, on the e. shore 
of Chesapeak bay, bounded e. by Newcastle, and 
part of Kent county, Delaware, and w. by Chesa 
peak bay. It is about 32 miles long and 13 
broad, and contains 12,836 inhabitants, including 
5433 slaves. Chief town, Chester.] 

[KENT, a eounly of Rhode island, lyings, of 
Providence county, on the o. side of Narraganset 
bay. It is 20 miles in length, and JO in breadth, 
and is divided into four townships. It contains 
8785 inhabitants, including 63 slaves.] 

[KENT, the middle of the three counties of De 
laware. It is 40 miles from n. to s. and 26 from 
e. to w. and contains 18,920 inhabitants, includ 
ing 2300 slaves. The lands in Kent county are 
esteemed the richest in the state. It is well wa 
tered by several small streams that empty into the 
Delaware. Chief town, Dover.] 

[KENT, an island in Queen Ann s county, Ma 
ryland, and the largest in Chesapeak bay. It is 
12 miles from n. to s. and six in breadth.] 
[KENT, a township in Litchfield county, Con- 



K E N 



351 



nccficut, bordering on the state of New. York, ami 
eight or 10 miles w. of Litchfield.] 

[KENTUCKY, a very crooked river in the 
stale of its name, which after a general w. w. course 
of 200 miles, falls into the Ohio, in lat. 38 20 n. 
It is sometimes called Cuttawa. I(s source is in 
the Laurel mountains, and it interlocks with Lick 
ing river. Its mouth is 77 miles above the Rapids, 
and 62(3 below Pittsburg. Its mouth is 250 yards- 
wide, and the river is navigable ISO miles; the 
current is considerably rapid, the banks being 
high and rocky. It is said black-lead mines 
have been found on the head waters of this river. 
Little Kentucky river is 25 yards wide, and three 
miles ZL\ of Kentucky river.] 

[KENTUCKY, one of the United States of Ame 
rica, bounded n. w. by the river Ohio, zo. by the 
Mississippi, s. by Tennessee state, e. by Sandy river 
and the Great Laurel mountains. It lies between 
lat. 36 30 and 38 45 n. and between long. 81 50 
and 89 10 w. ; about 350 miles long "and 134 
broad, and contains about 50,000 square miles. 
It is divided into 14 counties, viz. Jefferson, I ( ay- 
ette, Bourbon, Mercer, Nelson, Maddison, Lin 
coln, Wood ford, Mason, Washington, Clark, 
Scott, Logan, and Franklin. By the census of 
1810, the population of this state amounted to 
406,511 souls, and by the former census to only 
73,677, of whom 12,430 were slaves. In this 
state there are, according to Mr. Ashe, millions of 
acres, called barrens, altogether incapable of cul 
tivation from want of water. Of the inhabitants 
of this state Mr. Ashe exhibits a very disagreeable 
picture; charging them with ferocity, boisterous* 
ness, and coarse debauchery. 

The river Ohio washes the n. w. side of Ken 
tucky, in its whole extent. Its principal branches 
"which water this fertile tract of country, are Sandy, 
Licking, Kentucky, Salt, Green, and Cumber 
land rivers. These again branch in various di 
rections into rivulets of different magnitudes, fer 
tilizing the country in all its parts. The springs 
and streams lessen in June, and continue low, 
hindering navigation, until November, when the 
autumnal rains swell the rivers, and replenish the 
whole country with water. At the bottoms of these 
water-courses the lime-stone rock, which is com 
mon in this country, appears of a greyish colour; 
and where it is exposed to the air in its natural 
state, it looks like brown free-stone. On the banks 
of these rivers and rivulets, this stone has the ap 
pearance of fine marble, being of the same texture, 
and is found in the greatest plenty. After heavy 
rains, the waters in the rivers rise between the high 
lime-stone banks from 10 to 30 feet. There ae 



352 



KENTUCKY. 



[five noted salt-springs or licks in this country, viz. 
the Higher and Lower Blue springs, the Big Bone 
lick, Drinnon s lick, and Bullet s lick, at Saltsburg. 
The last of these licks has supplied this country 
and Cumberland with salt, at three dolls. 33 cents, 
a bushel, and some is exported to the Illinois 
country. The method of procuring water from 
these licks, is by sinking wells from 30 to 40 feet 
deep, which yield water more strongly impreg 
nated with salt than the water from the sea. 

This whole country, as far as has yet been dis 
covered, lies upon a bed of lime-stone, which in 
general is about six feet below the surface, except 
in the valleys, where the soil is much thinner. A 
tract of about 20 miles wide, along the banks of 
the Ohio, is hilly, broken land, interspersed with 
many fertile spots. The rest of the country is 
agreeably uneven, gently ascending and descend 
ing at no great distances. The angles of ascent 
are from 8 to 24, and sometimes more. The val 
leys in common are very narrow, and the soil in 
them is very thin, and of an inferior quality ; and 
that along the ascending ground is frequently not 
much better ; for where you see a tree blown up 



undertaken to cut a road (it is thought a waggon 
road may be made) from Kentucky, to pass by the 
Sweet springs, in Virginia ; thence to Winches 
ter. This new road, it is supposed, will be nearly 
00 miles shorter than the one now travelled. 

This country in general is well timbered. Of 
the natural growth which is peculiar to this coun 
try, we may reckon the sugar, the coffee, the 
pa paw, the hackberry, and the cucumber trees. 
The two last are soft wood, and bear a fruit of the 
shape and size of a cucumber. The coffee tree 
resembles the black oak, and bears a pod, which 
encloses a seed, of which a drink is made not un 
like coffee. Besides these, there is the honey-lo 
cust, black mulberry, wild cherry, of a large size; 
the buck-eye, an exceeding soft wood, and the 
horse-chesnut of Europe. The magnolia bears a 
beautiful blossom of a rich and exquisite fragrance. 
Such is the variety and beauty of the flowering 
shrubs and plants which grow spontaneously in 
this country, that in the proper season the wilder 
ness appears in blossom. The accounts of the fer 
tility of the soil in this country have, in some in 
stances, exceeded belief, and probably have been 



you find the roots clinging to the upper parts of exaggerated. That some parts of Kentucky, par- 



the rock. The soil on these agreeable ascents (for 
they cannot be called hills) is sufficiently deep, as 
is eVident from the size of the trees. The soil is 
either black or tinged with a lighter or deeper ver 
milion, or is of the colour of dark ashes. In 
many places there are appearances of potter s 
clay, and coal in abundance. The country pro 
mises to be well supplied with wholesome well- 
tasted water. In Nelson county, ??. w. of Rolling 
Fork, a branch of Salt river, is a tract of about 
40 miles square, mostly barren, interspersed with 
plains and strips of good land, which are advan 
tageous situations for raising cattle, as the neigh 
bouring barrens, as they are improperly styled, are 
covered with grass, and afford good pasturage. 
Thclandse. of Nolin creek, a branch of Green river, 
are in general of an inferior quality ; butthe banks 
of Green river afford many desirable situations. 

Toward the head waters of Kentucky river, 
which interlock with the waters of Cumberland 
and Sandy rivers, and the whole country e. and 
5. as far as the Holstori river, is broken and moun 
tainous; and from the description given by hunters, 
it has been much doubted whether it would ever 
be practicable to make a passable road from Ken 
tucky across to Winchester, in Virginia, on the 
e. side of the mountains, which, on a straight 
line, is not perhaps more than 400 miles, and the 
way now travelled being 600. This doubt, how 
ever, is now removed, and a company have lately 



ticularly the high grounds, are remarkably good, 
all accounts agree. The lands of the first rate are 
too rich for wheat, and will produce 50 and 60, and 
in some instances, it is affirmed, 100 bushels of 
good corn an acre. In common, the land will pro 
duce 30 bushels of wheat or rye an acre. Barley, 
oats, flax, hemp, and vegetables of all kinds com 
mon in this climate, yield abundantly. Cotton is 
seldom and with difficulty brought to perfection. 
Irish potatoes produce in abundance ; sweet pota 
toes are raised with difficulty. 

The old Virginia planters say, that if the climate 
does not prove too moist, few soils known will 
yield more or better tobacco. Experience has 
proved that the climate is not too moist. Great 
quantities of this article have been exported to 
France and Spain, through New Orleans ; and it 
is a well known fact, that Philadelphia is a profit 
able market for the Kentucky planters, notwith 
standing all the inconveniences and expences of re- 
shipment at New Orleans, under a Spanish go 
vernment. What advantages then m. iy not this 
country expect, since the free navigation of the 
Mississippi is now enjoyed ? 

In the rivers are plenty of buffalo, pike, and 
catfish of uncommon size, salmon, mullet, rock, 
perch, rarfish, eel, suckers, sun fish, &amp;c. Shad 
have not been caught in the w. waters. 

Swamps are rare in Kentucky; and of course 
the reptiles which they produce, such as snakes,] 



KEN 

| frogs, &amp;c. are not numerous. The honey-bee 
may be called a domestic insect, as it is said not 
to be found but in civilized countries. This is 
confirmed by a saying which is common among 
the Indians, when they see a swarm of bees in the 
woods, " Well, brothers, it is time for us to de 
camp, for the white people are coming." Never 
theless, bees, of late years, have abounded, to their 
amazement, even 200 miles n. and n. zo. of the 
Ohio. The quadrupeds, except the buffalo, are 
the same as in Virginia and the Carolinas. 

The climate is healthy and delightful, some few 
places in the neighbourhood of ponds and low 
grounds excepted. The inhabitants do not ex 
perience the extremes of heat and cold. Snow 
seldom falls deep, or lies long. The winter, 
which begins about Christmas, is never longer 
than three months, and is commonly but two, and 
is so mild as that cattle can subsist without fodder. 

Kentucky experiences a greater degree of tem 
perature than any of the neighbouring slates ; 
Fahrenheit s thermometer seldom falling below 
35 deg. in winter, nor rising above SO deg. in sum 
mer. The approach of the seasons is gradual. 
The summer continues mostly to the middle of 
October. The autumn or mild weather generally 
continues until Christmas, when there is some 
cold and frost until February, when the spring ap 
proaches; and by the beginning of March several 
shrubs and trees begin to shoot forth their buds ; 
by the middle of the month the buck-eye or horse- 
chesnut is clad in summer s array ; and by the 
middle of April the foliage of the forests is com 
pletely expanded ; which is a fortnight earlier 
than the leaves arc shot forth in Virginia and 
Maryland : and Cumberland is proportionally 
more temperate than N. Carolina, as Kentucky is 
to Virginia. Malt-liquor, spirits distilled from 
corn and rye, and the juice of the sugar-tree mixed 
with water, constitute the ordinary beverage of the 
country. Here are various minerals ; as iron, 
copper, lead, sulphur, nitre, c. Iron-works are 
in such forwardness as to furnish large quantities 
of castings. 

The legislature of Virginia, while Kentucky be 
longed to that state, made provision for a college 
in it, and endowed it with very considerable landed 
funds. The Jlcv.John Todd collected, chiefly 
from a number of liberal gentlemen in England, a 
very handsome library for its use. This college, 
of late, has not flourished ; and another has been 
established, and considerable funds collected for its 
support. Schools are established in the several 
towns, and in general regularly and handsomely 
supported. In this state are two printing 1 offices, 

VOL. II. 



K E O 



353 



and two weekly gazettes published. There are 
erected a paper-mill, oil-mills, fulling-mills, saw 
mills, and a great number of valuable grist-mills. 
Several valuable tanneries have been established in 
different parts of the country. Their salt works 
are more than sufficient to supply all their inha 
bitants at a low price. They make considerable 
quantities of sugar from the sugar-trees. 

The banks, or rather precipices, of Kentucky 
and Dick s river, are to be reckoned among the 
natural curiosities of this country. Here the 
astonished eye beholds 300 or 400 feet of solid 
perpendicular rock, in some parts of the lime-stone 
kind, and in others of fine white marble, curi 
ously checquered with strata of astonishing regu 
larity. These rivers have the appearance of deep 
artificial canals. Their high rocky banks are 
covered with red cedar groves. 

Caves have been discovered in this country of 
several miles in length, under a fine lime-stonr 
rock, supported by curious arches and pillars. 
Springs that emit sulphureous matter have been 
found in several parts of the country. One is near 
a salt spring in the neighbourhood of Boons- 
borough. There aie three springs or ponds &amp;lt;) 
bitumen near Green river, which do not form u 
stream, but empty themselves into a common re 
servoir, and when used in lamps, answer all thf- 
purposcs of the best oil. Copperas and alum are 
among the minerals of Kentucky. Near Lexington 
are found curious sepulchres full of human .skele 
tons. It has been asserted that a man in or neas 
Lexington, having dug five or six feet below tin* 
surface of the ground, came to a large flat stone, 
under which was a well of common depth, re 
gularly and artificially stoned. 

The distance of Philadelphia, by land, to Ken 
tucky is between 700 and 800 miles; from Balti 
more nearly 700 ; nearly 600 from Alexandria ; 
and upwards of 500 from Richmond. From the 
rapids of the Ohio to Santa Fe, is 1000 miles, and 
from thence to the city of Mexico, 1500.] 

KENTY, a settlement of Indians, of the district 
and territory of the Iroquces Indians; on the 
shore of the lake Ontario, and on the point of land 
formed by this lake and that of S. Leon. 

KENUMMO, a small river of Virginia, in the 
county of Hampshire ; which runs n. and enters 
the Ohio. 

[KEOWE, or KEOWF.E, the name given to Sa 
vannah river, above its confluence with the Tugulo, 
the w. main branch.] 

[KEOWE, anciently a populous town and terri 
tory of the Cherokee Indians, on the river of that 
name, the n. easternmost branch of Savannah river, 
z z 






K I C 

The soil is very fertile, and the adjacent heights 
might, with little expence, be rendered almost im 
pregnable. The fruitful vale of Keowe is seven or 
eight miles in extent, when a high ridge of hills 
terminates the vale, but opens again below the 
ridge, and continues 10 or 12 miles down to Sinica, 
and in width one or two miles. This was formerly 
one continued and thickly inhabited settlement, 
well cultivated and planted. It now exhibits a 
very different spectacle to the feeble remains of the 
once potent Cherokees. Fort George formerly 
stood near the old site of Keowe.] 

[KEPLERS, a village in Berks county, Penn 
sylvania, on Little Schuylkill river, the n. branch 
of Schuylkill river ; 21 miles n. n. w. of Reading, 
and 32 w. of Bethlehem.] 

[KERISONGAR, a lake in the district of 
Maine, which sends its waters to Penobscot river.] 
KERK, a settlement of the province and govern 
ment of Guayana, in the part possessed by the 
Dutch ; on the shore of the river Cotica. 

KERSANGO, a lake of Canada, on the con 
fines of New England. It empties itself into the 
river Penobscot. 

[KERSHAW, a county of Camden district, S. 
Carolina, oa Wateree river, which separates it 
from Richland county. It is 35 miles in length 
and 30 in breadth.] 

[KESIAH. See CUSHAI River.] 
KEWOCHE, a settlement of Indians of S.Ca 
rolina, on the n. confines. 

[KEYES, or KEVCHIES, are Indians who live 
on the e. bank of Trinity river, a small distance 
above where the road from Natchitoches to St. 
Antoine crosses it. There are of them sixty men : 
have their peculiar native language, but mostly 
now speak Caddo ; intermarry with this tribe, and 
live together in much harmony, formerly having 
lived near them, on the head waters of the Sabine. 
They plant corn and some other vegetables.] 

[KEYWAWA, a small isle in Charlestown 
harbour, S. Carolina.] 

[KIARSERGE GORE, inHillsborough county, 
New Hampshire, contains 103 inhabitants.] 

[K1CKAPOUS, an Indian nation, whose dif 
ferent tribes inhabit near the entrance of lake Su 
perior, where 20 years ago they had 400 warriors ; 
part reside at lake Michigan, and between that 
and the Mississippi, near 1 he Outtagomies, &amp;c. and 
another tribe near the Piankeshaws, and on the 
VV abash and its branches. 

The Kickapous and Kaskaskias, two Indian na 
tions lately hostile, ceded lands to the United 
Suites at the treaty of Greenville, August 3, 1795. 
The United States, on the other hand, paid them a 



K I N 

sum of money in hand, and engaged to pay then* 
in goods, annually, to the value of 500 dollars for 
ever.] 

[KICKEMUIT River is a n. w. arm of Mount 
Hope bay. It is about two miles long, and half 
a mile broad. The town of Warren, in Bristol 
county, in the state of Rhode Island, lies w. w. of it.] 

[KIGLAPYED, on the coast of Labrador, in 
Davis strait, n. from and near NAIN ; which see.] 

"KIKE I ON EC Point. See KIOANON.] 

KIKOTAN, a small river of the province and 
colony of Maryland, which runs e. and enters the 
sea.] 

[KILKENNY, a town in Grafton county, 
New Hampshire, incorporated in 1774, but not in 
habited.] 

[KILL1NGLY, a town in Windham county, 
Connecticut, in the n. e. part of the state, border 
ing on Rhode Island, and separated from Pomfret 
by Quinebaug river. It lies about 16 miles e. of 
Windham, and has a Congregational church. The 
original settlers were from Massachusetts. The 
town was incorporated in May 1708. In 1728, it 
was divided into two parishes ; one of which is 
now incorporated by the name of Thompson.] 

[KILL1NGTON, a mountainous township in 
Rutland county, Vermont, having Medway on the 
w. Barnard n. e. and Saltash on the s. e. and con 
tains 32 inhabitants. Waterquechee river has its 
source in a pond in this town.] 

[KILLING WORTH, a post-town in Middle 
sex county, Connecticut ; situated on Long island 
sound, seven miles e. ofGuilford,and 17 w. of New 
London. The Indian name of the township was 
Hammonasset ; and a stream of that name runs on 
the w. side of the town, and divides it from Guil- 
ford. It was settled in 1663 by 12 planters from 
Hartford, Guilford, and Windsor. The English 
name designed to have been given this town was 
Kennelwortb, but by mistake it was recorded Kil- 
lingworth. It was incorporated in 1703.] 

["K1LLISTINOES, Indians who inhabit on 
lake Superior, and can furnish 250 warriors.] 

[KIMBECK, a place on the e. bank of Hud 
son s river ; 17 or 18 miles n. of Poughkeepsie.] 

[KINDERHOOK, a post-town in Columbia 
county, New York, on the e. side of Hudson s 
river, eight miles n. of Hudson city, 15 s. of Al 
bany, 105 n. of New York, and 22 w. by n. of 
Stockbridge in Massachusetts. The township 
contains 4661 inhabitants; of whom 411 are elec 
tors, and 638 slaves.] 

[KINDERHOOK Landing, in the above township, 
is situated under the bank of the river, surrounded 
with an uncleared barren country ; has about 15 or 



K I N 

20 houses, and nearly as many stores and other 
buildings; 11 miles s. of Albany. The town, 
through which the stage to New York runs, is 
about five miles c. of the Landing.] 

K1NEBEQU1, a small river of the province 
and colony of New England. 

[KING AND QUEEN, a county of Virginia, on 
Mattapany river, which separates it from King 
William s county. It is about 25 miles long and 
20 broad, and contains 9377 inhabitants, includ 
ing 5 143 slaves.] 

[KiNG GEORGE, an ancient fort on the borders 
of E. Florida, near St. Mary s river.] 

[KiNG GEORGE, a county of Virginia, lying 
between the Patowmac, and Itappahannock rivers. 
It is 22 miles long and 14 broad, and contains 
7366 inhabitants, of whom 4157 are slaves.] 

[KING GEORGE S Sound, or NOOTKA, lies on 
the n. w. coast of N. America, in lat. 49 36 n. 
See NOOTKA.] 

[KiNG\ViLLiAM,acounty of Virginia, between 
Mattapany and Pamunky rivers. It is 47 miles 
long and 15 broad, and contains 8128 inhabitants, 
of whom 5151 are slaves.] 

[KING S, a county of Nova Scotia, compre 
hending the lands on the s. w. and s. sides of the 
Basin of Minas. The Habitant is navigable for 
vessels of 40 tons a little way up; the Canaid 
for vessels of 160 tons, four or five miles ; and the 
Cornwallis is navigable for vessels of JOO tons five 
miles, for those of 50 tons 10 miles farther. There 
are considerable settlements on these rivers, and 
they afford a good portion of fine lands for tillage, 
and for herbage, and some excellent meadows. In 
the rivers are found a great abundance of shad of 
an excellent kind ; and in the Basin of Minas are 
fine cod-fish, haddock, bass, and flat fish of dif 
ferent kinds.] 

[KING S BRIDGE, a post-town of New York, 
15 miles n. of New York city^ and 29 s. w. of 
Stamford in Connecticut. The bridge here con 
nects New York island with the mainland. It 
was strongly fortified during the war. The heights 
about it are commanding.] 

[KING S or PEARL. Island, a small island in 
the bay of Panama. It belongs to Spain, and is 
famous for its pearl fishery ; and lies in lat. 7 12 
. Long. 81 36 w. from London.] 

[KING S, a maritime county of New York, 
* containing all that part of the state bounded e. 
by Queen s county, n. by New York county, w. 
partly by Hudson s river, partly by the ocean ; 
and s. by the Atlantic ocean, including Coney 
islands." This fertile tract of land, situated OH 
the w. end of Long island, and separated from 



KIN 



355 



Staten island by the Narrows, contributes largely 
to the supply of the New York market with ve 
getables, roots, fruits, butler, &amp;c. It is divided 
into six townships, and contains 4495 inhabitants, 
including 1432 slaves. Chief towns, Brooklyn 
and Flatbush. ] 

[KINGLESS, a township in Philadelphia 
county, Pennsylvania.] 

[KINGSBURY, a township in Washington 
county, New York, bounded e. by the tract of 
land called the Provincial Patent. It contains 
1120 inhabitants.] 

KINGSTON, a city, the capital of the island 
of Jamaica, one of the Antilles ; situate n. of the 
bay of Port Royal, and at the present day a parish 
and head of the district, although it formerly be 
longed to San Andres: founded in 1692, accord 
ing to a plan drawn by Colonel Lilly, after the 
great, earthquake, which destroyed Port Royal. It 
is of a very beautiful plant, and contains about 
12,000 houses well built and divided into plots. 
T he streets are wide, and cut at right angles. It 
is the residence of the principal merchants of the 
island, is a mile and an half long, and about the 
same wide. The number of inhabitants is 1 i ,000, 
amongst which we count 5000 Negro slaves, and 
1200 Negro and Mulatto bondsmen. [Other ac 
counts say, that in 1788, the white inhabitants 
amounted to 6539 ; free people of colour 3280 ; 
and slaves 16,659 ; in all 26,478.] 

It is a town of great commerce, and there are 
never fewer vessels in its bay than 200; so that it 
is in fair competition on this score with Port Royal. 
The bay of Kingston was fortified at great expence 
by Adroiral Charles Knowles, the governor of the 
island, and is capable of containing a thousand 
ships, which may lie very close to the land ; but 
the peninsula which protects it from the sea is so 
low and narrow that they are not secure in tem 
pests. There are established for the defence of this 
city 10 companies of infantry and two of horse, 
amounting in the whole to about 1000 men. It 
has a Protestant church, two Jewish synagogues, 
and a Quakers meeting-house, and it used to send 
three deputies to the assembly. Besides the ordi 
nary tribunal of justice, which sits every two 
months, there are resident a receiver-general, a 
commandant of marine, a secretary, and a super- 
intendant. By the list of vessels which for 20 
years have left its port, we have the average of 400 
annually. In 1722, it suffered much from an hur 
ricane, which was extremely furious, and lasted 
from eight in the morning till 10 at night, destroy 
ing half the houses; and it has since experienced 
many others, though not of equal violence. It i* 
z z 2 



356 



KIN 



five miles by sea from Puerto Heal, but by land f 5, 
and by very bad roads; 1! miles from Spanish- 
town, half of which way it is necessary to make 
by hind, and the other half by sea ; and is in lat. 
17 59 SO" 71. Long. 76 43 /- w. 

[KINGSTON, orEsopus, a post-town of New 
York, situated in Ulster county, on the w. side 
of Hudson s river, six miles z. of Rhinebeck, and 
on the e. side of Esopus kill or creek. It. was de 
stroyed on the 15th of October 1777, by order of 
General Vaughan, cammanding a fleet which 
sailed up the Hudson, when large quantities of 
stores were consumed. It is rebuilt on a regular 
plan, and contains about 150 houses, a court-house, 
gaol, a Dutch reformed church, and an academy. 
It is most pleasantly situated upon, and surrounded 
by a spacious plain. It is 45 miles s. of Albany, 
and 76 n. of New York. Lat. 41 56 n. Long. 
73 56 w. The township contains 3929 inhabi 
tants, of whom 556 are electors, and 302 slaves.] 

[KINGSTON, a township in Addison county, 
Vermont, containing 101 inhabitants.] 

[KINGSTON, a township in Plymouth county, 
Massachusetts, on the to. part of Plymouth bay, 
bounded n. by Duxborough, and contains 1004 
inhabitants. There is here a slitting and rolling 
mill. The town was incorporated in 1707. It is 
22 miles s. e. of Boston.] 

[KINGSTON, a township in Rockingham coun 
ty, New Hampshire, lying on the road which 
leads from Exeter to liaverhill, in Massachusetts, 
six miles from the former, 10 from Haverhill, and 
sixteen from Portsmouth. It was incorporated in 
1694. In 1775, it contained 961 inhabitants, and 
in 1790, 906.] 

[KINGSTON, a village in New Jersey, three 
miles w. f. of Princeton, and 11 s. .w. of Bruns 
wick ; an elevated and pleasant spot.] 

[KINGSTON, the chief town of Lcnoir county, 
Newbern district, N. Carolina. It is a post-town, 
situated in a beautiful plain on the n. side of Neus 
river, and contains a court-house, gaol, and about 
30 houses. It is 34 miles ^r. of Newbern, and 17 
from Waynesborough.J 

[KINGSTON, a township in Luzerne county, 
Pennsylvania.] 

[KINGSTON, a town of Georgetown district, S. 
Carolina. It is situated on the w. side of Wak- 
kamau river, and contains an Episcopal church, 
and about 30 houses. It is 27 miles ??. by e. of 
Georgetown, and 85 n. n. e. of Clmrlestown. Lat. 
335l H. Long. 78 54. w.J 

[KINGSTON, a village in lalbot county, Mary 
land, situated on the e. side of (Jhoptank river, 
four miles below the Forks.] 



K I S 

[KINGSTON, formerly called Frontinac, is si 
tuated on the n. part of lake Ontario, at the month 
of its outlet into Iroquois river ; 167 miles &amp;lt;?. w. of 
Montreal, and 115 n. e. of Niagara. Here the 
king s stores are kept and guarded by one com 
pany of men. Part of Old fort Frontinac is now 
standing, the best part of which is the magazine. 
Kingston contains about 100 houses. Large ves 
sels go no farther than this place ; thence to Nia 
gara, &amp;c. stores and merchandise are conveyed in 
boats.] 

KINGSTON, a city, the capital of the island of 
St. Vincent, one of the Caribcs ; situate in the 
bay of the same name, at the extremity, and in the 
s. w. part of the island. It is the residence of the 
governor, and the place of meeting for the as 
sembly. 

[KINGWOOD, a township in Huntingdon 
county, New Jersey, containing 2446 inhabitants, 
including 104 slaves. It is about five miles be 
low Alexandria, and 15 s. ze. of Lebanon. Also 
the name of a small river of New Jersey.] 

[K1NSALE, a post-town of Virginia, 16 miles 
from Westmoreland court-house, and 12 from 
Northumberland court-house.] 

[KIOANON Point, called in some maps Ki- 
keionec, is the extremity of a large peninsula 
which projects far into the s. side of lake Supe 
rior.] 

KlOIIICANS, a settlement of Indians of the 
province and government of Louisiana, on the 
shore of the Ked river. 

[KIONTONA, an Indian town on Conewango 
river in Pennsylvania, and 11 miles n. from its 
mouth in Alleffhany river.] 

KIOVEOIJNAN, a point on the s. coast "of 
lake Superior in Canada. 

KIHTON, a settlement of the island of Barba- 
does, on the s. coast. 

KiSHEQUOCHKELOS, a small river of the 
province and colony of Pennsylvania, which runs 
s. between the a), and c. arms of the river Susque- 
hannah. 

[K1SIITAC, an island on the n. a?, coast of N. 
America, lies e. of Foggy cape, on the s. e. side 
of the peninsula of Alaska, and on that part of it 
opposite the head of Bristol bay, on the n. w. side 
of the peninsula. It is also opposite the mouth of 
Cook s river.] 

KISKEMANITAS, a town of the province 
and colony of Virginia, on the shore of the river 
Ohio, in the country of the Schawnoes Indians. 

[KisK EM ANITAS River is a branch of Alle- 
ghany river, into which it empties in lat. 40 4CK 
a, in Westmoreland county, Pennsylvania. Its 



K N O 

head waters arc Little Conemangh ami Stone 
crock. After their junction it is called Cone- 
maugh river. It tliea receives Black Lick from 
the tt. e. and 17 miles from its mouth Loyalhannon 
creek enters from the s. s. e. after which it is 
called Kiskemanitas river. It is navigable for bal- 
teaux 40 or 50 miles, and good portages are 
found between it and Jnniatta and Patowmac 
rivers. Coal und salt arc discovered in the vicinity 
of these rivers.] 

KITANING, a settlement of Erics Indians, in 
the province and colony of Pennsylvania, where 
the English have a fort and establishment for their 
commerce. It is situate on the shore of the river 
Ohio. 

K1TCHIGAMIN, a lake of Canada, formed 
by the river Outagamis, and emptying itself in 
the bay of Puants of the lake Michigan. 

KTTOWA, a settlement of Indians of the pro 
vince and colony of N. Carolina, in the county 
of the Cherokecs Indians. 

[K1TTAT INNY Mountains, a ridge of the 
Allcghany mountains, which runs through the n. 
parts of New Jersey and Pennsylvania.] 

[K1TTERY, a township in York county, dis 
trict of Maine, incorporated in 1653, and consists 
of three parishes, containing 3250 inhabitants. 
It is situated between Piscataqua and York rivers, 
49 miles . of Boston. In this town is Sturgeon 
creek, called so from the plenty of that fish in the 
mouth of the creek at the first settlement of the 
country ; but there have been none found for these 
many years past. This creek is famous in the 
history of the first settlers.] 

[KITT S, ST. See ST. CHRISTOPHER S.] 

KNIGHT, a settlement of the island of Barba- 
tloes, in the district of the parish of Christchurcb, 
on the s. coast. 

[KNOB Lick, in Mercer county, Kentucky, 
lies 15 miles s. e. of Ilarrodstown, and about 12 s. 
of Danville.} 

[KNOVVLTON, a township in Sussex county, 
New Jersey, containing 1937 inhabitants, of whom 
13 are slaves.] 

[KNOWLTON, a grant in Chittenden county, 
Vermont, lies e. of Smithfield, and w. of Kellys- 
burgh, and contains 10,000 acres of land.] 

[KNOX, a county in the state of Tennessee, 
in Hamilton district, contained in 1795, accord 
ing to the state census, 1 1,573 inhabitants, of whom 
2365 were slaves.] 

[KNOX, a county in the N. W. Territory, erected 
June 20, 1790. " Beginning at the Standing 
Stone forks of the Great Miami river, and down 



K O R 



357 



the said river to its confluence with the Ohio river; 
thence with the Ohio to the small rivulet above 
fort Massac ; thence with the e. boundary line of 
St. Clair county to the mouth of the Little Mi- 
chilimackinack ; thence up the Illinois river to the 
forks or confluence of the Theakiki and Chicago ; 
thence by a line to be drawn due n. to the boun 
dary line of the territory of the United Stales, and 
so tar e. upon said boundary, as thai a due s. line 
may be drawn to the place of beginninu;." Also 
the name of a fort in the same territory.] 

[KNOX, one of Ingraham s islands. Captain 
Ingraham discovered two islands, which he called 
Knox and Hancock, which Captain Roberts soon 
after discovering, called Freeman and Langdon. 
These islands had every appearance of fertility. 
Their latitude is from 8 3 1 to 8 5 s. and their 
longitude very nearly 141 a), from Greenwich.] 

[KNOXV1LLE, the metropolis of the state of 
Tennessee, is situated in Knox county, on the n. 
side of Ilolston river, on abeautiful spot of ground, 
37 miles above the junction of Ilolston river with 
the Tennessee, and 70 below the mouth of French 
Broad river. It is in a nourishing situation, and 
enjoys a communication with every part of the 
United States by post. It is regularly laid out, 
and contains about 130 houses, a court-house, 
gaol, and barracks large enough to contain 700 
men. The supreme courts of law and equity for 
the district of Hamilton are held here half-yearly, 
and the courts of pleas and quarter sessions for 
Knox county are held here. A college has been 
established here by government, called Blount 
College. It is 32 miles r?. e. of Tellico, 1 10 s. e, 
by .9. of Frankfort in Kentucky ; 305 w. by s. of 
Richmond in Virginia, and 470 s. w. of Phila 
delphia.] 

[KODIAC, an island on the s. shore of the 
peninsula of ALASKA, on the n. to, coast, which 
see.] 

KOKO, a river of the province and captainship 
of Scara in Brazil, which runs into the sea in the 
buy of Iguape and port Mocoripe. 

KONOHASET, a maritime city, with a good 
port, in the county of Suffolk, and province and 
colony of Massachusetts. Four miles e. of If ing- 
ham, four w. of Situate town and its port, and 11 
s. e. of Boston. 

KONONICUT, an island in the bay of Nar- 
rangaset, and province of Rhode Island. It is 
long arid narrow, seven miles from n. to s. and not 
more than one wide. 

[KORTR1GHT, a township in Otsego county, 
New York ; 122 of its inhabitants are electors.] 



358 



LAB 



KOUROW, a settlement of the missions held 
by the French, in the province and government of 
Guayana. 

KOUROW, a river of Cayenne, belonging to the 
French. It rises in the mountains, and enters the 
sea between Surinam and Cayenne. 

KOUSAKI, a lake of the province and colony 
of Sagadahock, on the confines of Nova Scotia, 
from which is formed the river S. Croix. 

[KOYAHT, a small isle at the s. end of Wash 
ington isle, at the entrance of a strait separating a 
small isle from the largest.] 

KRABBEN, an island of the N. sea, near the 
coast of Guayana, in the part possessed by the 
Dutch, at the mouth of the river Berbice. 

[KRIS, Indians inhabiting the banks of lake 
CUristineaux. They can raise 1200 warriors.] 



LAB 

KUERICOURT, a river of the province and 
government of Guayana, in the French posses 
sions. It runs n. and enters the Oyapoco. 

[KULSAGE,or SUGAR Town, a little Cherokee 
town in the vale of Keovve.] 

KUPUNA W1N1, a river of the same province 
and government as the former, in the Dutch pos 
sessions. It enters the Essequebo. 

KUSKUSKIES, a town and capital of the ter 
ritory of Six allied Indian Nations of Canada, on 
the shore of the river Beven, where the English 
have an establishment and fort for their com 
merce. 

[KYUQUOT, a large sound or bay on the 
n. w. coast of N. America, having Roberts island 
on the one side. Lat. 50 n. Long. 127 20* 



, a large and abundant river of the 
kingdom of Chile; 15 leagues from the renowned 
Biobio to the s. and 50 from the Maulc, and be 
tween both lies the country and province of the 
Araucanos Indians. It abounds in excellent fish, 
is navigable at high tides, though only by small 
vessels, and empties itself into the Pacific or S. sea, 
forming a small bay, in lat. 37 56 s. 

LABRADO, a small river of the province of 
Yapizlaga, orllanos of Manso, in Peru, which runs 
e. and enters the Paraguay, between the Blanco 
and port San Fernando. 

LABRADOR, one of the n. countries of N. 
America, called also New Britain or Equimaux. 
It is s. w. of Greenland, has to the n. the straits of 
Hudson and part of the Atlantic, and this latter 
sea also to the e. ; divided s. e. from Newfound 
land by the straits of Belleisle, and having on the 
s. the gulf and river of S. Lawrence and part 
of Canada, and to the w. Hudson s bay. It ex 
tends from lat. 50 to 61 n. and from long. 55 to 
about 70 w. It is nearly triangular, but the 
interior of the country is not precisely known, nor 
have we more than an imperfect idea of the coast. 
The great poverty and savage state of the nations 
dwelling near the sea-coast, and the excessive 
coldness of the climate, have deterred Europeans 
from settling. The savages live by hunting and 
bartering skins. This country, together with the 



coast of Hudson s bay and the neighbouring ter 
ritories, was ceded by France to the English at 
the peace of Utrecht, in 1713. Amongst all the 
nations known in America, to none is the term of 
savages so aptly applied as to the ESQUIMAUX ; 
see this article. 

LABRADOR, a large lake of Cape Britain, which 
empties itself into the sea by two channels of very 
unequal form, made by the island of Verderone or 
La Bouladerie. 

LABRADORES, a settlement and head settle 
ment of the district of the Nuevo Reyno de Leon, 
abounding in goats and neat cattle, but scanty in 
grain and vegetable productions. On the s. at the 
distance of 10 leagues, is an estate called El Pal- 
lillo, and to the s. e. of this, those of La Soledad 
and San Joseph, where are the boundaries of the 
jurisdictions of Ch areas and Mazapil. Thirty- 
four leagues s. a quarter to the s. w. of its capi 
tal. 

LABRANZA, GRANDE, a settlement of the 
jurisdiction of the city of Santiago of La Atalaya, 
in the government of Los Llanos, of the Nuevo 
Reyno de Granada. Its situation is in a rough 
and craggy territory, of a warm climate, abound 
ing in sugar-canes, cotton, maize, yucas, plan 
tains, and other fruits of the like climate ; also in 
horses and mules. It contains 300 housekeepers 
and many Indians, who trade in cotton stuffs, of 



LAC 

they make a considerable portion. Sixteen 
leagues from So^amoso. 

LABYRINTH, a lake of Canada, formed by 
a waste-water or river which enters the lake Abi- 
tibis, to enter the Temiscaming, and forms at in 
tervals some other small lakes or pools, to the 
number of eleven. 

LAC, a river of the province and government 
of Louisiana. It rises from lake Misisagan, runs 
*. e. and enters the Mississippi, close to the fall of 
S. Anthony. 

LACABAMBA, a settlement of the province 
and corregimiento of Conch ucos in Peru ; annexed 
to the curacy of Pallasca. 

LACHA, a small river of the province and cap 
tainship of Key in Brazil, which runs e. and enters 
the sea on the side of the bay of Tapicii. 

[LACHA WANNOCK, a mountain in the n. w. 
part of Pennsylvania.] 

[LACIIAWANNOCK, a township in Luzerne 
county, Pennsylvania.] 

LACHES, a settlement of the province and go 
vernment of Atacames or Esmeraldas in the king 
dom of Quito, with a good embarking place on 
the river Bogota to proceed down to the port of 
Limones, 

LACHES, a barbarous nation of Indians, of the 
Nuevo Reyno de Granada, in the province of 
Tunja. They live in the mountains of the woods, 
and are bounded by the Tames or Chitareros ; are 
ferocious, treacherous, and extremely sensual. 
Their country lies n. e. of Santa Fe de Bogota, 
and formerly it was a province distinct from 
Tunja, called after their own name, and now 
called Chocuy. 

LACHICHiNA, a settlement of the head settle 
ment of the district of Comaltepec, and alcaldia 
mayor of Villalta, in Nueva Espana. It is of an 
hot temperature, contains 62 Indian families, and 
is nine leagues w. of its capital. 

LACH1GOJANI, a settlement of the alcaldia 
mayor of Nexapa in Nueva Espana, containing 
51 Indian families. 

LACHIGUIRI, SAN JOSEPH DE, a settlement 
of the head settlement of the district of Mistc- 
peque, and alcaldia mayor of Nexapa, in Nueva 
Espana. It contains 75 families of Indians, whose 
commerce consists in making mats, as its district 
abounds in palms. Four leagues s. of the settle 
ment of San Agnstin. 

LACHIJOBA, a settlement of the head settle 
ment of the district of Comaltepec, and alcaldia 
mayor of Nueva Espana. It is of an hot tempe 
rature, contains S8 Indian families, and is 10 
leagues e. of its capital. 



LAG 



359 



LACHIRRIO, a settlement and head settle 
ment of the same alcaldia and kingdom as the 
former. It is of a mile temperature, contains 300 
families of Indians, and is a quarter of a league 
w. of its capital. 

LACH1VEA, SANTIAGO DE, a settlement of 
the head settlement of the district and alcaldia, 
mayor of Nexapa in Nueva Espaiia; situate in a 
llanura, of a cold temperature, and containing 27 
Indian families. 

LACHIXILA, SAN JUAN DE, a settlement of 
the head settlement of the district of Yautepec, 
and alcaldia mayor of Nexapa, in Nueva Espana ; 
situate on a plain on the shore of an abundant river, 
in which are caught plenty of trout and other fish 
called roncados, by the few Indian families the 
inhabitants. The decrease of its population has 
been excessive, owing to the number of venomous 
animals found here. Ten leagues w. of its head 
settlement. 

[LACK, a township in Mifflin county, Penn 
sylvania.] 

[LA-COLE, a river which falls into lake 
Champlain from the w. five miles s. s. w. of Nut 
island, after a short course.] 

[LACOMIC, a small creek which empties 
through the w. bank of Alleghany river in Penn 
sylvania, opposite Licking creek, a short distance 
below fort Franklin.] 

[LACON1A. The tract of land extending 
from the river Merrimack to Sagadahock, and 
from the ocean to the lakes and rivers of Canada, 
went under this name in the grant of lands, in 
1622, from the council of Plymouth to Captain 
Mason and Sir Ferdinand Gorges.] 

LACRAMARCA, a settlement of the province 
and corregimiento of Santa in Peru ; annexed to 
the curacy of Macate in the province of Guailas. 

LACSA, a settlement of the province and cor- 
regimiento of Omasuyos in Peru. 

LACTA, a settlement of the province and cor 
regimiento of Riobambain the kingdom of Quito. 

LACUMBO, a river of the province and cor- 
regimiento of Arica in the kingdom of Peru. It 
runs w. and enters the sea in the creek of La- 
quiaca. 

[LADIES Island, a small island of S. Carolina, 
near Port Royal.] 

LA DRONES, small isles of the S. sea, close to the 
coast of the province and government of Veraguu 
in the kingdom of Tierra Firme. They are two, 
arid lie at the side of the cape of Boruga. 

LAGARTOS, Rio DE, a river of the province 
and government of Santa Marta and Nuevo Rcyno 
de Granada. It rises in the mountains of that 

1 



360 



LAG 



vicinity, and enters the N. sea, near the settlement 
of Chagre del Oeste. 

LAGARTOS, another, of the province and king 
dom of Tierra Firme, \vhich rises in the moun 
tains s. of the isthmus near the river Bayano, 
and enters the Pacific in the bay and gulf of Pa 
nama. 

LAGARTOS, another, in the province and go 
vernment of Yucatan, and kingdom of Nueva 
Espafia. It enters the sea between the settlement 
of Silan and the port of Cuyo. 

LAG E WAN, a long island, situate at the 
mouth or entrance of the river Demerary, in the 
province and government of Guayana, in the 
Dutch possessions. 
LAGO. See LAKE. 

LAGOA, a settlement of the province and 
country of Las Amazonas, in the part of the Por 
tuguese, a reduction of (he missions held thereby 
the Carmelite fathers of Portugal ; situate on the 
shore of the river Paranaiba. 

[LAGOON, one of the new discovered islands 
in the S. sea. Captain Cook visited it in 1769. 
Lat. 18 47 s. Long. 139 28 w. from Green 
wich.] 

LAGOS, a province and alcaldia mayor of 
the kingdom of Nucva Galicia in N. America, 
bounded s. e. by the town of Leon. It is an ex 
tensive jurisdiction, of a mild temperature, and 
abounding in wheat, maize, French beans, and 
other seeds ; as well as in large and small cattle. 
Of the above its commerce consists, as also in its 
silver mines, renowned for purity of metal. It is 
irrigated by different rivers, which facilitate its 
trade, and the population consists of the following 
settlements : 

Oomanja, Nuestra Seiiora de S. 

S. Miguel de Buenavis- Juan, 

ta, Jalostolitlan, 

S. Juan dc la Lagu- S. Gaspar, 

na, Milic, 

Moya, Temacapulin. 

The capital is of the same name, a town found 
ed by Nuno de Guzman. It contains 200 families 
of Spaniards, Clusters, and Mnlattoes, and many 
Indians, who dwell in the wards of its district. 
It is 35 leagues e.n.e. of Guadalaxara, and 70 
from Mexico; in long. 101 32 w. Lat. 21 
27 H. 

LAGUEI, a small island of the N. sen, on the 
coast of California, at a small distance from the 
same, at the entrance or mouth of the port of 
Marques. 

LAGUNA, SAN ANTONIO DE LA, a town and 
capital of the province and government of Mainas 
5 



LAG 

in the kingdom of Quito, of the missions which, 
were held by the Jesuits. I( takes its name from 
a lake, on the c. shore of which it stands. The 
climate of this settlement is not very salutary, 
owing to the vapours of the lake, and the tempe 
rature is hot. It would have been more populous, 
but that the natives used to be afflicted with the 
small pox and the bloody flux. It was the general 
residence of the superior of the missions. In lat. 
5 13 s. 

LAGUNA, another town, in the province and 
corregimienlo of Tomina, and archbishopric of 
Charcas, in Peru, formerly flourishing, rich, and 
commercial, but now poor and reduced. It has 
a convent of the religious order of La Merced. 

LAGUNA, another, called La Nueva, of the 
province and captainship of Rey in Brazil ; situate 
on the coast, on a narrow strip of land, bet ween the 
bay of Embatuba and the mountains of Santa Marta. 
LAGUNA, a settlement, with the dedicatory title 
of San Juan, of the head settlement of the district 
and alcaldia mayor of Lagos, in the kingdom 
and bishopric of Nueva Galicia; e. of its capi 
tal. 

LAGUNA, another, of the province and go 
vernment of Popayan, and Nuevo Rey no de Gra 
nada. 

LAGUNA, another, of Nuevo Mexico, on the 
shore of a river which enters the Grande del N. 
between the settlements of Acomas and Sunis. 

LAGUNA, a lake, called Del Sur, in the pro 
vince and captainship of Pernambuco in Brazil, on 
the sea-shore. 

LAGUNA, another, called Del Norte, in the 
same province and kingdom. 

LAGUNA, another, called Del Este, in the pro 
vince and alcaldia mayor of Tabasco in Nueva 
Espaiia, near the sea-coast. It is thus named with 
respect to its situation with regard to the great 
lake of Terminos, and to distinguish it from ano 
ther called De Oeste. 

LAGUNA, a river of the province and corrc- 
o-imiento of Pasto in the kingdom Quito. It runs 
e. and enters the Putumayo. 

LAGUNA, an island near the coast of the province 
and government of Darien in the kingdom of 
Tierra Firme, between the river Del Oro and the 
rancho De Orpones. 

LACUNAS, the name of four lakes in the 
province and government of the Chiquitos Indians 
of the kingdom of Peru. The larger and prin 
cipal of them is near the river Ubia, and extends 
many leagues from e. to w. The other three, 
which are*", of the former, are considerably smaller. 
LAG UNAS, three other lakes, in the province 



LAG 

and government of Venezuela, of the Nuevo Reyno 
de Granada, on (lie w. shore of the river Guarico, 
and n. of the settlement of Zanoje. 

LACUNAS, three other lakes, on the coast of the 
province and government of Nicaragua, and king 
dom of Guatemala ; between the great lake of this 
name and the sea. 

LAGUNETA, a settlement of the province and 
government of Santa Marta in the Nuevo Reyno 
de Granada; situate between two streams which 
flow into the river Cesare, not far from the city of 
Los Keyes. 

LAGUNETAS, a settlement of the province 
and government of Venezuela in the Nuevo 
Reyno de Granada ; founded in the 17th century, 
in the serrania, after the establishment of the com 
pany of Caracas. 

LAGUNILLA, a settlement of the province 
and government of Tucuman in Peru, of the dis 
trict and jurisdiction of Cordoba, and close to this 
place. It has its name from a lake near it, from 
the centre of which may be heard to proceed, at a 
great distance, much rumbling noise ; and, some 
years since, on the day of San Pedro Nolasco, the 
waters rose to such a degree as to inundate a third 
part of the city, and some time afterwards it re 
mained dry, when a festival was celebrated to the 
said saint. There is a tradition here handed down 
from father to son, that when San Francisco Solano 
visited the place, he prophesied that the town 
would be destroyed by a subterraneous river ; and 
it must be confessed that in the silence of the night 
may be heard a faint noise, as it were of water 
dashing against rocks. 

LAGUNILLA, another settlement, with the dedi 
catory title of Santa Barbara, in the jurisdiction 
and dcaldia mayor of Octnpan in Nueva Espana. 

LAGUNILLA, a river of the Nuevo Reyno de 
Granada, which rises in the valley of Picara, runs 
e. and enters the Cauca, on the opposite shore, and 
fronting the city of La Palma. 

LAGUNILLAS, a settlement of the govern 
ment and jurisdiction of Merida in the Nuevo 
Reyno de Granada. It is of a hot temperature, 
but healthy and pleasant, producing much sugar 
cane, and plenty of yucas y maize, and plantains, 
and a variety of fruits, especially vines, of which 
the inhabitants make wine for their own consump 
tion. Here are some estates of cacao ^ and a good 
portion of cotton, also mills for making sweets. It 
contains about 100 Indians and 50 whites. 

LAGUNILLAS, another settlement, in the pro 
vince and corregimiento of Porco in Peru. Twelve 
leagues from Potosi. 

LAGUNILLAS, another, of the province and 
VOL. n. 



L A K 



361 



corregimiento of Paria in the same kingdom ; an 
nexed to the curacy of Condocondo. 

LAGCNILLAS, another, with the dedicatory title 
of San Pedro, of the head settlement of the district 
and alcaldia mayor of Tequexpa in Nueva 
Espana. It is of a cold temperature, contains 84 
Indian families, employed in agriculture, and is 
eight leagues e. of its capital. 

LAGUNILLAS, another, of the government of 
Maracaibo, and province of Venezuela, in the 
Nuevo Reyno de Granada ; on the coast of the 
lake of Maracaibo, at its entrance, and in the e. 
part. 

LAGUNILLAS, another, of the missions held by 
the order of San Francisco, in the akaldia mayor 
of San Luis de Potosi, and kingdom of Nueva 
Espana. 

LAGUNILLAS, another, of the province and go 
vernment of Maracaibo, and Nuevo Reyno de 
Granada, in the district of the city of Merida, t&amp;lt; 
tiie n. n. w. in the road which leads to Santa Fe. 

LAGUNILLAS, some small lakes of the province 
and government of Buenos Ayres, of the coast 
lying between the river Plata and the straits of 
Magellan, between the rivers Saladillo and Tandil. 

LAHUAITAMBO, a settlement of the province 
and corregimirnlo of Guarochiri in Peru; an 
nexed to the curacy of Chorrillo. 

LAICACOTA, a territory of Peru, very popu 
lous in former years, and rich from a mine of its 
name, celebrated for the abundance of silver which 
has been cut out by the chisel, and discovered by 
Caspar de Salcedo in 1593. On its llanura a 
bloody battle was fought in 1661, by the native 
Spaniards of the mountains of Burgos, together 
with the Vizcayanos, against the Andalucians and 
the Spaniards born in America, called Creoles ; 
when the former were vanquished, and the tragical 
death of the discoverer took place. 

LAIMES, a settlement of the province and cor 
regimiento of Chayanta, or Charcas, in Peru. 

LAINAO, a settlement of Indians, of the king 
dom of Chile, in the district of Tolten Baxo ; 
situate on the coast, at the mouth of the river 
Budi. 

LAIO, a settlement of the province and corregi- 
micnlo ofTinta, or Canes and Canche. c , in Peru; 
annexed to the curacy of Langui. 

LAIQUEN DEL LIMIT E, a settlement of the 
kingdom of Chile, in the territory of the Lcuvu- 
ches Indians. 

LAKE signifies a portion of water shut in on 
all sides, where it is always fresh and never fails. 
Some there are which receive a supply by no dis 
cernible means, and vent themselves unperceived; 
3 A 



362 



L A L 



1he ingress of the waters of some are to be scon, 
and the egress not; others are seen to receive 
rivers, "which afterwards flow back into themselves; 
and others to receive rivers, without the appear 
ance of any egress whatever for their waters. 
There are all of these different sorts of lakes in 
America ; and we shall here mention some of the 
principal, which will be found described under 
their respective articles. 

Principal lakes of S. America. 
Arabanate, Loro-cocha, 

Aullaga, Mahuati, 

Balza, Mallabauquen, 

.Boca de Mar, Maniore, 

Boubon, Maracaibo, 

Capucui, Mocoa, 

Caracares, Mocorca, 

Cassipa, Nachego, 

Cayama, Paria, 

Cayubaba, Parime, 

Chimarac, Patan-cocha, 

Chimbuza, Porongo, 

Chiuchay-cocha, Puma-cocha, 

Choclo-cocha, Piinrun, 

Colay cocha, Pueguc, 

Colta, Puren, 

Culluc, Rimachuma, 

Cuy-cocha, S. Pablo, 

Dantas, Tesca, 

Fuqucnc, Tiella-cocha, 

Gran Cocama, Titi-caca, 

Guanacache, Tota, 

Guatavita, Ttiratini, 

Huarmicocha, Uncuicia, 

Huaichao, Vilafro, 

Huaillarun, Xareyeyes, 

Itaya, Yagnar-cocha, 

Jacabamba, Yurubi, 

Lauri-cocha, Yuturiacu. 

In JV. America. 

Abitibis, Huron, 

Asiniboels, Michigan, 

Atimipegon, Nicaragua, 

Bois, Ontario, 

Champlain, Quidchidechovan, 

Chapala, Superior, 

Ciistinaux, Tecamanioven, 

Enriquillo, Temiscaming, 

Erie, Xaragua. 

[LAKE OF THE WOODS, See WOODS.] 
LAI/A, a settlement of the head settlement of 
the district of Chuapa, and alc.aldiu mayor of ViU 
lalta, in Nueva Espafm. It is of a hot tempera 
ture, contains 166 families of Indians, and is 14 
fcagues e. of its capital. 



LAM 

JLALAMA, a settlement of the head settlement 
of the district of Tcotalzinco, and of the same 
akaldiu and kingdom as the former. It contains 
70 families of Indians, and is 19 leagues e. of its 
capital. 

LA MAI, a settlement of the province and ror- 
regimienlo of Calca and Lares, in the same king 
dom as the former ; where arc to be seen the ves 
tiges of a palace in form of a fortress, such as be 
longed to the Iricas in the times of the gentilism. 

LAMA III, a settlement of the province and cor- 
regfmiento of Casto- Virreyna in Peru ; annexed to 
the curacy of Cordoba. 

LAMAS, a province and corregimicnlo of Peru, 
a spiritual conquest of the missions of the Jesuits 
of the province of Mainas, and particularly those 
of the settlement of San Borja, one of the same pro 
vince, which they called the Trunfo de la Santa 
Cruz de los Lamas. These missionaries, pene 
trating through the mountainous parts of this 
country in the 16th century, discovered these In 
dians, and instructed them in the faith, domesti 
cating them and reducing them to settlements. 
Afterwards the bishop of Truxillo appointed 
amongst them a secular curate, who not being able 
to accommodate himself to the solitude of the 
country so immense, and to the difficulty of pro 
viding necessaries, besought that prelate, who was 
then Senor Paravicini, that he would permit the 
Jesuits to have the charge of these souls : a system 
which was acceded to by the viceroy of Peru, who 
also nominates for their government a comegidor. 
The confines of this province are in all parts moun 
tainous and woody, as is its territory. The cli 
mate is hot and very moist, and its productions are 
maize, roots, and all the other trees found on the 
mountains, such as plantains, pines, guai/abas, 
lemons, &amp;c. Here also are monkeys, the llesh of 
some of which are eaten by the Indians, and of 
others not, parrots, guacamayoS) pigs, and various 
other mountain animals ; nor is it wanting in an 
abundance of snakes, vipers, and venomous insects. 
The natives cultivate much cotton, and the pro 
vince is irrigated by some rivers, the chief of which 
is Moyobamba, which passes through the middle 
of it, and in its mid-course receives a great supply 
of waters from the river Negro, from the Huam- 
bos and others ; and which at the end of the pro 
vince unites itself with a river which flows from 
Guanuco, also large, and takes the name of Hual- 
lagua ; when, running to n. e. for 20 leagues, it 
enters the Maranon, first passing by the settlement 
named La Laguna, of the province of Mainas. 
The inhabitants of this province amount only to 
600 Indians, excepting a few Mustecs. It has no 

5 



L A M 

icltlemcnts, save the capital, which is of the same 
name, that of Tobalosos, and that of Cnzabamba. 

LAMAS, the settlement and aforesaid capital of 
the province, is of an hot climate, and the place 
where the Quechiian language is spoken in its 
greatest purity. In lat. 7 5 s. 

LAML5AMARCA, a settlement of the province 
and corrcgiwiento of Caxamarquilla in Peru. 

LAM BARE, a fort and garrison of the pro 
vince and government of Paraguay, for the purpose 
of restraining the infidel Indians, [it has since 
become a parish, and is situate on the Paraguay, 
about two miles s. from Asuncion, in lat. 25 20 s. 
and long. 57 4 1 4" a-.] 

LAM BART, a settlement of the island of Bar- 
badoes, in the e. part. 

LAMBAYEQUE, a settlement of the province 
and corrcginiiento of Sana in Peru, and bishopric 
of Truxillo. It is the capital since that the greater 
part of the inhabitants of Mirallores, formerly the 
capital, passed to this, when that was plundered 
and sacked by the pirate Edward David, in 1586. 
It is beautifully situate, fertile, and of good tem 
perature. It was first founded one league from the 
sea, and was since removed to the distance of two, 
in a llanura watered by the river of its name, and 
by which passes the road leading from Piura to 
Lima. In its church, which is very beautiful, are 
four curacies, with as many branches or chapels of 
ease, the which are called San Pedro, Santa Rosa, 
and San Iloque, to administer the sacraments to 
the Indians. Its territory is very fertile in fruits 
and vines, of which some wine is made. The 
poor people maintain themselves by making cover 
lets, mantles, and other cotton garments. The in 
habitants amount to about 8000 souls. In lat. 6 
3Ts. 

LAMBERT, S. a settlement of the island of 
Barbadoes ; situate in the n. part, near the e. 
coast. 

LAMBERT, S. a fort of the French, in the pro 
vince and country of the Iroquees Indians ; situate 
on the shore of the river S. Lawrence, opposite 
the island Montreal. 

LAMBRAMA, a settlement of the parish of the 
French, in the island of Martinique, a curacy of 
the Capuchin fathers ; situate near the n.w. coast, 
at the entrance of the bay of Cul de Sac Royal. 

LAMHAVEN, a bay of the coast, in the pro 
vince and colony of N. Carolina, behind cape 
Henry, at the entrance of the bay of Chesapeak. 

LAMOCHA, a town of the province and corre- 
gimicnlo of Puchacay, and kingdom of Chile; si 
tuate on the shore of the river Biobio, near its en 
trance into the sea. 



L A M 



363 



[LA-MOELLE, a large river in the n.ic. 
part of Vermont. Its general course is re. 1 . After 
running about 75 miles, and receiving 14 lesser 
streams, it falls into lake Champlain, at Colchester, 
five miles n. of the month of Onion river, and is of 
about the same magnitude.] 

LAM PA, a province and corrcgimiento of 
Peru; bounded n. by the province of Carabaya, 
c. by that of Asangaro, s. by that of Paucarcolla, 
and in some degree by the lake of Chucuito, s. e. 
by the province of Moquegua, and w. by that of 
Arequipa. It is 30 leagues long from n. to s. and 
20 wide. Its temperature is very cold, as being 
situate, the greater part, in the midst of the cordil- 
leras Nevadas, covered with snow the whole year; 
and notwithstanding that it has many llanos or 
pampas, yet these lie so exposed and lofty as to be 
of much the same coldness as the other parts. 
Thus we find this province produces no other 
fruits than the bitter papas, of which is made 
chunO) and another little seed like millet, and some 
bark; being obliged to furnish itself with the rest 
from the other provinces, and giving in exchange 
large and small cattle. Here breed sheep of 
the country, vicunas and vixcacha$\ and from their 
wools are made many coverlets and carpets, in which, 
as well as in lamb-skins, the natives frequently 
pay their tribute, as also their bulls and parochial 
tithes. At each shearing, 70 arrobas of wool is 
procured from every thousand sheep, and are sold 
at seven reals each ; when they are carried to the 
manufactories at Quispicanchi and elsewhere. A 
great emolument is also derived here from the tal 
low of the animals when killed, since, at every 
slaughter of 100 sheep, they regularly procure 
from four to five quintals, which are sold at 10 
dollars : again, the meat being hardener! by frost, 
and called chalona, will fetch four reals. These 
are the articles of its commerce ; for, although it 
has some mines, yet the metal is of base alloy, arid 
scarcely any one gives himself the pains to work 
them ; not, however, that it is without certain 
mills for grinding metals, which are worked to from 
JO to J 2 marks each caxon, but that the expences 
are excessive. Metals are also extracted from the 
ancient mine of Vilavila, and formerly from other 
mines, in great abundance; so as, with all the 
above drawbacks, to yield 15,000 marks of silver. 
Towards the n. of the province is a very lofty 
mountain, called Caquenquerafiani, in which was 
found a rich vein of quicksilver, formerly worked; 
and near to it is a lake of three leagues in cir 
cumference, and abounding with tortora (reed), 
amongst which breed rabbits, turtle-doves, 
pigeons, cui/es, deer, and halcyons. This pro- 
3 A2 



364 



L A JVf 



vince has various rivers, such as the Ayaviri and 
Nunoa, and others which run to empty themselves 
into the lake of Chucuito. Here are neither woods 
or trees of note; but in the lake aforesaid is found 
a kind offish called there chini, and which, when 
dried, is carried by the Indians to sell, in bags at 
three or lour dollars each bag. The inhabitants of 
this province amount to 37,000. Its corregidor 
had a repartimiento of 160,000 dollars, and it used 
to pay an alcuvala of 6-100 dollars every five years. 
The capital is the settlement of the same name ; 
and the other settlements are, 

Lampa, Pucara, 

Calapuja, Umachiri, 

Cabanilla, Juliaca, 

Cabana, Vilavila, 

Manazo, Ayaviri, 

Cupi, Orurillo, 

Ocubiri, Nunoa, 

Vilque, Santa Rosa, 

Atuncalla, Macari, 

Caracoto, Llalli, 

Huaca, Nicasio. 

Llasin, 

LAMPA, another settlement, of the province and 
Corregimiento of Parina-cochas in Peru ; in the 
vicinity of which is a warm mineral spring. 

LAMPA, another, of the province and corregi- 
miento of Santiago in the kingdom of Chile. 

LAMPA, a valley of the same province and king 
dom, three leagues from the capital of Santiago ; 
in which grows a herb like sweet-basil, the colour 
of which is of an ash-green, though not so tall as 
the plant just mentioned. This herb is covered in 
the summer-time with some small grains of salt, 
which form upon its leaves, being dried by the 
heat of the sun, the same being much esteemed by 
the Indians, as it is of a very delicate flavour. 

LAMPA, a river of the same province and king 
dom, which rises in the cordillera, and, joining the 
Colina, enters the Maipo. 

[LAMPAGUE, a territory in the government 
and kingdom of Chile, wherein a number of mines 
of all kinds of metal, such as gold, silver, iron, 
lead, copper, and tin, were discovered in the year 
1710.] 

LAMPANGU1, a very lofty mountain of the 
Cordillera of the Andes in the kingdom of Chile, 
celebrated for its rich mines of gold, silver, copper, 
lead, tin, and iron, which were discovered in 1710. 
The gold especially is of the best quality of any in 
America. Eighty leagues from the city of Valpa 
raiso, in lat. 33 18 s. 

LAMPAS, S. PEDRO DE, a settlement of 
the province and corregimiento of Andabuai- 



LAN 

las in Peru ; situate on the shore of the river 
Pampas. 

[LAM PETER, a township in Lancaster county, 
Pennsylvania.] 

LAM PI AN, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Canta in Peru. 

[LAMPREY River, a water of Great bay in 
New Hampshire.] 

LAM UK, a settlement and asiento of mines of 
silver, in the province and corregimiento of Luy a 
and Chillaos in Peru ; annexed to the curacy of its 
capital, and of a very cold temperature. 

LAN AS, Rio DE, a river in the province and 
government of Florida, which runs 5. and enters 
the sea, between the point of Perro and the river of 
Los Chacatos. 

[LANCASTER, a bay or sound on the ic. coast 
of Sir Thomas Smith s bay. The southernmost 
part lies in lat. 74 20 n. The most n. is called 
Alderman Jonas s Sound, and lies in lat. 76 /?.] 

[LANCASTER, a populous and wealthy county 
in the interior part of Pennsylvania, extending s. 
to the Maryland line. It is about 42 miles square, 
is divided into 25 townships, and contains 566,240 
acres of land, and 36,147 inhabitants, including 
348 slaves. The lands in this county are rich and 
well-cultivated. The hills in the n. parts abound 
with iron ore; for the manufacturing which, two 
furnaces and eight forges have been erected. The 
furnaces manufacture about 1200 tons of pigs, and 
nearly that number of bar-iron annually. Copper 
and lead have also been found here. Chief town, 
Lancaster.] 

[LANCASTER, a county of Virginia; bounded 
e. by Chesapeak bay, and s. w. by Rappahannock 
river. It is about 40 miles long and 15 broad, 
and contains 5638 inhabitants, of whom 3336 are 
slaves.] 

[LANCASTER, a county of Camden district, S. 
Carolina, lying on Lynche s creek, and Wateree 
river. It contains 6302 inhabitants, of whom 
4684 are whites, and 1370 slaves.] 

[LANCASTER, Borough of, a handsome and 
flourishing post-town, the capital of Lancaster 
county, Pennsylvania, and the largest inland town 
in the United States. It is pleasantly situated upon 
the descent of a hill, half a mile w. of Conestoga 
creek, which falls into Susquehannah river, nine 
miles s. by a?, of the town. Its trade is already 
great, and must increase in proportion as the sur 
rounding country populates. It contains about 
700 or 800 houses, and about 5000 people. The 
legislature is to meet here in future, till a perma 
nent seat of government shall be established. The 
public buildings are, a handsome court-house of 



LAN 

brfek, a market-house of the same materials, atid a 
strong stone gaol. Here arc six places of worship 
for as many different persuasions, viz. German 
Lutherans, German Calvinists, Presbyterians, 
Episcopalians, IVIoravians, and Roman Catholics. 
The German Lutheran church is a large brick 
building, having an organ, and a handsome spire ; 
the others are of brick, and are neat and commodi 
ous buildings. The only manufactures here are 
carried on by individuals. There are three brew 
eries, and two or three valuable tanneries. Frank 
lin college is established here for the Germans. 
Its endowments are nearly the same as those of 
Dickinson college at Carlisle. Its trustees consist 
of Lutherans, Calvinists, Presbyterians, and Epis 
copalians, of each an equal number. The princi 
pal is a Lutheran, and the vice-president a Cal- 
vinist. It is 55 miles w. by n. of Philadelphia, 
and 26 from Reading. Lat. 40 3 n. Long. 76 
20 o&amp;gt;.] 

[LANCASTER, a post-town of S. Carolina, 27 
miles from Camden, and 35 from Charlotte, N. 
Carolina.] 

[LANCASTER, a very pleasant post-town in 
Worcester county, Massachusetts, the oldest in the 
county, having been settled in 1645, and incorpo 
rated in 16 5S. It is situated on a branch of Na 
shua river, which empties into the Merrirnack. It 
is 28 miles r. n. w. of Boston, four miles w. of 
Bolton, and 14 n. by c. of Worcester. The lands 
of the township of Lancaster, and those of Sterling 
on the s. zo. are part of the tract called Nashawogg 
by the Indians. The pleasantness of this town has 
invited many persons of education and fortune to 
reside here. In the n. e. part of Lancaster there is 
a valuable, and perhaps inexhaustible slate-pit, 
furnishing slates for houses, and excellent stones 
for tombs and graves. No slates equal to these 
have yet been discovered in the United States. 
These are sent to Boston, and exported to New 
York, Virginia, &amp;c. Two principal branches of 
Nashua river, over which are nine large bridges, 
water this town, and have on their banks excellent 
intervale land. Cumbery pond, in this town, is 
observed to rise as much as two feet, just before a 
storm ; and Sandy pond rises in a dry season.] 

[LANCASTER, a township in Grafton county, 
New Hampshire, on the e. bank of Connecticut 
river, about 41 miles above Hanover. It was in 
corporated in 1763. In 1775, it contained 61 in 
habitants, and in 1790, 161.] 

[LANCE Isles, on the n.w. coast of N. Ame 
rica, lie off cape Scott, which is the s. point at the 
mouth of Pintard s sound, opposite to point Dis 
appointment. There is a narrow channel between 



LAN 



365 



the largest isle and the cape. See PINTARD S 
Sound.] 

LANCHA, a settlement of the province and 
corregimicnlo of Caxatambo in Peru ; annexed to 
the curacy of Andajes. 

LANCON, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Cercado in Peru ; annexed to the 
curacy of Carabaillo. 

[LANDAFF, a township in Grafton county, 
New Hampshire. It was incorporated in 1774, 
and contains 292 inhabitants.] 

[LAND S HEIGHT, in N. America, is the high 
ground on the chain of lakes between lake La Plue 
and lake Superior, where there is a portage of 
seven miles. It is 80 miles e. of the grand port 
age from the w. end of lake Superior.] 

LANE, a bay of the s. coast of the island of 
Newfoundland, in the middle of it; between the 
bays of Fortune and Plaisance. 

[LANESBOROUGH, a township in Berkshire 
county, Massachusetts, n. by e. of Hancock, 12 
miles n. by w. of Lenox, and 96 w. by . of Boston. 
It affords a quarry of good marble, and contains 
2142 inhabitants.] 

LANG, a settlement of the island of Barbadoes, 
near the n. coast. 

LANGA, a settlement of the province and cor 
regimiento of Guarochiri in Peru ; annexed to the 
curacy of Chorrillo. 

[LANGDON, a township in Cheshire county, 
New Hampshire, incorporated in 17S7, and con 
tains 244 inhabitants.] 

LANGUER, a river of the province and go 
vernment of Honduras in the kingdom of Guate 
mala. It runs n. and enters the sea by the side 
of the cape which has the name of the province. 

LANGUI, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Tinta, or Canes and Canches, in 
Peru. 

[LANSINBURGH City, in the township of 
Troy, Renssalaer county, New York, is very 
pleasantly situated ou the e. bank of Hudson s 
river, opposite the mouth of the Mohawk, and con 
tains about 200 dwelling-houses, a brick church, 
the joint propertj of the Dutch and Presbyterian 
congregation, a court-house, gaol, and an aca 
demy, incorporated in 179Q. Here is a library 
company which was incorporated in 1775. It is a 
very flourishing place, situated on a plain at the 
foot of a hill, from the top of which is a most de 
lightful prospect. A few years ago there was but 
one stage between this town and Albany ; and now 
morethan 20 stages daily pass and repass between the 
neighbouring towns of Lansinburgh, Troy, Water- 
ford, and Albany ; and the average number of 

5 



366 



t/ A R 



passengers is said to exceed 150. It is eight miles 
;?. of Albany, three above Troy, 125 n. by e. of 
New York, and 185 n. n. e. of Philadelphia.] 

LAP1SLAZULI, a shoal or isle of stone almost 
covered by the sea, near the coast of Nova Scotia ; 
about three quarters of a league from the island of 
Monano, and forms the passage to the river 
S. John, to the n. part of the bay of Fundy and of 
Silver. 

LAQUARIBE, a river of the province and 
captainship of Seara in Brazil. It runs between 
the rivers Scope and Varirin, abounds in excellent 
fish, and in its vicinity are some plantations of 
sugar-canes. It empties itself into the sea. 

LAQUEIQUE, a settlement of the province 
and corregimicnto of Carabaya in Peru ; annexed 
to the curacy of its capital. 

LAQUIAGA, or HUAMAHUACA, a river of the 
province and corregimienlo of Chichas and Tarija 
in Peru. It rises from a lake near the settlement 
ofCasavindo, runs n. and turning its course to c. 
enters the large river of Xuxuy. 

LAQUIACA, a creek of the coast of Peru, in the 
province and corrcgimiento of Arica. 

LARAHUE, a settlement of the province and 
corrcgimiento of Colchagua in the kingdom of 
Chile; situate to the w. of the town of Triana. 

LARAMARCA, a settlement of the province 
and corrcgimiento of Castro Virreyna in Peru ; an 
nexed to the curacy of Cordoba. 

LARA MATE, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Lucanas in Peru. 

LARAO, a settlement of the province and corre 
gimiento of Guarochiri in Peru ; annexed to the 
curacy of Carampoma. 

LARAOS, a settlement of the province and cor- 
regimienio of Yauyos in the kingdom of Peru. In 
the most lofty part of it is a lake which empties 
itself below the church, and the furthest part of 
the settlement ; and there tumbling down a rock, 
falls into the river which runs to the province of 
Canete. 

LARAQUITE, a river of the kingdom of 
Chile, which runs o&amp;gt;. and enters the sea between 
the mouth of the Carampangue and the heights of 
Villagnin. 

LARCA1, a settlement of the province and cor 
regimiento of Lucanas in Peru, where there are 
some hot medicinal baths. 

LARECA.IA, a province and corrcgimiento of 
Peru; bounded n. and n. e. by the mountains of 
the infidel Indians, nearly s. by the missions of 
Apolabarnba, s. by the city of La Paz, w. by the 
province of Omasuyos, the cordilkra running bc- 
iiveen, and n, by those of Paucarcolla, Asangaro, 



L A R 

and Carabaya. The whole of this province is lull 
of chasms and ravines, and it extends from n. tos. 
as far as the mountainous countries of the infidels, 
where it becomes very wide. It has a quantity of 
streams, which form one large river, the which 
passing through the mountains, runs to unite its 
waters with the ISeni. It is 36 leagues long, and 
10 wide. Its territory is very unequal ; and al 
though the mountains and ravines are generally 
covered with snow the whole year, the settlements 
are not only healthy, but the temperature mild. 
On the skirts of the mountains are cultivated all 
seeds and fruits, and towards the Andes is grown 
coca ajid other mountainous productions. In some 
parts are breeds of cattle of every species ; and in 
the district of Quebaya, and in other places, are 
various gold mines, which were formerly very pro 
ductive, but now scarcely worked, more from want 
of resolution and means of paying the cxpcnces of 
labour, than from any scarcity of metal; not but 
that considerable profit is, nevertheless, derived 
from these mines. In the part of the mountains 
of the Andes, are the missions which are vulgarly 
called Of Part it i of the Augustins, in which there 
are six settlements of converted Indians, who for 
some years past have paid a small tribute to the 
king into the coffers of La Paz. This province 
was conquered and added to the empire by the Inca 
Maytacapac. Its inhabitants amount to 20,000, 
and it had a repartimiento of 114,635 dollars, the 
corregidor paying an alcavahi of 4585 dollars every 
five years. The capital is Zorata, and the other 
settlements are, 

Songo, Chuchulaya, 

Challana, Copaique, 

Qu iabaya, Cusahuaya, 

Hilabaya, Timuti, 

Combaya, Sococone, 

Ambana, Chadaya, 

Atalaque, Punanui, 

Mocomoco, Patazcachi, 

Chuma, Yanabaya, 

Ayata, Iluacapata, 

Charazani, Antarete, 

Camata, Chajaya, 

Pelechuco, Chulina, 

Chiacani, Curba, 

Carasani, Omobamba, 

Cumlili, Carijana, 

Coate, 

Of the Missions. 

HiKcumane, Chinijo, 

Tipuane, Consata. 

Mapite, 
LAREDO, a town of the province and govern- 



L A T 

ttient of I /n Sierra Gorda in the bay of Mexico, ami 
Reyno de Nucva Espana; founded in 1748 by 
the Count of Sierra Gorda, D.Joseph dc Escan- 
don, colonel of militia of Querctaro. 

LARES, a settlement and head settlement of 
the district of the province and corregimicnto of 
Calca and Lares in Pern. 

LAKES, an island near the coast of the province 
and government of Yucatan, at the mouth of the 
gulf of Iligneras. 

LAKES, another, near the coast of the kingdom 
of Granada, in the province and government of 
Cartagena, opposite the river Sinu. 

LARES, a bay on the e. coast of the island of 
Jamaica, between another called Pequeiia (Little) 
and the n. e. point. 

LARES, an island, near the coast of the province 
and captains/iip of Ilhcos in Brazil, opposite the 
town of Portoseguro. 

LARGA. See LONG Island. 

LARGAS, some islands of the N. sea, in the 
province and government of Guayana, belonging 
to the Dutch. They are three, and are at the 
mouth of the rivers Essquibo and Demerary. 

LARGE River, of the province and govern 
ment of Louisiana, which runs s. and enters the 
Missouri. 

LARGE, another, in the province and colony of 
S. Carolina. It runs s. f. and enters the Congari. 

[LARGE Rock lies on the s. bank of Ohio river, 
in* the tract called Indiana, and nearly opposite 
the mouth of Mnskingum river.] 

LARGOS CAYOS, some isles near the s. coast 
of the island of Cuba, opposite the port of Trini 
dad. 

LAR1, a settlement of the province and corre- 
imienlo of Collahuas in Peru. 



L A T 



367 



[LARICAXAS. 
LA 



ARO, a river of the province and government 
of Nicaragua in the kingdom of Guatemala, 
which runs e. and enters the sea in the gulf of 
Nicnesa. 

[LATACUNGA, Asicnto of, the first jurisdic 
tion to the s. of that of Quito in Peru. The 
Avord (isiento implies a place less than a town, but 
larger than a village. It stands on a wide plain, 
having on its e. side the e. cordillera of the Andes, 
from which projects a very high mountain ; and at 
a small distance from its foot is situated Latacunga. 
On its w. side is a river, which is sometimes ford- 
able, but generally passed over by a bridge. This 
asiento is large and regular, the streets broad and 
straight, the houses of stone, arched and well con 
trived, one story high. This precaution the in 
habitants were taught to observe by a dreadful 



destruction of all the buildings, on the 20th of 
June 1699. Out of GOO stone houses, which the 
asiento then contained, only a part of one, and 
the Jesuit s church, were left standing; the mos( of 
the inhabitants Mere buried in the ruins. The 
stone of which the houses and churches are built, 
is a kind of pumice, or spongy stone, ejected from 
volcanoes ; which have formed inexhaustible 
quarries in the neighbourhood. It is so light, that 
it will swim in the water; and from its great poro 
sity, the lime cements the different pieces very 
strongly together. This jurisdiction contains 17 
principal villages. The air of the asiento is cold, 
from the place being only six leagues from the 
mountain of Cotopaxi ; which as it is little less in 
height or extent than those of Chimborazo and 
Caymburo, so, like them, it is covered with ice and 
snow. The villages are populous ; such as arc 
seated in the valleys are hot, those in the plains 
temperate, whilst those which border on the moun 
tains, like that of the asiento, are cold, and some 
times to an excessive degree. The inhabitants 
amount to about 12,000, chiefly Spaniards and 
Mmtees. Great quantities of pork are salted 
here and sent to Quito, Guayaquil, and Riobambn, 
being highly valued for the peculiar flavour given 
it in the pickling. The manufactures arc those of 
cloth, bays, and titcuyos. The inhabitants of" 
Pugili and Saquisili are noted for making earthen 
ware, highly valued all over the province of Quito. 
The clay of which they are made is of a lively 
red, remarkably fine, emitting a kind of fragrancy, 
and the workmanship very neat and ingenious.] 

LATANI, a head settlement of the district of 
the alcaldia mayor of Villalta in Nueva Espana ; 
of a warm and moist temperature, and containing 
331 families of Zapotecos Indians, including the 
wards of its district. Thirteen leagues n. of its ca 
pital. 

LATANIERS, PUNTA DE i.os TRES, a point on 
the s. coast of the island of S. Domingo, in the 
French possessions, between the point of Diamante 
and cape Benet. 

LATE, a settlement of the province and corre- 
gimiento of Cercado in Peru. 

LATELONGI, a river of the province and 
captainship of Rcy in Brazil, which runs e. and 
enters the lake of Mini. 

LATIGIOCA, PUNTA DE, a point on the coast 
of the province and captainship of Para in Brazil ; 
one of those which form the embouchure of the 
river Amazonas. 

LATIGIOCA, some shoals or rocks of the same 
province and kingdom as the former point ; si 
tuate near to it, anil taking from it their name. 



L A U 



LATIREQUIQUI, a river of the province and 
country of the Chiquitos Indians. It rises close 
to the road which leads to San Juan Baptista, 
runs e. and enters the Paraguay, in the part called 
the Paso. 

LAV r ANDERAS, PUNT A DE LAS, an extremity 
of the coast of the island of Trinidad. 

LAVAP1E, PUNT A DE, a point on the coast of 
(he kingdom of Chile, of the country ot the Arau- 
canos Indians ; between the point of Rurnena and 
the mouth of the river Tubul. 

LAVAQUERO, a river of the province and 
government of Popayan. It rises e. of the lake of 
Papay, and enters the Caqueta. 

LALJRA, MESA DE, a very lofty mountain of 
the province and government of Maracaibo in the 
Nuevo Reyno de Granada, and jurisdiction of the 
city of La Grita, and s. w. of the same. 

LAUREL, a small river of the province and 
colony of N. Carolina ; which runs s. s. e. and 
enters the source of the Conhaway. 

[LAURKI, Mountain, a range of mountains w. 
of the Alleghany ridge, and a part of what is called 
the Alleghany mountains. It extends from Penn 
sylvania to N. Carolina, and gives rise to several 
brandies of the Ohio river. The Great Kanlm- 
way breaks through the Laurel ridge in its way to 
the Ohio, in lat 37 50 n. Long. 81 32 w. In 
a spur of this mountain, about lat. 36, is a spring 
of water, 50 feet deep, very coltl, and, it is said, 
as blue as indigo. The lands within a small dis 
tance of the Laurel mountain, through which the 
Youghiogany runs, are in many places broken and 
stoney, but rich and well timbered ; and in some 
places, and particularly on Laurel creek, they are 
rocky and mountainous. From the Laurel moun 
tain to Monongahela, the first seven miles are good, 
level fanning lands, with fine meadows ; the tim 
ber, white oak, chesnut, hickory, &amp;c.J 

[LAURELES, a parish of the province and 
government of Paraguay ; situate a little to the 
w. of the Parana, in Laguna. Ubcra, in lat. 
27 13 57" s. Long. 57 20* 31" a&amp;gt;.] 

[LAURENS, a county in Ninety-six district, 
S. Carolina, lying between Enoree and Saluda 
rivers. It is about 31 miles long and 22 broad, 
and contains 8217 free inhabitants, and 1120 
slaves.] 

[LAURENS Court-house, in the above county, 
is 20 miles from Bush river, 22 from Newbury 
court-house, and 17 from Grenville court-house.] 
[LAURENT OF TUB MINE, ST. a settlement 
in the island of St. Domingo, near the Spanish ca- 
pital, St. Domingo. It stands in the place where 
the capital was first founded, on the e. side of the 



LAW 

Ozama, and about a quarter of a league from its 
confluence with the Isabella. It can only be con 
sidered as a dependency on St. Domingo, and con 
tains 300 inhabitants, all free Negroes, constituting 
a cure. It was formed in 1723 by 128 run-away 
French Negroes, who being sent down to the bay 
of Ocoa to be shipped oft , the Spaniards attacked 
the escort, and gave arms to the fugitives, main 
taining that they were free men.] 

LAURENT S. See S. LORENZO. 

LAURENT, a bay on the s, coast of the island of 
Newfoundland, between cape Rouge and that of 
Burins. 

LAURENT, a point or extremity of the n. coast 
of Cape Britain. 

LAURICOCIIA, S. ANTONIO DE, a settlement 
of the province and corregitniento of Quanta in 
Peru. 

LAURICOCHA, a lake of the province and corrt- 
gimiento of Guanuco in that kingdom ; celebrated 
for being the source of the renowned river Mara- 
iion, or of Las Amazonas, which commences its 
course thence to n. It is 10 leagues long and 3| 
wide. In lat. 9 56 s. 

LAURIER, COLINES DE, some small moun 
tains of the province and colony of Pennsylvania, 
in N. America, near the w. arm of the river Sus- 
quehannah. 

LA WARE, a large river of the same province 
and colony as the former mountains. 

LAWLESS, a small river of the province and 
colony of N. Carolina, which runs n. w. and enters 
the Hughes. 

[LAWRENCE. See LORENZO.] 

[LAWRENCE River and Gulf, ST. St. Law 
rence is one of the largest rivers in N. Ame 
rica. It issues from lake Ontario, forming the 
outlet of the long chain of great lakes which sepa 
rate Upper Canada from the United States. From 
lake Ontario to Montreal it has the name of Iro- 
quois, and taking a n. c. course embosoms the 
island of Montreal ; just above which it receives 
Ottawas from the a , and forms many fertile islands. 
From Montreal it assumes the name of St. Law 
rence, and conl inning the same course passes by 
Quebec, and meets the tide upwards of 400 miles 
from the sea, and is so far navigable for large ves 
sels. Having received in its course, besides Ottawas, 
St. John s, Seguina, Desprairies, Trois Rivieres, 
and innumerable other smaller streams, it falls into 
the ocean at cape Rosieres, by a mouth about 90 
miles broad. In its course it forms a great variety 
of bays, harbours, and islands, many of them fruit 
ful and extremely pleasant. See QUEIJEC, MONT 
REAL, &amp;c. The main entrance into the gulf of 



LAX 

St. Lawrence from the Atlantic ocean is on the e. 
between cape Hay, the s. point of Newfoundland 
island, and the ??. cape of Cape Breton ; the gut 
of Canso leads into it from the s. e. between Nova 
Scotia and the s. end of Cape Breton ; and the 
straits of Bellcisle lead into it from the n. between 
Newfoundland island and the coast of Labrador. 
It. contains a number of islands, viz. St. John s, 
at its -v. extremity, on the coast of New Brunswick 
and Nova Scotia ; Anticosti, at the mouth of the St. 
Lawrence ; besides a number of small islands.] 

[LAWRENCE, Fort, is a little above the cross 
ing place of Tuscarawas, a branch of Muskin- 
gum river.] 

[LAWRENCE Town, a thinly settled agricultural 
township, a few miles to the e. of Halifax, iuNova 
Scotia.] 

[LA \VUNAK-IIANNOCK, a Moravian set 
tlement nearly opposite Goshgoshink, on Alle- 
ghany river, and 20 miles n. c. effort Franklin.] 

LAXA, a settlement of the head settlement of 
the district of Tamazunchale, and alcaldia mayor 
of Valles, in Nueva Espaiia. It is a settlement of 
Chichimecos Indians ; annexed to the curacy of 
Tula, and belonging to the bishopric of Mechoa- 
can. Its amouiit of population is not exactly as 
certained, since they could never be brought toge 
ther so as to be counted, as they continually desert 
the settlement. They are of a sluggish disposition, 
and difficult to be reduced to the faith. Thirty 
leagues from its head settlement. 

LAXA, another settlement, with the dedicatory 
title of San Joseph; one of the missions and re 
ductions of Indians of the order of S. Francisco, 
in the district of the alcaldia mayor of Guadalax- 
ara; from the capital of which it is more than GO 
leagues to the e. 

LAXA, another, of the province and corregi- 
mienlo of Omasuyos in Peru ; on the shore of the 
river Coya. 

LAXA, a river of the province and district of 
the island of this name, in the kingdom of Chile. 
It rises in the mountain and volcano of Chilian, 
runs in a large stream to the w. for many leagues, 
and enters the Biobio, turning its course some 
what to the n. w. It has different fording places, 
namely those of Salts and Pangal, and a great 
cascade, where the water precipitates from an 
height of 40 fathoms over rocks. Near its head is 
the fort of Tucapel, built by the Spaniards to 
check the incursions of the Araucanos Indians. 
Its shores are covered with many very fertile estates, 
called Tarpeyanca, Leon, Caripuchon, and Jesus ; 
and it has an excellent stone quarry, called San 
Joseph. Its mouth is in lat. 37 9 s. 

vol.. n. 



LEA 



369 



LAXA, a rocky shoal near the coast of (he 
island of Cuba, between the cape of San Antonio 
and the coast of Florida. 

LAXA, another, near the coast of the province 
and kingdom of Tierra Firme, at the mouth of 
the river Chagre. 

LAXA, an island of the kingdom of Brazil, 
which is a territory surrounded by rivers of its 
name, and some others. 

LAXAS, a settlement and real of silver mines 
of the government of Mariquita, in the Nuevo 
Reyno de Granada; of an hot temperature, and 
abounding in vegetable productions. It was for 
merly a rich town, owing to its mines, which are 
no longer worked, and is now reduced to a popu 
lation of 100 housekeepers. It is very near it.s 
capital. 

LAXAS, another settlement, in the province and 
government of Popayan in the same kingdom ; 
on the shore of the river Caqueta. 

LAXAS, a river of the province and kingdom 
of Tierra Firme ; which rises in the mountains oi 
Pacora, runs s. and enters the sea in the bay and 
gulf of Panama. 

LAXAS, a river of the province and correct* 
miento of Pataz or Caxarnarquilla in Peru, which 
rises in the territory of the Uritucailis Indians, 
runs n. w. and enters the Guallaga. 

LAZA, a settlement of the province and corrc- 
gimiento of Cicasica in Peru. 

LAZAO, a settlement of the head settlement of 
the district of Juquila, and alcaldia mayor of 
Xicayan, in Nueva Espana. It contains 39 fami 
lies of Indians, and is 30 leagues n. c. of its head 
settlement. 

LAZARO, S. a settlement of the province and 
government of Maracaibo in the Nuevo Reyno 
de Granada ; situate on the shore of the river Ma- 
tazan, to the w. of the city of Truxillo. 

LAZARO, another settlement, in the province 
and government of Sonora, and kingdom of Nueva 
Espana ; on the shore of a river, near the town of 
San Felipe de Guebavi. 

[LAZARUS, ARCHIPELAGO OF ST. See DE 

FONTE.] 

[LEA COCK, a township in Lancaster county, 
Pennsylvania.] 

LEAN, a river of the province and government 
of Honduras, and kingdom of Guatemala ; running 
into the sea at the gulf of this name. 

LEAP1, S. PEDRO DE, a settlement of the head 
settlement of the district and alcaldia mayor of 
Nexapa in Nueva Espana ; situate in the plain of 
a rugged territory, surrounded with mountains 
covered with trees. It is inhabited by 32 families 



370 



L E B 



of Indians, employed in the commerce of cochi 
neal, fruits, and seeds. Ten leagues from its ca 
pital. 

[LEASBURGH, the chief town of Caswell 
county, N. Carolina. It contains a court-house, 
gaol, and a few houses.] 

[LEBANON, a township in York county, dis 
trict of Maine ; situated on the e. side of Salmon 
Fall river. It was incorporated in 1767, arid con 
tains 1275 inhabitants. A species of stone is found 
here which yields copperas and sulphur.] 

[LEBANON, NEW, a pleasant village in New 
York state, bordering on Pittsficld, Massachu 
setts ; situated partly in a vale, and partly on the 
declivity of hills. The medicinal springs here are 
next in celebrity to those of Saratoga. The pool 
is situated on a commanding eminence, overlook 
ing the valley, and surrounded with a few houses 
which afford tolerable accommodations to invalids.] 

[LEBANON, a township in Windham county, 
Connecticut, was settled in 1G97. The soil is 
equal to almost any in the state, and the inhabi 
tants are generally farmers, many of whom are 
wealthy. The thick settled part of the town forms 
a very wide street, and the houses are at consider 
able distances from each other. Academic education 
has been patronised in this place for above 80 years, 
greatly to the honour of the people. The river 
Shetucket is formed by the junction of Willa- 
mantic and Mount Hope rivers, which unite be 
tween this town and Windham. It lies between 
Hartford and Norwich.] 

[LEBANON, a township in Grafton county, New 
Hampshire; situated on Muscomy river, and on 
the e. side of the Connecticut, 15 miles below 
Dartmouth college. It was incorporated in 1 1761. 
In 1775 it contained 317 inhabitants, and in 1790, 
1 180. It is in contemplation to build a bridge 
on Connecticut river at the middle bar of Agar s 
falls to this town, where the distance between the 
rocks is 1 10 feet. It is 35 miles above \ he bridge 
built by Col. Hale at Bellows s falls at Walpole. 
See MASCOMY Pond.] 

[LEBANON, a post-town of Pennsylvania ; 
situated on the s. side of Quitapahilla creek, in Dau 
phin county. About a mile from the town is the 
Susquehannah and Schuylkill canal, which con 
nects this creek with the Tulpehocken, a branch 
of the Schuylkil!. Lebanon contains about 300 
houses regularly built, many of which are of brick 
and stone; a German Lutheran and a Calvinist 
church. It is 22 miles e. by n. of Harrisburg, 35 
e. by n. of Carlisle, and 63 n. w. by w. of Phila 
delphia.] 

LEBOj a river of the kingdom of Chile ; to the 



LEE 

s. of that of Labapi, and distant from it six 
leagues. It runs o&amp;gt;. between the port of Carnero 
and the mouth of the river Tucapel, and on its 
shore stood the city of Canete, now destroyed ; 
also near it is the spot where a battle was fought 
between the Spaniards and the Araucanos Indians. 
It empties itself into the Pacific or S. sea, in lat. 
37 57 s. 

LEBOLCOBAN, a settlement of Indians of 
the kingdom of Chile, in the interior of the country 
of the infidels, on theshore of the river Comoleuvu. 

LEB11IJA, an abundant river of the province 
and government of Santa Maria in the Nuevo 
Reyno de Granada ; which rises near the city of 
Pamplona to the a?, runs many leagues, collecting 
the waters of several others, to enter with a much 
increased stream into the Magdalena, by two arms, 
at some distance from each other, forming an 
island, opposite to which is the port of Ocana. 

LECH A, a small river of the province and co 
lony of Pennsylvania, which runs s. and enters 
the w. arm of the Delaware. 

LECHAVAKSEIN, a settlement of Indians, of 
the same province and colony as the former river ; 
on the shore of the e. arm of the river Delaware. 

LECHE, Rio DE LA, a river in the province 
and corregimienlo of Sana, and kingdom of Peru. 
It runs w. and enters the sea opposite the island of 
Lobos to windward. 

LECHES, some islands of the S. sea, situate in 
the middle of a bay formed by the coast of the pro 
vince and government of Veragua, in the king 
dom of Tierra Firme. They are three, one mo 
derate-sized, and the two small; situate near the 
continent. 

LEGOS, a river of the province and govern 
ment of Moxos in the kingdom of Quito. 

LEDA, a cape on the coast of the province and 
captainship of Paraiba, and kingdom of Brazil, be 
tween cape Blanco and the river of Mongangape, 
where the Portuguese have a castle, called Santa 
Catalina. 

LEDESMA, a fort of the province and govern 
ment of Tucnman, in the district of the city of 
Xuxuy, on the shore of the river Negro. 

[LEE, a small town in Straftbrd county, New 
Hampshire, about 12 miles ;?. of Exeter. It was 
formerly part of Dover and Durham, and was in 
corporated in 1766. In 1775 it contained 954 in 
habitants, in 1790, 1029.] 

[LEE, Fort, was erected by the Americans du 
ring the late war, on the w. bank of North river, 
having the tract called the English Neighbour 
hood on the n. and that called Heboken on the s. 
in lat. 40 56 n. and about nine miles above the 



LEG 

town of Bergen. The Americans had 2000 men 
in garrison here in the lute war, but evacuated it 
in November 1776, with the loss of their artillery 
and stores.] 

[LEE, a county of Virginia, lately taken from 
Russel, in the s.w. corner of the state ; bounded ,v. 
by the state of N. Carolina, and zo. by Kentucky.] 

[LEE, a township in Berkshire county, Massa 
chusetts, five miles s. of Lenox, four e. of Stock- 
bridge, and 140 w. of Boston ; was incorporated 
in 1777, and contains 1 170 inhabitants. Ilousa- 
tonick river runs s. through this town.] 

[LEE S Island, in Patowmac river, in Fairfax 
county, Virginia, about two miles s. e. of Thorp, 
which is on the n. side of Choose creek.] 

[LEEDS, a town in the e. part of Gloucester 
county, New Jersey, four miles w. of the mouth 
of Mullicus river, and eight n.w. of Brigantine inlet.] 

[LEEDS, a village of Richmond county, Virgi 
nia ; situated on the n. bank of Rappahannock 
river ; 12 miles e. by s. of port Royal, 27 s. e. of 
Fredericksburg, and 49 n. e. of Richmond. 
Near Lcedstown is a famous course for horse- 
racing.] 

[LEEFOOG A, one ofthe Friendly islands, in the 
S. sea. It was visited by Captain Cook in 1776, 
who considers it superior, in some respects, to 
Anamooka. The island is situated near llapaee, 
and is about seven miles long and three broad.] 

[LEEK, a small island of Pennsylvania, in De 
laware river.] 

[LEESBURG. See LEASBURG.] 

[LEESBURG, a post-town of Maryland, 25 
miles from Frederickstown.] 

[LEESBURG, a post-town of Virginia, and capi 
tal of Loudon county. It is situated six miles s. w. 
of the Patowmac, and four s. of Goose Creek, a 
branch of that river on the great road leading from 
Philadelphia to the s. and on the road leading from 
Alexandria to Bath. It contains about 60 houses, 
a court-house and gaol. It is 20 miles from Shep- 
herdstown, 20 miles from Frederickstown in Mary 
land, 25 n.w. of Alexandria, and 39 e. s. e. of 
Winchester.] 

[LEESBURG, or LF.ESTOWN, a settlement in 
Kentucky, on the banks of Kentucky river, 20 
miles from Lexington, and -nbout SO from the 
Upper Blue lick. It was destroyed by the In 
dians, and abandoned. The country for many 
miles round is first-rate land. Great plenty of 
marble is found on the banks of Kentucky, parti 
cularly at this place.] 

[LEEWARD Islands See WEST INDIES.] 

LEGOS, a settlement of the province and cor- 



L E 1 



regimiento of Piura, and kingdom of Peru ; in the 
road which leads from Loxa. 

[L E-GRAN D, or MA u A M E, a considerable river 
ofthe N. W. Territory, which rises within a few 
miles of the w. extremity of lake Erie, and pur 
suing a n. n. w. course for nearly 75 miles, thence 
turning to the w. empties into lake Michigan. It 
is about 250 yards wide at its confluence with the 
lake.] 

LEGS, a town of Indians of Canada, in the ter 
ritory and country of the Ohios Indians, s. of 
lake Erie. 

[LEHIGH, or Lr.ciiA, a river which rises in 
Northampton county, Pennsylvania, about 21 
miles c. of Wyoming falls, in Susquehanhah 
river ; and taking a circular course, passing through 
the Blue mountains, empties into Delaware river 
on the s. side of Easton, J5 miles n. e. of Beth 
lehem. It runs about 75 miles, and is navigable SO 
miles.] 

[LEICESTER, a township in Addison county, 
Vermont ; situated on the e. side of Otter creek, 
having 343 inhabitants. Great Trout pond or 
lake is partly in this town, and partly in Salis 
bury, on the n. The title of township was granted 
Oct. 20, 1761.] 

[LEICESTER, called by the Indian natives Towt- 
aid, is a considerable town in Worcester county, 
Massachusetts, containing 1076 inhabitants. It is 
situated upon the post-road from Boston to Hart 
ford, New York, and Philadelphia, six miles w. 
of Worcester, and 41 ni. by s. of Boston ; bounded 
n. by Paxton, and s. by Oxford. It was settled 
in 1713, and incorporated in 1720 or 1721. There 
are three meeting-houses here for Congregational- 
ists, Anabaptists, and Quakers ; who live in har 
mony together. The Leicester academy was in 
corporated in 1784, and is well endowed. Wool 
cards are manufactured here to the annual amount 
of 15,000 pairs.] 

LEIDA, a settlement of the province and go 
vernment of Jaen dc Bracamoros in the kingdom 
of Quito, between two rivers, and s. e. of the 
town of Valladolid. 

LEIVA, NUESTRA SENOHA DE, a town of the 
province and corregirnicnto of Tunja in the Nuevo 
Reyno de Granada ; founded by Francisco dc 
Villalobos and Juan de Otalora, in 1572, by order 
of D. Pedro Diaz Venero de Lciba, president of 
Santa Fe, and in honour of whom it was called. 
It is on a fertile and pleasant plain, at the foot of 
some mountains abounding in silver, but which 
are not worked from the sloth of the natives, who 
are, besides, more disposed to agriculture. It is 



L E N 



of a moderately cold temperature, and is of 
the best climates in the kingdom. It has abund 
ance of very good sweet water, from streams which 
irrigate and fertilize its territory, and render it pro 
ductive of all kinds of grain and fruits, anil olives 
as good as those of Sevilla. It abounded in wheat 
of excellent quality till 1691, when, after an 
eclipse of the sun it was all blasted; the which was 
not the case with the maize, barley, papas, arraca~ 
chas, and onions. The parish church is one of 
the best in the kingdom. It has convents of the 
orders of San Agustin, San Juan de Dios, under 
the charge of which is the hospital, and a monas 
tery of Carmelite nuns. A market is celebrated 
here every Friday in the year, when the traffic is 
very great, as the merchants and inhabitants of 
Velez and of Tunja make it a rendezvous. The 
jurisdiction of this town is much reduced: for 
only one league to the n. it is bounded by the river 
Cane ; to the n. zo. are the settlements of Yuca 
and Ecce-Homo, which are of the district of Ve 
lez ; and to the e. it has, at a very short distance, 
the river of the Desaguadero, and to the s. the ju 
risdiction of Tunja. It is five leagues w. of this, 
and 11 of Chiquinquira. 

[LE-MAIRE. SceMAiRE.] 

[LEM1NGTON, a township in Essex county, 
Vermont, on the z&amp;. bank of Connecticut river, 
and near the n. e. corner of the state. The Great 
Monadnock mountain is in this town. It contains 
3J inhabitants.] 

LEMPA, a river of the province and govern 
ment of. Nicaragua in the kingdom of Guate 
mala. 

[LEMPSTER, an inconsiderable township in 
Chester county, New Hampshire. It was incor 
porated in 1761. In 1775, it contained 128, and 
in 1790, 414 inhabitants.] 

LENA, LA, a settlement of the province and 
correpimiento of Porco in Peru. 

LENE1BAMBA, a settlement of the province 
and corregimfento of Chachapoyas, in the same 
kingdom as the former. 

LENGUA DE VAC A, a point of the const of 
the S. sea, in the province and corregimicnto of 
Coquimbo, and kingdom of Chile, near the port of 
Tongoi. 

LENGUPA, a settlement of the province and 
corrcgimiento of Tunja in the Nuevo lleyno de 
Granada. It is of an hot climate, abounding in 
sugar-canes, plantains, yucas, potatoes, and cot 
ton, which is carried to Tunja. It is situate amidst 
woods and pools, and in it the Jesuits had a rich 
estate, with large sugar-engines. It was conquered 



LEO 

in 1537 by Juan de San Martin. It contains 300 
housekeepers, and is 24 leagues s. e. of its ca 
pital. 

LENGUSAQUE, a settlement of the same 
province and kingdom as the former, belonging to 
the corrfgimiento of Indians of Turrneque. It is 
of a cold temperature, produces wheat, maize, 
papas, and other fruits of its climate ; and was in 
the time of the Indians a large and populous city. 
It was conquered by Gonzalo Ximinez de Quesada 
in 1537, and is now reduced to 60 housekeepers 
and 40 Indians. Eight leagues s. e. of Tunja, and 
16 n. w. of Santa Fe. 

LENKIN, a settlement of the island of Barba- 
does, in the district of the parish of San Joseph; 
situate near the w. coast. 

[LENOI1I, a county of Newbcrn district, N. 
Carolina, surrounded by Glasgow, Craven, Jones, 
and Dauphin. It contains 2484 free inhabitants, 
and 957 slaves. Chief town, Kingston.] 

[LENOX, the shire town of Berkshire county, 
Massachusetts. It is a pleasant and thriving town, 
and has a court-house and gaol. Housatonick 
river passes through the town.] 

LEOGANE, a town of the French, in their 
possessions in the island of St. Domingo; founded 
in 1660, in a beautiful and extensive valley of the 
same name, half a league from the sea. It is very 
fertile, and abounds in sugar-cane, cacao, tobacco, 
indigo, and other vegetable productions. Of the 
former of these it makes great quantities of the 
finest sugar, one of its principal branches of com 
merce. As its situation is near a lake, and the 
soil is swampy, the climate cannot be otherwise 
than unhealthy ; and this, added to the inconve 
nience of its having no port, and the want of se 
curity to vessels coming in to lade and unlade in 
an open road, induced the governor the marquis, 
to think of changing its situation to some better 
spot ; a design which he proposed to the king in 
1723, but which was not put into execution, since 
the continually increasing wealth, which was arid is 
daily collecting by the inhabitants, made them 
strongly resist such a step. The figure of this 
town is of a regular hexagon, fortified with a good 
wall and 10 bastions after the modern form; and 
in one of the points&amp;gt;&amp;gt;which form the road, is a fort 
of a triangular figure, called De la Punta. A 
river, which runs into the sea, passes through the 
middle of the town. 

[The exports of this town, from Jan. 1, 1789, 
to Dec. 31, of the same year, were 895,87 libs, 
white sugar ; 7,079,2051bs. brown sugar ; 
l,932,9521bs coffee; 139,887lbs. cotton ; and 



A. 

49601bs, indigo. The duties on the exportation 
of the above, 26,103 dollars 70 cents.] 

[LEOGANE, Bay of, called also Bight or Bite 
of Leogane, also Cut de Sac of Leogane, at the w. 
end of the island of St. Domingo, is formed by two 
peninsulas. It opens between cape St. Nicholas at 
tlLe w. end of the n. peninsula, and cape Dame 
Marie, the n. w. point of the s. peninsula, 45 
leagues apart. At the bottom of the bay are the 
islands Gonave, and on the n. side of the s. penin 
sula the isles Ressif and Caymite. It embosoms a 
vast number of fine bays. The chief bays, towns, 
and ports from cape St. Nicholas round to cape 
Dame Marie, are La Plate Forme, or the Plat 
form, Gonaives, St. Marc, Montrouis, Archahaye, 
Port au Prince, Leogane, Goave, Miragoane, 
Petit Tron, bay of Baradaires, bay of Durot, Je- 
remie, cape Dame Marie, &amp;c. Trou Bordet, at 
the head of which is Port au Prince, is at the ex 
tremity of the bay of Leogane eastward, 60 leagues 
e. of cape Dame Marie, and 51 s. e. of cape St. 
Nicholas.] 

[LEOMINSTER, a post-town in Worcester 
county, Massachusetts, seven miles n. by w. of 
Lancaster, 20 s. e. of Winchendon, 46 w. of Bos 
ton, 19 n. or Worcester, and 20s. of Marlborough, 
in New Hampshire, has a printing-office and se 
veral neat buildings. This (ownship was taken 
from Lancaster, incorporated in 1740, and con 
tains 1189 inhabitants. On the different streams 
which pass through the town are two grist mills, 
five saw mills, an oil mill, and clothiers works, 
very excellent. About 200,000 bricks are an 
nually made here. The manufacture of combs is 
also carried on to great perfection and profit. Leo- 
minster Gore, adjoining, contains 27 inhabitants.] 

LEON, NUEVO REYNO DE, in N.America; 
bounded by the jurisdictions of V alles and Guadal- 
cazar, the deserts ofJaurnave and the borclerings 
of the grand sierra of Tamaolipan lying between. 
Its length at the greatest extent is 98 leagues, from 
lat. 24 to 32 from s. to n. and its width at the 
narrowest part 50 leagues from e. to zc. The 
greater part of this extensive country is void of 
settlements and missions, and inhabited only by 
different barbarous nations from the sierra afore 
said to the confines of the province of Tejas and 
the river Medina ; though in these unpeopled 
tracts there are not wanting rich mines of silver and 
of excellent salt. Nearly the whole of the king 
dom is mountainous and full of thickets, as well as 
rivers and lakes ; and it has many sierras, which 
are distinct from the leading chain, which is an 
extensive cordillera, extending from the province 



LEO 3T3 

of Coaguila and kingdom of Nueva Vizcaya, girt 
ing this kingdom from w. to s. and dividing it 
from the province of Gimsteca. Many rivers flow 
labouring down from these mountains, originating 
in the streams at their tops, and all of them abound 
in excellent fish of all kinds. Here is a sort of 
wild grand) which, when cultivated, is the same 
as cochineal, as it comes from the same plant, 
namely the copal. By the aforesaid grand river 
Del Norte, which runs to this rhumb, are some 
saline earths of great extent ; and towards the s. 50 
leagues from these, others called De la Barra. It 
enjoys for the most part a mild temperature, from 
its being blown upon freely by the n. and e. winds. 
The whole of its territory is very abundant in pas 
tures and woods. Its chief commerce is comprised 
in the selling, in the provinces of Coaguila and 
Texas, its goats, mules, and horses, as also in some 
lead, which is extracted from the mines of the reals 
of these provinces. The grain and fruit cultivated 
here are more valuable than those cultivated in 
Nueva Esparia ; nor would they be produced in less 
quantities were the country better peopled. This was 
a subject which drew the attention of the viceroy 
the Count of Revillagigedo, who convened a junta 
to take it into consideration ; but, although a few 
settlements were inconsequence formed, the greater 
part of the country has still remained unpeopled. 
It is a bishopric, erected in 1777. The capital is 
the town of Monterrey, and the other settlements 
are the following : 

Valle de Sta. Catalina, Santiago de las Sabinas, 
Valle de la Pesqueria, Sun Grcgorio de Cer- 
Santiago del Sultillo, ralvo, 

Valle de las Salinas, S. Nicolas de Gualegas, 

S. Pedro Boca deLeones, S.Juan dc Cadereita, 
Tlaxcala, Las Tublas, 

Santiago de Guajuco, S. Mateo del Pilon. 
S. Felipe de Linares, La Mota, 
Santa Engracia, S. Antonio de los Llanos. 

El Pablillo, Los Labradores, 

La Presa, San Miguel de Aguayo. 

Bishops who have presided in the Nuevo Reyno 
de Leon. 

I.Don JV.Antonio.de Jesus Sacedon, of the 
order of San Francisco. 

2. Don Fr. Rafael Joseph de Vergen. 

LI ? ON, a province and alcaldia mayor of the same 
name, of the kingdom and bishopric ot Mechoacan, 
the jurisdiction of which extends as far as the 
great river which divides it from the jurisdictions 
of Salamanca, Pasquaro, and Tlazasalca ; and 
being bounded w. n. w. by that of Lagos. It is 
very abundant in maize ? wheat, and large and 



zn LEO 

-mall cattle ; is entirely covered with estates, by 
which it supplies with fruits some reules of mines 
and the provinces of La Pucbla. 

The capital is the town ofthe same name ; and 
in it reside 521 families of Spaniards, 471 of Mus- 
ifeS) and 196 of Mulattoes. It has a good convent 
of the order of San Francisco, which is adminis 
tered by the curate; another, with an hospital, of 
the monks San Juan deDios; a college which be 
longed to the Jesuits ; and a convent for women 
A\ho follow the rules and institutes ofthe last order, 
and which was the only one in all America. It is 
80 leagues n. n. w. of Mexico, in lat. 2 IS . Long. 
272 10 . The other settlements of the jurisdic 
tion are reduced to the following: 
San Francisco de Cui- San Pedro de Picdra 

sillo, Gorda, 

San Miguel, San Francisco, 

San Francisco del Rin- Penjamo, 

con, La Concepcion. 

LEON, another city, the capital of the province 
and government of Nicaragua in the kingdom of 
Guatemala ; situate on the shore of a great lake of 
fresh water, in which are found abundance offish, 
anil at the distance of 12 leagues from the S. sea. 
It is the head of a bishopric, erected in 1534 by 
the Pontiff Paul III. ; and was discovered by Gil 
Gonzalez Davila in 1522, being first settled by 
Francisco Hernandez de Cordoba. It is small, 
but does a pretty trade in its native fruits. In 
1585, it was sacked by some English pirates, in 
sight of a body of soldiers, Avho could not obstruct 
them. One hundred and four leagues from Guate 
mala, in lat. 12 25 . Long. 291 25 . See the 
catalogue of bishops in the article NICARAGUA. 

LEON, a settlement ofthe province and govern 
ment of Santa Marta, and district of the Rio del 
Hacha, in the Nuevo Reyno de Granada, near the 
shore of the river. 

LEON, another, ofthe district of the island of 
La Laxa in the kingdom of Chile. 

LEON, another, with the surname of Froes, in 
the province and captainship of Espiritu Santo in 
Brazil ; situate on the shore of the river of this 
name. 

LEON, a river, of the province and government 
of Tucnman in Peru, of the district and jurisdic 
tion of Xuxuy, which runs e. and enters the river 
Grande. 

LKON, another, of the province and corregi- 
miento of Arica in the same kingdom, which runs 
n. then turns w. and enters the sea near the ca 
pital. 

LEON, another, of the Nuevo Reyno of its name, 



L E P 

which enters the sea in the bay of Mexico or lake 
of San Joseph, 

LEON, another, a small river of the province and 
corrcgimiento of Cuenca in the kingdom of Quito, 
which runs s. at some little distance from the city, 
and enters the Jiron. 

LEON, a lake of the province and country ofthe 
Iroquees Indians in N.America ; formed from the 
river or waste-water ofthe lake Quento to enter 
the Ontario, of which it is part, or at least with 
which it is communicated. 

LEON, a valley of the province and corregi- 
mienlo of Arica in Pern, near the coast. 

[LEONARDS TOWN, a post-town of Mary 
land, and the capital of St. Mary s county, is si 
tuated on the e. side of Britton s brook, just where 
it falls into Britton s bay, five miles from its mouth 
in the Palowmac, and contains about 50 houses, a 
court-house, and goal. It is 52 miles s. of Balti 
more, 27s. bye. of Upper Marlborough, 17 s. e. of 
port Tobacco, and 122 s. w. of Philadelphia. Lat. 
3S 24 n. \ 

LEONES, PUERTO DE LOS, a port in the pro 
vince and government of Tierra Firine, and by the 
N. sea, at the back ofthe bay of Portobelo. It is 
a. bay shut in by various isles, and has served as a 
shelter for foreign vessels which come to carry on 
an illicit commerce. 

LLONES, another port, on the coast lying be 
tween the river La Plata and the straits of Magel 
lan. It is large but shallow. The entrance is of 
two mouths, formed by an island in the middle, in 
lat. 44 13 s. 

LEONES, some islands on the same coast as the 
former port. They are five, all small, and at the 
entrance ofthe port Deseado. 

LEONES, some other small islands, of the S. sea, 
near the coast of the kingdom of Tierra Firme, in 
the bay of La Soledad, of the province and govern 
ment of Veragua, at the mouth ofthe river Martin 
Grande. 

LEONES, a settlement and real of silver mines 
in the Nuevo Reyno de Leon ; called San Pedro 
de Boca de Leories. Twenty-four leagues n. of its 
capital. 

LEONISA, SAN JOSEPH DC, a settlement of 
the province of Guayana, and government of Cu- 
mana ; one of the missions which are held there 
by the Catalonan Capuchin fathers. 

[LEPER S Island, one of the New Hebrides. 
The inhabitants of this island, according to Bou- 
gainvill s account of them, " are of two colours, 
black and mulatto. Their lips arc thick, their 
hair frizzled, and some have a kind of yellow wool ; 



L E R 

they are small, ugly, ill-made, and in general de 
voured by the leprosy, which occasioned the dis 
coverer Bougainville to call it the Isle of Lepers : 
few women were seen, but they were altogether as 
disgusting as the men. They go naked, hardly 
covering their waists with a mat." They carry 
their children on their backs in a kind of scarf. 
They wear ornaments in their nostrils, and have 
no beards.] 

LERMA, a city, the capital of the alcaJdia 
mayor in Nueva Espana; founded, by order of 
the Marquis of Guadalcazar, viceroy of that king 
dom, by Don Martin Varejon, in 1613; the king 
having granted to it four leagues for the extent of 
its jurisdiction, but which has been curtailed in 
the present day by the encroachment of the juris 
diction of the estates of the marquisate del Valle, 
and of other masters of estates of the jurisdictions of 
Toluca and Metepec, on its boundaries ; and 
thus, on this account, as well as from having been 
deserted by many of its inhabitants, is its commerce 
very small, and it is in a state nearly bordering 
upon complete poverty. Jt lies in the direct road 
leading from Mexico to the interior provinces; on 
which account, for the accommodation of travellers, 
a large causeway was built, which traverses the 
city from n. to s. It is small, of an irregular 
plant, and the houses are in a state of dilapidation. 
Its temperature is cold and moist, as being situate 
just at the commencement of that, extremely cold 
valley of Toluca and Metepec, which is continually 
covered with snow. Very near to this city runs 
the river called Matlazingo, which in the lowest 
part of the territory forms a swamp, and being re 
plenished by various springs which rise in the 
country, forms a very deep body of water, at the 
spot where it has a bridge. The origin and source 
of this river is in a small spring rising near the set 
tlement of Santiago. The city contains 9.5 families 
of Indians, 57 of Spaniards, 1 33 of Mustees and 
Mulattocs ; and produces maize and other seeds, 
though not in abundance, from the want of land, 
since in its jurisdiction, which is no more than 
four leagues long, and a little more than three 
wide, the greater part of the territory consists of 
mountains and ravines incapable of cultivation. It 
is consequently obliged to look to the neighbour 
ing jurisdictions for a supply of all the necessaries 
of life, being content in the breeding some swine. 
This alialdia has no more than four settle 
ments, which are Tarasqnillo, Santiago, San Ma- 
teo, and San Miguel. It is nine leagues w.s. w. of 
Mexico, in lat. ^19 16 . Long. 99 21 30" w. 
LKRMA, a settlement of the province and go- 



L E U 



375 



vernment of Yucatan ; on the coast, on the shore 
of a creek which gives it its name, and defended 
with a castle garrisoned by a detachment of the city 
of Campcche. 

[LE-ROACH Island is near Falkland s islands; 
discovered in J()57.] 

[LES CAVES, a jurisdiction on the s. side of the 
French part of the island of St. Domingo, con 
tains four parishes, and yields abundance of sugar, 
cotton, and coffee. Its exports from the town 
Les Cayes, from January ], 1789, to December 
31, of the same year, were 2,597,666!b. white 
sugar ; 24,526,0501b. brown sugar ; 3,025,604lb. 
coftee ; 855,4471b. cotton ; l(&amp;gt;9,3051b. indigo ; 
and small articles to the value of 8256 livres. The 
value of duties paid on the above, on exportation, 
]0 1,528 dollars, 85 cents. The town Les Cayes 
lies between the villages Torbcck and Cavaillon, 
on the large bay which sets up to the island 
Avache; from which it is about three leagues dis 
tant, and five leagues n. of point Abacon. Lat. 
18 12 n. ^ Long. 76 8 to. from Paris.] 

LESTE, PUNTA DEL, a point on the coast of 
the island of Tortuga, near that of S. Domingo. 

[LETTERKENNY, a township in Franklin 
county, Pennsylvania.] 

LEVANTADOS, CAYO DR LOS, an isle of the 
N. sea, near the coast of the island S. Domingo, in 
the e. head, at the entrance of the great- bay of Sa- 
mana, close to the isle of Balandra. 

LEVANTADOS, a port of the same island, on the 
s. coast, of the part possessed by the French, be 
tween the cape Marechal and the point of La Belle 
Roche. 

LEVANTO, n settlement of the province a nd 
corregintiento of Chachapoyas in Peru. 

[LEVERETT, a township in Hampshire 
county, Massachusetts, near Connecticut river, and 
about 72 miles w. of Boston. It was incorporated irt 
1774, and contains 524 inhabitants. A copper 
mine has been found in this township.] 

LEV1 POINT, a settlement of Canada, on the 
shore of the river S. Lawrence, opposite Quebec. 

LEVIS, a river of the province and colony of 
Pennsylvania in N. America. 

LEUPILLAN, a settlement of Indians, of the 
district of the island of La Laxa in the kingdom of 
Chile ; on the shore of the river Bureu. 

LEUQUITAN, a settlement of Indians, of the 
same district and kingdom as the former; situate 
between the rivers Bureu and Recalqne. 

LEUVANA, a bay on the s. coast of the island 
of Jamaica. 

LEUVANA, another. See MIALTLU, 



376 



L E W 



LETJVANA, another. Sec MOYALEC. 
LEWES, a city of the province and country of 
Delaware ; situate on the coast, at the entrance of 
the bay of this name. 

LEWIS, the principal port of the island of 
Granada, one of the Caribes. See article GRA 
NADA. 

LEWIS, a settlement of the island of Barbadoes, 
in the.?, part. 

FLEwis, a town in Essex county, s. w. of 
Lemington, adjoining 1 , in Vermont. It is about 
eight miles s. of the Canada line.] 
[Lewis. See Louis.] 

[LEWIS Creek, in Vermont, a small stream 
which falls into lake Champlain at Ferrisburg, a 
little n. of (he mouth of Little Otter creek.] 

[Lewis s Bay. See BARNSTABLE County, 
Massachusetts.] 

[LEWISBURG. See LOUISBOURG.] 
[LKWISBURG, a county in Orangeburgh dis 
trict, S. Carolina.] 

[LEWISBURG, or TARSTOWN, a town of North 
umberland county, Pennsylvania ; situated on the 
to. side of the w. branch of Susquehannah, nine 
miles above Northumberland. It contains about 
60 houses, and is well situated for carrying on a brisk 
trade with the n. w. part of the state. It is 24 
miles e. bv n. of Aaronsburg.] 

[LEWISBURGH, a post-town of N. Carolina, 
and capital of Franklin county. It is situated on 
Tar river, and contains between 20 and 30 houses, 
a court-house and gaol. It is 17 miles n. c. of 
Raleigh, 23 s.w. of Warrenton, and 42 from 
Taiborough.] 

[LEWI* BURGH, a post-town, and the chief town 
of Greenbriar county, Virginia ; situated on the n. 
side of Greenbriar river, contains about 60 houses, 
a court-house and gaol. It is 149 miles w. by u. 
of Richmond. Lat. 37 52 .] 

[LEWISTOWN, a plantation in Lincoln 
county, district of Maine ; situated on the e. side 
of Androscoggin river, and bounded s.w. by Bow- 
doin. Lewistown and Core contain 532 inhabi 
tants. It is 27 miles n. n. e. of Portland.] 

[LEWISTOWN, or LEWIS, a town in Sussex 
county, Delaware, is pleasantly situated on Lewes 
creek, three miles above its mouth in Delaware 
bay, and as far rt\ of the light-house on cape Ilcn- 
lopen. It contains a Presbyterian and Methodist 
church, and about 150 houses, built chiefly on a 
street which is more than three miles in length, and 
extending along a creek, which separates the town 
from the pitch of the cape. The situation is high, 
and commands a full prospect of the light-house 



LEX 

and the sea. The court-house and the gaol are 
commodious buildings, and give an air of import 
ance to the town. The situation of this place must 
at some future time render it of considerable im 
portance. Placed at the entrance of a bay, \vhich 
is crowded with vessels from all parts of the world, 
and which is frequently closed with ice a part of 
the winter season ; necessity seems to require, and 
nature seems to surest, the forming this port into 
a harbour for shipping 1 . The deficiency of water 
in the creek may be cheaply and easily supplied 
by a small canal, so as to afibrd a passage for the 
waters of Rehoboth into Lewes creek, which would 
ensure an adequate supply. The circumjacent 
country is beautifully diversified with hills, woods, 
streams, and lakes, forming an agreeable contrast 
to the naked sandy beach, which terminates in the 
cape ; but it is greatly infested with musquitoes and 
sand-flies. It carries on a small trade with Phila 
delphia in (he productions of the country. A ma 
nufacture of marine and glauber salts, and mag 
nesia, has been lately established here, which is 
managed by a gentleman skilled in the practical 
knowledge of chemistry. It is 70 miles 5. of Phi 
ladelphia. Lat. 38 47 n. Long. 75 18 a?.] 

[LEWISTOWN, the chief town of Mifllin county, 
Pennsylvania ; situated on the n. side of Juniatta 
river, on the w. side, and at the mouth of Cishico- 
quillis creek ; a short way a\ of the Long Nar 
rows in Juniatta river, and about 23 miles n. e. of 
Huntingdon. It is regularly laid out, arid con 
tains about 120 dwelling-houses, a court-house and 
gaol. ]t was incorporated in 1795, and is go 
verned by two burgesses, one high-constable, a 
town-clerk, and two assistants. Jt is 117 miles 
w.tt. w. of Philadelphia. Lat. 40 36 n. Long. 
773(&amp;gt; ?tf.] 

[LEW UNAKIIANNEK, a town on the 
Ohio, where Christian Indians settled under the 
care of the Moravian missionaries.] 

[LEXAWACSEIN, a small river of Pennsyl 
vania, which rises by several branches in North 
ampton county, Pennsylvania, on the e. side of 
mount Ararat ; these unite about 10 miles from its 
mouth in Delaware river. Its course is s.e. and e. 
It joins the Delaware about 92 miles above Phila 
delphia.] 

[LEXINGTON, a post-town of Virginia, and 
capital of Rockbridge county. It is situated on 
the post-road from Philadelphia to Kentucky, by 
way of the wilderness, and about a mile s. of the 
. br.inch of James s river. It contains a court 
house, gaol, and about 100 houses. The situa 
tion of the town is healthy and agreeable, and the 



L E Z 

country round highly cultivated. It is 95 miles 
w. by n. of Richmond, 242 from Philadelphia, and 
240 from Danville in Kentucky.] 

[LEXINGTON, a post-town of Kentucky, and 
formerty the metropolis of that state. It is situ 
ated on a rich extensive plain in Fayette county, 
on the n. side of Town Fork, a small stream which 
falls into the s. branch of Eikhorn river. It is 
built on a regular plan, and contains about 250 
houses, three places of public worship, a court 
house and gaol. It contains two printing-offices, 
which publish two weekly gazettes ; has several 
stores of goods well assorted, and is a flourishing, 
agreeable place. It is situated in the midst of a 
fine tract of country, on the head waters of Elk- 
horn river, 15 miles e. of Frankfort. Its inhabi 
tants were supposed to amount in 1796 to 2000 ; 
among whom were a number of very genteel fami 
lies, affording very agreeable society. Lat. 37 
54 n. Long. 84 27 w. Near this town are 
found curious sepulchres full of human skeletons. 
It has been asserted that a man in or near the town, 
having dug five or six feet below the surface of the 
ground, came to a large flat stone, under which 
"was a well of common depth, regularly and arti 
ficially stoned. In the vicinity of Lexington are 
found the remains of two ancient fortifications, fur 
nished with ditches and bastions, overgrown with 
large trees.] 

f LEXINGTON, a county in Orangeburgh dis 
trict, S. Carolina.] 

[LEXINGTOV, formerly called the Great Falls, 
a small town of Georgia; situated on the s. side 
of Ogeechee river, on a beautiful eminence which 
overlooks the falls of the river. It is two miles 
from Georgetown, and 30 from Greensborough.] 

[LEXINGTON, a town in Middlesex county, 
Massachusetts, 10 miles n.w. of Boston, having a 
neat Congregational church, and a number of 
compact houses. It has been rendered famous by 
the battle fought in it, April 19, 1775, which may 
be considered as the commencement of the Ame 
rican revolution. This township contains 941 in 
habitants, and was incorporated in 1712.] 

[LEYDEN, a township in Hampshire county, 
Massachusetts, between Colerain and Bernardston, 
27 miles from Northampton, the shire town. It 
was incorporated in 1784, and contains 989 inha- 
fcitantO 

LEZAMANA. a settlement of the province and 
government of Venezuela ; situate in the boun 
dary which divides its jurisdiction from that of 
Cumana. 

LEZARD, a river of the island of Guadalupe, 
which runs n. e. and enters the sea in the bay of 

VOL, IK 



LIC 



377 



the Cul de Sac Petit, between the river Maho, 
and the settlement of the same name as the bay. 

[LEZARS, an Indian nation, who inhabit be 
tween the mouth of the Ohio and Wabash rivers. 
They can furnish 300 warriors.] 

LIBANO, PINAR J)EL PINONF.S DEi;, a wood 
of the kingdom of Chile, in the division and dis 
trict of Token Alto. 

LIBERTE, Point of, on the coast of French 
Guayana ; one of those which form the m&amp;lt;&amp;gt;utli of 
the river Montsinery. 

[LIBERTY, a post-town of Virginia, 1 1 miles 
from New London, 23 from Fincastle, and 44 from 
Martinville.] 

[LIBERTY Town, a village of Maryland ; situ 
ated in Frederick county, 10 miles n. e. of Frede 
rick s town, and about 40 n. n. w. of the federal 
city. Copper mines have been found near this 
town, and have been worked ; but to no great ex 
tent as yet.] 

LIB1LCA, a settlement, of the province and 
corregimiento of Arica in Peru ; annexed to the 
curacy of Copta. 

LiBITICA, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Chumbivilcas in Pern. 

LI BON, a river of the island of S. Domingo, 
which rises at the foot of the mountains near the n. 
coast, runs s. and enters the Artibonito in the 
valley of Banica. 

LIB UN, a settlement of Indians of the kingdom 
of Chile, near the river Maule. 

LICAN, a settlement of the province and cor- 
rrgimiento of Riobamba in the kingdom of Quito. 
In its district to the e. is a great estate called La 
Cant era. 

L1CANI, a settlement of Indians of the district 
ofTolten Baxo in the kingdom of Chile, on the 
shore of the river Metenquen. 

LICfl, a small river of the province and co 
lony of N. Carolina. It runs . w. and enters the 
Ohio. 

LICH, another, also a small river in the same 
province and colony; an arm of the Muskingum, 
which runs s. e. and returns back into itself. 

[LlCHTENAU,a Moravian settlement on the e. 
side of Muskingum river, three miles below Gas- 
chachguenk ; but as the warriors passed constantly 
through this place it was forsaken, and they re 
moved to Salem, five miles below Gnadenhueten.] 
[LICK, a name by which salt springs are called 
in the w. parts of the United States. See BIG 
BONE Lick.] 

[LICKING, a navigable river of Kentucky, 
which rises on the w. confines of Virginia, inter 
locks with the head waters of Kentucky river, 
3 c 



L I G 



runs in a n. w. direction upwards of 125 miles, and 
by a mouth 150 yards wide, flows through the s. 
bank of Ohio river, opposite fort Washington. 
Upon this river are iron works, and numerous salt 
springs. Its principal branch is navigable nearly 
70 miles. From Limestone to this river, the coun 
try is very rich, and covered with cane, rye-grass, 
anil natural clover.] 

LICTO, a settlement of the province and corre- 
gimiento of Riobamba in the kingdom of Quito. 

L1CUREO, VALLE DE, a valley in the king 
dom of Chile ; between the river Lebo and that of 
Tucapel, near the sea-coast. 

LIEBRE, a bay on the e. coast of the island of 
Newfoundland ; between the port S. Julian and 
cape S. Antoine. 

L1GATU, a river of the province ofGuaira, 
and government of Paraguay, which runs w. and 
enters the Guibay. 

[LIGON1ER, Fort, lies a little to the n. of the 
road from Philadelphia to Pittsburgh ; 185 miles 
from the former, and 37 from the latter, and nine 
miles from the e. side of Laurel hill.] 

LIGUA, a settlement of the province and corrc- 
gimiento of Quillota in the kingdom of Chile ; si 
tuate on the coast, on a beautiful, fertile, and well- 
cultivated plain. It has fine breeds of Merino 
sheep, of the wools of which, the same being very 
large, are made pads for saddles, this being the 
principal trade of the place. Here is a rich gold 
mine, and the soil affords sugar-cane, of which is 
made honey, and formerly sugar. 

LIGUA, a mountain and volcano which vomits 
fire, in this province and kingdom ; 25 leagues 
from the coast of the S. sea; 36 from Valparaiso; 
and 21 n. of S.Juan de laFrontera; in lat. 31 
56 7" s. 

LIGUA, a river of the same province, which 
rises in the mountain and volcano of its name, and 
enters the sea four leagues below the point of the 
Gobernador, in lat. 31 58 s. 

LIGUA, a port on the coast of the same province 
and kingdom, in lat. 32 5 . 

LIGUA1, a small river of the district of Maule, 
in the same kingdom as the former. It runs e. 
and joins the Archihuenu to enter the Longo- 
milla. 

LIGUANEA, mountains in the island of Ja 
maica. At the foot of these, in St. Andrew s pa 
rish, about six miles from Kingston, is the most 
magnificent botanical garden in the world. It 
was established in 1773, under the s;inction of the 
assembly. The fortune of war having thrown into 
Lord Rodney s hands many rare plants, he pre 
sented to his favoured island plants of the genuine 



L I M 

cinnamon, the mango, bread-fruit, and other ori 
ental productions; which are now beiome com 
mon in the island. See COLD Spring.! 

LIGUILLAPATAGUA, some Amines, cele 
brated for their abundance and quality of the 
gold, in the province and corrcgnmento of Maule, 
in the kingdom of Chile ; on the shore of the river 
Cauquenes. 

LILCO, a settlement of Indians, of the district 
of Tolten Baxo in the kingdom of Chile; situate 
on the shore and at the source of the river Tolten, 
near the lake of Mallababquen. 

LILE, or LII-EN, a settlement of the province 
and government of Antioquia in the Nuevo Key no 
de Granada ; situate in the valley of its name, on 
the shore of a river which enlers the Cauca, at a 
small distance from the city of Cali. 

LILIBI, a settlement of the province and corre- 
gimiento of Chilchas and Tarija in Peru, of the 
district of the former, and annexed to the curacy of 
Talina. 

[LILL1E, a citadel at cape Ann, in the town 
ship of Gloucester, Massachusetts.] 

LIMA, a city, the capital and metropolis of the 
kingdom and provinces of Peru ; founded on the 
6th of January, and not on the 18th, as some au 
thors affirm, by Don Francisco Pizzaro, Marquis 
of Las Charcas y Atavillos, in 1535. The Em 
peror Charles V. gave it the title of Royal City, on 
the 7th of December 1537 ; and for arms a shield, 
with three crowns of gold, on an azure field, and 
above a star, with this motto, " Hoc Signitm V&amp;lt;re 
Regum est;" and for supporters, two crowned 
eagles, and on their heads a J and a L\ initials of 
the name of Jane and Charles. It is also called 
the city of Los Reyes, (the Kings,) in memory of 
the day of its foundation, and to whom it was dedi 
cated, and to which the three crowns on the shield 
have an allusion. It is situate in an extensive 
llanura, called the Valley of Rimac ; and from a 
corruption of the spelling we \ave its present 
name, Lima. On the n. it is washed by the river 
of this same name; and over this is a beautiful 
stone bridge of five arches, built by order of the 
viceroy, The Marquis of Montes Claros. The 
placet mayor is square and large; the buildings sur 
rounding the same arc magnificent, and in the 
rnidst is a large brass fountain, made with great 
taste, arid at the order of the viceroy, the Count 
of Salvatierra. The episcopal palace is the loftiest 
and finest structure : the cathedral is of han some 
architecture, and was finished building on the 8th 
of December 1758. This city is of a triangular 
figure, and the part facing the river is two-thirds 
of a league long. It is surrounded by a mud-wall 



LIMA. 



379 



with 346 balustrades, the work of the viceroy, 
the Duke of Palata, and executed by the engineer 
Peter Ramon, a Fleming, in 1685. The streets 
are wide, although the houses are low, to guard 
against mischief in earthquakes ; these are, how 
ever, of comely appearance, convenient in the 
interior and richly adorned, having, almost all 
of them, gardens and orchards attached. The 
city is divided into five parishes, which are, 
El Sagrario, Santa Ana, S. Sebastian, S. Marcelo, 
and S. Lazaro, besides two other churches called 
S. Salvador and the Chapel of the Foundlings, 
where there is a priest, who acts also as a" parish 
priest, and another parish of Indians in the Cer- 
cado, with the title of Santiago, administered for 
merly by the Jesuits. It has 19 convents of reli 
gious orders, which are named as follows : La 
Casa Grande, La Recoleccion de la Magdalena, 
the college of S. Tomas for studies, that of Santa 
Rosa ; three of S. Francisco, La Casa Grande, 
Recoletos de Nuestra Senora de los Angelos or 
Guadalupe, and Descalzos de S. Diego, which 
are in the suburbs ; three others of S. Agustin, the 
Casa Grande de S. Ildefonso, the college for 
studies, and Nuestra Senora de Guia for novices ; 
three others of La Merced, the Casa Grande, the 
college of S. Pedro Nolasco, and the Recoleccion 
de Belen ; six which were of the Jesuits, namely, 
S. Pablo or Collegio Maximo, S. Martin, a col 
lege of study for seculars, S. Antonio, a house for 
novices; a convent with the dedicatory title of 
Nuestra Senora de los Dolores or Los Desampa- 
rados, the college of the Cercado, and that of La 
Chacarilla, a house of exercises. It has also an 
oratorio of the congregation of S. Felipe Neri, a 
monastery of Benedictine monks, with the title of 
Nuestra Senora de Montserrat ; a house of the 
fathers the Agonizantes, with that of La Buena 
Muerte, which was founded in 1715, and after 
wards rebuilt, in 1736, in the suburb of S. Lazaro ; 
a convent of the religious minims of S. Francisco 
de Paula, with the title of Nuestra Senora del 
Socorro ; three others, with hospitable institutes, 
called the one San Juan de Dios, with the title of 
Convalescencia, and the two others of Bcthlemites, 
the one being called the Casa Grande, and being 
out of the walls of the city, and provided for the re 
ception of convalescents, the other for incurables. 
Besides all the above are nine public hospitals, 
namely, S. Andres for the Spaniards, S. Pedro 
for poor ecclesiastics, Espiritu Santo for sailors, 
S. Bartolome for Negroes, Santa Ana for Indians, 
S. Pedro de Alcantaro for women, La Caridad 
for the same, and S. Lazaro for lepers. Here are 
14 monasteries and convents of nuns, which are, 



La Encarnacion, La ( oncepcion, Santa Catalina? 
Santa Clara, La Trinidad, El Carmen, Santa Te 
resa or Carmen Baxo, Las Descalzas de S. Joseph, 
Las Capuchinas, Nazarenas, Mercenarias, Santa 
Rosa, Trinitarias Descalzas, and the nuns of 
Prado ; four beaterios or houses of recluse women, 
namely, Santa Rosa de Viterbo, Nuestra Senora 
del Patrocinio, Nuestra Senora de Copacavana 
for Indian nobility, that of S. Joseph for women 
divorced from their husbands, and a house of sup 
port for poor women : all the above being a proof 
of the richness, magnificence, and devotion of the 
city. This city is also graced with an university, 
with the title of S. Marcos, which has produced 
innumerable wise men, and was founded in 1549, 
by the bull of pope Pius V. when the same privi 
leges were granted it as those enjoyed by the 
university of Salamanca : also by a cedule of 1572, 
and again by one of 1576, it was put under the 
royal patronage, and separated from the order 
of S. Domingo, being transferred to a more public 
spot ; and from being in a state of great dilapida 
tion, re-established by Philip III. on the present 
footing, such as to render it the first and most 
celebrated of all America. Here is also another 
royal college, founded by the viceroy Don Fran 
cisco de Toledo ; a tridentine seminary, called Of 
Santo Toribio, from its founder; and a beautiful 
college with a house of retirement for some noble 
families. In this metropolis resides the viceroy, 
who is the president of the tribunal of the royal 
audience, founded in 1541, but according toother 
authors, m 1544; also the tribunal of the consulate 
of the commerce, founded in 1613. The Pontiff 
Paul erected it into a bishopric in 1539, and three 
years afterwards it was raised into an archbishop 
ric, and in 157 J, declared a metropolitan, having 
been previously suffragan to the archbishopric of 
Sevilla. Its titular was S. Juan Evangelista, to 
distinguish it from that of Cuzco, which has the 
titular of La Asuncion, the same that was given to 
it by Francisco Pizarro. The tribunal of the in 
quisition was erected in 1570, with a jurisdiction 
extending as far as the river Mayo, which divides 
the kingdom of Quito from the Nuevo Reyno de 
Granada, where the jurisdiction of the tribunal of 
Cartagena commences. Here are also the tribunal 
of the holy crusade, established in 1574; the trea 
sury, founded in 1607 ; and the royal mint, in 1565, 
and translated to Potosi in 1570, but afterwards 
re-established in 1603. The ecclesiastical cubildo 
is composed of five dignitaries, nine canons, six 
minor canons, and as many other inferior minor 
canons. The tribunal of the protomedicato con 
sists of a president, a fiscal, and two examiners. 



380 



LIMA. 



This city is inhabited by many families of the very 
first Spanish nobility, amongst which are reckon 
ed 45 titles of Castilla, many knights of the mili 
tary orders, and 24 rich mayoralties. The house 
ofAmpuero, which descends by the female line 
from the Incas of Peru, enjoys many distinctions 
and privileges, conceded to them by the kings of 
Spain. The climate of this city is very healthy 
and pleasant, although infested by swarms of flics 
and nmsquitoes, the whole year round. There is 
never any other rain than a sort of abundant dew, 
called garua. It is fertile and copiously supplied 
with every kind of vegetable production, and fails 
in nothing either for the necessities or conveniences 
of life. Its commerce also is the best and most 
flourishing of any city in America. In its cathe 
dral five provincial councils have been celebrated, 
two by Don Fr. Geronimo de Loaisa, in the years 
1551 and 1567; and three by Santo Toribio, in 
3582, 1591, and 1601. The infirmities most fre 
quently experienced here are putrid fevers and 
convulsions, which are called pasmo and cancro. 
It is very subject to earthquakes, by which it has 
been frequently destroyed : the strongest of these 
occurred in the following years, viz. in 1582, 
1586, 1609, 1630, 1655, 1678, 1687, 1690, 
1697, 1699, 1716, 1725, 1734, 1743, 1746; and 
in this last in particular it was completely demo 
lished. Its inhabitants amount to 60,000 souls. 
Its jurisdiction extends to 96 provinces, and the 
most immediate of these are in number 48. 

Lima, which may well be considered the em 
porium of the new world, is large, populous, rich, 
handsome, and superior to all the cities of South 
America. It is near the Pacific or S. sea, in long. 
76 58 30 w. and in lat. 12 2 31" s. The 
needle declines here 8 5 to n. e. 

Lima has produced very many subjects of great 
virtue and letters, a catalogue of whom would be 
too diffuse, and we shall therefore be content with 
mentioning some only of the most conspicuous ; 
such are, 

Santa Rosa de Santa Maria, who was the 
greatest ornament which this city can boast. 

The venerable Father Francisco del Castillo, 
whose beatification is in a state of forwardness. 

Don Bernardino de Almanza, archbishop of 
Santo Domingo and Santa Fe. 

Don Fr. Juan de Arguinao, a monk of the 
order of Santo Domingo, bishop of Santa Cruz de 
la Sierra, and archbishop of Santa Fc. 

Don Diego de Banos y Sotomayor, chaplain of 
honour, preacher to the king. 

Don Lope de Arrnend;iriz, Marquis of Cadreita, 
viceroy of JNueva Espana. 

5 



Don Alonso Perez de los Rios, Count of S.Donai, 
ambassador of Spain, in the reign of Philip IV. at 
the court of Paris. 

Don Fernando de Figueroa, Marquis of Surco, 
lieutenant-general of the royal armies, chamber 
lain and under-tutor to the intant Don Philip, Duke 
of Parma. 

Don Joseph Vallejo, lieutenant-general of the 
royal armies, governor of Gerona, and a celebrated 
partisan in the war of succession. 

Don Miguel Nunez de Roxas, of the council of 
orders, private judge of goods confiscated through 
the war of succession. 

Don Feliciano de Vega, archbishop of Mexico. 

Don Pedro de Reyna Maldonado, bishop of 
Cuba, a celebrated author. 

Don Martin del Barco Centenera, author of 
the history of the Rio de la Plata or Argentina. 

Fr. Buenaventura and Fr. Diego de Salinas y 
Cordoba, authors of many works, both of the 
order of S. Francisco. 

Fr. Miguel de Lima, a Capuchin, called for 
merly Don Tornas de la Concha, whose great wis 
dom and fine memory were notorious in Rome. 

Don Pedro Peralta Barnuevo y llocha, ac 
countant in the tribunal of accounts, professor of 
mathematics, whose great wisdom is borne testi 
mony to by his works. 

Don Joseph de Pardo y Figueroa, Marquis of 
Villaumbrosa, a learned man of the first order. 

The Father Juan de Alloya, Nicolas de Olea, 
Rodrigo Valdes, Juan Perez Menacho, all of the 
Jesuits, and esteemed as oracles at Lima. 

The Licentiate Antonio de Leon Pinelo, and his 
father Don Diego, relator of the council of the 
Indies, both celebrated writers. 

Don Joseph Bermudez de la Torre y Solier, 
algiiacil mayor of the royal audience, according 
to Treboniano. 

Don Andres de Munive y Garavito, chanter of 
the holy church of Lima, judge of the holy office, 
provisor and vicar-general of the archbishopric. 

Don Tomas de Salazar, assessor-general of the 
viceroys, author of the great work entitled, " In- 
terpetation of the Royal Laws of the Indies." 

The venerable Fr. Martin de Porras, of the 
order of Santo Domingo. 

The venerable Fr. Juan Masias, lay-brother of 
the same order. 

The venerable Jr. Vicente Vernedo, a Domini 
can. 

The venerable Fr. Pedro Urraca, of the order of 
La Merced. 

The venerable Fr. Gonzalo Diaz de Amaranta, 
of the same order. 



LIMA. 



381 



The venerable Fathers Fr. Juan de Salazar, 
Fr. Juan de Vargas, Fr. Christoval de Albar- 
ran, who were martyred in Paraguay by the In 
dians. 

Dona Lucia Guerra de la Daga, founder of the 
monastery of Santa Catalina de Sena, of great 
virtues. 

The Mother Maria Bernardina de Jesus, a reli 
gious Carmelite, and perfect imitatress of Santa 
Teresa. 

The Mother Juan de Jesus, a Capuchin; and 
infinite others, some of whom are still living and 
are at once the ornament and splendour of their 
country. 

Archbishops who have presided at Lima. 

1. Don Diego Gomez de la Madrid, native of 
Palencia, collegiate-major of Salamanca, visitor of 
the archbishopric of Granada, governor of the 
same in the vacant seat, inquisitor of Cuenca ; 
presented to be first archbishop of Lima in 1538, 
and before he passed thither, presented to the 
bishopric of Badajos : and thus is he not, by rights, 
to be counted in the list of these bishops ? 

2. Don Fr. Geronimo de Loaisa, of the order 
of Santo Domingo, native of Talavera, prior of his 
convent of Carboneras ; presented to the bishopric 
of Cartagena in 1538, promoted to that of Lima in 
1540, this being erected into an archbishopric in 
1545 ; he governed 32 years, and died in 1575. 

3. Santo Toribio Alfonso Mogrovejo, native of 
Mayorga in the kingdom of Leon, collegiate-major 
of San Salvador de Oviedo, in the university of 
Salamanca, inquisitor of Granada; presented to 
the archbishopric of Lima in 1578; he thrice 
visited the great extent of his diocese, confirmed 
above a million of souls, and possessed such great 
virtues as to induce the church to beatify him 
during the government of Pope Innocent XI. in 
1679, and he was in consequence beatified by 
Benedict XIII. in 1727; he governed the church 
of Lima for 24 years and 10 months, and died in 
1606. 

4. Don Bartolome Lobo Guerrero, native of 
Honda in Andalucia ; he studied and graduated as 
doctor and lecturer in the college of Santa Maria 
de Jesus of Sevilla, where he was rector, and from 
whence he departed to become fiscal and inquisitor 
of Mexico ; he passed to the archbishopric of the 
Nuevo Reyno de Granada, and was promoted to 
Lima in 1609, where he governed with great skill 
12 years, and died in 1622. 

5. Don Gonzalo de Ocampo, native of Madrid ; 
he studied and graduated in the university of Sala 
manca, passed to Rome, and served seven years as 
privy chamberlain to his holiness Clement VIII. ; 



he was canon of the holy church of Sevilla, and 
afterwards archdeacon of Niebla, judge of the 
church, provisor and vicar-general of the arch 
bishopric, and commissary of the holy crusade ; 
he was presented to the bishopric of Guadix, and 
afterwards promoted to the archbishopric of Lima 
in 1623 ; he was very charitable and generous, 
and consecrated the cathedral, and, making the 
visitation, died at Becuay, not without suspicion 
of having been poisoned by an Indian, from whom 
the archbishop had taken away a mistress, in 
1626. 

6. Don Fernando Arias de Ugarte, of whom we 
treat in the catalogue of the bishops of Quito; he 
was promoted from the archbishopric of Charcas 
to this of Lima in 1630, in the visitation of which 
he spent five years ; he celebrated mass daily, 
lived constantly in the greatest state of penance and 
mortification, and died in 1638. 

7. Don Fr. Fernando de Vera, religious of the 
order of San Agustin, native of Villanueva ; elect 
ed archbishop of Lima in 1640, where he mani 
fested an example of all the virtues, and died in 
167 f, having governed 30 years. 

8. Don Fr. Juan de Almoguera, native of Cor 
doba in Andalucia, religious of the order of La 
Santisima Trinidad Calzada, professor of philoso 
phy and theology, obtained the degrees of pre- 
sentator and master, and was minister, provincial, 
and visitor in the province of Andalucia, passed 
as ransomer of captives to Teutan, and at his re 
turn to Madrid made preacher to the king ; after 
wards presented to the bishopric of Areqnipa, and 
promoted to the archbishopric of Lima i i 1674 ; 
he founded the monastery of the bare-footed nuns 
of La Santisima Trinidad, with the name of San. 
Salvador, was a great penitent, and died in 1676. 

9. Don Melchor de Lilian y Cisneros, native of 
Tordelaguna ; he was collegiate in Alcala, and 
poser to the professorships and curacies, gaining 
himself those of Santa Maria of Buitrago and of 
his native place ; from hence he was brought by 
the cardinal of Sandoval to San Salvador of Madrid, 
and by his great merits presented to the bishopric 
of Santa Marta ; promoted to that of Popayan, 
then made visitor, president, and captain-general 
of the Nuevo Reyno de Granada, and archbishop 
of Charcas, and lastly, of Lima in 1678 ; he was 
then nominated viceroy and captain general, go 
verning with great address both in temporal and 
ecclesiastical matters ; he died in 1708. 

10. Don Francisco de Levanto, who was des 
tined to the bishopric of Badajoz before he passed 
to Lima. 

1 1 . Don Antonio de Zuloaga, abbot of Covar- 



382 



L I M 



rubias ; elected bishop of Ceuta, and archbishop 
in 1714; he died in 1722. 

12. Don Fr. Diego Morcillo Rubio de Aunon, 
religious of the order of La Santisima Trinidad; 
elected bishop of La Paz, afterwards of Nicaragua, 
promoted to the archbishopric of Charcas, and 
lastly, to that of Lima in 1724, exercising at the 
same time the viceroyalty for some space ; he died 
in 1730. 

13. Don Francisco Antonio de Escandon, of the 
order of San Cayetano ; he passed from the bishop 
ric of La Concepcion of Chile, was promoted to 
that of Quito, and before he took possession of 
this archbishopric, in 1732, and died m 1739. 

14. Don Joseph Antonio Gutierrez de Cevallos, 
knight of the order of Santiago, collegiate-major 
in the college Del Rey in Salamanca, inquisitor of 
Lima; elected bishop of Cordoba of Tucuman, 
promoted to the archbishopric in 1744 ; he died in 
1745. 

15. Don Agustin Rodriguez Delgado ; he was 
bishop of Panama, then of La Paz, archbishop of 
Charcas, and promoted to Lima in 1746 ; he died 
in the same year, before he entered the church. 

16. Don Pedro Antonio Burroeta y Angel, 
knight of the order of Santiago; elected arch 
bishop of Lima in 1748; he passed to the arch 
bishopric of Granada in Spain, in 1758. 

17. Don Diego del Corro, who passed from the 
bishopric of Popayan to this archbishopric in 
1759; he died in 1761. 

18. Don Diego Antonio de Parada, who passed 
from the bishopric of La Paz in 1762 ; he died in 
1779. 

19. Don Juan Domingo Gonzalez de la Reguera; 
elected archbishop of Lima in 1781. 

LI MA CHE, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Santiago in the kingdom of Chile; 
situate in a spacious and pleasant valley of the 
same name, in which there are some abundant 
quicksilver mines not worked. This valley is 
celebrated for a sanctuary called Del Santo Christo 
de Limache, which image was found naturally 
engraved on the trunk of a tree, in 1636. 

LIMACO, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Santiago in the kingdom of 
Chile ; situate near the source and on the shore of 
the river Biobio. 

L1MAN, a river of the province and corregi 
miento of Coquimbo, in the same kingdom as the 
former settlement. It flows down from the cordil- 
lera of the Andes, and, after running 32 leagues, 
empties itself into the Pacific sea, in lat. 30 



s. 



LIMARI, a settlement of the same province 



L I M 

and corregimiento and kingdom as the former 
river ; situate in a beautiful valley of the same 
name, which is very fertile in grain and wine of 
excellent quality ; in lat. 30 45 s. 

LIMARI, a river in this province and kingdom, 
which rises in the cordillera of the Andes, and enters 
the S. sea, in lat. 30 29 s. 

LIMARI, a mountain and volcano of the same 
province and kingdom. 

L1MATAMBO, a settlement of the province 
and corregimiento of Abancay in Peru, 13 leagues 
from Cuzco. 

LIMBACH, a small island near the n. coast of 
the island of Cape Britain. 

LIMBANI, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Carabaya in Peru ; annexed to 
the curacy of Para. 

LIMBE, Qu ARTEL DE, a settlement and pa 
rish of the French, in the part they possess in the 
island of St. Domingo, on the n. coast, between 
cape Frances and port Margol. 

LIMBO, a river of the same island as the 
former settlement, which runs n. and enters the 
sea on the coast of this rhumb, and in the part 
possessed by the French, between the ports Mar 
gol and Frances, opposite the island of its name. 

LIMBO. This island is near then, coast of St. 
Domingo. 

LIME, a settlement of the province and colony 
of Connecticut, and county of London, at the 
entrance of the strait of Long island, at the mouth 
of the river Connecticut, w. of New London, and 
e. of Saybrook. 

[LIMERICK, a township in York county, 
Maine, situated near the confluence of Little 
Ossipee river with Saco, and opposite Gorham in 
Cumberland county. It was incorporated in 1787, 
contains 411 inhabitants, and is 85 miles n. of 
Boston.] 

[LIMERICK, a township in Montgomery county, 
Pennsylvania.] 

[LIMESTONE Creek, in Tennessee, is the 
n. e. branch of Nolachucky river. It rises 22 
miles s. of Long island in Holston river.] 

[LIMESTONE, a post-town in Kentucky, si 
tuated on the s. side of Ohio river, and on the w. 
side of the mouth of a small creek of its name. It 
stands on a lofty and uneven bank, and is not seen 
from the river until one is Avithin two miles of it. 
This is the usual landing-place for people coming 
down in boats, who mean to settle in the upper 
parts of the state ; and here the champaign coun 
try on the e. side of the river begins. It is seven 
miles n. e. of (he town of Washington, 37 s. e, of 
fort Washington, 38 n. e. of Bourbon town, and 



LIN 

68 n. c. of Frankfort. Lat. 38 25 . Long. 
83 28 a&amp;gt;.] 

[LIMONADE, a village on the n. side of the 
French part of the island of St. Domingo, four 
leagues s. w. of fort Dauphine, and 1\ measuring 
in a straight line s. e. of cape Fran9ois. Lat. 19 
37 n.l 

LIMONAL, a settlement of the French, in the 
same island as the former. It was destroyed and 
burnt by the Spaniards in 1691. 

LIMONAL, another, with the dedicatory title 
of Santa Rosa, of the jurisdiction of Tocaima and 
government of Mariquita, in the Nuevo Reynode 
Granada ; situate in the road of Neiba. It is of 
a mild temperature, produces maize, yucas^ plan 
tains, and sugar-canes ; is annexed to the curacy 
of S. Juan de Melgar, contains more than 100 in 
habitants, and is 16 leagues from Santa Fe. 

LIMONAL, a lake ot the province and corregi- 
miento of Pastos, and kingdom of Quito, in the 
district of Mocoa, and near the river of Ca- 
queta. 

L1MONES, a settlement of the province and 
government of Esmeraldas in the kingdom of 
Quito ; situate on the shore of a river, at its mouth 
or entrance into the S. sea, with a good port and 
embarking place. 

LIMONES, another settlement, in the island of 
Cuba ; on the shore of the river of its name. 

LIMONES, a river on the n. coast, and by the 
cape of Sumana in St. Domingo. It runs n. n. w. 
and enters the sea between the port of Yaqueson 
and North bay. 

LIMONES, another, called Cafio de Limones, 
in the Nuevo Reyno de Granada. It is an arm of 
the Orinoco, which communicates with the chan 
nel of Guarapo, and has on its shore a fort of its 
name. 

[LIMPIO, a parish of the province and go 
vernment of Paraguay ; situate on the e. bank of 
the Paraguay, about 11 miles n. e. from Asuncion, 
in lat. 25 10 25" j. and long. 57 31 49" o&amp;gt;.] 

LINARES, S. FELIPE DE, a town of the 
Nuevo Reyno de Leon in N. America, founded 
in the time of the viceroy of Nueva Espana, the 
duke of this title, who gave it his name. It is the 
head of a district, and contains 60 families of 
Spaniards, abounds in grain of various sorts, so 
much so as to be actually in want of cattle, since 
the inhabitants are afraid to breed any for fear of 
a visit from the barbarous Indians. It is bounded 
e. by the sierra of Tamaclipa, and is 40 leagues 
s. e. of its capital. 

[LINCOLN, a large maritime county of the 
district of Maine, bounded n, by Canada, s. by 



L I N 



,583 



the ocean, e. by Hancock county, and w. by that 
of Cumberland. Its sea-coast extends from that part 
of Penobscot bay opposite to Deer island e. to cape 
Small Point w. It is 200 miles long and 54 broad, 
and comprehends 46 towns and plantations ; but 
there are large tracts yet unsettled. The popula 
tion amounts to 29,962 free persons. The sea- 
coast of the counties of Cumberland and Lincoln 
is 100 miles in extent, measured in a straight line, 
but is said to be above 200 by the course of the 
waters. It abounds with safe and commodious 
harbours, and the whole shore is covered by a line 
of islands, among which vessels may generally 
anchor in safety. There arc in these counties 
many large rivers, some of them navigable far up 
the country ; and although navigation for large 
vessels is interrupted by falls, when far up the 
rivers, yet above the falls there is plenty of water 
for boats, nearly to the source of the rivers; and 
by the lakes and ponds and branches of the rivers, 
there is a water communication, with few interrup 
tions, from the w. to the e. bounds, across the 
country, above the centre of it. By this route its 
productions may, at a small expence, be transport 
ed to the different sea-ports. The supreme judi 
cial court held in Lincoln county has civil and 
criminal jurisdiction in causes arising in Hancock 
and Washington counties. Chief towns, Pownal- 
borough, Hallowell, and Waldoborough.] 

[LINCOLN, a county of Morgan district, N. 
Carolina, bounded n. e. by Iredell, n. w. by Burke, 
w. by Rutherford, and e. by Cabarras. It con 
tains 9224 inhabitants, of whom 935 are slaves. 
Here are mineral springs and mines of iron. A 
furnace and forge have been erected, which carry 
on the manufacture of pig, bar iron, &amp;c. Chief 
town, Lincolntown.] 

[LINCOLN, a county of Kentucky, bounded n. 
by Mercer, n. w. by Washington, n. e. by Mad- 
dison, and s. by Logan. By the census of 1790, 
it contained 6548 inhabitants, of whom J094 were 
slaves. The road from Danville on Kentucky 
river passes through it s. w. and over Cumberland 
mountain to Virginia.] 

[LINCOLN, a town in Mercer county, Ken 
tucky, situated on the c. side of Dick s river, on 
the road from Danville to Virginia. It stands 12 
miles s. e. of Danville, and 11 n. w. of Crab 
Orchard.] 

[LINCOLN, a township in Grafton county, New 
Hampshire, incorporated in 1764, contains 22 
inhabitants.] 

[LINCOLN, a township in the n. part of Ad- 
dison county, Vermont, granted November 7, 
1780.] 



38* 



L I P 



[LINCOLN, a township in Middlesex county, 
Massachusetts, incorporated in 1754. It contains 
740 inhabitants, and is 16 miles n. w. of Boston.] 

[LINCOLN, a new county of Georgia, laid out 
in 1796 from Wilkes county, on Savannah river, 
between Broad and Little rivers. 1 

[LINCOLNTOWN, a post-town of N. Caro 
lina, and capital of Lincoln county. It contains 
about 20 houses, a court-house, and gaol. It is 
30 miles from Morgantown, 33 from Salisbury, 
and 74 from Salem.] 

[L1NDLEY, a village on the w. side of the 
Canawisque branch of Tioga river, in New York, 
two miles n. of the Pennsylvania line, eight s. w. 
by s. of the Painted Post, 64 s. e. of Hartford, on 
the road to Niagara.] 

LIN ECO, a river of the province and corregi- 
miento of the island of Laxa in the kingdom of 
Chile, which runs w. and enters the Vergara. 

LINN, a city of the province and colony of 
Massachusetts in New England, on the shore of 
the port of Boston. 

[LiNN, a township in Northampton county, 
Pennsylvania.] 

[LINNELINOPIES. See DELAWARES.] 

L1PES, a province and corregimiertto of Peru ; 
bounded n. by the province of Carangas, n. e. by 
that of Paria and that of Porco, e. by Chicas, s. e. 
and 5. by Tucuman. Its length is 60 leagues 
trom n. w. to s. e. and its width 20 at the broadest 
part. Its temperature throughout is cold and 
dry, and consequently it is unfruitful, with the ex 
ception of the territories of Lica and Tahua, where 
they gather very fine bark, the same being a seed 
similar to the millet, and some papas and onions. 
Here are abundance of vicunas, huanacos, and viz- 
each as, very large partridges and ostriches. The 
rivers which irrigate it are small. That of S. Juan 
is, however, considerable, and divides this pro 
vince in part from Tucuman. In some of these 
rivers arc found gold ; and two or three of them, 
after having run a short distance, lose themselves 
in the sand. Here are some large llanuras, where 
they find salt and saltpetre in abundance, from the 
which, as from some good sulphur which they 
find in the mountains, which are four in number, 
and volcanoes, the Indians make powder; grind 
ing the ingredients not in mills, but in skins by 
mortars. In the district of the settlement of San 
Antonio, annexed to the curacy of San Pablo, are 
veins of stone of a round form, similar to 24 
pounders, which are accustomed to burst with a 
great sound, and discovering in the inside some 
brilliant points resembling diamonds. Here are 
mines of copper, red and white, mixed with gold 



L I T 

and silver, iron and load-stone, and very many 
mines of silver; and these metals, particularly in 
the mine of Taquehua, used to yield three thou 
sand marks each caxon ; so that this province may 
rightly be considered the most important of any in 
Peru, and that which has yielded the greatest 
riches. At present the greater part of the mines 
have filled with water, and they would, if emp 
tied, still render prodigiously. In the asiento of 
San Christoval is one, called La Hedionda, on ac 
count of the great smell which it discharges from 
its mouth ; and they assert that the metal in this 
mine laid in bars. It is abandoned, because who 
ever enters it is certain to meet his death ; and al 
though it might be worked if it were open at top, 
and if there were adequate energy and fortunes for 
the undertaking, the want of bands, which has 
caused the decay of all the mines here, would 
stand in the way of any advantage, the whole of 
the inhabitants not exceeding 3500 persons of all 
ages and sexes. Its corregidor had a repartimiento 
of 19,800 dollars, and it paid an alcavala of 719 
annually. 

LIPES, the capital, is the settlement of the same 
name, with the dedicatory title of San Antonio, 
belonging to the archbishopric of Charcas. It was 
in former times a very large and rich town, as its 
church and other vestiges and ruins indicate, al 
though it is now reduced to a miserable state. 

- LlRCAI, a settlement of the province and cor- 
regimiento of Angaraes in Peru. 

LIRCAI, a river of this province and kingdom, 
which rises close to the town of Acobaniba, runs e. 
and enters the Iscuchaca. 

LIRCAI, another, of the province and corre~ 
gimiento of Maule in the kingdom of Chile, which 
runs n. n. w. and enters the Maule. 

LISAS, PUNTA DE, a point on the coast of the 
S. sea, of the province and alcaldia mayor of Nata 
in the kingdom of Tierra Firme. 

[LISBON, a town in New London county, 
Connecticut, lately a part of Norwich, about seven 
miles n. of Norwich. It contains two parishes, 
each having a Congregational church. It lies on 
the w. side of Quinebaugh river, and e. of 
Franklin.] 

[LISBON, a village of York county, Pennsyl 
vania ; situated near thes. side of Yellow Breeches 
creek, which falls into the Susquehannah. It 
contains about 15 houses, and lies 18 miles from 
York.l 

LISCOMB, Islands of, near the s. coast of 
Nova Scotia. They are small ; situate between 
those of Portland and Les Blanches. 

[LITCHFIELDj a township in Lincoln county* 



LIT 

district of Maine, 10 miles from Hallowcll, and 
J 18 n. e. of Boston.] 

[LiTCiiFiELD, a township in Hillsborough 
county, New Hampshire ; situated on the e. side 
of Merrimack river, about 34 miles w. of Ports 
mouth. It was settled in 1749, and in 1775 it con 
tained 284, and in J790, 357 inhabitants.] 

[LITCIIFIELD, a populous and hilly county of 
Connecticut; bounded n. by the state of Massa 
chusetts, ft. by New Haven and Fairfield counties, 
e. by Hartford, and w. by the state of New York. 
It is divided into 20 townships, containing 38,755 
inhabitants, inclusive of 233 slaves. The general 
face of the country is rough and mountainous. 
The soil is fertile, yielding hirge crops of wheat 
and Indian corn, and affording fine pasture. It 
is separated entirely from maritime commerce, 
and the inhabitants are almost universally farm 
ers.] 

[LiTCHFiF.i.D, the chief town of the above 
county; situated upon an elevated plain, and much 
exposed to the cold winds* of winter, but enjoys also 
a large shnre of the refreshing breezes of summer. 
It is a h;uidsome situation, containing about 60 or 
70 dwelling-houses, a court-house and meeting 
house. It is 27 miles w. of Had lord, and 35 
n. 11. w. of New Haven. Lat. 41 46 n. Long. 
73 12 w. In the s. w. corner of the township 
stands an high hill, called Mount Tom. On seve 
ral small streams, some of which fall into Great 
pond, are three iron works, an oil mill, and a 
number of saw and grist mills.] 

[LiTCHFiELD, a town hip in Herkemer county, 
New York, taken from German flats, and incorpo 
rated in 1796.] 

LITE, a settlement of the English, in the island 
of Barbadoes, and in the jurisdiction and district 
of the city of Bridgetown. 

[L1T1Z, or LKDITZ, a village or town in Lan 
caster county, Pennsylvania ; situated in War 
wick township, on the s. side of a small stream, 
which sends its waters through Conestoga creek 
into the Susquehannah. It contains about 50 
houses, chiefly of stone, a stone tavern, and an ele 
gant church, with a steeple and bell. The settle 
ment was begun in 1757. It is inhabited by the 
United Brethren, whose mode of life and customs 
are similar to those of Bethlehem. There is also 
a good farm and several mill-works belonging to 
the place. The number of inhabitants, including 
those that belong to Litiz congregation, living on 
their farms in the neighbourhood, amounted, in 
1787, to upwards of ^00. It is eight miles n. of 
Lancaster, and 55 w. by n. of Philadelphia.] 

[LITTLE EGG Harbour, a port of entry ^on 

VOL. II. 



LIT 



385 



the e. coast of New Jersey, comprehending all the 
shores, bays, and creeks from Barr.egat inlet to 
Brigantine inlet, both inclusive. The town of 
Tuckerton is the port of entry for this district. 
See EGG.] 

[LITTLE ALGOMQUINS, Indians who inhabit 
near the Three Rivers, and can raise about 100 
warriors.] 

[LITTLE BIUTAIN, a township in Lancaster 
county, Pennsylvania. Also a township in Chester 
county, in the same state.] 

[LITTLE COMI-TON, a township in Newport 
county, Rhode island, bounded n. by Tiverton ; 
s. by the Atlantic ocean, where are Seakonnet 
rocks ; w. by the e. passage intoMount Hope bay ; 
and e. by the state of Massachusetts. It contains 
J542 inhabitants, of whom 23 are slaves. It was 
called Seconnet or Seaconnet by the Indians, and 
is said to be the best cultivated township in the 
state, and affords greater quantities of meat, but 
ter, cheese, vegetables, &amp;c. than any other town 
of its size. The inhabitants are very industrious, 
and manufacture linen and tow cloth, flannels, 
&amp;c. of an excellent quality, and in considerable 
quantities for sale.] 

[LITTLE Fort, in the N. W. Territory, stands 
on the s. w. bank of lake Michigan, and on the 
s. side of Old Fort river, which runs a n. e. course 
into the lake. See CHIGAGO.] 

[LITTLE HARBOUR. See PASCATAQTJA. It 
is near the mouth of Pascataqua river, about a 
mile from Portsmouth in New Hampshire. A 
settlement was attempted here in 1623.] 

[LITTLE Island, one of the Bahamas; situated 
about five leagues n. e. from the n. end of Long 
island.] 

"LITTLE MECATIXA. See MECATINA.] 
LITTLE PELICAN. See PELICAN.] 

^LITTLE River, in Georgia, is a beautiful and 
rapid river, and at its confluence with Savannah 
river, is about 50 yards wide. On a branch of 
Little river is the town of Wrightsborough. Also 
a river which separates, in part, N. and S. Caro 
lina.] 

[LITTLE RIVER, a plantation in Lincoln county, 
district of Maine, containing 64 inhabitants.] 

[LITTLE Rocks, on the n. w. bank of Illinois 
river, are situated 48 miles from the Forks, and 74 
to the nearest part of the Mississippi river. The 
s. w. end of these rocks lies nearly opposite to the 
mouth of Vermilion river, and the two small ponds 
where the French and Indians have rriadc good 
salt, lie opposite to the n. e. end. A coal-mine, 
half a mile long, extends along the bank of the 
river above these rocks.] 

3 D 



S86 



L I Z 



[LITTLE Sonus, a small harbour of lake On 
tario, about 15 miles s. of Oswego.] 

[LITTLEBOROUGH, a plantation in Lincoln 
county, district of Maine, having 263 inhabi 
tants.] 

[LITTLETON, a township in Middlesex 
county, Massachusetts, 30 miles n. w. of Boston.] 

[LITTLETON, a township in Grafton county, 
New Hampshire, (apart of Apthorpe), was incor 
porated in 1784, and contains 96 inhabitants. It 
lies on Connecticut river, below the Fifteen-mile 
falls, and nearly opposite Concord in Vermont.] 

[LITTLETON, a township in Caledonia county, 
Vermont, on thetw. side of Connecticut river, op 
posite the Fifteen-mile falls, and contains 63 in 
habitants.] 

[LITTLETON, a township of Massachusetts, in 
Middlesex county, 28 miles . w. of Boston. It 
was incorporated in 1715, and contains 554 inha 
bitants.] 

[LITTLETON Fort, in Pennsylvania, is 25 
miles e. of Bedford, and 39 s. w. by w. of Car 
lisle.] 

[LIVERMORE, a plantation in Cumberland 
county, district of Maine ; situated on Androscog- 
gin river, 19 miles n. w. of Hallowell.] 

[LIVERPOOL, a town on the s. side of the 
bayofFundy, in Queen s county, Nova Scotia, 
settled by New Englanders. Rossignole, a consi 
derable lake, lies between this town and Annapolis. 
It is 32 miles n. e. of Shelburne, and 58 n. w. of 
Halifax. It was formerly called Port Rossig 
nole.] 

[LIVINGSTON, a township in Columbia 
county, New York ; situate on the e. bank of Hud 
son s river, four miles w. of Palatine town, 11 s. of 
Hudson, and nine s. e. of Claverack. It contains 
4594 inhabitants ; of whom 659 are electors, and 
233 slaves.] 

[LIVINGSTON S Creek, a considerable branch 
or arm of Cape Fear river. This creek heads in 
vast swamps in the vicinity of the beautiful lake 
"VV auk a ma.] 

L1XMAI, a river of the province and colony 
of New York, on the e. shore of the river Hud 
son, 25 miles n. e. of Kingston, and five s. e. of 
Salisbury. 

LIXMAI, a river of the province and captain 
ship of Scrgipe in Brazil. It rises in the moun 
tains between the rivers Real and San Francisco, 
runs s. s. e. and enters the &amp;ea between the former 
of those rivers and the Vazabaris. 

[LIZARD. SeeLEZARD.J 

LIZARDO, PUNT A DE ANTON, a point on the 
coast of the IS . sea and kingdom of Nueva Espana. 

2 



L L A 

3 leagues from the mouth of the river Medel- 
lin, and 6{ from the city of Vera Cruz. Two 
leagues higher up is a large stream, known by the 
name of the Rio Salado, in the vicinity of which 
are some very good salines, which are a little more 
than nine leagues from the said city. 

LLACAN, a settlement of the province and cor- 
rcgimiento of Tarma in Peru; annexed to the cu 
racy of Tapu. 

LLACLLA, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Caxatambo in the same kingdom ; 
annexed to the curacy of Tillos. 

LLACLL1N, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Guailas in the same kingdom ; 
annexed to the curacy of Pararin. 

LLACON, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Guanuco in the same kingdom ; 
annexed to the curacy of Santa Maria del Valle. 

LLACOS, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Tarma in the same kingdom ; an 
nexed to the curacy of Guarnalies. 

LLACTA, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Guamalies, in the same kingdom as 
those above. 

LLALLAN, S. JUAN DE, a settlement of the 
province awd corregimiento of Caxamarquilla in 
Peru ; annexed to the curacy of Chalique. 

LLALLI, a settlement of the province and cor* 
regimiento of Lampa in Peru; annexed to the 
curacy of Umachiri. 

LLAMA, a settlement of the province and cor 
regimiento of Caxamarca in the same kingdom ; 
annexed to the curacy of Huambos. 

LLAMELLEN, a settlement of the province 
and corregimiento of Conchucos in Peru ; where 
there are abundant mines of saltpetre and sulphur, 
and a stream or fountain, whose waters, flowing 
down into a ravine, become converted into a white 
stone, called there catachi, in figure of columns 
resembling white wax candles; the same being of 
particular influence in stopping the flux of blood; 
and it being alsoaflirmed of the said stone, that being 
beaten to pieces, and mixed with the white of an 
egg and sugar, it causes broken bones to knit to 
gether speedily. 

LLAMOK, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Tarma in the same kingdom ; an 
nexed to the curacy of Caina. 

LLAMOS, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Guamalies in the same kingdom; 
annexed to the curacy ot Hnacaracucho. 

LLANACACHI, a settlement of the province 
and corregimiento of Tarma in the same kingdom ; 
annexed to the curacy of Pnsco. 

LLANACOCHA, a settlement of the same pro- 



L L A 



387 



vince and kingdom as the former; annexed lo the 
curacy of Chacayan. 

LLANAHUANTA, a settlement of the same 
pro vince arid kingdom as the former; and annexed 
to the same curacy as the latter. 

LLANA1VJATE, a settlement of the same pro 
vince arid kingdom as the former ; annexed to the 
curacy of Pasco. 

LLANAS, a settlement of the province and cor- 
regimietito of Guamalies in Peru ; annexed to the 
curacy of Pachas. 

LLANCA, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Condesuyos de Arequipa in the 
same kingdom ; annexed to the kingdom of 
Choco. 

LLANGANATE, a very lofty mountain, al 
ways covered with snow, in {\\ecordillera of Coto- 
paxi, of the province and corregimiento of Am- 
bato in the kingdom of Quito. There is a com- 
mon tradition, that in this mountain there are some 
exceedingly rich gold mines, to which no one 
could ever come ; but that they may be seen at a 
distance. Down it to the e. runs the river Cura- 
ray, and on the 5. the Topo, Verde, Agoyan, M-i- 
poto, and others, which enter the Pasta/a, and thus 
lose their names. Lat. 1 I z s. 

LLANGAS, a settlement of the province and 
corregiu.icnto of Cafiete in Peru; half a league 
from the river of this name. 

LLANO, GRANDE, a settlement of the pro 
vince and government of Popayan in the Nuevo 
Reyno de Granada. 

LLANOS, a province and government of the 
Nuevo Reyno de Granada, and one of the most 
extensive; discovered by Gonzalo Ximinez de 
Quesada in 1541, when he went out on the dis 
covery of the famous Dorado; and he was asto 
nished to find llanos or levels, extending for up 
wards of 600 leagues from n. to s. from the river 
of Canela on the skirts of the cordillera of Peru, as 
far as the coasts of the N. sea; where the great 
river Maranon or of Amazonas disembogues itself, 
serving as a boundary to this province, and divid 
ing it from the kingdom of Brazil. Its width is 
200 leagues, and in some parts 300. If is watered 
by several abundant rivers; amongst the which 
the most notable are the Apure, Meta, Casanari, 
and the Orinoco, the greatest of them all, and into 
which all the others enter. It is very fertile and 
pleasaat, ot a temperature so immoderately hot, 
that were it not for the refreshment afforded by the 
n. wind it were quite uninhabitable. It has no 
other seasons but winter and summer. The first, 
which is the rainy season, is from April to No 
vember, and the second is when the rains cease, 



giving place to the heats, which prevail nntil the 
April following. It abounds extremely in neat 
cattle, with which it supplies the other provinces 
of the kingdom, as also in horses, and one species 
of such a nimble and light nature as that with 
these it is common to run down and tire out the 
deer, a very common amusement for the natives, 
who thus kill many and profit by their hides. 
Here also are found many other species of cattle 
and birds delicious to the taste, fish in swarms and 
of many soils in the rivers and lakes. Here are 
found woods of peculiar durability and incorrup 
tibility ; such as guayacanes, gra. adillo? , amaril- 
los, cedars, turayes^ and infinite others ; trees 
which yield olives, balsams, and resins, at once 
medicinal and of the most delightful odour ; such 
are the curru(Ui/^ olava, carana^ ttorax^ incense, 
canafistold) baymlla, zarzaparil/a, China root ; 
also much wild caca , purgative herbs, and others 
which are a certain antidote against the bite of 
snakes, of which this country is full. Nor does it 
abound less in venomous insects ; such as mosqui- 
toes, spiders, gegenes, rodadores, flies, gad-flies, 
wasps, and above all in some green mosquitoes^ 
which they call de gusano^ since in their bite they 
vomit a small imperceptible egg, which produces 
a gusano or pimple which causes great pain and 
fever. This last plague has been carried by the 
cattle into some of the neighbouring provinces. 
Here are many tigers, deer, bears, dantas, and 
other animals ; some snakes of such vast size as to 
appear like trunks of trees, and called bu/itus, and 
to which is attributed the power of attracting to 
them other creatures by their breath. 

This country is most fruitful in all the vegetable 
productions that one can imagine, and those the 
most cultivated are maize andyucas; not but that 
all these advantages are superseded by the afore 
said distressing visitations, and by the circumstance 
of its being of a very sickly climate. The Jesuits 
had a mission here of four settlements, now under 
the charge of the religious of S. Francisco. The 
capital of the whole of this province is of the same 
name. 

LLANOS. It is the city, with the dedicatory 
title of S. Juan ; founded in 1555 by Juan de 
Avellaneda, in the part where stood the settlement 
called by Jorge de Spira, De Nuestra Seriora, 
and by Nicolas de Fedreman, conqueror of Vene 
zuela, De la Fragua ; on the shore of the river 
Cunimia, and near the river Ariari. It is most 
abundant in gold mines, which were formerly 
worked, and produced largely, but which are 
now abandoned : its inhabitants, who may amount 
to about 50 poor housekeepers, living in great po- 



388 



L L A 



verty. It is of an hot and unhealthy temperature, 
87 miles s. s. e. from Santa Fe, in lat. 3 1 1 n. and 
long. 73 55 30" w. 

LLANOS, an alcaldia mayor and jurisdiction of 
Nueva Espafia ; extending over some extensive 
llanos, of which it is composed, and which are co 
vered with cultivated estates, which annually pro 
duce in abundance, vthcat, maize, and other seeds, 
of which consists the commerce of the natives ; as 
also in the breeding of large and small cattle and 
swine. The Indians cultivate likewise many fruits 
and herbs, which they carry for sale to the sur 
rounding markets ; some of them exercising them 
selves in the fishery ofbobo and trout in the large 
river Xonocotlan ; which fertilizing with its 
waters the country from the settlement of Santiago, 
passes through other provinces, till it enters the 
sea. 

Here are also mountains which abound in 
waters, and extending as far as Tlatlauquitepec, 
and which are so fertilized by these streams as to 
cause the whole face of the serrania to be covered 
with flowers and fruit-trees, and most particularly 
apples. There are good symptoms of there being 
mines in these mountains ; and in 1725, there were 
found in the river Teitic, at the foot of the moun 
tain called Jolozin, some large rifled pieces of 
earth, which were spangled with grains of silver, 
and even some lumps of this metal. But although 
it was frequently attempted to discover where these 
pieces were disrupted, such was the urievenness 
and craggy face of the territory as to mock all 
search. These parts abound in monkeys, parrots, 
and pheasants ; also in lions, tigers, and venom 
ous serpents, called nauyaques. The population 
consists of 1 1 settlements, as follows : 
Zacapuaztla, Tezuitlan, 

S.Juan Quimixtlan, Tlatlauquitepec, 

S. Pedro Ghilchota, Tenextlatiloyan, 

Chichiquila, Xonacatlan, 

S. Francisco de Ixtac, Xuchitlan. 
Maztitlan, 

The capital is the settlement of the same name, 
with the dedicatory title of San Juan; situate 
in a very large llano, sheltered from every wind. 
Jt is of a dry and cold temperature, of a large po 
pulation, but built without regularity; since the 
streets are at a great distance from each other, the 
houses naked and scattered ; and thus is its square 
one of the largest in the kingdom. It has many 
immediate wards, which surround it on all sides, 
and in the. k e inhabit 200 families of Spaniards, 
Mulattc es, and AJustees, and lUOO Indians. It is 
38 leagues e. of Mexico. 

LLANOS, another settlement, of the province 



L L E 

and government of Tucuman, in the jurisdiction 
of the city of Rioja. 

LLANOS, another, with the dedicatory title Del 
Valle de S. Antonio de los Llanos, the head settle 
ment of the district of the alcaldia mayor of Rio 
Blanco in the Nuevo Reyno de Leon. It pro 
duces only some seeds, and is eight leagues from 
Rio Blanco. 

LLANOS, another, with the addition Del Piano 
del N. which is a parish of the French, in the 
part they possess in the island St. Domingo, on 
the H. coast, to the s. of cape Frances. 

LLANQUE, a territory or district of the king 
dom of Quito, to the s, w. of the province and cor- 
regimiento of Juan de Bracamoros; bounded by 
the ancient province of Copallen. It is covered 
with woods, lakes, and swamps ; and it is not 
known whether it be inhabited by any nation of 
Indians. 

LLANQUERA, a settlement of the province 
and corregimiento of Carangas in Peru, and of the 
archbishopric of Charcas ; annexed to the curacy 
of Huaillarnarca. 

LLAON, a mountain of the cordillera of the 
Andes in the kingdom of Chile ; where there is a 
celebrated gold mine, worked to great profit. 

LLAPO, a settlement of the province and corre 
gimiento of Conchucos in Peru. 

LLAQUA, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Cotabambas in the same king 
dom. 

LLARIGUES, a river of the province and cor 
regimiento of Bogota in the Nuevo Reyno de 
Granada. It runs n. and collecting the waters of 
various streams, enters the Chicamocha or Soga- 
moso before the port of this name, and at the ruins 
of the settlement of Tora. 

LLASIN, a settlement of the province and cor 
regimiento of Lampa in Peru ; annexed to the cu 
racy of Caracoto. 

LLAUTA, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Collahuas in the same kingdom. 
LLAUTA, another settlement, in the province 
and corregimiento of Lucanas of the same king 
dom ; annexed to the curacy of Laramate. 

LLAUTAN, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Santa in the same kingdom j at 
the foot of the cordillera by the coast. 

LLAUZCO, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Chumbivilcas in the same king 
dom. 

LLEMECAHUI, a settlement of Indians, of the 
district of Guadalabquen in the kingdom of Chile; 
situate on the shore of one of the lakes of Hua- 
nahue. 



LOB 

LLERA, a settlement of the province and go 
vernment of Sierra Gorda, in the bay of Mexico, 
and kingdom of Nueva Espana ; founded by the 
Count of that title, Don Joseph de Escandon, 
colonel of militia of Querctaro, in 1750. 

LLEULLEN, a river of the kingdom of Chile; 
which runs w. and enters the sea between those of 
Tucapel and Quidico. 

LLICH1VILCA, a settlement of the province 
and corregimicnlo of Cotabambas in Peru; an 
nexed to the curacy of Huaillati. 

LLICO, a settlement of the province and cor 
regimiento of Maule in the kingdom of Chile. It 
runs s. w. forming an S in the valley of Puren, 
and enters the Raponulahue. 

LLILLINTA, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Castro Virreyna in Peru ; an 
nexed to the curacy of Julcamarca in the province 
of Yauyos. 

LLDCO, S, PEDRO DE, a settlement of the pro 
vince and corregimiento of Sana in Peru. 

JLLOCLLO, a settlement of the province and 
correghniento of Omasuyos in the same kingdom ; 
annexed to the curacy of Lacsa. 

LLOLLEIIUE, a small river of the district of 
Tolten Alto in the kingdom of Chile. It runs *. 
and enters the Tolten. 

LLONGOCURA, a settlement of the province 
and corregimiento of Maule in the same kingdom. 
It has three vice-parishes annexed. 

LLORO, CONCEPCION DE, a settlement of the 
province and government of Choco in the Nuevo 
Reyno de Granada ; on the shore of the river 
Atrato. 

LLUPANQUI, a small settlement of Indians, 
of the kingdom of Chile, in the cordillera of the 
Andes; celebrated for the rich mines of 22 carats 
gold discovered in 1710. It has also other mines 
of silver, copper, and iron ; but none of these are 
worked, tlyoughthe hardness of the soil, and from 
the scarcity of inhabitants. 

LLUZ1N, a river of the province and corregi- 
miento of Riobamba in the kingdom of Quito. It 
flows down from the paramo called Del Altar, 
having its origin in a lake ; runs e. and then, col 
lecting the waters of the Min and Chicon, follows 
its course with great rapidity to enter by the w. 
side into the renowned river Pastaza, in lat. l36 s. 

LOA, a port of the S.sea, in the province and 
corregir/riertto of Tarapaca, of the kingdom of 
Pera. It is the boundary at which terminates the 
province afAtacama, in lat. 21 SO . 

LOBA, a seltlem&amp;lt; nt of the province and go 
vernment of Cartagena, and Nuevo Reyno de 
Granada ; situate in an island, one of those formed 



LOG 



389 



by the river Cauca, in the district of the town of 
Mom pox. 

LOBERA, a settlement of the missions which 
were held by the Jesuits in the province and go 
vernment of Cinaloa. 

LOBINIERS, a settlement of Canada, on the 
shore of the river St. Lawrence, and at the mouth 
of the Chene. 

LOBO, a settlement of the head settlement of 
the district of Tamazunchale, and alcaldia mayor 
of Valles, in Nueva Espana. Its natives for the 
most part are gentiles. 

LOBOS, Lake of, in the province and govern 
ment of Buenos Ayres ; s. of the capital, and in it 
rises the river of Las Flores. 

LOBOS, an island of the S. sea, near the coast of 
Brazil ; at the entrance of the river La Plata. It 
is small, and abounds in marine wolves, from 
whence it is named ; as are the other islands which 
follow. It is w. of that of Maldonado. 

LOBOS, another, of the N. sea ; opposite the 
bay of the river Tampico in Nueva Espana. 
It is desert, and has in it nothing but some marine 
wolves ; though many fountains of pure warm 
water, which form various streams. 

LOBOS, another, of the N.sea, which is one of 
the Lucayas, which form the channel of Bahama, 
between the islands Isaac und Los Mimbres. 

LOBOS, another, of the S. sea, near the coast of 
the province and corregimiento of Canete in Peru ; 
with the surname of Pasta, to distinguish it from 
the rest. It is desert, having in it nothing but 
some marine wolves, in lat. 6 21 s. 

LOBOS, another, of the same coast of Peru, in 
the province and corregimiento of Sana ; called 
Windward, to distinguish it from 

LOBOS, another, of this province and kingdom, 
called Leeward. This is by the point of La Agnja. 

LOBOS, another, of the S.sea, in the bay of one 
of the Malvine or Falkland isles. 

LOBOS, an isle in the N.sea; near the coast of 
the island of Cuba, in the centre of the sandbank 
of Placer. 

LOBOS, another isle, of the S.sea, called De 
Lobos Silvestres, near the coast of the province 
and corregimiento of lea in Peru. 

LOBOS, a cape or point of land on the coast of 
the province and government of Buenos Ayres, 
near cape San Antonio. 

LOUO-YACU, a small river of the province 
and government of Mainas in the kingdom of 
Quito. It runs between those of Pinches and 
Uuasaqua, nearly parallel to each ; and at a short 
distance from its course, enters the Pastaza. 

LOCA, AR RECIFE DE LA, an isle or rock of 



390 



LOG 



the N. sea, close to the e . cape of the island Vaca ; 
opposite the point of Pa^qual of the island St. Do 
mingo. 

[LOCKARTSBURG, a town in Luzerne 
county, Pennsylvania ; situated on an isthmus 
firmed by the confluence of the Susqneharmah and 
Tioga rivers, about a mile above their junction. 
There are as yet few houses built, but it promises 
to be a place of importance, as both the rivers are 
navigable tor many miles into the state of New 
York. Jt is four miles s. of the New York line, 
nearly 42 w. of Harmony, and 53 above Wilks- 
barre.J 

[LOCKE, a military township in New York 
state, adjoining to Milton on the e. situated in 
Onondago county. The centre of the town is 13 
miles n. e. of the s. end of Cayuga lake. See 

Ml I. TON.] 

LOCK VVOODS, a small island near the coast 
of S. Carolina, in Long bay, at the back of cape 
Fear. 

LOCOS, CABO DE TXJS, a point of the head and 
w. extremity of the island St. Domingo, in the 
part possessed by the French, between the cape 
San Nicolas and the bay of Las Perlas. 

Locos, another c;ipe, in the same island, and in 
the district of the French, between cape Dona 
Maria and the point of Ballenas. 

Locos, a valley of the province and govern 
ment of Merida in the Nucvo Hey no de Gra 
nada. 

LOCROSA, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Guanta in Peru ; annexed to the 
curacy of Mayoc. 

LOCUMBA, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Arica in the same kingdom; an 
nexed to the curacy of Illabaya ; situate in the 
valley of its name, very fertile in wine. 

LOCUSHATCHI, a river of the province and 
colony of S. Carolina, which runs n. w. and enters 
the Albama. 

LOCUST, a settlement of the island of Barba- 
does, in the district and parish of Santo Tomas. 

LODAZAL, a river of the province and alcaldia 
mayor of Tabasco. See SAN PEDRO, and SAN 
PA BIX). 

LODO, Cape of, on the coast of the province 
and government of Florida ; 30 leagues n. of Mo- 
vila, in lat. 28 12 . Long. 281. 

L0BO8, River of the, in the island of St. Do 
mingo, and part possessed by the French. It rises 
in the w. head, near the coast, in the mountains of 
Tapion, runs w. and enters the sea opposite the 
small island of Arcadins. 

LOG, a town of the English in Canada ; situate 



L O L 

on the shore of a river, to the s. of the lake 
Erie. 

[LOGAN, a new county in the state of Ken 
tucky.] 

LOGRONO, SAN JOSEPH DE, a city, the ca 
pital of the province and corregimiento n\ Melipilla 
in the kingdom of Chile ; founded by Don Joseph 
Manso, president of the kingdom, who gave it this 
name in memory of his native place, in 1742, on 
the spot where the settlement of Melipilla stood, 
in a valley also of the same nime. It has, besides 
the parish church, two convents of the orders of 
San Francisco and La Merced, and it had a col 
lege of the Jesuits : on the shore of the river 
Maipocha. Lat. 33 38 s. and Long. 71 
16 w. 

LOGRONO, another city, which there was of this 
name, in the province and government of Qnixos 
and Macas of the kingdom of Quito: founded by 
Gil Ramirez Davalos, which was destroyed about ^ 
the middle of the 16th century by the Xibaros 
Indians, who rebelling put to death all the Spa 
niards, taking with them the women to the moun 
tains of Macas and to the shores of the river Mo- 
rona. Since that time it has not been rebuilt, and 
nothing but the memory of its name remains, and 
the fame of the great quantities of go d that used to 
be extracted from its mines. It stood to the s. of 
Quito, and e. s. e. of Cuenca, on the shore of the 
river Paute. La Martiniere calls it Sogrona, and 
indeed his whole account of it is replete with 
errors. 

[LOCSTOWN, on the w. side of the Ohio, 
lies s. of Butler s town, and 18 miles from Pitts- 
burg.1 

[LOGWOOD Country lies n. w. of the Mos 
quito shore, at the head of the bay of Honduras, 
and extends from Vera Paz to Yucatan, from lat. 
15| to 18^ n. The whole coast is overspread 
with islets, keys, and shoals, and the navigation is 
intricate.] 

LOIL, a small river of the province and colony 
of Virginia ; which runs n. w, in the county of 
Hampshire. It then turns w. and enters the Mo- 
nongahela. 

LOLACOS, a barbarous nation of Indians, de 
scendants of the Betoyes, in the Nuevo Reyno de 
Granada ; s. e. of the river Apure, and n. of the 
Tame. They dwell in the woods, and were first re 
duced to the faith by the Jesuits in 1716. 

LOLOL, ESTERO nr, a small river of the dis 
trict of Chanco in the kingdom of Chile; which 
runs ,v. s. w. and enters the Nilahue. 

LOLQUftN, a settlement of Indians of the dis 
trict of Toltcn Alto, in the same kingdom as the 



L O N 

former river; on the shore and at the head of the 
river Tolten. 

LOMA, LA, a settlement of the province and 
government of Cartagena in the Nuevo Key no de 
Granada ; on the shore of the river Sinu, to the w. 
of the town of Lorica. 

LOMA, another settlement in this province and 
kingdom ; in one of the islands formed by the river 
Cauca. 

LOMA, another, in the province and corregi- 
miento of Arica in Pern ; on the coast. 

LOMAS, a settlement of the province and go 
vernment of Jaen de Bracamoros in the kingdom 
of Quito. 

LOMAS, a large bay on the s. coast of the straits 
of Magellan, at its entrance. It is formed by cape 
Orange and that of the Nombre de Jesus, or Del 
Espiritu Santo. 

[LONDON, a town in Ann Arundel county, 
Maryland, five miles s. w. of Annapolis.] 

[LONDON Cove, a narrow water of Long island 
sound, which sets up n. into the township of New 
London, four miles w. of the mouth of Thames 
river. Millstone point separates it from another 
much broader on the w. across which is a hand 
some bridge, with a draw at Rope ferry.] 

[LONDONDERRY, a post-town in Rocking, 
ham county, New Hampshire; situated near the 
head of Beaver river, which empties into Merri- 
mack river, at Pawtucket falls. It is 26 miles s.w. 
by w. of Portsmouth. Londonderry was settled 
in 1718, and incorporated 1722, and contains 2590 
inhabitants. The people are mostly the descen 
dants of emigrants from it, came chiefly from Ulster 
county in Ireland, or originally from Scotland, 
and attend largely to the manufacture of linen 
cloth and thread, and make considerable quantities 
for sale. The town is much indebted to them for 
its wealth and consequence.] 

[LONDONDERRY, a township in Halifax county, 
Nova Scotia ; situated on the K. side of Cocheqnid 
or Colchester river, about 30 miles from its mouth, 
at the basin of Minas. It was settled by the North 
Irish and Scotch.] 

[LONDONDERRY, a township, and the . wes 
ternmost ofWindham county, Vermont, on the 
head waters of West river, about 20 miles n. e. of 
Bennington. It was granted March 16, 1780. 
Moose mountain extends into the e. part of this 
town.] 

[LONDONDERRY, the name of two townships in 
Pennsylvania, the one in Chester county, the other 
in that of Dnnphine.] 

[LONDON GROVE, a township in Dauphine 
county, Pennsylvania.] 



L O N 



391 



LONDRES, a city of the province and govern- 
ment of Tucuman ; founded by the governor Pe 
dro Tarita in 1555, in the ancient province of the 
Juries Indians. This name was given it in ho 
nour of Queen Mary of England, from the mar 
riage which had taken place with King Philip II. 
of Spain ; although its duration was as short as 
the life of the princess, as its inhabitants deserted 
to other parts, and soon left it a miserable village. 
Inlat. 29 81 s. 

[LONG Bay extends along the shore of N. and 
S. Carolina, from cape Fear to the mouth of Pedee 
river.] 

[LONG Bay, on the s. side of the island of 
Jamaica, extends from Gutt to Swift river, and 
affords anchorage for small vessels.] 

[LONG Bay, in the island of Barbadoes, in the 
W. Indies, lies on the w. side of the island, having 
St. Joseph s river s. e. and Pico Teneriffe n. w. 
Another bay of the same name lies on the s. end of 
the island, about two miles e. of the s. point.] 

[LONG or EIGHTEEN-MILE Beach, on the coast 
of New Jersey, lies between Little Egg harbour in 
let and that of Barnegat.] 

[LONG Island, HI Penobscol bay. See ISLES- 
BOROUGH.] 

[LONG Island, formerly called MANHATTAN, 
afterwards NASSAU Island, belongs to the state of 
New York. It extends from Hudson s river op 
posite to Staten island, almost to the w. bounds of 
the coast of Rhode island, terminating with Mon- 
tauk point. Its length is about 94 miles, and its 
medium breadth not above 10 miles ; and separated 
from Connecticut by Long island sound. It con 
tains 1400 square miles ; and is divided into three 
counties, King s, Queen s, and Suffolk ; and these 
again into 19 townships. The n. side of the island 
is rough and hilly. A single rnnge of these hills 
extends from Jamaica to Southhold. The soil is 
here well calculated for raising grain, hay, and 
fruit. The s. side of the island lies low, with a 
light sandy soil. On the sea-coast are extensive 
tracts of salt meadow, which extend from South 
ampton to the w. end of the island. The soil, 
notwithstanding, is well adapted to the culture of 
grain, particularly Indian corn. Near the middle 
of the island is Hampstead plain, in Queen s 
county. It is 16 miles long, and about eight 
broad. This plain was never known to have any 
natural growth, except a particular kind of wild 
grass, and a few shrubs, although the soil is black, 
and to appearance rich. It produces some rye, 
and large herds of cattle are fed upon it, as well as 
on the salt marshes. On the e. part of the island, 
e. of Hampstead plain, is a large barren heath, 



392 



L O N 



called Brusliy Plain. It is overgrown with shrub- 
oak, intermixed with a few pine trees, where a 
number of wild deer and grouse harbour. The 
largest river or stream in the island is Peakonok, 
an inconsiderable stream. It runs e. and empties 
into a large bay, that separates South hold from 
Southampton. In this bay are Robbin and Shel 
ter islands. Rockonkama pond lies about the 
centre of the island, between Smith-town and Islip, 
and is about a mile in circumference, and has been 
found by observation to rise gradually for several 
years, until it had arrived to a certain height, and 
then to fall more rapidly to its lowest bod ; and 
thus is continually ebbing and flowing. The cause 
has never been investigated. Two miles to the s. 
of the pond, is a stream called Connecticut river, 
which empties into the bay. The produce of the 
middle and w. parts of the island is carried to 
New York. The island contained in 1790, 
4 1 ,782 inhabitants, of whom 4839 were slaves.] 

[LONG INLAND Sound is a kind of inland sea, 
from 13 to 18 miles broad, and about 86 miles long, 
extending the whole length of the island, and di 
viding it from Connecticut. It communicates with 
the ocean at both ends of Long island, and af 
fords a very safe and convenient inland naviga 
tion.] 

[LONG Island, an island in Susquehannah 
river.] 

[LONG Island, in Holston river, in the state of 
Tennessee, is three miles long. Numbers of boats 
are built here every year, and loaded with the pro 
duce of the state for New Orleans. Long island 
is 10 miles a\ of the mouth of Wataugo river.] 

[LONG Island, or YUMA, one of the Bahama 
islands ; situate on the s. e. extremity of the Great 
Bahama bank. It is about 54 miles long, but 
very narrow. It is inhabited ; and besides other 
produce, a considerable quantity of salt is an 
nually exported, chiefly from Great harbour, 
which is situated about 15 leagues from the n. end 
of the island, and on the e. side of the island. The 
5. end of Long island is about 23 miles from Bird- 
rock Crooked island. The population, including 
blacks, amounted in 1803 to 2500, and the lands 
granted by the crown previous to May in the same 
year, to 65,405 acresfor the purpose of cultivation. 
See BAHAMAS.] 

[LONG ISLE or ISLE RIVER Indians inhabit on 
Isle or White river, which runs w. into the river 
Wabash. The mouth of White river is in lat. 
J824 w. Long. 87 41 a).] 

[LoNG Lake, in the Genessee country in New 
York. See HONKYYOK Lake.] 

[LoxG MEADOW, a town in Hampshire county, 



L O N 

Massachusetts; situated on the e. bank of Connec 
ticut river, about four miles s. of Springfield, and 
17 n. of Hartford. It was incorporated in 1783; 
contains a Congregational church, and about 70 
dwelling-houses, which lie upon one wide street, 
running parallel with the river. The township 
contains 744 inhabitants. It is 73 miles w. by w. 
of Boston.] 

[LONG Point, a peninsula on the n. side of lake 
Erie, and towards the e. end of the lake. It is 
composed of sand, and is very convenient to haul 
boats out of the surf upon, when the lake is too 
rough for rowing or sailing. Vermilion point, be 
tween Puan bay and lake Michigan, is also called 
Lonu; point in some maps.] 

[LoNoPond, in the district of Maine, lies mostly 
in Bridgton, and is 10 miles long from 11. zv. to s. e. 
and about a mile broad. On each side of this pond 
are large swells of excellent land, with a gradual 
descent to the margin of the pond, and furnish a 
variety of romantic prospects. See B a IDG TON, 
and SEBAGO.] 

LONGABl, a river of the province and corre- 
gimiento of Maule in the kingdom of Chile, which 
runs n. and enters the Longomilla. On its shore, 
between it and the river Liguay, is a large estate, 
called Minas de Polcura. 

LONGEN, a river of the same province and 
kingdom as the former. It rises e. of the volcano 
of Tucapcl, runs nearly s. and loses itself in the 
lakes of the Desaguadero. 

LONGOMILLA, a river of the same province 
and kingdom as the former ; founded by an union 
of several small lakes, and running, with this name, 
to enter the Maule. 

LONGOR1BO, a river of the province and 
captainship of Todos Santos in Brazil, which rises 
near the sierra Chapada and the coast ; runs s. s. e. 
and enters the sea opposite the island Taporica. 
At its entrance, on the top of a mountain, is a cas 
tle called Morro de San Pablo. 

LONGOTOMA, a river of the province and 
corregimiento of Copiapo, in the same kingdom as 
the former. It has its source in the mountain of 
the same name, which is one of the loftiest of the 
Cordillera at "the Andes, runs a?, and enters the S. sea, 
in lat. 1 40 s. 

LONGOTOMA, a settlement, in this province and 
kingdom ; on the shore of the former river. 

LONGEN, another, near the coast of Nova 
Scotia, at the entrance of the great bay of Fundy. 

LONGEN, another, near the s. coast of New 
foundland, within the bay of Despair. 

LONGEN, a large, convenient, and handsome 
bay in the province and colony of S. Carolina. 



LOR 



393 



LONGEN, a point of land on the.w. coast of the 
river St. Lawrence, in the district and country of 
Labrador. 

LONGV1LLE, a fort of the French, in the pro- 
vince and country of the Iroquees Indians, on the 
shore of the river St. Lawrence, opposite the island 
Montreal. 

LONGUEN, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Itata in the kingdom of Chile ; 
situate in the valley of Tango. 

LONGUEN, a river of this province and king 
dom, which runs s. s. w. in a serpentine course, 
and enters the Maule near its embouchure. On its 
shore is an estate called Cuchacucha. 

[LONGU1LLE, or, as the Indians call it, KE- 
NAPACOMAQUA, an Indian village on the n. bank of 
Eel river, in the N. W. Territory. It was des 
troyed by Gen. Scott in 1791, with 200 acres of 
corn in its neighbourhood.] 

LONIA, a settlement of the province and go 
vernment of Pamplona in the Nuevo Reyno de 
Granada; on the shore of a small river. 

LONIA, another settlement, in the province and 
corregimienlo of Luya and Chillaos in Peru ; an 
nexed to the curacy of Pipincos in the province 
of Jaen. 

LONTEIHE, a river of the province and cor- 
regimiento of Itata in the kingdom of Chile ; which 
runs s. s. e. and enters, united with the Uuaico, 
into the Mataquino. 

LONTUE, an abundant and large river of the 
province and corregimiento of Maule in the same 
kingdom as the former. It rises in the Cordillera^ 
and unites itself with the Teni, to divide this pro 
vince from that of Colchagua ; taking from thence 
the name of Mataquino. 

LOOKOUT, Cape, or DE LOS DI-SVOLOS, a 
point of land on the coast which lies between the 
river La Plata and the straits of Magellan, between 
the bay of San Julian and port Deseado, in lat. 
48 24 s. Long. 66 9 w. 

[LOOKOUT, Cape, on the coast of N. Caro 
lina, is the s. point of a long insulated and narrow 
slipof land, e. of Core sound. Itsw. point forms 
the s. side of Ocrecock inlet, which leads into 
Pamlico sound. It lies . e. of cape Fear, and 
*. w. of cape Hatteras, in about lat. 34 23 n. and 
long. 76 51 w. It had an excellent harbour, 
which has been filled up with sand tince the year 
1777.] 

[LOOKOUT, Cape, on the 5. coast of Hudson s 
bay, in New S. Wales, e. s. e. of the mouth of Se 
vern river. Lat. 56 n. Long. 84 wJ] 

[LOOSA CHITTO. See LOUSA CHITTO.] 

LOPA, a settlement and head settlement of the 
VOL. n. 



alcaldia mayor of Villalta in Nueva Espana. It 
contains 128 families of Indians, and is six leagues 
w. of its capital. 

LOPE DE FIEURO, a settlement of the mis 
sions which are held by the Jesuits i:i the province 
of Tepeguana, and kingdom of Nueva Vizcaya; 
on the shore of the river Florido, and nine leagues 
from the settlement and garrison of the Valle de 
San Bartolome. 

LOPEZ, a settlement of the province and go 
vernment of Tucumau in Peru ; on the shore of 
the river Dulce. 

LOPEZ, a small river of the province and go 
vernment of Guayaquil in the kingdom of Quito ; 
which rises near the settlement of Guasuntos, runs 
w. and enters the Guayaquil. 

LOPEZ, some islands, called Of Antonio Lopez, 
in the river La Plata, near then, coast. They are 
small, and two in number, and lie close to the 
islands of Muleques, and the two English isles. 

LORA, a settlement of the province and district 
of Chanco in the kingdom of Chile ; on the shore 
of the river Mataquino, near the coast. 

LORA, a lake of this province and kingdom. 

[LOREMBEC. See LOUISBO; RG. It is a 
cape near the ?/. side of Louisbourg harbour, and 
may be seen 12 leagues off at sea.] 

LORENZA DONNA, a small river of the pro 
vince and government of Buenos Ayres, which 
runs e. near the coast, and enters the mouth of the 
river La Plata, on the same shore on which stands 
the capital. 

LORENZANA, SAN VICENTE DE, a city of 
the province and alcaldia mayor of San Salvador 
in the kingdom of Guatemala; founded, in 1642, 
by Don Alvaro de Qui nones Osorio, Marquis of 
Lorenzana, president, governor, and captain-ge 
neral of the kingdom. It is of a scanty popula 
tion ; contains, besides the parish church, a con 
vent of the religious order of St. Domingo ; pro 
duces much indigo, which is the principal branch 
of its commerce, and for the preparing of which 
there are several engines in its vicinity. Twelve 
leagues from the city of San Salvador, 18 from 
that of San Miguel, and 50 from the capital of the 
kingdom, Guatemala. 

LORENZO, S. a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Chimbo in the kingdom of Quito. 

LORENZO, S. another, in the province and go 
vernment of Guayaquil ; also of the kingdom of 
Quito. 

LOKENZO, S. another, of the district and alcal 
dia mayor of Mexilcaltzingo in Nueva Espana. 
It contains 58 families of Indians, and is 2f 
leagues from its capital. 

3 E 



LOR 



LORENZO, S. another, of the head settlement of 
the district and alcaldia mayor of Teotihuacan in 
the same kingdom ; half a league w. of its ca 
pital. 

LORENZO, S. another, of the head settlement 
of Quatepec, and alcaldia mayor of Marinalco, 
in the same kingdom. It is of a cold and moist 
temperature, one league from its head settlement, 
and the road to it is covered with coco-trees and 
large oaks. 

. LORENZO, S. another, of the head settlement 
of the district and alcaldia mayor of Toluca in 
the same kingdom. It contains 60 families of In 
dians, and is a little to the w. of its capital. 

LORENZO, S. another, of the head settlement 
of Huatuzco, and alcaldia mayor of Cordoba, in 
the same kingdom. It contains 78 families of free 
Negroes ; for this was an establishment for such as 
had obtained their liberty of the masters for whom 
they worked in the sugar manufactories of this 
jurisdiction. Three leagues e. s. e. of its head 
settlement. 

LORENZO, S. another, of the head settlement 
and alcaldia mayor of Tecali in the same king 
dom. It contains 59 families of Indians. 

LORENZO, S. another, of the head settlement 
of Coronango, and alcaldia mayor of Cholula, in 
the same kingdom. It contains 70 families of In 
dians, and is one league s. of its capital. 

LORENZO, S. another, of the province and corre- 
gimiento of Chilques and Masques in Peru ; an 
nexed to the curacy of Colcha. 

LORENZO, S. another, of the province and cor- 
regimiento of Canta in the same kingdom ; annexed 
to the curacy of Arahuay. 

LORENZO, S. another, of the head settlement 
of the district of Uruapan, and alcaldia mayor of 
Valladolid, in the province and bishopric of Me- 
choacan. It contains 10 families of Indians, and 
is three leagues n. of its head settlement, and 12 
from the capital. 

LORENZO, S. another, of the head settlement 
of Papalotipac, and alcaldia mayor of Cuicatlan, 
in the same kingdom. One league s. of the ca 
pital. 

LORENZO, S. another, of the head settlement 
of the district of Taximarca, and alcaldia mayor 
of Maravatio, in the same kingdom. It contains 
20 families of Indians, and is one league e. of its 
head settlement. 

LORENZO, S. another, of the head settlement of 
the district of Huehuetlan, and alcaldia mayor of 
Cuicatlan, in the same kingdom. It contains 125 
families of Indians, and is three leagues n. of its 
head settlement. 



LOR 

LORENZO, S. another, of the head settlement of 
the district of Mistepeque, and alcaldia mayor of 
Nexapa, in the same kingdom. It contains eleven 
families of Indians, and is two leagues from its 
head settlement. 

LORENZO, S. another, which is the head settle 
ment of the district, of the same alcaldia mayor 
and kingdom as the former. It has united to it 
seven other settlements, and is one of the most 
abundant in cochineal of any in its jurisdiction. 
It contains 102 families of Indians, and is nine 
leagues from its capital. 

LORENZO, S. another, of the head settlement of 
Pinoteca, and alcaldia mayor of Xic.ayan, in the 
same kingdom. It contains 35 families of Indians, 
employed in the cultivation of cochineal, seeds, 
and tobacco, and is five leagues from its head set 
tlement. 

LORENZO, S. another, of the head settlement of 
the district of Mitla, and alcaldia mayor of Teu- 
titlan, in the same kingdom ; situate between two 
mountains. It contains 13 families of Indians, 
and is four leagues e. of the settlement of Sa- 
potitlan. 

LORENZO, S. another, of the missions that were 
held by the Jesuits in the province of Taraumara, 
and kingdom of Nueva Vizcaya. It is 19 leagues 
from the town and real of mines of San Felipe de 
Chiguagua. 

LORENZO, S. another, of the province of Bar 
celona and government of Cunmna, in the king 
dom of Tierra Firme ; situate on the shore of the 
river Sacaguar. 

LORENZO, S. another, of the same province and 
kingdom as the former ; one of the missions held 
under the care of the Aragoncse Capuchin fathers ; 
s. of the city of Cumanagota. 

LORENZO, S. another, of the district of Chiri- 
qui, in the province and government of Viragua, 
and kingdom of Tierra Firme. Fourteen leagues 
from its head settlement, in the high road ; a high 
mountain, called Dupin, and which it is indispen 
sable to pass, being situate between both. 

LOR ENZO, S. another, in the province and country 
of Las Amazonas, in the part possessed by the 
Portuguese ; a reduction of the missions held hy 
the Carmelite fathers of this province; on the 
shore of the river Guatuma. 

LORENZO, S. another, of the missions which 
were held by the Jesuits in the province and go 
vernment of Paraguay ; [situate on the Paraguay, 
about five miles s. e. from Asuncion, in lat. 
25 21 14" s. Long. 57 37 o&amp;gt;.] 

LORENZO, S. another, of the island of St. Do 
mingo, on the shore of the river Ozama, at its con- 

2 



LOR 

fluence at the entrance of the Isabella ; nearly to 
the s. of the capital. 

LORENZO, S. another, of the province and cap 
tainship of Rio Janeiro in Brazil ; in a bay formed 
by this river. 

LORENZO, S. another, of the province and go 
vernment of Popayan in the Nuevo Reyno de 
Granada, of the district of the corregimiento of 
Pastos. 

LORENZO, S. another, of the province and king 
dom of Guatemala. 

LORENZO, S. another, of the province and cor- 
regimienio of Aconcagua in the kingdom of Chile; 
on the shore of the river Ligua. 

LORENZO, S. another, of the province of Ta- 
raumara ; four leagues from the garrison of the 
Paso del Norte. 

LORENZO, S. another, of the missions held by the 
religious of San Francisco in Nuevo Mexico. 

[LORENZO, S. another settlement of Indians, of 
the province and government of Buenos Ayres ; 
situate about ten miles e. of San Luis, on a branch 
of the Piratiny river, in lat. 28 27 24" s. Long. 
54 48 30" w.\ 

LOIWENZO, S. a river of the province and go 
vernment of Buenos Ayres ; which runs 5. s. e. 
and enters the river La Plata between the town of 
Santa Lucia and the city of Corrientes. 

LORENZO, S. another river, of the island of St. 
Domingo; which rises near the n. coast of the 
great bay of Samana, runs n. n. e. and enters the 
sea in that bay, within the port of its name. 

LORENZO, S. an island of the S. sea, opposite 
the port of Callao, inhabited by some Indian fish 
ermen. The same port was entered by James 
Hermit Clerk, an Englishman, who died of vex 
ation from not having been able to take it when he 
besieged it in 1624, throwing into it red-hot shot. 
Here is a small fort, called Torre de los For- 
zados. 

LORENZO, S. another small island, of the gulf of 
California or Mar Roxo de Cortes ; near the coast, 
between this and the island of Espiritu Santo, so 
that it is in the middle of the channel, or mouth, 
of the bay of Joabio. 

LORENZO, S. another small island, of the same 
gulf as the former ; in the interior of it, and also 
near the coast. 

LORENZO, S. a cape or point of the coast of 
the S. sea, in the province and government of 
Guayaquil. 

LORENZO, S. a lake of the province and cor- 
regimicnto of Guamachuco in Peru; from which 
and the lake Guagaicocha is formed the river 
Moche, which traverses and irrigates this province, 



LOR 



295 



and that of Truxillo, running into the sea in its 
district. 

LORENZO, S. a port on the coast of the island of 
St. Domingo, within the great bay of Samana, 
and in the interior part of it. 

LORENZO, S. another, a dry port, in the sierra 
of San Francisco Xavier, of Nuevo Mexico. 

LORENZO, S. a fort on the coast of the province 
and captainship of Seara in Brazil ; near the capi 
tal, in the e. part, and divided from it by the 
river Guaracu, between this river and that of 
Laguaribe, on a point of land projecting into 
the sea. 

[LORENZO, S. See St. LAWRENCE.] 

LORETO, a settlement of the province and 
government of Quixos and Macas in the king 
dom of Quito; fertile in maize, i/ucas, plantains, 
and pita, in which the natives pay their tribute, 
and which is much esteemed throughout Peru, 
as they spin and twist it with great neatness and 
beauty. 

LOHETO, another settlement, with the additional 
title of Paranapuras, as being a reduction of In 
dians of this name, made by the Jesuits, in the pro 
vince and government of Mainas, of the kingdom 
of Quito. Jt is situate on the shore of the river 
Maranon, and at a small distance from it is a for 
tress, which was the first establishment of the Por 
tuguese in that quarter. * This settlement was 
founded by the Father Rymundo de Santa Cruz, 
who collected in it the Chayavitas and Muniches 
Indians. 

LORETO, another, of the province and govern 
ment of Santa Cruz de la Sierra in Peru ; on the 
shore of the river Guapaig. 

LORETO, another, of the missions which were 
held by the Jesuits in California ; near the coast 
of the gulf. It has a fortress and garrison for its 
defence. The Indians call it Concho. [It is a 
garrison, and was the principal place of all the 
missions of Old California, founded at the end of 
the 17th century by Father Kiihn, the astro 
nomer, of Ingolstadt.] 

LORETO, another, of the province and govern 
ment of Paraguay ; one of the missions which 
were held by the Jesuits ; situate on the e. shore of 
the river Parana, between the settlement of Santa 
Ana and San Ignacio, [about 15 miles n. e. from 
Candelario, in lat. 27 19 58" s. Long. 55 
34 39"o&amp;gt;.] 

LORETO, another, of the province and govern 
ment of Moxos in the kingdom of Quito ; a re- 
duccion of Indians of the missions which were held 
by the Jesuits, founded on the shore of the river 
Marmore. 

3 E2 



396 



LOU 



LORETO, another, which is a real of mines of 
silver, of the province and government of Cina- 
loa in Nneva Espana. 

LORETO, another reduction of Indians, of the 
missions which were held by the Jesuits in the 
same province as the former. 

LORKTO, another, of the province of Gaira, and 
government of Paraguay, in Peru ; on the shore 
of the Parapamena, near where it enters the 
Parana. 

LORETO, another, there was, of this name, in 
the same province and government, but which was 
destroyed and burnt by the infidel Indians. At 
present nothing but its ruins remain on the shore of 
the river Parana. 

LORETO, another, of New France or Canada, a 
reduction of Indians made by the missions held 
there by the French Jesuits, who gave it this name 
from the similarity of its church to the holy house 
of Loretto in Italy ; it having also a painting co 
pied from the image which is venerated in that 
sanctuary. The Father Charlevoix makes a very 
favourable description of these Neofites, who, he 
asserts, have a peculiar simplicity and rectitude in 
their customs. They have embraced the Catho 
lic faith in all its purity, and exercise the virtues 
without any corruptive vice whatever. It is ad 
mirable, says the aforesaid father, to see the devo 
tion with which they sing in the choir hymns in 
their own language, the men distinct from the 
women, and the fervour and modesty with which 
all of them devote themselves to their religious 
acts. 

This settlement was formerly numerous, but 
sickness has much diminished its population ; but 
what there are, are governed with such peace and 
tranquillity as that they form the appearance of one 
family. Nor ought this to be other than a subject 
of astonishment to those who know what the cha 
racters of the Indians are, and especially the Ilu- 
rons. Here is a great concourse of people com 
ing from all parts of the province on the festival, 
through the great devotion which they have to the 
aforesaid image. Three leagues from Quebec. 

LORIAN, Cape, a point of land of the e. coast 
of Newfoundland, between New cape and point 
St. Gilles. 

LORICA, SANTA CRUZ DE, a town of the 
province and government of Cartagena in the 
Nuevo Rcyno de Granada; on the shore of the 
river Sinui, in the district of this name. 

LOROCOCHA, a lake of the province and 
corregimiento of Canla in Peru, from which rises 
the river Carabaillo. It is n. of the capitaJ, close 
to the lake of Socaibamba. 



[LOROMIE S STORE, in the territory n. w. of 
the Ohio, a place w. from fort Lawrence, and at or 
near a fork of a branch of the Great Miami river, 
which falls into the Ohio. At this spot, bounded 
w. by the Indian line, the Indians ceded a tract of 
land to the United States, six miles square, by the 
treaty signed August 3, 1795. Here the portage 
commences between the Miami of the Ohio, and 
St. Mary s river, which runs into lake Erie.] 

LORQUE, a settlement of the province and 
district of itata in the kingdom of Chile; on the 
shore of tbe river Itata. 

LORRAIN, River of, in the island of Marti 
nique, which runs n. e. and enters the sea, between 
the settlement of La Grande Ance and the river 
Mace. 

LOS CHARCOS. See CHARCAS.] 

"Los REYES. See LIMA.] 
Los REYES, the chief town of the province of 
Uragua, in the e. division of Paraguay, in S. 
America.] 

LOSICHA, SAN AGUSTIN DE, a settlement of 
the head settlement of the district of Tequila, and 
alculdia mayor of Chichicapa, in Nueva Espana. 

LOSICHA, another settlement, of the head settle 
ment of the district and alcaldia mayor of Miahu- 
atlan in the same kingdom. It is to the s. on the 
confines of the jurisdiction of Xicayan. 

LOSCO1PUS, ESTERO DE, a small river of the 
district of Chanco in the kingdom of Chile, which 
runs e. and enters the river Nilahue. It has on 
its shores the estate of Banil. 

[LOUDON, Fort, a fort erected in the country 
of the Cherokees. See TELLICO Block-house.] 

[LOUDON, a county of Virginia, on the river 
Potowmac, adjoining Fairfax, Berkley, and Fa- 
quicr counties. It is about 50 miles long, and 20 
broad, and contains 18,962 inhabitants, including 
4030 slaves. Chief town, Leesburgh.] 

[LouooN, a township in Rockingham county, 
New Hampshire, taken from Canterbury town 
ship, and incorporated in 1773. It is situated on 
the e. side of Merrirnack river, 40 miles from Ports 
mouth, and contains 1084 inhabitants.] 

[LOUDON, a township in Berkshire county, 
Massachusetts, 21 miles s. e. of Lenox, and 20 w. 
of Springfield. It was incorporated in 1673, and 
contains 344 inhabitants. It contains 13,000 acres, 
of which 2914 are ponds.] 

[LOUGHABER, or LOCIIABER, a small settle 
ment in Georgia, on a branch of Savannah river, 
above its confluence with the Tugulo, the w. main 
branch.] 

LOUIS, S. a city and capital of the island of 
Guadalupe in La Gran Tierra. It has a castle 



LOU 

three leagues from the river La Sal. After the 
peace of 1763, its fortifications have been much in 
creased, and a suburb added, called El Burgo, 
which adds greatly to its beauty. 

Louis, S. a settlement and fort of the French, 
near the mouth of the river Coza, in the province 
and government of Florid:), nearly 20 leagues n.e. 
of the highest mouth of the Mississippi ; and it 
was, until the peace of 1763, the ordinary residence 
of the governor of Louisiana. 

Louis, S. another settlement and fort of the 
French, in the province and country of the Iro- 
quees Indians, on the shore of the river St. Law 
rence, opposite the island of Montreal. 

[Louis DE MAHANHAM, ST. a town on the 
n. coast of Brazil, and on the Atlantic ocean ; si 
tuated on the e. side of Mearim river, about half 
way between point Mocoripe, and the mouth of 
the river Para.] 

[Louis, ST. a jurisdiction and town on the s. 
side of the island of St. Domingo. The jurisdic 
tion contains three parishes. Its exports shipped 
from the town of St. Louis, from Jan. ], 1789, to 
Dec. 31, of the same year, were 120,6651b. coffee; 
19,253Ib. cotton; 5751 Ib. indigo. Total value 
of duties on exportation, 904 dollars 13 cents. 
St. Louis is rather a borough than a town. It is 
situated on the head of the bay of its name, oppo 
site a number of small isles, which shelter the bay 
on thes. towards the ocean, and on the s. side of 
the s. peninsula, 14 miles n. e. of Les Cayes, eight 
s. z&amp;. of Aquin, and 70 s. w. by w. of Port au 
Prince; from which last are two roads leading to 
it, the one by Jacmel, the other by Leogane, and 
of much the same length ; both join at Aquin. 
Lat. 18 15 n. Long. 73 3 1 30" o&amp;gt;.] 

[Louis, ST. a small, compact, beautiful bay in 
AT . Florida, having about seven feet water. It is 
18 miles from the Regolets, and 26 from the bay of 
Biloxi. The land near it is of a light soil, and 
good for pasture. There were several settlers for 
merly on it ; but in the year 1767, the Chactaw In 
dians killed their cattle, and obliged them to re 
move.] 

[Louis, ST. a Spanish village, on the w. side 
of the river Mississippi, about seven miles below 
the mouth of the Missouri. Its site is on a high 
piece of ground, the most healthy and pleasurable 
of any known in this part of the country. Here 
the Spanish commandant and the principal Indian 
traders reside ; who, by conciliating the affections 
of the natives, have drawn all the Indian trade of 
the Missouri, part of that of the Mississippi n. 
and of the tribes of Indians residing near the Ouis- 
consing and Illinois rivers, to this village. About 



LOU 



397 



20 years ago there were here 120 large and com 
modious houses, mostly built of stone, and 800 in 
habitants, chiefly French. Some of them have 
had a liberal education, and were polite and hos 
pitable. They had about 150 Negroes, and large 
stocks of cattle, &amp;c. It is four or five miles n. by 
w. of Cahokia, on the e. side of the Mississippi, 
and about 140 miles zo. by s. of Post St. Vincent s, 
on Wabash river. Lat. 38 18 n. Long. 89 
28 w.] 

Louis, ST. some mountains of the province and 
colony of Nova Scotia or Acadia, in the peninsula 
of the Gaspesios Indians, which run w. between 
the coast of the river St. Lawrence and that of the 
bay of Chaleurs. 

Louis, S. a river of Canada, which rises from a 
small lake, runs s. e. in a tolerably abundant stream, 
and enters lake Superior. 

Louis, ST. a fort or castle of the n.w. coast of 
the island St. Christopher, one of the Antilles, in 
the limits of the part which the English possessed 
previous to the cession of the island. It is a strong 
square fortification, and stands between the river 
Cabrito and the mountain of Morne. 

Louis, ST. another fort or castle of the French, 
in the province and government of Louisiana, at 
the entrance of the river of La Mobila and bay of 
this name. It is also called the castle of Conde. 

Louts, ST. a great bay on the e. coast of the 
country of Labrador, near the entrance of the 
straits of Bclleisle. 

Louis, ST. a cape or extremity of the e. coast 
of Nova Scotia or Acadia, which looks n. and is 
fronting the e. point of the island San Juan. 

[Louis. See LEWIS.] 

[LOUISA, a county of the province and colony 
of Virginia, adjoining Orange, Albemarle, Flu- 
vanna, Spottsylvania, and Goochland counties. It 
is about 35 miles long, and 20 broad, and contains 
8467 inhabitants, including 4573 slaves. There 
are here some medicinal springs, on the head wa 
ters of South Anna, a branch of York river ; but 
they are little frequented.] 

[LouisA, a river of Virginia, the head water of 
Cole river, a s. w. branch of the great Kanha- 
way.] 

LOUISA, a small river of the province and co 
lony of N. Carolina, which runs n, and enters the 
Charbons. 

LOUIS BO URG, a city and capital of.the island 
of Cape Breton in N. America, with one of the best 
ports of that country, and four leagues in circum 
ference, also of sufficient depth all over, and hav 
ing an entrance of only 300 toises wide. This port 
is Ibrmed by two small islands ; and at the distance 



LOU 



LOU 



of 12 leagues may be distinguished cape Lorem- 
bec, which is nearly to the n. e. It abounds 
greatly in cod-fish, which are caught from the 
month of April to December. 

The English, commanded by Admiral Peter 
Warren, and the land forces under Colonel Wil 
liam Papparel, took it from the French in 1745 ; 
but it was restored to those in the peace of Aix-la- 
Chapelle in 1748. It was retaken under the or 
ders of Admiral Boscawen and Lieutenant-general 
Amherst, in 1758, when the fortifications were de 
molished. 

The city is situate on a long strip of land, to the 
s. e, of the island. Its streets are wide and re 
gular; the houses, for the greater part, of stone, 
with a great square where the parade is held, at a 
short distance from the citadel ; the which is a 
square of 200 feet front. In the n. part, during 
the possession of the French, was the governor s 
house and the church ; and the other sides were 
occupied by casemates bomb-proof, wherein the 
women and children lay in security in time of 
war. 

The city is about half a mile in circuit. The 
port, at the narrowest part, is a mile wide from 
n. w. to s. e. and six miles from n. e. to s. w. In 
the n. e. part is a good place for careening vessels, 
as these may here lie perfectly secure and sheltered 
from wind : and in the n. part, where the fishery 
is carried on, 2000 vessels may lie close to the 
land. In the winter it is impassable from the in 
tense frost : this season begins in November, and 
lasts till May and June. Sometimes the frosts set 
in earlier, and are very strong, as was that of the 
year 1745, when in the middle of October a great 
part of the port was already frozen. The princi 
pal, if not the only commerce of Louisbourg, is the 
cod-fishery ; and from this the inhabitants derive 
great emolument, as the cod caught here are finer 
than any of these seas. 

The inhabitants deposit their stores in large ma 
gazines, some of which are within the fort, and 
others on the sea-shore ; though some keep their 
goods aboard their fishing vessels. An inhabitant 
will be master of 40 or 50 of these barks, with three 
or four men to each ; and to these, besides wages, 
he is obliged to give a certain portion of the fish 
caught. Thus there is always a great supply on 
hand, and ready to export by the vessels arriving 
from most of the French ports, who here leave in 
exchange other kinds of food and necessaries ; 
though some of the inhabitants make shipments 
on their own account to Europe. 

Vessels also arrive here to take aboard this fish 
from, the French colonies of St. Domingo and 



Martinique, bartering for it sugar, tobacco, coffee, 
rum, &amp;c. What remains is sent to Canada, in 
exchange for skins of castor and other animals. 
This was not the only port in which the French 
laded with cod, for many vessels proceeded to the 
. coast and the banks of Newfoundland. Besides 
the inhabitants of Louisbourg, there are great 
numbers of French established on the coasts of the 
neighbouring islands, particularly that of St. John, 
where, besides their dwellings, they have store 
houses and piles of fish : these having found this 
trade more lucrative and less hazardous than the 
pursuits of agriculture ; inasmuch as, in the winter, 
the ground is constantly covered with snow ; some 
times three and four feet deep, and which does not 
disappear till the summer has well entered ; it 
being evident that there is thus scarce time for the 
fruits to ripen. Louisbourg is in lat. 45 57 n. 
Long. 59 54 w. 

[LOUISBURGH, in Pennsylvania. See HAH- 

RISBURG.1 

[LOUISIADE, Land of, discovered and named 
by Bougainville in 1769, is probably a chain of 
islands, forming as.e. continuation of New Guinea. 
The coast seen by the Dutch Geelwink yacht, in 
1705, is a small distance n. of Louisiade.J 

[LOUISIANA, a Spanish province of N.Ame 
rica ; bounded e. by the Mississippi, s. by the 
gulf of Mexico, w. by New Mexico, and n. by 
undefined boundaries. Both sides of the Missis 
sippi were under the French government till the 
peace of 1762, when the e. side was ceded to the 
king of Great Britain ; and the day before the pre 
liminaries of peace were signed, his Christian Ma 
jesty ceded to Spain all his territories to the w. of 
the Mississippi, together with the town of New 
Orleans ; with a stipulation that the French laws 
and usages should not be altered : this precaution, 
however, proved afterwards of no avail. 

Louisiana is intersected by a number of fine ri 
vers, among which are St. Francis, the Natch ito- 
ches, the Adayes or Mexicano river, the Mis&amp;ouri, 
Rouge, Noir, and many others, which are described 
under their respective names. The greater part of 
the white inhabitants are Roman Catholics. The 
quantity of good land on the Mississippi and its 
branches, from the bay of Mexico to Ohio river, a 
distance of nearly 1000 miles, is very great ; but 
that in the neighbourhood of the Natchez, and of 
the river Yazoo, is the flower of it all. There 
have been some plantations of sugar-canes ; but it 
is not a crop to be depended upon, as the frost has 
sometimes been too powerful for that plant. The 
chief articles of exportation are indigo, cotton, 
rice, beans, myrtle, wax, and lumber. 



LOU 

The climate is said to be favourable for health, 
and to the culture of fruits of various kinds, and 
particularly for garden vegetables. Iron and 
lead mines, and salt springs, it is asserted, are 
found in such plenty as to afford an abundant sup 
ply of these necessary articles. The banks of the 
Mississippi, for many leagues in extent, commenc 
ing about 20 miles above the mouth of Ohio, are a 
continued chain of lime-stone. A fine tract of 
high, rich, level land, s, w. t w. , and n.w. of 
New Madrid, about 25 miles wide, extends quite 
to the river St. Francis. 

While the United States were engaged in the 
revolution war against England, the Spaniards at 
tacked and possessed themselves of all the English 
posts and settlements on the Mississippi, from the 
Ibberville up to the Yazoo river, including the 
Natchez country; and by virtue of this conquest 
have since peopled and governed an extent 3 n. 
of the United States s. boundary, claiming the 
exclusive navigation of the other. This business 
was amicably settled by the treaty of 1796. 

The Mississippi, on which the fine country of 
Louisiana is situated, was first discovered by Fer 
dinand dc Soto in 1541. Monsieur de la Salle 
was the first who traversed it: he, in the year 
1682, having passed down to the mouth of the 
Mississippi, and surveyed the adjacent country, 
returned to Canada, from whence he took passage 
to France. From the flattering accounts which he 
gave of the country, and the consequent advan 
tages that would accrue from settling a colony in 
those parts, Louis XIV. was induced to establish 
a company for the purpose. Accordingly, a 
squadron of four vessels, amply provided with men 
and provisions, under the command of Monsieur 
de la Salle, embarked with an intention to settle 
near the mouth of the Mississippi : but he unin 
tentionally sailed a hundred leagues to the w. of it, 
where he attempted to establish a colony ; but, 
through the unfavourableness of the climate, most 
of his men miserably perished, and he himself was 
villanously murdered, not long after, by two of 
his own men. Monsieur Ibberville succeeded him 
in his laudable attempts. He, after two successful 
voyages, died while preparing for a third. Cro- 
zat succeeded him; and in 1712, the king gave 
him Louisiana. This grant continued but a short 
lime after the death of Louis XIV. In 1763, 
Louisiana was ceded to the king of Spain ; and 
since 1803, a part of it has formed one of the ter 
ritorial governments of the United States; the po 
pulation of which, according to the census of 1810, 
amounted to 20,815 souls. 

The following is Melford s account of the Spa- 



L O U 



399 



350 
150- 
200 
100 



nish strength in the Floridas and Louisiana, in 

1790: 

Provincial levies and troops at St. Augustine, 

and on St. John s river, 
The garrison at St. Mark s, 

Do. at Pensacola, - 

Do. Mobile and Tombigbee, 

Do. at the Natchez, 

Do. Red river, w. of Mississippi, 

Do. in the Illinois country, 

1600 
men, called the Orleans or Louisiana regiment. 

All the Spanish settlers in these districts are 
under the immediate orders of the military com 
mandants, and subject to martial law, with an 
appeal from stage to stage, up to the viceroy of 
Mexico. The property of the subject, at his 
decease, is to be managed by the commandant, 
whose fees are settled by law, and amount to 25 
per cent.] 

[LOU1STOWN, in Talbot county, Mary 
land, lies on the w. side of Tuckahoe creek, about 
four miles n. of King s town, and seven or eight 
n. e. of Easton.J 

[LOUISVILLE, a port of entry and post- 
town of Kentucky, and chief of Jefferson county, 
pleasantly situated on the e. side of the Ohio, on 
an elevated plain, at the Rapids, nearly opposite 
fort Fenny. It commands a delightful prospect 
of the river and the adjacent country, and pro 
mises to be a place of great trade ; but its un- 
healthiness, owing to stagnated waters back of the 
town, has considerably retarded its growth. It 
consists of three principal streets, and contains 
about 100 houses, a court-house, and gaol. It is 
20 miles from Bairdstown, 43 from Danville, and 
28 w. of Frankfort. See OHIO.] 

[LOUISVILLE, the present seat of government 
of Georgia, situated in Burke county, in the lower 
district of the state, on the n. f. bank of the Great 
Ogeechee river. It has been lately laid out, and 
contains a state-house, a tobacco warehouse, and 
about 30 dwelling-houses. Large quantities of 
tobacco are inspected here, and boated down to 
Savannah. The convention for the revisal of the 
constitution sat in this town in May 1795, and 
appointed the records to be removed, and the legis 
lature to meet here in future. A college, with 
ample and liberal endowments, is instituted here. 
It is 50 miles s. w. of Augusta, and 100 n. w. of 
Savannah.] 

LOOP, a bay on the coast of the country of 
Labrador and straits of Belieisle. 

LOUPS, Islands of the, irear the coast of Nova 



400 



LOW 



Scotia, at the entrance of the great bay Francesa, 
opposite the point of Sable. They are five, lying- 
in the space of two leagues and an half, two of 
them being larger than the rest, and the largest 
about a league long. The particular names given 
them by the Indians are, Great Island, Mem- 
kechkaoveck, Chibiamkek, Concheacadia, and 
thePlana, which is the smallest. In all of these 
are abundance of marine wolves ; and they are 
five leagues from the aforesaid cape. 

LOUPS, some other islands near the w. coast of 
Cape Britain, in the gulf of St. Lawrence. 

Lonps, another, a small island of the N. sea, 
near the n. w. coast of Guadalupe. 

LOUPS, a river of New France or Canada, 
which runso). then turns its course tow. and enters 
the St. .Lawrence, opposite the island Rouge. 

[LOUSA CHITTO River runs a s. w. course 
in the Georgia w. lands, and joins the Missis 
sippi just below the Walnut hills, and 10 miles 
from Stoney river. It is 30 yards wide at its 
mouth ; but after you enter it, is from 30 to 40 
yards, and is said to be navigable for canoes 30 or 
40 leagues. It is 39% miles below the Yazoo 
cliffs.] 

LOU VET, a settlement and parish of the 
French, in the island of St. Christopher, one of 
the Antilles ; situate on the n. w. coast, possessed 
by the English before the cession of the whole 
island. It is between Sable point and Papillons 
bay, on the shore of a bay of the same name as 
itself. 

[LOVE Cove, a fine opening to the w. of 
Whale cove, in New N. Wales.] 

LOVE Cove, an opening of the coast of the 
country of New Wales in N. America, and thought 
to be a communication or pass to enter the S. sea. 

[LOVELL S Pond, in New Hampshire, lies 
at the head of the e. branch of Salmon Fall river.] 

LOVERNOLFLOCK, a county of the pro- 
yince and colony of Virginia. 

[LOWER ALLOWAY S Creek, a township in 
Salem county, New Jersey.] 

[LOWER DUBLIN, a township in Philadelphia 
county, Pennsylvania.] 

[LOWER MILFORD, a township in Buck s 
county, Pennsylvania.] 

[LOWER MARLBOROUGH, a post-town in 
Maryland, 18 miles from Annapolis, and 12 from 
Calvert court-house.] 

[LOWER PENN S Neck, a township in Salem 
county, New Jersey.] 

[LOWER WEAU Towns, in the territory n. w. 
of the Ohio, lie 20 miles below Rippacanoe creek, 
at its mouth in Wabash river.] 



L O X 

[LOWHILL, a township in Northampton 
county, Pennsylvania.] 

LOXA, a province and corregiinienlo of Quito, 
bounded n. by the province of Guayaquil, s. by 
that of Yagnarsongo, e. by that of Jaen, and a?, 
by the city Zamora. it is of a benign and healthy 
temperature, and fertile in all kinds of grain, 
fruits, and cattle; the grain being in such abun 
dance that much more is carried away by the 
floods than is consumed by the people, the inha 
bitants. Its particular cattle are cows and mules, 
of which great numbers are taken for the supply 
of the other provinces, even as far as Quito. Its 
principal commerce is in woven stuffs of cotton 
and wool, of which there are many fabrics ; also 
in carpets, which have a peculiar estimation. 

In this province they gather abundant supplies 
of cochineal, which the natives employ for dyeing 
their fabrics, selling to the province of Cuenca the 
surplus. Here also, in the city of Zaruma, some 
gold mines are worked, although of very bad 
alloy, as the metal does not exceed 14 carats; so 
that it is only fit for making common utensils, such 
as buckles, relic-cases, and snuff-boxes ; and 
without these few persons are to be seen, however 
poor their circumstances. 

The principal source of riches in this country is 
the bark, called here cascarilla deLoxa, which is 
not found elsewhere : it is in quantity sufficient for 
the demands of the whole world, and it is indeed an 
article of commerce exported to all nations. Al 
though it is the opinion of some writers that the 
Indians knew its virtue in fevers, and that they 
actually used it in like circumstances, it is certain 
that it was never in great repute here till the year 
1730, it being thought that the bark of Europe 
and other parts was most efficacious in dyeing, this 
being the way in which the bark of this place was 
employed. As soon, however, as its worth was 
known, its cultivation became more important ; 
and some time after Mr. Jusieu, professor of 
botany, and who had passed over to Peru, in 
company with the academicians of the sciences at 
Paris, visited Loxa, and taught the natives the 
mode of gathering it, of using it, of making ex 
tract from it, how to distinguish its qualities, and 
many other operations equally curious as useful. 
The vast mountains on which this tree grows be 
gin 10 leagues before you arrive at the llano of 
Cuzibamba, and reach as far as the province 
of Yaguarsono, a distance of upwards of 70 
leagues. 

The corregidor enjoys at the same time the title 
of governor of this province, and the alcaldia mayor 
of the mines of Zaruma. Its jurisdiction com- 



L O Y 

prebends the 14 following settlements, of which 
the city of its name is the capital : 
Saraguro and Ona, Zo/oranga, 

San Juan del Valle, El Cizne, 

Zaruma, Dominguillo, 

Yuluc, Catacocha, 

Guanchanama, Malacatos, 

Gonzanama, San Pedro del Valle, 

Cariamanga, San Lucas de Ambocas. 

The capital stands in a beautiful and extensive 
valley, which they call Cuzibamba, and was 
founded by Captain AlonsodeMercadillo, in 1546, 
between two rivers which flow down from the cor- 
dilkra Nevada, with the names of Pulacu and 
Guacamana, and which, aiUr watering and fer 
tilizing the valley, unite at a small distance, in a 
spot called, from this circumstance, De las Jun 
tas. It stood formerly in the llanura of Canga- 
chamba, and was called Zarga, from whence it 
was translated to the spot where it now is. Its 
temperature is hot, though not in the extreme, 
and it is healthy, and of a territory of such fertility 
that, not having a population equal to its pro 
ductions, great part of its fruits are constantly 
lost. 

It has two parishes, three convents of the fol 
lowing religious orders: St. Francisco, St. Do 
mingo, and La Merced ; and it had also a college 
of the Jesuits, and an hospital. It has suffered 
much from the earthquakes which it has expe 
rienced, and by which it has been brought to a state 
of great dilapidation, so as to be abandoned by many 
noble families ; and, although there be some still 
remaining, its population consists of only 10,000 
souls of all ages and sexes, including Musttcs, 
Mulattoes, and people of colour. Two hundred 
and thirty-seven miles from Quito, in lat. 3 59 
s. and long. 79 15 w. 

[LOVALSOCK Creek, in Northumberland 
county, Pennsylvania, empties into the w. side of 
the branch of Susquehannah river, from the n. e. a 
few miles e. of Lycoming creek, 26 from Sunbury, 
measuring in a straight line, and about 170 from 
Philadelphia. The lands from this to Sunbury are 
among the highest and of the best quality, and in 
the healthiest situation in the state. It is navi 
gable 20 or SO miles up for batteaux of 10 tons.] 

LOYOLA, SAN Luis DE, or DE LA PIJNTA, 
a city, the capital of the province and corrcgi- 
miento of Cuyo or Mendoza in the kingdom of 
Chile, founded in 1579 by the governor D. Mar 
tin Garcia Onez de Loyola, who gave it his name. 
It is small and poor, and of a cold temperature. 
It has, besides the parish church, a convent of the 
religious of St. Domingo, and had a college 

VOL. II, 



LUC 



401 



which belonged to the Jesuits. It was destroyed 
and laid waste by the Araucanos Indians in 1599, 
when the same misfortune happened to six other 
cities of this kingdom. It is the first of all, and 
consequently that in which is arranged the recep 
tion of the presidents, against their arrival from 
Peru. One hundred and sixty-six miles e. of the 
capital of the kingdom ; in lat. 33 IS s. and long. 
65 44 a?. 

LOYOLA, another city, of the province and 
government of Jaen de Bracamoros or Yaguar- 
songo in the kingdom of Quito, with the dedi 
catory title of Santa Cruz, and near the Chumbi- 
namas Indians, founded by Juan de Salinas in. 
1542, and now nearly depopulated. It is small 
and poor, and little else than a village, contains 
a few families of Spaniards, the rest of its popu 
lation being people of colour. It stands on the 
shore of the river Veriel, which laves it on the n. 
is of an hot temperature, and has in its district 
some mines of gold, but of very bad alloy. Thir 
teen miles s. e. of Valladolid, in lat. 4 45 *. 

LOYOLA, a settlement of the French, in the 
island of Cayenne, near the sea-coast, on the top 
of a mountain. 

LUANCO, a settlement of Indians, of the pro 
vince and correg imienio of Vilcas Huarnan in 
Peru ; annexed to the curacy of Zancos. 

LUCANAS, a province and corregimiento of 
Peru, bounded n. and n. w. by the province of 
Castro Virreyna, e. and s. e. by that of Parina- 
cochas, n. e. by that of Vilcas Huaman arid Au- 
dahuailas, s. w. and w. by that of Camana. It is 
60 leagues long and 30 wide, and in some parts 
it is as narrow as 12. Its situation is amongst 
spiring rocks of the cordillera, with very few llanos, 
and even these extremely small. The tempera 
ture is that of the sierra, cold throughout the 
year; and thus are its vegetable productions re 
duced to papas y oca?, wheat, barley, and maize ; 
also in some of the ravines grow seeds and pas 
tures, especially in those which look towards Ca 
mana, where they cultivate some fruit trees, such 
as peaches, figs, apples, and others ; though with, 
all this they are forced to supply themselves with 
all necessaries, except meat, from the other pro 
vinces, for the subsistence of the people labouring 
in the mines ; nor is even the cattle here in such 
abundance as in the other provinces. 

Close to the settlement of Larcay, of the curacy 
of Soras, is a stream of hot medicinal water, the 
heat of which is excessive. There are not in this 
province other estates of consideration than those 
in which they grind the metals of silver. It is this 
alone which causes this province to keep up a kind 
3 F 



402 



LUC 



of trade with the rest ; and but for it, its popula 
tion would soon dwindle to nothing; nor would 
those bordering upon it have wherewithal to sell 
their commodities. It has not, with the exception 
of some streams, anymore than one large river, 
which incorporates itself with that of Vilcas Huu- 
man, and in it (hey catch some trout. 

In short, what gives the whole existence to this 
province, are its silver mines, the winch are near 
the settlement of San Juan, annexed to (he curacy 
of Lucanas. The principal veins which have 
been discovered are iO ; and some of these have 
been worked to the depth of 50, and others 80 
fathom. These metals are prepared by quick 
silver and salt, with (he aid of copper, which they 
here call colpa. This method was discovered by 
Don Lorenzo de la Torre, who was master of the 
principal veins ; and the same practice has been 
adopted at many other mines in the kingdom, 
where the metal is found to be of a nature similar, 
or little differing. What these mines produce 
yearly amounts to from 20 to 25,000 marks of 
silver ; and the vein which at the most does not 
yield more than eight marks a caxon. and that 
which at the least yields four marks, Avould pro 
duce much more if they had but people sufficient 
to work them : but in this province there are few 
Indians fit for the purpose; and, including the 
Spaniards and Mustees engaged in mining, the 
persons employed scarcely exceed 10,000 of all 
classes. 

Its corregidor had a repartimiento of 124,200 
dollars, and it paid an alccrcala of 4968 dollars 
yearly. The capital is the settlement of the same 
name, in lat. 14 58 s. and the others contained 
in its jurisdiction are the following : 
Lucanas, San Juan, 

O(oca, San Christoval, 

Laramate, Visca, 

Pucquin, Acola, 

Paraisaucos, Ulec, 

Cabana, Huaicahuacho, 

Abucara, Ishita, 

Sorac, Chacralla, 

Huacaiia, Poma, 

Concepcion de Caxa, Chilcayo, 
Sondondo, Chalcos, 

Audamarcas, Urcusa, 

Matara, Palco, 

Paucara, Concepcion, 

l?elcn, Ocaua, 

Palco, Flauta, 

Querobamba, Carhuacucho, 

Cahuanca, Iluacas, 

Chipau, Santa Lucia, 



LUC 

Vechuitambo, San Andres, 

Pambamarca, Chilquez, 

Carcay, Santa Cruz, 

Chischama, San Pedro, 

Quixe, Santa Ana, 

Mayobamba, Chavina, 

Cueca, Parco, 

Huallluia, Morocolla, 

Tarn l)o Quemado, Tentay. 

Vechuirnanca, 

[LUGAR, Fort, ST. lies on the n. e. coast of 
Brazil, about half-way between the city of Scara 
and Rio Grande.] 

[LucAR, Cape, ST. or LUCAS. The s. e. end 
of the peninsula of California is so named.] 

LUCAS, S. EVANGELISTA, a settlement of the 
head settlement of the district of Tenanzingo, and 
alcaldia mayor of Marinalco, in Nueva Espana ; 
annexed to the curacy of the former. It contains 
24 families of Indians, who trade in wheat, of 
which the crops are very great. At the distance 
of three quarters of a league is award of a very 
hot temperature, with seven families of Indians, 
situate in some lofty plains. Haifa league s. e. of 
its head settlement. 

LUCAS, another settlement, in the head settle 
ment of the district and alcaldia mayor ofTochi- 
milco in the same kingdom ; situate on the top of 
a mountain, although barren, of a very benign, 
temperature; and on the skirts of it grow wheat, 
maize, and much wild cochineal. It contains 40 
families of Indians, and is a quarter of a league 
from the settlement oflluilango, and a little fur 
ther from the capital. 

LUCAS, another, of the head settlement of the 
district of S. Francisco del Valle, and alcaldia 
mayor of Zultepec, in the same kingdom ; situate 
in a spacious and pleasant valley, but of a cold 
temperature ; annexed to the curacy of its capital, 
and containing 90 families of Indians. Three 
leagues n. e. of its head settlement. 

LUCAS, another, of the head settlement of the 
district of Texupilco, of (he same alcaldia mayor 
and kingdom as the former, on the top of a moun 
tain, and containing 84 families of Indians. Three 
leagues n. of its head settlement. 

LUCAS, another, a small ward of the head set 
tlement of Mistepec, and alcaldia mayor of Ixt- 
lahuaca, in the same kingdom. 

LUCAS, another, of the head settlement of Co- 
ronan^o, and alcaldia mayor of Cholula, in the 
same kingdom. It contains 13 families of Indians, 
and is one league n. of its capital. 

LUCAS, another, of the head settlement of 
Taximaroa, and alcaldia mayor of Maravatio, in 



LUC 

the same kingdom. It contains 22 families of In 
dians, and is two leagues w. of its head settle 
ment. 

LUCAS, another, of the head settlement and 
alcaldia mayor of Guimeo in the same kingdom. 
It contains 72 families of Indians, and is annexed 
to the curacy of Pungaravato. 

LUCAS, another, of the head settlement of Hue- 
huetlan, and alcaldia mayor of Cuicatlan, in the 
same kingdom ; annexed to the curacy of that head 
settlement, of a cold and moist temperature. It con 
tains 90 families of Indians, employed in the cul 
tivation and commerce of salt-petre and cochi 
neal. Two leagues s. of its head settlement. 

LUCAS, another, of the head settlement and 
alcaldia mayor of Inchipila in the same kingdom; 
situate four leagues from Atemanica, to the curacy 
of which it belongs. 

LUCAS, another, of the missions which were 
held by the Jesuits, in the province of Nayarith, 
and kingdom of Nueva Galicia. Twelve leagues 
n. n. e. of the settlement of La Mesa. 

LUCAS, another, of the province and govern 
ment of Costarica in the kingdom of Guatemala, 
on the coast of the S. sea, on the shore of the river 
Solano. 

LUCAS, another, of the province and alcaldia 
mayor of Chiapa in the kingdom of Guatemala. 

LUCAS, another, which is a parish of the Eng 
lish, in the island of Barbadocs. 

[LucAS, or LUQUE, a parish of the province 
and government of Paraguay ; situate on the e. 
bank of the Paraguay, about six miles n. e. from 
Asuncion, in laf. 25 15 30" s. and long. 57 32 
19" a&amp;gt;.] 

LUCAS, a port on the coast of the province 
and government of Cinaloa. It is large and con 
venient, in the gulf of California or Mar Roxo de 
Cortes, has an island at its mouth which defends 
it, and lies between the rivers of Fuerte and 
Mayo. 

LUCAS, a cape, point, or extremity of land of 
the coast of the province of California. It is the 
signal or mark by which vessels discover land on 
sailing from the Philippins to Nueva Espana, and 
it also gives advice of their appearance. 

LUCAS, a very lofty mountain of the province 
and government of Frencli Guayana, at the mouth 
and on the shore of the River Oyapoco. 

LUCAYAS, some islands of the N. sea, situate 
near the tropic of Cancer, s. of Carolina, from 
22 to 27 lat. extending along the whole coast of 
Florida, as far as the island of Cuba ; following 
the chain which is prolonged by the Antilles, 



LUC 



4oa 



making a bow from the channel of Bahama as far 
as the coast of the continent of Tierra Firme. Here 
it was that the discovery of America was begun 
by the incomparable Christopher Columbus. Some 
assert that their number amounts to 500, counting 
the small isles and rocks, which are indeed the 
greater part. The principal, however, and those 
which we with propriety call islands, are 14. 
Some of these are very fertile and of a good tem 
perature, though all desert, or inhabited only by 
a few fishermen, excepting some English establish 
ments. The greater of them is that from which 
the rest all take their name : this is 70 leagues e. 
of Florida, and six from the island of Bahama. 
It is nine leagues long and two wide, in long. 78 
5 . Lat. 27 27 . 

[LUCAYONEQUE, another, of the Bahama 
isles, which lies about nine leagues further e. than 
the former, whose length is 28 leagues and breadth 
three, and lies n. and s.~\ 

[LUCEA, a harbour on the n. side of the island 
of Jamaica, situated in Hanover parish, between 
Great cove and Mosquito cove. It is land-locked, 
and has excellent anchorage ; 15 or 16 miles n. e. 
of Negril.] 

LUCERO, a river of New Mexico in North 
America. 

LUCHUTA, a well furnished fortress, which 
was held by the Indians, on the confines of the 
province of Los Panches of the Nuevo Reyno de 
Granada. It is now destroyed, and nothing but 
its ruins remain. 

LUCIA, S. thus called by the French, as 
having been discovered on the day of this saint. 
It is one of the Caribes, situate 18 miles s. of 
Martinique, and 72 n. w. of Barbadoes. It is 
nearly 24 miles long from n. to s. and 10 wide, 
and has in it several mountains, two of which be 
ing round and pointed, are called by mariners the 
Breasts of St. Lucia ; and both of them are said to 
be volcanoes. At the foot of them are some very 
good fertile plains, well irrigated, and abounding 
with large trees, the timber of which is used by 
the inhabitants of Martinique and Barbadoes for 
building houses and wind-mills. 

It produces also much cacao. The climate is 
esteemed healthy, for the mountains not being ex 
cessively lofty, they do not impede the course of 
the winds, which generally blow from the e. and 
mitigate the heat, making the climate delightful. 
It has different bays and ports very convenient, 
especially one called Carenero Chico, from which 
the French preferred this island to the rest; and 
in this likewise the English wished to build a fort, 



404 



LUC 



through its advantages of having a good bottom, 
and three places where vessels might be careened. 
In it 30 ships of the line may lie sheltered from 
hurricanes. 

[The boats of the country, which have been kept 
a long time in this harbour, have never been eaten 
by the worms ; however, they do not expect that 
this advantage will last, whatever be the cause. 
For the other harbours, the winds are always good 
to go out with, and the largest squadron might be 
in the offing in less than an hour.] 

This island has been possessed and surrendered 
several times by the English and the French, un 
til that it was settled in 1722, by the courts of 
these nations, that it should be evacuated together 
with that of St. Vincent, until that its destiny 
should be amicably determined. Shortly after 
wards, however, the English resolved to appro 
priate it to themselves, and King George I. gave 
it, together with that of St. Vincent, to the Duke 
of Montague; who, going to great expence, sent 
hither Captain Uring as governor, with people, 
arms, instruments, and other things necessary to 
the establishment of the colony. This, therefore, 
left England with a convoy of seven vessels, de 
fended by the ship of war the Winchelsea, and 
disembarked at St. Lucia ; but it was shortly after 
obliged to leave its situation, owing to the supe 
rior force of the French of Martinique, when it 
was agreed that it should be evacuated until the 
right of possession was amicably settled. Not- 



L U C 

withstanding this, the French returned to establish 
themselves ; and in the peace of Versailles of 1763, 
it was ceded to these, who have since built many 
forts for its defence. [The British made them 
selves masters of it in 1758 ; but it was restored 
again to the French in 1783, arid retaken by the 
British in 1794. St. Lucia had 900 of its inhabi 
tants destroyed by an earthquake, October 12, 
J788.] 

It is divided into nine parishes, eight being on, 
one part of the island and only one on the other ; 
this preference arising, not from any better quality 
of the soil, but from the greater convenience for 
vessels to enter and go out of port. A great road 
which surrounds the whole island, and two others 
which cross it from c. to w. facilitate the bringing 
of effects to the vessels. In 1 7G9, the free inhabi 
tants amounted to 2524, the slaves to J 0,270. It 
had 598 mules and horses, 1819 head of large 
cattle, and 2378 of smaller. Its plantations were 
reduced to 1,279,680 plants of cacao, 2,463,880 
of coffee, 681 square plots of cotton, and 254 of 
sugar-canes ; J 8 sugar-engines, and 16 which were 
being erected: and all the above producing a 
revenue of 112,000/. which has since increased to 
500,000/. 

[The official value of the imports and exports of 
St. Lucia were, in 

Imports. Exports. 

1809, ..120,431, - ..35,569, 

1810, j. 193,743, - ..43,830. 



An&amp;lt;l the quantities of the principal articles imported into Great Britain were, in 



Coffee. 


Sugar. 


Rum. 


Cotton Wool. 


Brit. Plant. 


For. Plant. 


Brit. Plant. 


For. Plant. 


Cwt. 


Cwt. 


Cwt. 


Cut. 


Galls. 


JAs. 


1809, 7,993 
li!JO, 10,011 





1,789 

86,755 


14 


21, (532 
11,416 


114,839 
1*7,009 



It is 63 miles w. zo. of Barbadoes. Lat. 14 n. 
Long. 61 ?0.] 

LUCIA, S. a settlement of the province and go 
vernment of Venezuela, e. of the town of Victoria, 
one of the missions of Barinas, held by the religious 
of St. Domingo. 

LUCIA, S. another, of the missions which were 
held by the Jesuits, in the province of Topia, and 
"kingdom of Nueva Vizcaya, on the shore of 
the river Fiastla, in the middle of the sierra of 
Topia. 

LUCIA, S. another, of the province and govern 
ment of Buenos Ay res, [on the e. bank of the Pa 



rana, about 80 miles s. w. of Corrientes, in lat. 
28 59 30" s. Long. 58 58 2" w. ] 

[LuciA, S. a town of the province and govern 
ment of Buenos Ayres; situate on the river St. 
Lucia, about 30 miles n. of Monte V ideo. Lat. 
34 30 35". Long. 56 20 4 1".] 

LUCIA, S. another, of the district of Daule in 
the province and government of Guayaquil, and 
kingdom of Quito, abounding in cacao, tobacco, 
cotton, and sugar-cane. 

LUCIA, S. another, of the province and corr-e- 
ginriento of Qnispicanchi in Peru ; annexed to the 
curacy of Pamacanchi. 



LUG 

LUCIA, S. another, of the province and corrc- 
giniiento of Sana in the same kingdom. 

LUCIA, S. another, of (lie province and corre- 
gim iento of Oinasuyos in the same kingdom; an 
nexed to the curacy of Ancoraimes. 

LUCIA, S. another, of the province and corre- 
gimiento of Lucanas in the same kingdom ; an 
nexed to the curacy of Saizn. 

LUCIA, S. another, of the province and rorre- 
-gimiento of Potosi in the same kingdom ; annexed 
to the curacy of Tarapaya. 

LueiA,S. another, of the head settlement of 
the district of Ciiilapa, and alcaldia mayor of 
Quatro Villas, in Nueva Espana. It contains 24 
families of Indians, employed in the cultivation 
and commerce of cochineal, seeds, fruit, and 
coal, and cutting of wood. Half a league from 
its head settlement. 

LUCIA, S. another, of the head settlement of 
the district of Tcpacaltepec, and alcaldia mayor 
of Nexapa, in the same kingdom as the former. 
It contains 107 families of Indians, and is one 
league s. of its head settlement. 

LUCIA, S. a large river of the province and 
government of Buenos Ayres in Peru, which runs 
s. unites itself with the San Joseph, and enters the 
Plata, by the side of Monte Video. 

LUCIA, S. another, of the kingdom of Brazil, 
which rises in the sierra Grande, runs n. n. e. 
and enters the Tocantines, between that of Capo- 
tera and that of Los Monges. 

LUCIA, S. another, of the province and go 
vernment of Maracaibo, which rises e. of the city 
of Barinas Nueva, and enters the Apure. 

[LuciA, S. another, of E. Florida, runs s. e. 
along the the e. side of the peninsula, and com 
municates inland with Indian river. It has six 
feet water as far as the Tortolas, where are hilly 
know Is. A branch joins it from the s.] 

LUCIA, S. another, a small river, of the king 
dom of Brazil, which runs e. and enters the To 
cantines, between the river Maguez and the real of 
LaAsuncion. 

LUCIA, S. another, of the province and go 
vernment of Buenos Ayres, called also De los 
Astores. It runs constantly nearly due s. and 
enters the Paraguay, close to the town of its name. 

LUCIA, S. another, a small river of the same 
province and kingdom as the former. It runs 
also s. and enters the Sanla Lucia Grande, which 
has this latter title to distinguish it from this river. 

LUCIA, S. a cape or point of land on the e. 
coast of the province and government of Florida 
and channel of Bahama. 

LUCMA, a settlement of the province and 



L U [ 



405 



corregimicnlo of Caxamarca in Peru, on the shore 
of the river Chicama. 

LUCMA, another settlement, in the province 
and corregimienlo of Guamachuco in the same. 
kingdom. 

LUCMA, another, with the dedicatory title of 
Sari Juan, in the province and corregimiento of 
Calca and Lares, in the same kingdom as the 
former ; annexed to the curacy of V ilcabamba. 

LUCUE, a settlement of the province and ror- 
regimicnlo of Aimaraes in Peru; annexed to the 
curacy of Colcubamba. 

LUCUCHANGA, a settlement of the same 
province, corregimiento, and kingdom as the 
former; annexed to the curacy of liuancarama in 
the province of Andahuailas, belonging to the 
bishopric of Guamanga. 

LUCUCHE, a river of the district of Guada- 
labqucn, and kingdom of Chile, which runs 5. and 
enters the Valdivia. 

LUDLEY, a small island of the N. sen, near 
the coast of New Jersey, between the islands 
Seven Miles and Pecks. 

[LUDLOW, a township in Hampshire county, 
Massachusetts, s. of Granby, 10 miles n. e. of 
Springfield, and 65 w. of Boston. It was incor 
porated in 1784, and contains 560 inhabitants.] 

[LUDLOW, a township on Black river, Wind 
sor county, Vermont. It contains 179 inhabitants, 
and is about 10 or 12 miles a\ of Weatherstield, 
on Connecticut river.] 

[LUE, ST. the chief town of the province of 
Petaguci, in the n. division of Brazil.] 

LUENGO DIEGO, or *CAYO LUENGO, an 
island of the N. sea, between those of Los Caicos 
and that of La Panuelo Quadrado. 

LU1EME, a small river of the province and 
government of Guayana or Nueva Aridalucia, one 
of those which enter the Orino o by the e. side, 
between the settlement of Urana and that of En- 
caramada. 

LU1PAI, a settlement of Indians, of the island of 
Laxa in the kingdom of Chile, on the shore of the 
river Biobio, between this and that of Buren. 

LUIS, S. a settlement of the province and 
corregiimento of Iliobamba in the kingdom of 
Quito. 

Luis, S. another, with the surname of Gonzaga, 
of the missions which were held by the Jesuits in 
the province and government of Mainas, of the 
kingdom of Quito. 

Luis, S. another, in the province and govern 
ment of Moxos of the same kingdom, which was 
entirely desolated by an epidemic. 

j S. another, with the surname De la Costa, 



406 



L U I 



the head settlement of the district of the alcaldia 
mayor of Tlapa in Nueva Espana ; of an hot 
temperature; situate near the coast of the S. sea. 
It contains 100 families of Spaniards, Mustees, 
and Mulattoes., and 39 of Misiecos Indians. Its 
principal commerce is reduced to rice, which is 
yielded in abundance throughout all its territory, 
and with which it supplies many provinces. Six 
teen leagues from its head settlement. 

Luis, S. another, of the head settlement of the 
district of Tlacotepec, and alcaldia mayor of Te- 
peaca, in the same kingdom. It contains 103 fa 
milies of Indians, and is three leagues from its head 
settlement. 

Luis, S. another, of the head settlement of the 
alcaldia mayor of Tecali in the same kingdom ; 
containing 36 families of Indians. 

Luis, S. another, of the head settlement and 
alcaldia mayor of Cholula in the same kingdom. 
It contains 77 families of Indians, and is a little 
more than half a league n. of its capital. 

Luis, S. another, of the head settlement of the 
district of Juquila, and alcaldia mayor of Xi- 
cayan, in the same kingdom. It contains 40 fa 
milies of Indians, and is 28 leagues to the w. with 
an inclination to the n. of its capital. 

Luis, S. another, of the head settlement of 
Mitla, and alcaldia mayor of Teutitlan, in the same 
kingdom. It contains 30 families of Indians, and 
is of a cold and moist temperature; a little more 
than four leagues from its head settlement. 

Luis, S. another, which is a head settlement of 
the district, of the alcaldia mayor of Tequepexpa, 
in the same kingdom. It contains 25 families of 
Indians, dedicated to the cultivation of its lands ; 
in the fruits of which they trade. 

Luis, S. another, of the head settlement of the 
district of Chapala, and alcaldia mayor of Zayula, 
in the same kingdom ; situate s. of the Great lake 
or sea of Chapala. It contains 56 families of In 
dians, who trafh c, by their canoes, in fish, which 
they carry to the other settlements. In its district 
are abundance of seeds and fruits, and it is very 
pleasant. 

Luis, S. another, of the head settlement of the 
district and alcaldia mayor of Caxititlan in 
the same kingdom. It is one league distant to 
the 5. of its head settlement. 

Luis, S. another, of the head settlement and 
alcaldia mayor of La Barca in the kingdom of 
Nueva Galicia, very close to its capital. 

Luis,S. another, with the surname of Gonzaga, 
of the missions which were held by the Jesuits in 
California ; situate near a river, ia the bay of Mag- 
dalena. 



Luis, S. another, of the province of Venezuela, 
and government of Maracaibo. 

Luis, S. another, of the province and govern 
ment of Venezuela, at the head of the river Seco, 
to the s. one quarter e. of the city of Coro. 

Luis, S. another, of the province and govern 
ment of Moxos in the kingdom of Quito, on the 
shore of the river Cobitu, above the settlement of 
San Joseph. 

Luis, S. another, of the province and govern 
ment of Sonora, in the country and territory of the 
Sobaipuris Indians, on the shore of a river, and 
near the real of mines of San Felipe de Guebavi. 

Luis, S. another, the capital of the Malvine or 
Falkland isles, founded in 1763 by the naval 
captain Don Luis de Bouganville, with a castle 
for its defence, and which is of the same name ; 
on the shore of a good port within the bay, in the 
greater of the two largest islands. 

Luis, S. another, of the French, in the province 
and government of Cayenne, on the shore of the 
river Oyapoco. 

Luis, S. another, of the province and kingdom 
of Guatemala. 

Luis, S. another, of the missions which were 
held by the Jesuits, in the province and govern 
ment of Paraguay, on the shore of the river Pi- 
ratini. 

[Luis, S. another, of Indians, of the province 
and government of Buenos Ayres ; situate between 
two small rivers, running into the river Piratiny, 
about 15 miles s. e. of San Nicholas. Lat. 28 25 
6"*. Long. 55 2 14" w.] 

Luis, S. another, which is a parish of the 
French, in the part they possess in the island of 
St. Domingo, on the n. coast; between the bay of 
Marquis and the river St. Anne. 

Luis, S. a city of the same island as the former 
settlement, in the part possessed by the French. 
It is on the s. coast, at the w. head, on the shore 
of a great port, between the bay of Sail Jorge and 
that of Los Flamencos. 

Luis, S. another settlement, of the province of 
Barcelona, and government of Cumana ; on the 
shore of the river Arivi, to the e. of the city of 
San Fernando. 

Luis, S. another, called Portal de San Luis, a 
village of the Portuguese, in the kingdom of Brazil; 
situate on the e. shore of the river Tocantines, in 
which rhumb are the great gold mines of La 
Navidad. 

Luis, S. a bay on the coast of the gulf of Cali 
fornia. In the interior part it is much confined, 
but is convenient and safe. It is opposite the head 
of the island of the Angel de la Guardia. 



L U L 

Luis, S. a lake in the province and government 
of Mainas, and kingdom of Quito; near the shore 
of the river Amazonas, between those of Charn- 
bira and Tigre. 

Luis, S. a cape or point of land on the s, 
coast of the straits of Magellan, the extremity 
which looks to the w. of the island of Luis el 
Grande. 

Luis, S. another bny, of the coast of the pro 
vince and government of Louisiana, between the 
rivers l j ascagulas and Las Perlas. 

Luis, S. a river, with the surname of Pereyra, 
in the province and government of Buenos Ayres. 
It runs s. and enters the river La Plata, on the side 
of that of San Joseph. 

Luis, S. an island, with the surname of Grande, 
in the straits of Magellan ; opposite the bay of 
San Geronimo, and at the entrance of the canal of 
Santa Barbara, near the s. coast. The French, 
who arrived here by permission of the king of 
Spain, to carry on a trade on the coasts of Peru at 
the beginning of the 17th century, gave it this 
name in honour of King Louis XI V. then reigning 
in France. It is of a low territory, desert, and ex 
tending more than 1C leagues w. n. w. and e. s. e. 
in lat. 53 56 s. 

Luis, S. a small river of the kingdom of Brazil, 
which runs n. n.w. and enters the Tocantines, be 
tween the river Preto and the settlement of the 
Portal de San Luis. 

LUISA, a llanura of the island St. Domingo, 
in the part possessed by the French ; between port 
Frances and the river Limbo. 

LUISA, a river of theNuevo Reynode Granada, 
in the district and jurisdiction of the city of To- 
caima. it rises at the foot of the paramo of Ruiz, 
near the city of Ibaque, and enters the Grande of 
the Ma "da Ion a, . 

"LUISBOURG. SecLouisBouRG.] 

"LUISIANA. See LOUISIANA.] 
LUJAN, a fort of the province and govern 
ment of Buenos Ayres ; situate near the river Lu- 
jan, about 20 miles s. w. of the town. Lat. 34 
39 30". Long. 59 44 50" &amp;gt;.] 

LUKE, a settlement of the island of Barbadocs, 
in the district and parish of Todos Santos. 

[LuKE, ST. a parish in Beaufort district, S. Ca 
rolina. ] 

LULES, a barbarous nation of Indians, of the 
province and government of Tucurnau, in the pre 
cincts of the city of Salta. It is not numerous, 
and a part of it was reduced to a civilized settle 
ment by the Jesuits, by which the province was 
freed of a very troublesome set of beings. 



407 



LULES, a settlement in the same province, on tire 
shore of a stream, at a small distance s. w. of the 
capital. 

LULLIER, a fort of the province and govern 
ment of Louisiana, on the shore of the river San 
Remi, at the conflux where it is joined by the rivers 
Verde and San Pedro. 

LULU M BAM A, a settlement of the kingdom 
of Quito, in the corrfgimiento of the district of 
Las Cinco Le - uas de la Capital. 

[LUMBERTON,a post-town of N. Carolina, 
and capital of Robeson county ; situated on Drown 
ing creek, 25 miles s.. of Fayetteville, and 70 s. by 
w. of Raleigh.] 

LUMB1, a river of the province and govern 
ment of iYiariquita in the Nuevo Reyno de Gra 
nada. It rises near the settlement of Guayabal, 
and unites itself with the Guali, to enter the Grande 
de la Ma&amp;lt;rdalena. 

LUMINABO, a small island of the coast of 
Guayana, in the part possessed by the French, at 
the entrance of the river Oyapoco. 

LLMLEY, Entrance of, a gulf of the N. Main, 
in the arctic part of America. It is in the e. coast; 
situate e. of the bay called White Bear. 

LUNA, AGUAGE DE LA, a settlement of the 
province and government of Sonora ; situate near 
the settlement of Agua Escondida. 

LUNA, a river of the province and corregimiento 
of Pataz or Caxnmarquilla in Peru. It rises in the 
mountains of the Untucalis Indians, runs n. and 
enters the Guallaga. 

LUNAGUANA, a settlement of the province 
and corregintiento of Cande in Peru. Its tempe 
rature is one of the most delightful and salubrious, 
and it abounds in delicious fruits. Thirty-five 
leagues from Guancabelica. 

[LUNENBURG, a township in Essex county 
in Vermont; situated on Connecticut river, s.zo. 
of Guildhall, and n. of Concord. The river takes 
a s. e. course along these towns, separating thtm 
from Lancaster, Dalton, and Littleton, in the state 
of New Hampshire. The upper bar of the Fifteen- 
mile falls is opposite this town. The Cat-bow, a 
bend of the Connecticut, is near the middle of the 
town. The upper bar lies in lat. 44 21 30". The 
township contains 1 19 inhabitants.] 

[LUNENBURG, a township of \Vorcester county, 
Massachusetts, on an elevated situation, 25 miles 
from the Great Monadnock mountain in New 
Hampshire, 12 from \\atchusett mountain in this 
county, and 45 miles n. w. of Boston. Jt contains 
J4,OCO acres of land, on which are J300*inhabi 
tauts j and is much more remarkable for the health 



5 



L U R 

than the wealth of its possessors. The people have 
little trade or intercourse with the neighbouring 
country, and live a solitary but independent life. 
The nailing business is carried on to advantage. 
There is a hill in the middle of the township, 
called Turkey-hill, on account of the great num 
ber of wild turkeys which formerly frequented the 
place, and which denominated the whole tract pre 
vious to its incorporation in 1728 ; when its present 
name \v;is given to it, in compliment to King 
George II. who was styled Duke of Lunenburg, 
from a town in his German dominions.] 

[LUNENBURG, a township of New York ; situ 
ated in Albany county, on the w. side of Hudson s 
river, opposite to the city of Hudson, and 24 miles 
s. of Albany. It is a thriving village of about 20 
or 30 houses, chiefly new, with a neat Dutch 
church, standing on the bank of the river. A new 
road is cutting from this village into the settlements 
on the upper branches of the Delaware and Susque- 
hannah rivers, which will probably prove highly 
beneficial to the town. A number of the Messrs. 
Livingstons have purchased land in and about this 
village, to the amount of 10,000 /. and have laid 
out a regular town, which will be a rival to Kaats 
Kill, five miles zv. The site of the town is uneven, 
and not of a very good soil.] 

[LuNENBUiiG, a county of Nova Scotia, on 
Mahonc bay, on the 5. coast of the province, facing 
the Atlantic ocean. Its chief towns are New Dub 
lin, Lunenburg, Chester, and Bland ford. In Ma- 
hone bay, La Have, and Liverpool, several ships 
trade to England with timber and boards. Chester 
is settled by a few New England families and 
others. From hence to Windsor is a road the dis 
tance of 28 miles.] 

[LUNENBURG, a township in the above county; 
situated on Merliqueth or Merlinguash bay, well 
settled by a number of industrious Germans. The 
lands are good, and generally well cultivated. It 
is 38 miles s. w. by s. of Halifax, arid 27 n. by e. 
of Liverpool.] 

[LUNENBURGH, a county of Virginia, ad 
joining Nottaway, Brunswick, Mecklenburg!) , and 
Charlotte counties. It is about 30 miles long and 
20 broad, and contains 8959 inhabitants, including 
4332 slaves.] 

fLUQUE. See LUCAS.] 

LUKES, a river of the province and govern 
ment of San Juan de \6&amp; Llanos in the Nuevo 
Reyno de Granada. It runs n. and enters the 
Meta, opposite the settlement of the missions of 
S mta Teresa de Maipures, which were held by the 
Jesuits, 



L U Y 

[LU11GAN, a township in Franklin county, 
Pennsylvania.] 

LURIBAl, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Cicasica in Peru. 

LURIGANCHO, a settlement of the province 
and corregiiniento of Cercado, in the same king 
dom as the former. 

LUR1N, a settlement of the same province and 
kingdom as the former. It is very handsome, fer 
tile, and pleasant, and serves as a place of recrea 
tion to the people of Lima ; with the capital of 
which it has a great traffic. Six leagues from that 
capital. 

LURIN, a river of this province ; on the shores 
of which are to be seen the ruins of an ancient for 
tress of the Incas. 

LURUCACHI, a settlement of the province and 
corrcgimiento of Tinta in Peru. 

[LUSAN, a town of the province and govern 
ment of Buenos Ay res ; situate on the great road 
from Buenos Ayres to Cordova, and about 30 miles 
w. from the former city. Lat. 34 36 s. Long. 
59 20 30" ro.] 

LUT11, a small river of Canada, which runs 5. 
and enters lake Huron, opposite the island Manito- 
valin. 

LUTH, a fort of this province, opposite the 
shore of lake Superior, at the mouth of the river 
Bagovagache ; built to impede the navigation of 
the rivers to the bay of Hudson against the Kilis- 
tonotis Indians. 

[LUTTERELLE, an island in Machias bay, 
in the district of Maine.] 

[LUTTERLOCK, a township in Orleans 
county, in Vermont, n. of Craftsborough, Iras- 
burgh, Coventry, and Salem, which lie in aw. w.r. 
direction from this town. Hazen s road, which 
extends s. s. e. to the Oxbow on Connecticut river, 
passes through Lutterlock.] 

LUX AN, a small town of the province and go 
vernment of Buenos Ayres in Peru ; in the road 
which leads to Lima. Eighteen leagues from the 
capital. 

Lux AX, a river of this province and govern 
ment . It runs n. e, and enters the river La Plata, 
between those of Areco and Conchas. 

LUYA AND CHILLAOS, a province and corrc- 
gimiento of Peru ; bounded e. by the mountains, 
n. and n. w. by the province of Jaen, the Mara- 
rion running between, and s. e. by that of Caxa- 
marca, the same river dividing it. Its figure is 
nearly circular, as the river girts it in a direction 
from n. w, to n. e. On the e. part runs another 
great river named Uccubamba ; which rising ia 



L U Y 

the steeps of the province of Caxamarquilla, and 
becoming enlarged in that of Chachapoyas by Ihe 
Taulia and others, enters the Maranon, nearly op 
posite the port of Tomependa, of the province of 
Jaen, in the vicinity of the lofty mountains called 
Reintema, where its streams are tributary to that 
river. Also here is another great river, called Ch in 
ch ipe, which flowing down from Loxa, passes 
through the province of Jaen. This province, of 
which we treat, is equally small as poor; being 
scarcely 18 leagues long from s. e. to n. w. and 
somewhat less than eight in an opposite direction ; 
although it has, indeed, a long strip of land run 
ning into the jurisdiction of Chachapoyas, and ex 
tending s. nearly as far as that of Caxamarquilla. 

This province was erected in the time of Lope 
Garcia de Castro, governor of Peru in 1569 ; and 
was established in all form by the viceroy Don 
Francisco de Toledo in the following year. Its 
temperature is very good with respect to heat and 
cold, since in some parts the spring lasts all the 
year ; not but that there are some cold settlements, 
and amongst the rest the capital Luya, as through 
this passes a branch of the Cordillera. The climate 
is very moist in some parts bordering on the Ma 
ranon, and consequently sickly, especially in ter 
tians. It abounds greatly in vegetable produc 
tions, fruits, seeds, wheat, maize, &amp;c. ; also in 
cattle, sheep, mares, mules, horses, cows. It pro 
duces much cotton and tobacco, of which 7 to 
8000 arrobas are gathered annually ; and it yielded 
60,000 bundles before it became a part of the royal 
revenue. Here also is fabricated very white sugar, 
and they collect some cacao^ black wax, and zarza- 
parilla. In its forests grow very fine sorts of 
wood ; such as cedars, walnuts, carobs, guaj/a- 
cattes, mulberries, and in the tunal grounds some 
cochineal. 

The inhabitants, who amount to only 3500, dress 
leather to make shoes and strops, much esteemed. 
In the rivers are abundance of large and small fish 
of the most delicate kind. Amongst the particular 
productions of this province is found a bird called 
6rgano, (organ), imitating very exactly this in 
strument in its song; another called trompetero, 
(trumpeter), which, fixing its head in the ground 
and blowinjj through the upper part, gives a sound 
just like a trumpet ; monkeys of many kinds, and 
some which sleep all the day and watch all the 
night. It abounds in all kinds of snakes and rep 
tiles ; and there grows here a tree, which they call 
///, of so noxious a quality, that any one passing 
near it, immediately begins to swell, and can only 
be cured by strong caustics ; though the animals 
have an instinct teaching them to slmu it. Here 

VOL. n. 



L Y C 



409 



is likewise an herb, to which they give the name of 
aljosiichd), which being rubbed between the hands, 
and applied to the smell, is a great preservative to 
travellers both against the influence of heat and 
cold, as also of tertians in the parts which are sub 
ject to them. 

In the mountains are some mines of gold and 
silver, but none of them are worked. Its corre- 
gidor had a repaitimienlo of only 25,000 dollars, 
paying 1000 yearly. The capital is the settle 
ment of the same name ; the others of its popula 
tion are, 

Colina, Colcamar, 

Jacapatos, Balcho, 

Cosmal, Huaillabamba, 

Paclas, Jalca, 

Tambillo, Row, 

Tiapollo, Jamaica, 

Corobamba, Bagua, 

Chelel, Cheto, 

Cochaima, Soloco, 

Jucusbamba, Cumba, 

Lamur, Jamon, 

Olto, Magdalena, 

Cn mi mal Lonia. 

Chusgon, 

Of the same name is the capital of the former 
province ; and to its curacy are annexed the in 
habitants of the estates lying in the valleys of 
Tambillo and Juscubamba; both of a cold tem 
perature. In lat. 5 33 s. Long. 77 41 w. 

[LUZERNE, a large county of Pennsylvania, 
bounded ??. by Tioga county, in the state of New 
York, e. and s. e. by Northampton, w. by Ly- 
comingand Northumberland counties. It is about 
79 miles in length from n. to s. and 75 in breadth 
from e. to w. and is divided into 12 townships. 
In this county are two churches, 33 saw-mills, 24 
grist-mills, two fulling-mills, and one oil-mill. 
The number of inhabitants is 4904, including 11 
slaves. A great part of the country is barren 
where remote from rivers. It is well watered by 
the e. branch of Susquehaunah river and its tribu- 
tarievS, which furnish numerous and excellent mill- 
seats. The soil near the river is remarkably fer 
tile, producing good crops of wheat, flax, and 
hemp. The n. parts abound with pine timber and 
sugar-maple. In the townships of Wilksbarre, 
Kingston, Exeter, and Plymouth, are large beds 
of coal. Bog iron is found in several places, and 
two forges have been erected. In this county are 
many remains of ancient fortifications. They are 
of an elliptical form, and overgrown with large 
white-oak trees. Chief town, Wilksbarre.] 
[LYCOMING, a new county in the n. zv. part 
3 G 



410 



L Y N 



of Pennsylvania, bounded w. by the state of New 
York, and w. by Alleghany county.] 

[LYCOMING, a small creek which runs 5. and 
empties into the zo. branch of Susquehannab, a 
few miles w. of Loyalsock creek. See LOYAL- 
SOCK.] 

[LYCOMING, a village in Pennsylvania, 26 miles 
from Northumberland, and 54 from the Painted 
post in the state of New York.] 

[LYMAN, a township in Grafton county, New 
Hampshire; situated at the foot of a mountain on 
the e. side of Connecticut river, between Littleton 
and Bath, and seven miles zo. by n. of New Con 
cord. It was incorporated in 1761, and contains 
202 inhabitants.] 

[LYME, or LIME, a township in Grafton coun 
ty, New Hampshire ; situated on the e. side of 
Connecticut river, 12 miles above Dartmouth col 
lege. It was incorporated in 1761, and contains 
816 inhabitants.] 

[LYME, a township in New London county, 
Connecticut, the Nehantick of the Indians, is si 
tuated on the e. side of Connecticut river, at its 
mouth : bounded s. by Long island sound, n. by 
Haddam and Colchester, and e. by New London. 
It was settled about the year 1664, and was incor 
porated in May J667. It contains three parishes, 
besides a congregation of Separatists, and another 
of Baptists. In 1790, it contained 3859 inhabi 
tants.] 

[LYNCHBURG, a post-town of Virginia; si 
tuated in Bedford county, on the s. side of James 
river, nearly opposite to Maddison, and one mile 
distant. Here are about 100 houses, and a large 
warehouse for the inspection of tobacco. There 
is also a printing-office which issues a weekly 
gazette. In the vicinity of the town are several 
valuable merchant mills. It is nine miles from 
New London, 19 from Cabellsburg, 37 from Prince 
Edward s court-house, S3 w. by n. of Richmond, 
and 245 .?. w. of Philadelphia.] 

[LYNDEBOROUGH, a township in Hills- 
borough county, New Hampshire, about 68 miles 
from Portsmouth. It was incorporated in the year 
1764. In 1775, it contained 713; and in 1790, 
1280 inhabitants, who are chiefly farmers.] 

[LYNDON, a township in Caledonia county, 
in Vermont, lies n. of St. Johnsbury, and s. of 
Billymead and Burke. It contains 59 inhabi 
tants.] 

[LYNN, a maritime town in Essex county, 
Massachusetts; situated on a bay which sets up 



L Y S 

from that of Massachusetts, n. e. of Boston bay, 
and about eight miles n. by c. of the town of Bos 
ton. The compact part of the town forms a very 
long street. The township, named Saugaus by 
the Indians, was incorporated in 1637, and contains 
2291 inhabitants. Here are two parishes, besides 
a society of Methodists, and a large number of 
Friends. The business which makes the greatest 
figure, and for which the town of Lynn is cele 
brated, is the manufacture of womens silk and 
cloth shoes. These are disposed of at Bos 
ton, Salem, and other commercial towns, and sold 
for home use, or shipped to thes. states, and to the 
W. Indies. By a calculation made in 1795, it 
appeared that there were 200 master workmen and 
600 apprentices constantly employed in this busi 
ness, who make annually 300,000 pair of shoes. 
Lynn beach may be reckoned a curiosity. It is a 
mile in length, and connects the peninsula called 
Nahant with the mainland. This is a place of 
much resort for parties of pleasure from Boston, 
Charlestown, Salem, Marbleliead, &amp;c. in the sum 
mer season. The beach is used as a race ground, 
for which it is well calculated, being level, smooth, 
and hard. A mineral spring has been discovered 
within the limits of the township, but is not of 
much note.] 

[LYNNFIELD, a township in Essex county, 
Massachusetts, n. e. of Salem, and 15 miles n. by 
e. of Boston. It was incorporated in 1782, and 
contains 491 inhabitants.] 

[LYNNHAVEN Bay, at the s, end of Chesa- 
peak bay, and into which Lynnhaven river empties 
its waters, lies between the mouth of James river 
and cape Henry. The mouth of the river is seven 
miles w. of cape Henry. Here Compte de Grasse 
moored the principal part of the French fleet, at 
the blockade of York town in 1781. J 

[LYONS, a town lately laid out in Ontario 
county, New York, about 12 miles w. a?, of Ge 
neva, at the junction of Mud creek and Canandaque 
outlet. 1 

[LY SANDER, a township in Onondago coun 
ty, New York, incorporated in 1794, and compre 
hends the military towns of Hannibal and Cicero. 
The town meetings are held at the Three Rivers in 
this town. It is 16 miles s. e. of lake Ontario. In 
1796, there were 10 of its inhabitants entitled to be 
electors.] 

[LYSTRA, a small town in Nelson county, 
Kentucky ; situated on a w. water of Rolling fork, 
a s. branch of Salt river. Lat. 37 25 .] 



M A C 



M A C 



M 



LAATEA, one of the Society islands, in the 
S. sea. Lat. 17 52 . Long. 148 1 a&amp;gt;.] 

MABABl, a dry port of the serrania, in the 
province and government of Sonora. 

MABAL. See MAMOL. 

MABOABI, a small river of the province and 
government of Las Arnazonas. It runs nearly due 
s. and enters the Rio Negro. 

MACA, a settlement of the province and corre 
gimiento of Collahuas in Peru. 

MACABI, FAIIALLONES DE, two small isles ; 
one larger than the other, in the S. sea, near the 
coast of the province and corregimiento of Truxillo 
in Peru, close to the port of Mai Abrigo. 

MAC A BON, a river of the island of St. Do 
mingo, which rises near the n. coast, runs n. and 
enters the Rebuelto. 

MACABOU, a point on the s. e. coast of the 
island of Martinique, between that of Vauclan and 
cape Ferre. 

MAGACA, a small but convenient port of the 
island of Cuba, which was entered by Fernando 
Cortes with the armada of Diego Velazquez, when 
he was proceeding to the conquest of Nueva 
Espaiia ; and lie here laid in a supply of provi 
sions from one of the royal arsenals, since, from 
the precipitate escape that he had made from the 
port of Cuba, knowing that Velazquez had repented 
of his appointment, and wished to suspend him, 
he had not time to procure sufficient at his sailing. 

MACACHACRA, a settlement of the province 
and corregimiento of Guanta in Peru; annexed to 
the curacy of Guamanguilla. 

MACACIPA, a small river of the province and 
country of Las Amazonas. It runs n. n. w. and 
enters the Madcra, between those of lacare and 
Tucumare. 

M AC AGU A, a settlement of the province and 
kingdom of Guatemala. 

MACAGUANE, S. FRANCISCO XAVIER DE, 
a settlement of the province and government of San 
Juan de los Llanos, in tiie Nucvo Reyno de Gra 
nada ; a reduction of Airicos Indians, made by the 
regulars of the company in 1662. It is on the 
shore of Hie river Casanare, and close to a moun 
tain ; of a mild and unhealthy temperature, but 
abounding in maize and yucas&amp;gt; from the which the 



natives, who are very numerous, make cazabt. 
This settlement is at the present day under the 
charge of the religious order of St. Domingo, 18 
miles from (lie settlement of Pauto. 

MACAIBO, a port of the coast of the province 
and government of Venezuela, in the peninsula of 
Paraguana, and to the w. of the cape San Roman. 

MACAIRA, a mountain and point of the coast, 
in the province and government of the Rio de 
Hacha, of the Nuevo Reyno de Granada. 

MACANAO, a settlement of the island and 
government of La Margarita ; situate on the s. 
coast. 

MACAO, a river of the province and govern 
ment of Merida in the Nuevo Reyno de Granada. 
It rises in the valley of Los Locos, and enters the 
Apure. 

MACAOZA, a small river of the province and 
government of Guayana or Nueva Andalucia. It 
rises from a lake in the country of the Marucotos 
Indians, and forms the head of the river Pa- 
ragua. 

MACAPA, a settlement of the province and 
captainship of Para in Brazil ; situate on the n. 
shore of the Maranon or Amazon, and near its 
mouth, almost in front of the island Caviana. In 
it the Portuguese have a small fort, built in 1688, 
upon the ruins of another which belonged to the 
French ; and these leaving it, an order was issued 
for its demolition at the treaty of Lisbon in 1701, 
although it was afterwards rebuilt ; and the 
French ceded all their claims in the treaty of 
Utrecht in 1713. It is in lat. 6 n. and long 50 
53 w. 

MACAPU, a river of the same province and 
kingdom as the former settlement. It runs s. s. e, 
and enters that of Las Amazonas, where this enters 
the sea, between the river Anaura-pucu and the 
settlement and fort of Macapa. 

MACARA, a settlement of the province and go 
vernment of Jaen de Bracamoros in the kingdom 
of Quito; situate on the shore of the river "of its 
name. 

MACARA. This river, which is considerable, flows 

down from the mountains of the province of Loxa, 

to the s. It runs w. dividing this jurisdiction from 

that of Piura, and after collecting in its course tfcc 

3c 2 



412 



M A C 



waters of the Saviango, enters by th&amp;lt;? s. shore the 
river Golan or Catarnayu, in lat. 4 22 s. and lone-. 
80 15 . 

MACARABITA, a settlement of the province 
arid Corregimietttoot Tunja in the Nuevo Hey no de 
Granada. It is of a hot temperature, produces 
sugar-cane, plantains, arid various other fruits. 
Here are also large breeds of mules and cattle of 
the goat kind, of the skins of which are made very 
good leather. The natives are, however, very 
poor, for the most part idiotish, and subject to the 
epidemic of the cotos or tumors on the throat. 
The inhabitants may amount to 300, and it is 30 
leagues n. of Tunja. 

MACARAO, a settlement of the province and 
government of Venezuela in the Nuevo Key no de 
Grenada ; situate near the coast, between the city 
of Caracas and the town of Victoria. 

MACARAPANA, a settlement of the province 
and government of Curnana. 

MACARE, an island of the river Orinoco, be 
ing at its entrance or mouth, and one of the largest 
of the many which form its mouths or channels. 

MACAREO, CANO DE, an arm of the river 
Orinoco ; one of those which form the many islands 
which this river has at its mouth or entrance into 
the sen. 

MACARET, a small river of the province and 
government of Louisiana, which runs e. and enters 
the Mississippi. Near its banks, on the ;/. side, is 
a very abundant lead mine. 

MAGAR1, a settlement of the province and cor- 
rfgimienta of Lampa in Peru. 

MACAS, a district of the province and govern 
ment of Quixos and Macas, one of those which 
compose the same government, being the most e. 
part iu the kingdom of Quito; bounded s. by the 
province of Jaen de Bracamoros or Yaguar- 
songo, and tc. by those of Riobamba and Cuenca, 
from the which it is separated by the e. cordillcru 
of the Andes; and, being in this vicinity, of atem- 
perature very different from that of the district of 
Quixos, namely much colder, the seasons of the 
year also being more regular : the winter begins in 
the month of April, and lasts till September, which 
is the time when the summer is experienced in the 
parts lying between the two c ordil/e rns ; and from 
September forward they obtain in Macas the be 
nefit of this second season, when the air blows 
fresh fro:n the n. in proportion to the quantity of 
frost and snow lying upon the mountain deserts. 
Its territory is fertile for seeds and fruits, these 
being such as require a hot and moist temperature; 
but the principal crop is that of tobacco, which is 
gathered in great abundance, and carried in rolls 
5 



MAC 

to be sold over all Peru, being particularly prized 
through its fine quality. Here are likewise pro 
duced sugar-canes and cotton ; but not more, 
either of one or the other, than is necessary for the 
consumption of the inhabitants; and even this not, 
without a constant care on their part to guard their 
plantations against the incursions of the barbarian 
Indians, by whom every town is surrounded, and 
who oblige the inhabitants to live with arms per 
petually in their hands. The whole of this dis 
trict, as well as the other, is covered with wild 
woods, in which is found the storax-tree, the aro 
matic gum or resin of which is very fragrant: this 
is, however, very scarce, owing to the distance of 
these trees from the settlements, and the risk at 
tending those who go in search for them of being 
massacred by the Indians, who, like wild beasts, 
hide themselves in the hollow trunks and in the 
thickets. The same observation obtains with re 
gard to the minerals of blue stones, which are 
found here of a very superior quality ; although, 
in spite of these difficulties, small portions arc not 
unfrequcntiy procured, liere are also found cin 
namon-trees of the best quality, and differing- from 
those of Quixos. This advantage is derived from 
the trees growing in a more open spot, where they 
derive the benefit of the sun and air; and there 
is a particular example of this in a tree which, 
either from chance or design, is growing near the 
capital ; and which has a bark s&amp;gt;o delicate to the 
taste, arid so fragrant, as to exceed the finest cin 
namon of the East. The flower of this tree is like 
wise very fine. This district abounds in mines of 
copal, in wild honey, though not of a good qua 
lity, since, besides the detect of being red, it 
Avants consistency, and the candles made of it ex 
hale, when lighted, a very strong smell: the bees 
which manufacture this wax are different from 
those of Europe; they are larger, and inclining 
to a black colour. In the woods is found a snake, 
which is called by the Indians Curimullinvo, lire 
skin of which is of a gold colour, with spots simi 
lar to those of a tiger. It has a tremendous ap 
pearance, is covered with scales, having an ugly 
head, and teeth and grinders as large as those of 
an ordinary-sized dog, but sharper. The town 
consists of 1200 souls, the greater part being of 
Muslees, Mulattoes, and other casts. The Spa 
niards who dwell here are very few; and what 
there are, are divided into the eight following set 
tlements, 

S. Miguel de Narvaez, Zuria, 
Juan Lopez, Aguayos, 

Copueno, Yuquipa, 

Barahonas, Paira, 



MAC 

The capital is ihe city of the s-uno name, as 
also of tlie same government. It is small and 
poor, and its commerce consists in tobacco and cin 
namon, though in small quantities; the latter 
would be much better were a little pains taken 
in its cultivation. This city was called, at its first 
foundation, Sevilla del Oro, on account of its 
riches and its gold mines; but, owing to the re 
peated invasions that it has sn tiered from the infi 
del Indians, it has dwindled into a miserable place, 
being known as a city only by its name. It has a 
parish, to which are annexed some other four 
small settlements or wards. The houses are of 
wood, are covered with straw; and the inhabi 
tants consist of 700 souls, the greater part people 
of colour, and the others a lew and very miserable 
Spaniards. Although this is properly the resi 
dence of the governor, yet he generally resides at 
liiobamba or at Quito ; from the latter place this 
capital is 138 miles distant toward the.?, and lying 
on the a), shore of the river Upano, in lat. 2 28 s. 
Long. 77 48 a&amp;gt;. 

MACATE, a settlement of the province and 
correoimiento of Guailas in Peru ; in the district 
of which is the wonderful fountain, which sprouted 
forth its water at the intercession of St. Torobio, 
archbishop of Lima, he being at the time on his 
visitation, and seeing the people on the point of 
leaving the settlement from the distressing want they 
had experienced in that necessary article.. 

MACATEPEC, a settlement of the head set 
tlement of the district of Moloacan, and alcaldia 
mayor of Acayuca, in Nueva Espana. It con 
tains 18 families of Indians, and is one league to 
the e. of its head settlement. 

MACATOA, a city and capital of a terri 
tory of this name in the time of the gent.il ism of 
the Indians ; situate in the province of San 
Juan de los Llanos, of the Nuevo Key no de 
Granada, on the shore of the abundant river 
Guayvare. It contained 800 housekeepers. The 
town consisted of beautiful edifices, the streets 
were drawn in straight lines, and it had spacious 
squares; neatness and cleanliness being so univer 
sal that a stone was never seen out of its place, nor 
was any kind of dirt suffered to lie about. It was 
discovered by Felipe de Utre, ulion he was en 
gaged in the conquest of the celebrated Dorado; 
and he was the first who entered it, in 1543, he 
being received, like all the other Spaniards after 
him, with the greatest kindness and attention by the 
caziqne. He found the natives courteous, atiable, 
and of the most civilized of the Indians, and the 
territory abounding in maize, cazabc, fish, and 



M AC 413 

animals of the chase, the dainties with which it 
was customary to regale their guests. 

MACAUIiVAS, a barbarous nation of Indians, 
who inhabit the woods bordering on the source of 
the river Guassaga, to the w. of that of Pastazu, 
and bounded by the natives of the Fras-cavinas, 
Muratas, and Xibaros. 

MACAWINI, a small river of the province 
and government of LaGuayana, in the part which 
was possessed by the Dutch. It runs into the sea 
on the e . coast. 

MACAVAPA, a settlement of the head settle 
ment of Ihe district and (tlcaldia mayor of Aca- 
yuca in Nueva Espana. It is of a hot and moist 
temperature, founded at the skirt of the sierra ol" 
San Martin. It produces maize, French beans, 
beans, and thread of aloes; this being its princi 
pal commerce. It is to the n. \ to the n. e. of the 
settlement of Xocoteapa, and contains 107 families 
of Indians. 

MACCHA, an ancient province of Peru, in the 
time of the gentilisrn of the Indians, included at 
the present day in that of Chayanta or Charcas. 
It was conquered and united to the empire by the 
Inca Capic \ upanqui. The sectaries which ex 
isted in America in 1790, and of which Madoek, 
an Englishman, was one, affirm that Maccha, an 
Englishman, was the first who had extended his 
navigation thus far, and that it was he who gave 
it this name ; but in the article AMERICA we have 
shewn, that this is one of the many tricks that have 
been invented to usurp (he honour of the disco 
very of the new world from Christoval Colon. 
See what has been said by Fr. Gregorio Garcia 
concerning the origin of the Indians. 

[MAC-COWAN S Ford, on Catabaw river, is 
upwards of 500 feet wide, and about three feet 
deep. Lord Cornwall is crossed here in pursuit 
of the Americans in 1781, in liis way to Hills- 
borough.] 

MACE, a small river of the island of Martinique, 
which runs ;?. and enters the sea between the river 
Lorraiu and the settlement and parish of Santa 
Maria. 

[M4C-GILLIVRAY S Plantation, on Coosa 
river, is a little above the old French fort Ala- 
bamous.] 

MACHA, SAN PKDRO DE, a settlement of the 
province and corregimicnlo of Chayanta or Char- 
cas in Peru. 

MACHACA, ,Tr;sus DF, a settlement of the pro 
vince and co&amp;gt; re giimetito of Pucages in Peru ; where 
there is a nunnery inhabited by 19 holy women 
of the order of San Francisco. It was a large 



414 



MAC 



town in the time of ihc Incas, and capital of a 
territory of the same name ; the which was con 
quered and united (o the empire by the Inca 
Roca, sixth emperor. It lies s. of Cuzco, and on 
the e. shore of a lake out of which flows the river 
Desaguadero. It is 51 miles from La Paz, and 
174 from Arequipa, in laf. \7 33 s. 

MACHACA, another settlement of this name, 
with the dedicatory title of San Andres, in the 
same province and kingdom as the former. 

MACHACA, another, of the same province and 
kingdom, with the dedicatory title of Santiago. 

MACHACA, another, of the province and cor 
regimiento of Caxatambo in the same kingdom ; 
annexed to the curacy of Hacas. 

MACHACAM ARCA, a settlement of the pro 
vince and corregimiento of Paria in Peru ; an 
nexed to the curacy of Toledo. 

MACHACAMARCA, another settlement, in the 
province and corregimiento of Cochabamba in the 
same kingdom. 

MACHACHE, a large settlement of the kingdom, 
of Quito, in the corregimiento of the district of Las 
Cinco Lcguas de la Capital. It is of a cold tempera 
ture ; situate in a beautiful llamtra, abounding in ex 
cellent pastures. It has some celebrated baths of hot 
medicinal waters ; and there is celebrated here a 
weekly fair, at which there is a great meeting of 
trading people, who come from Quito as well as 
the immediate settlements, namely Aloa and Aloasi. 
It is 18 miles to the 5. of Quito, in lat. 30 s. 

MACHAHUAI, a settlement of the province 
and corregimiento of Condesuyos de Arequipa in 
Peru ; annexed to the curacy of Viraco. 

MACHAI, a small river of the kingdom of 
Quito, which runs s. between the rivers Verde 
and Mapoto, and enters by the n. side into the Pas- 
taza, in lat. 1 27 5. 

MACHALA, a settlement of the province and 
government of Guayaquil in the kingdom of 
Quito, and of the district of La Puna. It is 
situate on the coast of the gulf of Guayaquil to 
the s. of the river or salt-lake of its name. It is 
celebrated for the cacao grown upon its estates ; 
the which is esteemed as being of the best flavour 
and quality of any in the province. It is 60 miles 
from its capital, and in lat 3 11 s. [In its neigh 
bourhood are great numbers of mangles, or man 
grove-trees, whose spreading branches and thick 
trunks cover all the plains ; which lying low are 
frequently overflown. This tree divides itself 
into very knotty and distorted branches, and from 
each knot a multitude of others germinate, form 
ing an impenetrable thicket. The wood of the 



MAC 

mangrove-tree is so heavy as to sink in water, and 
when used in ships, &amp;c. is found ve ry durable, 
being subject neither to split or rot. The Indians 
of this jurisdiction pay their annual tribute in the 
wood of the rnangrove-tree.] 

MACHALA, a point of land on the coast of this 
province. 

MACHALA, a river of (lie same province, which 
runs ra. and empties itself into the gulf of Guaya 
quil. 

MACHALA, a bay of the same province and 
government. 

MACHANGARA, a river of the province and 
kingdom of Quito. It rises from various streams 
which flow down from the mountains of Pichinchc 
and Panecillo, passes through the suburb of the 
city, where there is a beautiful stowe bridge, and 
enters the river Tumbaco on the w. side, in lat. 
10 s. 

MACHAPUNGA, a small river of the province 
and colony of N. Carolina, in the district and ju 
risdiction of Hyde. It runs n. w. and enters the 
Pamticoe. 

MACHETA, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Tunja in the Nuevo Reyno de 
Granada; situate in the valley of Tensa. It is of 
a mild temperature, and produces fruits both of a 
hot and cold climate ; such as wheat, barley, 
yucas, plantains, maize, sugar canes, indigo, &amp;c. 
In its district is a chapel, which is, as it were, a 
chapel of ease. It contains 100 housekeepers and 
very few Indians, and is 12 leagues to the s. e. of 
Tunja, and the same to the n. e. of Santa Fe. 

MACHIANA, an island of the river Maranon, 
or of Las Amazonas; situate at its mouth or en 
trance, to the e. of La Caviana, from whence it is 
separated by a narrow channel or branch of that 
river ; also to the n. of the large island Joanes or 
Marajo. Its territory is very low, and subject to 
inundations. It lies under the equinoctial line, 
and belongs to the province and captainship of 
Para. 

[MACM1AS, a port of entry, post-town, and 
seat of justice, in Washington county, district of 
Maine ; situated on a bay of its own name, 20 
miles s. w. of Passamaquoddy, 62 c. by n. of Pe- 
nobscot, and 1 17 n. e. of Portland, in lat. 444S / w. 
and long. 67 17 w. It is a thriving place, and 
carries on a considerable trade to Boston and the 
West Indies in fish, lumber, &amp;c. It is contem 
plated to establish a regular post between this town 
and halirax, in Nova Scotia. The name of the 
town is altered from the Indian name Mecliioses, 
given to the river in the oldest maps. It is 229 



MAC 

miles n. e. of Boston, and about SCO by water. 
Early attempts were made to settle here, but the 
first permanent settlement "was made in 1763, by 
15 persons of both sexes from Scarborough, in 
Cumberland county ; and in 1784 the town was in 
corporated. The chief settlements are at the e. 
and w. falls, and at Middle river. Machias river, 
after running aw. course, six miles distance from 
Cross island, (which forms its entrance), separates 
at a place called the Rim ; one branch taking a 
n. e. direction, runs 2- miles, with a width of 30 
rods to the head of the tide, where are two double 
saw-mills and one grist-mill. The main branch 
runs a n. w. course nearly three miles, and is 70 
rods wi.le, to the head of the tide, where arc two 
double and single saw-rnills, and two grist-mills. 
The chief settlement is at, West falls, the 
county courts being held and the gaol erected 
there. The main channel of the river takes its 
course to these falls, which, though crooked and 
narrow, admits vessels of burthen to load at the 
wharfs within 50 rods of the mills. This advan 
tage no other part of the town can enjoy. The 
entrance of Machias river is in lat. 44 40 n. 
Long. 67 19 w. The town is divided into four 
districts for the support of schools ; and into two 
for the convenience of public worship. In 1792, 
Washington academy was established here. The 
general court incorporated a number of gentlemen 
as trustees, and gave for its support a township of 
land. In 1790, the town contained 818 inhabitants. 
Since that time its population has rapidly increased. 
The exports of Machias consist principally of 
lumber, viz. boards, shingles, chipboards, laths, 
and various kinds of hewed timber. The cod- 
fishery might be carried on to advantage, though 
it has been greatly neglected. In 1793, between 
70 and 80 tons were employed in the fishery ; and 
not above 500 quintals were exported. The mill- 
saws, of which there are 17, cut on an average 
three million feet of boards annually. A great 
proportion of timber is usually shipped in British 
vessels. The total amount of exports annually 
exceeds 15,000 dollars. From Machias bay to the 
mouth of St. Croix, there are a great many fine 
islands; but the navigation is generally without 
these, in the open sea. In the year 1704, when 
Colonel Church made an attack on the French 
plantation on the river Schoodick, he found one 
Lutterelle, a French nobleman, on one of these 
islands, and removed him. The island still retains 
his name.] 

MACIUGASTA, a settlement of the province 
and government of Tucunnin in Peru ; situate on 
the shore of the lake and river of Andalgala. 



MAC 



416 



MACHIGOMS, a river of the island of New 
foundland, in N. America. It runs n. e. in the 
s. part, and enters the sea in Blanche bay. 

MACHIMETON, a settlement of Indians, of the 
province and government of Louisiana in N. 
America ; situate on the shore of a lake in the ter 
ritory of the W. Scoux Indians. 

MACHUPO, a river of the province and go 
vernment of Moxos in the kingdom of Quito. It 
rises near the town of La Trinidad, runs w. for many 
leagues, with the name of Zanjon the Second, to 
distinguish it from another, and enters the Ubay. 

MACINGA, a settlement of the province and 
government of Santa Marta in the Nuevo Reyno 
de Granada ; situate in the country and territory 
of the Taironns Indians. 

[MAC-1NTOSH, a new county in the lower 
district of Georgia, between Liberty and Glynn 
counties, on the Alatamaha river.] 

[MAC-KENZIE s River, in the n. to. part of 
N. America, rises in Slave lake, runs a n. w. w. 
course, and receives a number of large rivers, many 
of which are 250 yards wide, and some are 12 fa 
thoms deep at the influx. It empties into the N. 
sea, at Whale island, in lat. 69 14 , between long. 
130 and 135 w. after a course of 780 miles from 
Slave lake. It has its name from Mr. M Kenzie, 
who ascended this river in the summer of 1789. 
He erected a post with his name engraven on it, 
on Whale island, at the mouth of this river. He 
saw there a number of men and canoes, also a num 
ber of animals resembling pieces of ice, supposed 
by him to be whales ; probably sea-horses, des 
cribed by Captain Cook. The tide was observed 
to rise 16 or 18 inches. In some places the cur 
rent of the river makes a hissing noise like a boil 
ing pot. It passes through the Stoney mountains, 
and has great part of that range on the w. side. 
The Indian nations, inhabiting the w. side from 
the Slave lake, are the Strongbow Mountain and 
Hare Indians ; those on the e. side, the Beaver, 
Inland, Nathana, and Quarrelers Indians. No 
discoveries w. of this river have been made by 
land.] 

MACOBAI, a small river of the province and 
county of Las Amazonas. It rises in the territory 
of the Mayorunas Indians, runs w. and soon enters 
the Maranon, on the side of the lake Huarare. 

[MACOKETH or M ACOCK ETH River, GREAT, 
empties into the Mississippi from the n. w. 
in lat. 40 55 n. Little Macocketh falls through 
ther?. bank of the Mississippi, about 27 miles above 
the month of Great Macocketh, and opposite to the 
old lead mine.] 

MACOLL.A, Point of, ou the coast of the pro- 



416 



M A C 



vince and government of Venezuela, and Nuevo 
Reyno do Granada. It is in the peninsula of Pa- 
rao uana, opposite cape San Roman. 

MACOMITE, a river of the province and go 
vernment of Santa Marta in the Nuevo Rcyno de 
Granada. It runs towards the n. to the e. of the 
capital, and enters the sea between the cape or 
point of Guiraca to the w. and that of Ceneguaga 
to the e. forming a small bay, in lat. 11 20 . 

[MACOP1N, a small river which empties into 
the Illinois, from the s. e. 11 miles from the Mis 
sissippi; is 20 yards wide, and navigable nine 
miles to the hills. The shore is low on both sides, 
clad with paccun, maple, ash, button wood, &amp;c. 
The land abounds with timber, and is covered 
with hi^h weeds.] 

MACORIZ, a river of the island of St. Do 
mingo. It rises in the mountains of the e. head, 
near the town of Bayaguana, runs 5. s. 10. and en 
ters the sea between the point of Caicedo and the 
river Seco. ^ 

MAOOS, a barbarous nation of Indians of the 
Nuevo Reyno de Granada, in 1lte mountains and 
woods of Fosca ; bounded by the nation of Los 
Guapis to the . being divided by the river Papa- 
mene. Some of these Indians were reduced to a 
settlement or town in 1702. 

MACOUBA, a large settlement and parish of 
the French, in the island of Martinique. It is a 
curacy of the religious order of St. Domingo, de 
dicated to Santa Ana. Its territory is extremely 
fertile in sugar canes, tobacco, cacao, indigo, and 
other vegetable productions. It has to the s. a 
small river, which fertilizes its district; and it 
lies upon the coast. Its population exceeds 1000 
souls ; the greater part of whom are Negroes em 
ployed in making sugar, the principal branch of 
its commerce ; as also tobacco, which takes the 
name of the settlement, and is an aromatic compo 
sition much esteemed throughout all Europe. The 
Father Labat, author of the voyage to the Antil 
les, written in French, was curate of this settle 
ment. If is in lat. 1 1 32 n. 

MACOURIA, a small river of the province and 
government of Guayana, in the part possessed by 
the French. 

MACOYA, a province of Florida in N. Ame 
rica, in the time of the ^enlilism of the Indians. 

MACTALLANCOCIIA, a lake of the province 
and corregimiento of Alausi in the kingdom of 
Quito. It is at the top of the mountain of Tiolo- 
rna ; and near it are other lakes, called Pichavi- 
nae and Cuvillu, all of which communicate and 
form the river Ozogoche or De las Ccvadas. It is 
in lat. 2 17 s. 



MAC 

MACUACUARI, a river of the province of 
Guayana, in the part possessed by the Portuguese. 
It runs s. s. e. and enters the Maranon, at its 
mouth. 

MACUCAGUI, a village and settlement of the 
Portuguese, in the province and captainship of 
Pernambuco in Brazil ; situate near the coast. 

MACUCO, a settlement of the missions that 
were held by the company of the Jesuits in the 
llanos of Casanare and Meta, of the Nuevo Reyno 
de Granada ; situate on the shore of the river of 
the last of the above names. It is at present under 
the charge of the religious order of St. Domingo. 

MACUCO, a river of the province and captainship 
of the Rio Janeiro in Brazil. 

MACU1LACATLAN, a settlement of Indians, 
of the Totonaqne nation, in Nueva Espaiia. It 
was left by the lord of those Indians, who was 
called ZatonUin, at his death, to one of his three 
sons, named Ichcatzinteuhtli, and stood at a 
league s distance from the settlement now called 
Ahuacatlan. 

MACULITLANGUESCO, a settlement of the 
head settlement and alcaldia mayor of Teocuilco 
in Nueva Espaua. It contains 98 families of In 
dians, who cultivate nothing but cochineal, and a 
sufficient quantity of maize for their own subsist 
ence. 

MACU1LZACH1L, a settlement and head 
settlement of the district and alcaldia mayor of 
Teutitlan in Nueva Espaua. It contains 130 fa 
milies of Indians, and lies somewhat more than a 
league to the s. of its capital. 

JVIACUL, a river of the province and govern 
ment of Guayaquil, in the district of Daulej and 
kingdom of Quito. It washes the territory of 
Baba, and enters the river of this name on the w. 
side, in lat. 1 b\ s. 

[MACUNGY, a township in Northampton 
county, Pennsylvania] 

MACUONA, CANO DE, an arm. of the river 
Orinoco, one of those which form the islands and 
mouth -5 which it has at its entrance into the sea. 

MACURAS, a settlement of the province of 
Barcelona and government of Cumanii; situate on 
the shore of the river Arivi, and of that of its 
name, at the mouth by which this enters the former 
river. 

MACURI, a river of the island of St. Domingo, 
which rises in the mountains of the . co ist, runs 
n. e. and enters the sea between the port of Santiago 
and the bay of Balsamo. 

MACURI, a point of land of the same island and 
coast. 

MACUR1SES, a river of the province and go- 



MAD 

vernmcnt of Yucatan, It runs into the sea in 
the gulf of Honduras, near io that of Triunfo dc 
la Cruz. It is large and navigable for middling 
sized vessels. 

MACURO, a settlement of the missions that 
were held by the company of the Jesuits, in tiie 
province and government of San Juan de los 
Llanos, of the Nuevo Reyno de Granada. It is a 
large town, and its inhabitants are numerous. The 
temperature is hot, and it abounds in fruits, and is 
situate near the river Cravo. The natives extract 
from some trees, called carime, and which grow 
upon the mountains, a kind of resin or oil, which 
is an antidote for curing wounds and the itch ; the 
same being also a purgative, and likev/ise acting 
as a vomit, three spoons-full being taken fasting 
and then some warm water, when it operates both 
by stool and vomit until the patient shall take cold 
water to put a stop to its effects. Here is also 
found a kind of yellow wood, which is called 
sassafras, of a fine smell and well known in Eu 
rope. This is a special antidote against the dropsy, 
a disease which is very common in these provinces. 
In the woods are also found the balsam of co 
pal, and another called amine, the herb escorn- 
zonera, (viper-root), also a reed called Colorado, 
and the agras, which, when a piece of it is cut off, 
and one end blown through, distils from the other 
end a quantity of water of a singular virtue, as has 
been experienced, against the infirmities of the 
eyes, destroying dimness, cataracts, &amp;c. 

MACUSANI, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Carabaya in Peru ; annexed to 
the curacy of Ayapata. 

MACUSTEPETLA, a settlement of the head 
settlement of the district and alcaldia mayor of 
Huejutla in Nueva Espana ; annexed to the cu 
racy of the same. It is of a hot and moist tempe 
rature, contains 43 families of Indians, who culti 
vate maguey trees, from whence they extract 
pulque and honey, which is the commerce of this 
place as well as of that of La Panocha. It is six 
leagues s. of its capital. 

MACUTO, a settlement of the province and 
government of Caracas or Venezuela, in the Nuevo 
Reyno de Granada ; situate on the e. of the go 
vernment of La Guaira. 

[MAD, a river, called also Pickawa Fork, a 
rapid branch of the great Miami, having a s. w. 
course. It is a beautiful stream, passing through 
a pleasant level country of the greatest fertility.] 

[MADAME Isle forms the n. e. side of the gut 
of Canso, as you enter from the s. e. and is oppo 
site to the e. extremity of Nova Scotia. The n. 

VOL. II. 



MAD 



point of the island lies 14 miles s. of St. Peter s 
harbour, in Cape Breton island. The isles De 
Madame are dependent on Cape Breton island.] 

[MADBUIlY, a township in Strafford county, 
New Hampshire, situated between Dover and 
Durham, about 10 miles n. w. of Portsmouth. It 
was incorporated in 1755, and has 592 inhabi 
tants.] 

[MADDISON, a county of Kentucky, adjoin 
ing Fayette, Clarke, Lincoln, and Mercer s coun 
ties. Chief town, Milford.] 

[MADDISON, a small town of Amherst county, 
Virginia ; situated on the n. side of James s river, 
opposite Lynchburgh. It lies 83 miles w. by n. 
of Richmond.] 

[MADDISON S Cave, the largest and most cele 
brated cave in Virginia ; situated on the n. side of 
the Blue ridge. It is in a hill of about 200 feet 
perpendicular height, the ascent of which on one 
side is so steep, that you may pitch a biscuit from 
its summit into the river which washes its base. 
The entrance of the cave is in this side, about two- 
thirds of the way up. It extends into the earth 
about 300 feet, branching into subordinate caverns, 
sometimes ascending a little, but more generally 
descending, and at length terminates in two dif 
ferent places, at basons of water of unknown ex 
tent, and which appear to be nearly on a level 
with the water of the river. The vault of this 
cave is of solid lime-stone, from 20 to 40 or 50 feet 
high, through which water is continually extidat- 
ing. This trickling down the sides of the cave 
has incrusted them over in the form of elegant 
drapery ; and dripping from the top of the vault, 
generates on that, and on the base below, stalac 
tites of a conical form, some of which have met 
and formed large massy columns.] 

MADELAINE, or MAGDALEN A, some islands 
of the gulf of St. Lawrence, between the coast of 
Nova Scotia and the island of Newfoundland. 
They are nine, and on them the French are accus 
tomed to kill the manati or sea-cows. 

MADERA, a large, abundant, and navigable 
river of Peru. It rises in the mountains of Chu- 
quisaca of the province of Charcas; it runs an e. 
course to Santa Cruz de la Sierra, with the names 
of La Plata, Chuquisaca, Cachimayo, and Gua- 
pay ; and turns its course n. to enter the Maraiion 
or Amazon, with the name of La Madera, (or 
Wood), on account of the vast quantities it car 
ries down with its current, and is one of the largest 
of those which enter the aforesaid river. The 
Indians call it Cuyari or Cayari, and they affirm 
that by it is the shortest passage to the provinces of 
3 n 



418 



MAD 



Peru by the Maranon or Amazon. It lias indeed 
been visited by some Portuguese, in 1741, as far 
as lat. 18 s. near to Santa Cruz de la Sierra. 
From this river the Portuguese know the Marafion 
by the name of Amazon-is, and up to it, by the 
name of Solimoes. According to the geographer 
Don Juan dc la Cruz, it keeps the name of Ma- 
dera only from the junction of the Marmore 
Grande and the Itenes, until where it runs into 
the Maranon or Amazon. In the woods imme 
diately upon its banks are great quantities of wild 
cacao trees; and here dwell various nations of in 
fidel Indians, namely, the Chiquitos, Tapngazus, 
Avacaries, Curanaris, Guarirmmas, Agazos, and 
some Tupinambos. This river abounds in exqui 
site fish, especially in sea-cows; and on its shores 
are found tortoises and alligators. It enters, as 
we have before observed, into the Maranon or 
Amazon, by the s. side, in about 3 24 18" s. 
latitude. 

MADERA, a small island close to the n. coast 
of the island of St. Domingo, between the island 
of Crisin and the mountain Cristi. 

MADOCTEG, a settlement of Indians of Nova 
Scotia or Acadia in N. America ; situate on the 
shore of the river San Juan. The English have 
an establishment for their commerce, and a fort for 
its defence. 

[MADRE DE Dios, Port. See CHRISTIANA, 
ST. also RESOLUTION Bay.] 

[MADRE DE POPA, a town and convent of 
Tierra Firme in S. America; situated on the river 
Grande or Magdalena. The pilgrims in S. Ame 
rica respect this religious foundation with zeal, 
and resort to it in great numbers ; many miracles 
being said to have been wrought here by the Holy 
Virgin, in favour of the Spanish fleets and their 
sailors, who are therefore very liberal in their do 
nations at her shrine. It lies 54 miles e. of Carta 
gena.] 

MADRE GORDA, a point of the coast of the 
province and government of Nicaragua, and 
kingdom of Guatemala, opposite the Pearl and 
Musqueto isles. 

[MADRID. See NEW MADRID.] 
MADRIGAL, or CHAPANCHICA, a city of 
the province and government of Popayan in the 
Nuevo Reyno de Granada, to the s. of the ter 
ritory formerly inhabited by the nation of the 
Abades Indians. It is in a craggy, rough, and 
barren spot, and produces nothing but maize, of 
which, however, two very abundant crops are ga 
thered yearly. It has some gold mines in its dis 
trict, which are scarcely worked, owing to the 



MAG 

poverty of the neighbourhood; in short, it ap 
pears rather like a miserable village than a city, 
this name being but ill suited to it. It is 35 leagues 
almost s. of Popayan. 

MADRIGAL, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Collahuas in Peru. 

MAESTRA, River of the, in the province and 
government of Darien, and kingdom of Tierra 
Firme. It rises in the mountains on the s. and 
enters the sea opposite the isles of Rey or De las 
Pcrlas. 

MAGALLANES, ESTRECHO DE, a channel 
or celebrated pass which communicates the N. 
and S. seas, formed by the extremity of the con 
tinent of America, and the island called Tierra 
del Fuego. It was discovered by Fernando de 
Magallanes, a Portuguese, in 1520, who gave it his 
name ; but others call it the strait of All Saints. 
Its length from e. to o&amp;gt;. is 110 leagues, and its 
width at its broadest part is one. It is very dan 
gerous to pass, on account of the force of the cur 
rents, as well as of its rocks and sand-banks, and 
from the high winds which prevail. That part of 
the continent which is considered the n. is called 
the coast ofthe PATAGONIANS, (Pamgoncs), under 
which article we shall say every thing that relates 
thereto; and in the w. part ofthe coast are innu 
merable small islands, inhabited by some few bar 
barians. In 1579, the Admiral Pedro Sarmiento 
de Gamboa founded, by order of Philip II. two 
towns in this strait, the one being called Norubre 
de Dios and the other Filipolis ; Don Francisco 
de Toledo then being viceroy of Peru, and also the 
same person who sent the admiral upon this com 
mission : but the colonists and founders perished 
through want, and the place has since that period 
been called Port of Hunger. The English and all 
other nations frequented this pass before that they 
discovered the strait of Maire, a much shorter and 
safer passage; it was then entirely abandoned. 
Its e. mouth or entrance is in lat. 52 32 5. and the 
w. mouth in 52 40 . 

[The temperature of these straits in summer has 
been wrongly compared by Commodore Byron 
with the climate of England in mid-winter ; the 
fact is, that the summers are agreeable, and the 
winters far from severe; and the floating islands 
of ice which are frequently met with in these seas, 
particularly in the summer, are driven by the s. 
winds blowing from the antarctic regions.] 
Series ofthe most celebrated Navigators who have 
passed this Strait. 

Fernando Magallanes, a Portuguese, in 1520.. 

Garcia de Loaisa, a Spaniard, in 1525. 



M A G 

Simon de Alcozava, a Spaniard, in 1535. 

Gutierre Caravallo, a Portuguese, in 1540. 

Ruiz Lopez de Vallalobos, a Spaniard, in 1549. 

Francis Drake, au Englishman, in 1577. 

Pedro Sarmienlo, a Spaniard, in 1579. 

Diego Florez de Valdes, a Spaniard, in 1581. 

Thomas Candish, an Englishman, in 1587, 
1592. 

Richard Hawkins, an Englishman* in 1593. 

Simon Cordero, a Fleming, in 1599. 

Oliver Noort, a Dutchman, in 1599. 

Geoge Spil oerg, a Dutchman, in 1615. 

Bartolome and Gonzalo Nodal, Spaniards, in 
1618. 

John Moore, a Dutchman, in 1619. 

Jacob Heremite, in 1670. 

Charles Henry Clarke, in 1670. 

MAGALL ANICAS TIER HAS, a large and 
spacious country, extending from n. to s. from 
the llanuras of Paraguay, called Pampas, to the 
Estrecho de Magallanes or straits of Magellan ; 
washed on the e. by the sea of Magellan, and w. 
by the Pacific. It is inhabited by some barbarous 
nations of Indians but little known, amongst whom 
are the Patagones or Tirumencos, of a prodigious 
stature and well formed ; the Cesarcs to the e. of 
the source of the river of Santo Domingo ; the 
Poyas and the Puelches, bordering upon the king 
dom of Chile, and being divided from the same 
by the river Sur Fondo, which empties itself into 
the Pacific or S. sea, in lat. 44 38 s. and serves 
as the s. boundary of Chiloe. The territory of the 
c. coast is low, barren, and desert ; and towards the 
s. upon the strait, it is lofty and full of woods and 
mountains covered with snow, where the great 
chain of the Cordillera of the Andes terminates. 
These woods and mountains abound in tigers, 
wolves, snakes, monkeys of different kinds, par 
rots, and other birds of most beautiful plumage. 
The interior of this vast continent is entirely un 
known to European nations. The Father Nicolas 
Mascardi, of the company of Jesuits in the province 
of Chile, was the first missionary who passed through 
Chiloe, and preached the gospel to those barba 
rians, receiving at their hands the crown of mar 
tyrdom. The climate towards the s. is very cold, 
and in the Pampas to t!ie n. very hot. The Chi- 
lenos consider this territory as part of their king 
dom. The Father Manuel Garcia, missionary of 
the extinguished company, is the first who in his 
map, dated April 1746, gave an account of the 
customs of these barbarians, who are generally 
called serranos, although they are divided into two 
tribes with the names of Puelches and Tuelches : 
these last are known at Buenos Ayrcs by the name 



M A G 



419 



of Magdalenistas ; since at onetime, when a famine 
happened, they came as far up the country as to 
the settlement called Magdalena : the others are 
called Pampas Matanzeros, they having, from the 
same cause, settled themselves near the settlement 
of Matanza, not far from Buenos Ayres. All these 
Indians are like those of the other s. settlements, 
fickle, inconstant, and irresolute; few, however, 
exceed them in fierceness and arrogance, and none 
in the miserable state in which they live, or in the 
poverty consequent upon their sloth ; although 
some indeed have settled near the Spanish towns, 
and get their livelihold by industry. Those who 
inhabit the mountains, although the cold there is 
intense, prefer going naked to the trouble of mak 
ing themselves garments, if perchance they may 
not buy some of the Aucaes, a people who breed 
cattle, and make these articles of their fleeces. 
They sow wheat, and grinding it between two 
stones, make little cakes. They have copper and 
other metals, which they found to make spoons 
and other utensils, though these are very scarce. 
They do not kill their cattle to cat, but when 
hungry they bleed them and drink their blood. 
Their common food is the flesh of asses, foxes, 
ostriches, and guanacos. Those who are in com 
merce with the Spaniards have learnt to game ; 
and so great is the influence of this vicious passion 
upon them, that they will sometimes continue 
playing whole nights and days without sleep. 
They are extremely usurious in their contracts, 
and whatever the Spaniards may offer, they are 
sure to exact something more : they will go many 
leagues for a trifle : they buy to sell again, and 
their good faith is on a par with that of highway 
robbers : they are subject to the most abject vices, 
and are void of all natural shame or modesty. 
They are not without ideas of a Supreme Being, 
and in their idioms they have words for expressing 
him, but they are not known to offer him any kind 
of adoration, although it was asserted by a Spa 
niard, who had lived for some time a captive 
amongst them, and who told the same to the Fa 
ther Garcia before mentioned, that he had always 
heard them mention his (the Supreme Being s) 
name with veneration. There are suspicions that 
the Aucaes adore the sun, since, when they catch 
any animal in the chase, they throw up the blood 
towards this luminary ; the women also, when they 
have brought forth, immediately present their 
children to the moon as an offering, and as an 
acknowledgment that they owe them to her libe 
rality, or perhaps that she may pour down her 
salutary influence upon them. They believe in 
the immortality of soul, and when any one dies, 
3H2 



420 



MAG 



MAG 



the old women collect together in their cabins, and 
sitting down, make lamentable plaints, to which 
the relatives answer in the same tone ; after some 
days the body is carried out (o be buried, together 
with all the articles that were used by the person 
when living, taking great care not to leave any 
thing that may cause a remembrance, burning even 
the cabin in which he lived, and arguing it as one 
of the most unfavourable omens should they hap 
pen to dream of him. They are full of supersti 
tion and witchcrafts, and to this the women are 
particularly given, although all prize themselves 
much upon having frequent communication with 
the devil. Marriage is contracted by the pur 
chase of the wife, and a man, when he does not agree 
with one, remedies the evil by buying another ; 
but the caciques and the rich alone are able to 
buy the number they wish for. When any one 
dies without children the brother marries the 
widow ; and if the wife dies, the vacancy is filled 
up in the same way by her sister, should she have 
any, and provided she be a widow. The love 
which the fathers and mothers bear towards their 
children is most extravagant ; they never chastise 
or reprehend them, even thougli these should 
manifest the greatest insolence, or, even at the mo 
ment of passion, strike them : on the contrary, 
should such a case occur, they, the parents, im 
mediately make what they style a feast of recon 
ciliation. The father speaks to the son with the 
highest respect and in the plural number; the son, 
with the greatest indignity to the father, and in the 
singular. These being their habits, there was no 
end to the disorders which arose amongst them, 
and the hope of reducing them to the faith, in pro 
portion, declined ; but in 1739, four chiefs arrived 
at Buenos Ayres, requesting of the colonel Don 
Juan de San Martin, that some of the Jesuits might 
be sent to instruct them in the Christian faith : 
accordingly, advice being sent to the governor 
Don Miguel Salcedo, this person wrote to the fa 
ther Lucas Machoni, then provincial, who taking 
occasion of the opportunity that presented itself, 
sent to the fathers Matias, Strobl, and Manuel Qui- 
rini, who offered themselves voluntarily, and la 
boured with much success in the reduction of these 
infidels. 
Catalogue of the barbarous Nations and principal 

Parts of the Tierra Magallanica. 
Barbarous Nations. Pueches, 
Csares, Tiriimentos. 

Chunianis, Cities. 

Huillanes, Nombre de Dios, 

Patagones, Filipolis. 

Poyas, 



Rivers. 
Angra, 
Camarones, 
Corrientes^ 
Gallego, 
De los Leories, 
De Martin, 
De los Martires, 
Nuestra Seiiora, 
San Julian, 
San Lazaro, 
San Matias, 
Santa Catarina, 
Santa Cruz, 
De Sardinas, 
De los Sauces. 

Promontories. 
Buen Suceso, 
De la Victoria, 
Deseado, 
Froivard, 
Horn, 

Montmouth, 
San Juan, 
San Isidro, 
Santa Elena, 
Once mil Virgines. 



Sardinas, 

Shapenhams, 

Valentino. 

Straits. 
De Roche, 
Magallanes, 
Maire, 

Santa Barbara, 
San Isidro. 

Islands. 
Barneveldt, 
Buena Justicia, 
Buena Esperaaza, 
Chonos, 

De los Apostoles, 
De los Estados, 
Dewaert, 
Diego Ramirez, 
Diego Rodriguez, 
Diego Ruiz, 
Eremita , 
Evangel istas, 
Falkland, 
Luis el Grande, 
Madre de Dios, 
Maluina, (Malvine), 
Maire, 
San Martin, 
Santa Barbara, 
Santa Catarina, 
Santa Cruz, 
Showten, 
Sebald or Vcertz, 
Talka, 
Trinidad, 
York. 



Ports. 

Buen Suceso, 
De Leones, 
Deseado, 
Enrrico, 
De la Hambre, 
Mauricio, 
Memniste, 
San Geronimo, 
San Julian, 

MAGALLANICAS, a port of the land in the 
mountains and sierras of the province and govern- 
vernment of Sonora. 

MAGAZ1N, a fort which belongs to the Eng 
lish, in the country of the Iroquees Indians, on the 
border of the great fall of Niagara, in the straitwhere 
the lakes Ontario and Osvego communicate. 

[MAGDALEN Isles, a cluster of isles n. e. of 
the isle of St. John s, and n. a&amp;gt;. of that of Cape 
Breton, in the gulf of St. Lawrence ; situated be 
tween lat. 47 13 and 47 42 n. and in long. 61 
40 w. They are inhabited by a few fishermen. 
Sea-cows used to frequent them, but they are now 
become scarce. These isles have, been fatal to 
many vessels. The chief of them are the Dead 
Man, Entry, and liomea islands. Seamen wish to 
make them in fair weather, as they serve them to 
take a new departure ; but in foggy weather 



Portuguese have 



M v G 

in part of the two jurisci lions which are distin 
guished by the names r Condesuyos and Are- 
quipa. 

MAGI, a river of the rovince and government 
of Paraguay in Peru. runs n. and enters the 
Curitiva. 

MAGISTRAL, a sdement and real of the 
silver mines of the pro ir ice of Tepeguana, and 
kingdom of NucvaVizca*, in N.America; situate 
between the settlement ol izonazoand the river of 
Las Nasas. In its viciny is a large estate called 
Calichal. 

MAGNA, a small cit y&amp;gt;f the province and cor- 
regintiento of Cuyo in th kingdom of Chile. 

MAGOLTJ, a small :vcr of the province and 
colony of Maryland in 1 s America. It runs e. and 
enters the sea in the bay ( Chesapeak. 

MAGOS, ALDEA DE os REYES, a settlement 
of the Portuguese, in thorovince and captainship 
of Espiritu Santo in Bizil ; situate on the sea- 
coast, at the foot of {\\&amp;lt; sierra Lunar or Maestro 
Alvaro. 

MAGOS, a river of thi province and kingdom. 
It is small, runs e. and tiers the Tocantines. At 
a small distance from its lore th 
a strong tower. 

MAGUA, a small rivr of the island of St. Do 
mingo, at the e. head. It enters the sea in the 
great bay of Samana, beteen the river of Las Cu- 
lebras and that of Sabanale la Mar. 

MAGUA, a kingdom f Hispaiiola or St. Do 
mingo, and one of the mr into which it was di 
vided, when the island wafirst discovered by Chris 
topher Columbus. Its nme signifies a level, since 
it comprehended that tcritory which was after 
wards called Vega Real, ic same being 80 leagues 
in length and 10 wide. /. Bartolome d las Casas 
asserts, that upwards ot &amp;gt;00 rivers take their rise 
here; and that, of these, 2 are as wide as the Ebro 
or the Guadalquivir, "e must easily conceive 
that there is much exageration in this statement, 
even should we take intoccount the small streams, 
which, without doubt, re very numerous, since 
the waters of the mounting which lie to the w. 
take their course thrown this kingdom. The 
chief who governed at IVlgua when the Spaniards 
arrived, was called Guanncx, and had his capi 
tal in the same spotwherdiese afterwards founded 
the city of La Concepcio de la V r ega. 

MAGUACA, a small ver of the province and 
government of Mairias i the kingdom of Quito. 
It rises in the country of je Indians of its name, 
runs s. and enters the Panza, at the same place 
that this joins the Mara no or Amazon. 

MAGUAN, a cerro c very lofty mountain of 



M A G 



423 



the province and government of Venezuela, in the 
Nuevo Reyno de Granada. It is on the shore of 
the river Portuguese, to the e. of the town of San 
Jay me, and lying between both. 

MAGUAN, a kingdom, which formerly bore this 
title, in Hispanola or St. Domingo, when the island 
was possessed by the Indians. It comprehended 
the province of Cibao, and all the course of the 
river Artibonito. The king here was called Coa- 
nabo ; he was a Caribee, and had come over to the 
island as an adventurer, to seek his fortune. Pos 
sessing great valour, he soon became respected by 
the natives, and by degrees gained such an influ 
ence over them as to establish a title to no small 
consideration. The Spaniards afterwards founded 
here a town, with the name of San Juan de Ma- 
guana, which remained but for a short time, and 
stood in the spot which the French call Savana de 
San Ovan. 

MAGUANA, MAYAGUANA, or MAUIGUAVA, 
an island of the N. sea ; situate to the n. n. w. of 
the islands of Caicos. By this island is formed 
what is called the Old Channel, which used to be 
navigated by the Spaniards, until the channel of 
Bahama was discovered by the pilot Anton de Ala- 
mi nos. 

MAGUAR1, a cape or extremity of the coast of 
the country of Las Amazonas, or point of the island 
of Mara jo, at the mouth of the river Maraiion. 

MAGUATIDA, SIERRA nr-;, some mountains of 
the province and government of La Guayana or 
Nueva Andalucfa. It runs from e. tou?. ; between 
the river Caura and the Orinoco. 

MAGUEBASA. See MAGUES. 

MAGUL^CK, a settlement of Indians of the pro 
vince and colony of Virginia ; situate on the shore 
of the river Seyota. 

MAGUEGAZU, or MAGUEYAZU, a lake of 
the province and country of the Amazonas, in the 
part possessed by the Portuguese. It is a rebalso 
or arm of the river of Los Abacachis, which is a 
waste-water of the river of La Madera. 

MAGUELON, an island of the N. sea, in N. 
America, one of the three, and the most, of those 
by Newfoundland. It is not so lofty as the other 
two, and is three quarters of a league long. 

MAGUES, or MAGUEBAZA, a river of the pro 
vince and country of Las Amazonas, in the part 
possessed by the Portuguese. It rises in the terri 
tory of the Andirases Indians, runs n.w. and bend 
ing its course n. for many leagues, enters the Aba 
cachis, which is an arm of that of the Madera, and 
according to the description of Mr. Beilin, enters 
the lake of Maguegazu. 

MAGUES, another river, in Brazil, rising in the 



422 



M A G 



MAG DA LENA, another, of the province and 
kingdom afore-mentioned. 

MAGDALENA, another, of the missions that were 
held by the regulars of the company of Jesuits in 
the province of California ; situate near the coast 
of the gulf, and in the most interior part of the 
same. 

MAGDALENA, another, of the province and go 
vernment of Moxos in the kingdom of Quito ; 
situate in the countjy of the Yuiquis Indi 
ans, on the shore of the river Ubay or La Mag- 
dalena. 

MAGDALENA, a city of Hispanola or St. Do 
mingo, founded by the commander Nicolas de 
Ovando, its governor, in 1504, 55 leagues from its 
capital. It is at present reduced to a very mean 
and scanty population. 

MAGDALENA, a parish of the province and go 
vernment of Buenos Ay res, in lat. 35 5 6", and 
long. 57 35 40". 

MAGDALENA, a mountain or promontory in the 
interior of Canada, where there is a celebrated iron- 
mine, which promises great advantage, as well 
from the good quality as from the abundance of this 
metal. 

MAGDALEXA, a point of land or extremity of 
the s. coast in the island of St. Domingo ; between 
the point of Caizcdo and the bay of Cavallos. 

MAGDALENA, a bay on the coast of California 
or Mar Roxo dc Cortes ; between the two ports of 
Ano Nuevo and Del Marques. 

MAGDALENA, another, a large, convenient, and 
beautiful bay on the coast of the S. sea, and king 
dom of Nueva Espana, discovered by Captain 
Sebastian, a Biscay an, in 1601, who first gave 
it the name of Santiago, which was afterwards 
changed to that of Magdalena ; in lat. 25. 

MAGDALENA, an island of the Estrecho Magal- 
lanes, (straits of Magellan), opposite the point or 
cape San Silvestre ; also called St. George or De 
los Leones. 

MAGDALENA, a channel or narrow pass, in the 
same straits of Magellan, formed by the islands of 
Rupert and Lord Harrington. 

MAGDALENA, a river of the province and go 
vernment of Los Texas in N. America, which runs 
into the sea, between that of Las Flores and the 
Mexicano. 

MAGDALENA, another, a small river of the pro 
vince and government of Choco, and district of 
Raposo, in the Nuevo Reyno de Granada. It runs 
into the S. sea, opposite the island of Gorgona. 

MAGDALENA, another river, of the province 
aud corregimienlo of Guamalies in Peru It luns 



MAG 

e. and enters the Guallaga, just at the beginning of 
its course. 

MAGDALENA, another, a small river of the pro 
vince and colony of Nova Scotia or Acadia. It 
runs n. and enters the St. Lawrence. 

MAGDELA1NE, or MAGDALENA, a cape of 
the territory of New France or Canada in N. Ame 
rica. It has this name from the abbot of La Mag 
dalena, a member of the company of the Hundred 
Associates, formed by Cardinal de Richelieu, mi 
nister of France, for the purpose of increasing the 
population of, and settling that country ; which 
was afterwards ceded to the religious order of the 
extinguished company of Jesuits, that they might 
establish a mission there amongst the Indians, who 
came from the very remote parts to trade in skins 
with the French, at the establishment \vhich these 
held on the border of the river of the Iroquees. 
In the aforesaid country are abundant mines of 
iron; and in 1715, various fountains of mineral wa 
ters were discovered, which produce the same ef 
fects, and have the same properties as those of 
Forges in France. 

MAGE, a river of the province and govern 
ment of Darien in the kingdom of Tierra Firme. 
It rises in the mountains of the s. coast, and enters 
the sea, opposite the islands of Rey, in the bay and 
gulf of Panama. 

[MAGEE S Sound, on the n. w. coast of N. 
America, is situated in Washington s islands, or 
what the British call Edward s or Charlotte s 
Isles, so called by two different captains on their 
first falling in with them. Lat. 52 46 n. Long. 
131 46 w. This sound is divided by Dorr s 
island into two parts, leading into one. The other 
port is called Port Perkins.] 

[MAGEGADAVICK, or MAGACADAVA, or 
EASTERN River, falls into the bay of Passama- 
quoddy, and is supposed to be the true St. Croix, 
which forms part of the c. boundary line between 
the United States and New Brunswick. This dis 
puted line has been long in train for settlement, 
agreeable to the treaty of 1794.] 

MAGELLAN. See MAGALLANES. 

MAGENE, a settlement and village of the Por 
tuguese, in the province and captainship of Espi- 
ritu Santo in Brazil. 

MAGES, a river of the province and corregi- 
miento of Camana in Peru. It runs w. and enters 
the sea between the creek of Quilca and the port of 
Ocoiia. 

MAGES, a beautiful and extensive valley of the 
province and corregiiniento of Condesuyos, in the 
same kingdom as the former river. It is included 



MAG 

in part of the two jurisdictions which are distin 
guished by the names of Coiulesuyos and Are- 
quipa. 

MAGI, a river of the province and government 
of Paraguay in Peru. It runs . and enters the 
Curitiva. 

MAGISTRAL, a settlement and real of the 
silver mines of the province of Tepeguana, and 
kingdom of NucvaVizcaya, in N.America; situate 
between the settlement of Tizonazo and the river of 
Las Nasas. In its vicinity is a large estate called 
Calichal. 

MAGNA, a small city of the province arid cor- 
reginiienlo of Cuyo in the kingdom of Chile. 

MAGOLTI, a small river of the province and 
colony of Maryland in N. America. It runs e. and 
enters the sea in the bay of Chesapeak. 

MAGOS, ALDEA DE LOS UK YES, a settlement 
of the Portuguese, in the province and captainship 
of Espiritu Santo in Brazil ; situate on the sea- 
coast, at the foot of the sierra Lunar or Maestro 
Alvaro. 

MAGOS, a river of this province and kingdom. 
It is small, runs e. and enters the Tocantines. At 
a small distance from its shore the Portuguese have 
a strong tower. 

MAGUA, a small river of the island of St. Do 
mingo, at the e. head, it enters the sea in the 
great bay of Samana, between the river of Las Cu- 
lebras and that of Sabana de la Mar. 

MAGUA, a kingdom of ilispaiiola or St. Do 
mingo, and one of the four into which it was di 
vided, when the island was first discovered by Chris 
topher Columbus. Its name signifies a level, since 
it comprehended that territory which was after 
wards called Vega Real, the same being 80 leagues 
in length and 10 wide. Jr. Bartolome de las Casas 
asserts, that upwards of 300 rivers take their rise 
here; and that, of these, 12are as wide as the Ebro 
or the Guadalquivir. We must easily conceive 
that there is much exaggeration in this statement, 
even should we take into account the small streams, 
which, without doubt, are very numerous, since 
the waters of the mountains which lie to the w. 
take their course through this kingdom. The 
chief who governed at Magua when the Spaniards 
arrived, was called Guarioncx, and had his capi 
tal in the same spot where these afterwards founded 
the city of La Concepcion de la Vega. 

MAGUACA, a small river of the province and 
government of Mairias in the kingdom of Quito. 
It rises in the country of the Indians of its name, 
runs s. and enters the Pastaza, at the same place 
that this joins the Maranon or Amazon. 

MAGUAN, a cerro or very lofty mountain of 



MAG 



423 



the province and government of Venezuela, in the 
Nuevo Reyno de Granada. It is on the shore of 
the river Portuguese, to the e. of the town of San 
Jay me, and lying between both. 

MAGUAN, a kingdom, which formerly bore this 
title, in Hispanola or St. Domingo, when the island 
was possessed by the Indians. It comprehended 
the province of Cibao, and all the course of the 
river Artibonito. The king here was called Coa- 
nabo ; he was a Caribee, and had come over to the 
island as an adventurer, to seek his fortune. Pos 
sessing great valour, he soon became respected by 
the natives, and by degrees gained such an influ 
ence over them as to establish a title to no small 
consideration. The Spaniards afterwards founded 
here a town, with the name of San Juan de Ma- 
guana, which remained but for a short time, and 
stood in the spot which the French call Savana de 
San Ovan. 

MAGUANA, MAYAGUANA, or MARIGUA.VA, 
an island of the N. sea ; situate to the n. M. w. of 
the islands of Caicos. I3y this island is formed 
what is called the Old Channel, which used to be 
navigated by the Spaniards, until the channel of 
Bahama was discovered by the pilot Anton de Ala- 
mi nos. 

M AGUARI, a cape or extremity of the coast of 
the country of Las Amazonas, or point of the island 
of Mara jo, at the month of the river Maranon. 

MAGUATIDA, SICRRA OK, some mountains of 
the province and government of La Guayana or 
Nueva Andalucia. It runs from e. tow. ; between 
the river Caura and the Orinoco. 

MAGUEBASA. See M AGUES. 

MAGU^CK, a settlement of Indians of the pro 
vince and colony of Virginia ; situate on the shore 
of the river Seyota. 

MAGUEGAZU, or MAGUEYAZU, a lake of 
the province and country of the Amazonas, in the 
part possessed by the Portuguese. It is a rebalso 
or arm of the river of Los Abacachis, which is a 
waste-water of the river of La Madera. 

MAGUELON, an island of the N. sea, in N. 
America, one of the three, arid the most, of those 
by Newfoundland. It is not so lofty as the other 
two, and is three quarters of a league long. 

M AGUES, or MAGUEBAZA,a river oi the pro 
vince and country of Las Amazonas, in the part 
possessed by the Portuguese. It rises in the terri 
tory of the Andirases Indians, runs n.w. and bend 
ing its course n. for many leagues, enters the Aba 
cachis, which is an arm of that of the Madera, and 
according to the description of Mr. Bellin, enters 
the lake of Maguegazu. 

MAGUES, another river, in Brazil, rising in the 



424 



sierra of Corixes. It runs . and bending its 
course (o the e. enters (lie Tocaritines, between the 
rivers of Puentc and Santa Lucia. 

[MAHACKAMACK, a river which falls into 
the Delaware from the n. c. at the n. w. corner of 
the state of New Jersey.] 

MAHANATAN, an island of the N. sea, in 
N. America, near the coast of Nova Scotia or 
Acadia. 

[MAH AS, Indians of N. America. They have no 
idea of exclusive possession of soil. About ten 
years since, they boasted of 700 warriors. They 
have lived in a village, on the w. bank of the Mis 
souri, 236 miles above the mouth of the river Plate, 
where they cultivated corn, beans, and melons : 
they were warlike, and the terror of their neigh 
bours. In the summer and autumn of 1802, they 
were visited by the small-pox, which reduced 
their numbers to something less than 300; they 
burnt their village, and have become a wandering 
nation, deserted by the traders : the consequent 
deficiency of arms and ammunition has invited 
frequent aggressions from their neighbours, which 
have tended to reduce them still further. They 
rove principally on the waters of the river Qui- 
curre, or Rapid river. The country is generally 
level, high, and open ; it is fertile, and tolerably 
well watered. They might easily be induced to 
become stationary ; they are well disposed towards 
the whites, and are good hunters : their country 
abounds in beaver and otter, and their trade will 
increase and become valuable, provided they be 
come stationary, and are at peace. The Tetons 
Bois-brule killed and took about sixty of them some 
short time since.] 

MAHO, a large river of the province and go 
vernment of La Guayana to the w. It flows down 
from the gold mountains, and unites itself with the 
river Tacatii, and afterwards collecting the waters 
of other rivers, forms the lake Blanco, which enters 
the Negro on its n. side. 

MAHO, another river, of the island of St. Do 
mingo. It rises from the n. coast, runs n. and en 
ters the grand river of Jacques. 

MAHO, another, a small river of the island Gua- 
dalupe, one of the Antilles. It runs e. and enters 
the sea in the bay of the Cul de Sac Petit, between 
the rivers of Lezard and De Coin. 

MAHO, a small port of the French, in their pos 
sessions in the island of St. Domingo. It lies on the 
s. coast, between the bay of Canoa andBenet river. 

MAHOMAS, a nation of Indians, of the pro 
vince and government of Paraguay, who inhabit 
the shores of the lake of this name, where, accord 
ing to Don Martin del Barco, beautiful pearls are 



MAI 

found. These Indians were friends and allies (o 
the Spaniards, and were on this account attacked 
in 1610 by the Gtiaranies, who killed many, and 
took others prisoners. The Mahamas, however, 
sought the protection of their allies, and the gover 
nor of the Spanish province having rendered them 
supplies of men, together with an officer and other 
Indians, who had been brought together by the 
Father Marcelo Lorenzana, of the extinguished 
company of Jesuits, conditions of peace were pro 
posed. These were rejected, and the Mahomas, in 
consequence, pursued their enemies with such 
valour and firmness, that they completely suc 
ceeded in recovering their liberty. They were 
reduced to the Catholic faith, and a settlement of 
them formed by San Ignacio Guazu, one of those 
who formed part of the so celebrated missions of 
Paraguay, under the care of the Jesuits. 

[MAHONE Bay, on the coast of Nova Scotia, 
is separated from Margaret s bay, by the promon 
tory on which is the high land of Aspotagoen.] 

[MAHONING, a township on Susquehannah 
river, in Pennsylvania.] 

[MAHONOY, a township on Susquehannah 
river, in Pennsylvania. See NORTHUMBERLAND 
County.] 

MAHUATI, or MANAS, a large lake of the pro 
vince and government of Mainas in the kingdom 
of Quito, and territory of the Xibaros Indians, to 
the n. It communicates with the river Iluallaga 
by means of a narrow channel, which is half a 
league long in the e. part. It abounds greatly in 
crocodiles and tortoises, and its centre is in lat. 5 
9 *. 

MAHURI, a mountain of the island of Cayenne, 
at the skirt of which the French have an establish 
ment. 

MAIBACA, a small river of the province and 
government of La Guayana, in the part possessed 
by the Dutch. It runs into the sea at the back of 
the mouth of the Demerari. 

[MAIDENHEAD, a small neat village in Him- 
terdon county, New Jersey, having a Presbyterian 
church, halt-way between Princeton and Trenton, 
on the great post-road from New York to Philadel 
phia. The township of Maidenhead contains 1032 
inhabitants, including 160 slaves.] 

[MAIDSTONE, a township in Essex county, 
in Vermont, on Connecticut river, containing 125 
inhabitants.] 

MA1GUAT1DA. See MAGUATJDA. 

MAINAS, a province and government of the 
kingdom of Quito ; bounded c. by the provinces 
of Quixos and Jaen de Bracamoros. Its limits on 
the n. and s. are altogether unknown. This ex- 



MAI 



425 



tensive country takes its name from the numerous 
nation of Indians who inhabit it, and was con 
quered in 1618 by General Don Diego Vaca de 
Vega, \vho was its first governor. In 1638, it was 
visited, for the purpose of shedding the light of the 
gospel, by the Fathers Caspar, Cnxia, and Lucas 
dela Cueva, of the society of the Jesuits, who esta 
blished some very flourishing missions on both 
shores of the river Maraiion. Indeed these mis 
sions continued to do infinite good, until the time 
of the abolition of the order in 1767. In 1635, an 
insurrection occurred amongst these Mainas In 
dians, of the city of San Francisco de Borja, but 
they were again pacified, and once more reduced 
to a civilized life, through the unabating exertions 
of the aforesaid missionaries. These Indians are 
very idle, and inclined to drunkenness, dishonesty, 
and superstition. They wander naked through 
the woods, and maintain themselves by fishing and 
the chase, using for their weapons bows and 
arrows. After these were reduced to the failh and 
the dominion of the crown of Castille, several other 
barbarous nations were discovered, who being 
equally converted by the regulars of the company 
of Jesuits, formed the missions commonly called 
De Mainas, which extended from the Pongo or 
strait of Manseriche, upon the w. shore of the Ma- 
ranon, as far as the settlement of Loreto de Ticu- 
nas, and s. as far as the river Yavari, in lat. 2 4 , 
occupying a space of 268 leagues from e. to w. 
The climate is very hot and moist, and the terri 
tory consists entirely of woods, marshes, lakes, 
and rivers. The productions arc v,l:i(e and black 
wax, cacao , and zar zap ar ilia; and only in some of 
the llanitras is there grown grain for the subsistence 
of the inhabitants. In this province is the re 
nowned meridian, or line of demarcation, drawn 
by the Pontiff Alexander VI. between the domi 
nion of the kings of Spain and Portugal, a subject 
which had hitherto caused so much litigation be 
tween these two crowns. The capital of this pro 
vince was formerly the city of San Francisco de 
Borja, but since the time that this was almost en 
tirely destroyed, this honour has been conferred 
upon the town of La Laguna ; where resides the 
superior of the missions, as also the governor, 
when he goes down from Quito upon his visitation. 
The other settlements founded by the missions arc 
as follows : 
S. Bartolome de Ne- El Nombre de Jesus, 

cony, S. Pablo de Guajoya, 

S. Estamslao de Agua- El Nombre de Maria, 

rico, S. Xavier de Icaguates, 

S. Luis Gonzaga, S.Juan Baptista de los 

Santa Cruz, Encavellados, 

VOL. ii. 



La Reyna de los An- S. Antonio Abad d e 

geles, A guanos, 

S. Xavier de Urarines, Nuestra Senora de las 
S. Francisco de Borja, Nieves de Yurima- 

S. Ignacio de Mainas, guas, 

S. Andres del AKo, S. Antonio de Padua, 

Santo Tomas de An- S. Joaquin de la Grande 

doas, Omagua, 

Simigacs, S. Pablo Apostol de Na- 

S. Joseph de Pinches, peanos, 

Concepcion dc Cagua- S. Felipe de Amaonas, 

panes, S. Simon de Nahuapo, 

Presentacion de Chaya- S. Francisco Regis dc 

vitas, Yameos, 

Encarnacion de Parana- S. Ignacio de Pevas y 

puras. Cuniaraes, 

Concepcion de Xibaros, Nuestra Senora de las 
S. Antonio de la La- Nieves, 

guna, S.Francisco Regis del 

S. Xavier de Cbami- Baradero, 

euro, Santa Teresa de Mainas. 

Series of the Governors of Mainas. 

1. Don Diego Vaca de Vega, conqueror of the 
province. 

2. Don Pedro Vaca de la Cadena. 

3. Don Martin de la Riva. 

4. Don Juan Mauriciode Vaca. 

5. Don Jeronimo de Vaca. 

6. Don Antonio Sanchez de Orellana. 

7. Don Luis de Iturbide. 

8. Don Joseph de Lizarzaburu. 

9. Don Juan Antonio de Toledo. 

10. Don Antonio Pastoriza. 

11. Don Antonio Mena y Bermudez. 

12. Don Joseph de Larrazaval. 

13. Don Antonio de la Pena. 

[MAINE, District of, belonging to Massachu 
setts, is situated between lat. 43 and 4550 w. and 
between long. 66 37 and 71 w. ; bounded n. by 
Lower Canada, e. by the province of New Bruns 
wick, s. by the Atlantic ocean, o&amp;gt;. by New Hamp 
shire. The district of Maine is in length, on an. 
average, 200 miles, and its average breadth 120 
miles ; containing 40,000 square miles, or 
25,600,000 acres. It is divided into five counties, 
viz. York, Cumberland, Lincoln, Hancock, and 
Washington : these are subdivided into near 200 
incorporated townships and plantations ; inhabited 
by 96,540 free people. The chief towns are Port 
land, the metropolis of the district of Maine, York, 
Povvnalborough, and Wiscasset, Hallowell, Bath, 
Waldoborough, Penobscot, and Machias. The 
last mentioned is the only incorporated town in 
Washington county, the other settlements being 
only plantations. The chief rivers are Penobscot, 
3 i 



426 



MAI 



Kennebeck, Saco, Androscoggin, St. Croix, &amp;c. 
besides a vast number of small rivers. The most 
noted lakes are Moosehead, Scoodic, and Seba- 
cook. The chief bays arc those of Casco, Penob- 
scot, Machias, Saco, and Passamaq noddy. The 
most remarkable capes are those of Neddock, Por 
poise, Elizabeth, Small point, Pemaquid, and Petit 
Manan. 

The district of Maine, though an elevated tract 
of country, cannot be called mountainous. A 
great proportion of the lands are arable and ex 
ceedingly fertile, particularly between Penobscot 
and Kennebeck rivers. On some parts of the sea- 
coast, the lands are but indifferent. The lands in 
this district may be considered in three divisions ; 
the first, comprehending the tract lying e. of Pe 
nobscot river, of about 4,500,000 acres ; the se 
cond, and best tract, of about 4,000,000 acres, 
lying between Penobscot and Kennebeck rivers ; 
the third, first settled and most populous at pre 
sent, w. of Kennebeck river, containing also about 
4,000,000 acres. The soil of this country in ge 
neral, where it is properly fitted to receive the seed, 
appears to be very friendly to the growth of wheat, 
rye, barley, oats, peas, hemp, and flax, as well as 
for the production of almost all kinds of culinary 
roots and plants, and for English grass ; and also 
for Indian corn, especially if the seed be procured 
from a more n. climate. Hops are the spontaneous 
growth of this country ; and it is also uncommonly 
good for grazing, and large stocks of neat cattle 
may be fed both summer and winter. The natural 
growth of this district consists of white pine and 
spruce trees in large quantities, suitable for masts, 
boards, and shingles; maple, beech, white and 
grey oak, and yellow birch. The low lands pro 
duce fir, which is neither fit for limber nor fuel, 
but yields a balsam that is highly prized. Almost 
the whole coast n. e. of Portland is lined with 
islands, among which vessels may generally anchor 
with safety. 

The principal exports of this country are various 
kinds of lumber, as pine boards, ship timber, and 
every species of split lumber manufactured from 
pine and oak ; these are exported from the various 
ports in immense quantities. A spirit of improve 
ment is increasing here. A charter for a college 
has been granted by the legislature, and five acade 
mies incorporated and endowed with handsome 
grants of public lands. Town schools are gene 
rally maintained in most of the towns. The com 
monwealth of Massachusetts possess between eight 
and nine million acres in this district, independent 
of what they have sold or contracted to sell, which 
bring into the treasury the net sum of 269,005/. 



M A I 

8*. Id. currency ; and besides about two million 
acres between St. Croix and Passarnaquoddy in 
dispute between the United States and the British 
nation. Exclusive of the lands sold, about 385.000 
acres have been granted for the encouragement of 
literature, and other useful and humane pur 
poses. 

Attempts were made to settle this country as 
early as 1607, on the w. side of Kennebeck river; 
but they proved unsuccessful, and were not re 
peated till between 1620 and 1630. In 1635, the 
w. part of it was granted to Ferdinando Gorges 
by the Plymouth company, and he first instituted 
a government in this province, [n 1652, this pro 
vince came under the jurisdiction of Massachu 
setts, and was, by charter, incorporated with it in 
1691. Its population has been always increasing 
greatly ; and in the census of 1810, it numbered 
228,705 souls.] 

MAIPO, a settlement of the province and cor- 
regimiento of Rancagua in the kingdom of Chile. 
It contains six vice-parishes, and in the district of 
its cordillera are the renowned silver mines of Co- 
pavana, San Simon, and San Pedro Nolasco, 
which yielded at their first being worked 500 
marks each caxon : at present they only render from 
20 to 40, and indeed they cannot be worked all 
the year round. Here is also a copper mine ; and 
the settlement is near the lake of Aculeo. 

MAIPO, a river of this province and kingdom. 
It is large, and notorious from the number of per 
sons who have been drowned in it. It rises from 
the lake Pudaquill, and runs with such force, that 
at the time of its overflows, no bridge can be found 
to resist the impetuosity of the current : accord 
ingly the only bridge used is made of ropes, very 
strong and tightly knit together. The waters of 
this river are very thick, and entering as it does 
into the sea with great violence, it causes the latter 
to retire as it were a considerable distance from its 
mouth ; leaving a very visible circle or line of de 
marcation between its own waters and those of the 
sea. Its waters are very cold, and do not allay 
thirst, owing to their being impregnated with par 
ticles of salt. This quality, however, renders very 
delicate, and in high estimation, the flesh of the 
sheep that feed upon its banks. It abounds in 
very dainty fish, and particularly in trout. It 
enters the Pacific or S. sea, in lat, 33 43 2" s. 

MAIPO, a volcano in the same province and 
kingdom. 

MAIPURES, SANTA TERESA DE, a settlement 
of the province and government of San Juan de 
los Llanos in the Nnevo Reyno de Granada; 
situate on the shore of the river Orinoco, and of 



M A I 

another river, called Tuparro, which enters the 
sume. 

MAIPUUES, another settlement, with the dedi 
catory title of San Fernando, in (he province and 
government of La Guayana ; founded by the 
chief of the squadron, Don Joseph de Iturriaga, 
who gave it this name out of respect to King Don 
Fernando VI. who then reigned in Spain. Al 
though it was honoured also with the title of city, 
it flourished so little, and is at the present day 
such a miserable village, as ill to become the 
name. 

MAIPUROG, a river of the province and 
country of Las Amazonas. It runs into the sea 
close to the cape Del Norte. 

MAIQU1TIA, a settlement of the province and 
government of Venezuela; situate on the n. coast 
of the city of Caracas, and to the c . of La Guaira. 

MA IRA, Strait of, a channel which leads from 
the N.to the S. sea, between La Tierra del Fuego 
and the island of Los Estados. It is also called 
Strait of St. Vincent, and took the former name 
from James le Maire, a Fleming, who discovered it 
in 1616, sailing in the ship Concord with William 
Cornelius Schouten, John Theodore Ilornan, Con- 
rade Theodore Oosterblocker, Nicholas Peter 
Oosthyse, and Cornelius Kinnerser, all companions 
and equally concerned in the fitting out of the said 
vessel. This strait was afterwards discovered by 
liartolome and Gonzalo Garcia Nodal in 1618, 
Juan de Mora in 1619, and Jacob Heremite Clerk 
in 1621. It is eight leagues long, and its currents 
are very violent. It has become the common pass 
for entering into the S. sea, ever since it was dis 
covered, being a shorter route than that th rough the 
straits of Magellan. The cape of San Diego, 
which is at its entrance, stands in lat. 54 42 s. 
and the centre of the strait is in 54 52 . 

MA IRENE, a river of the province and govern 
ment of San Juan de los Llanos in the Nuevo 
Key no de Granada, of the district of the city of 
Santiago de la Atalaya, and enters the Mela. 

MA1SON, FRANCOISE, a settlement of New 
France or Canada, in the territory of the Nekou- 
banistes Indians ; situate on the shore of the lake 
of San Pedro. 

MA1SY, Cape, the e. extremity of the island of 
Cuba, 135 leagues from the point of Hicacos, and 
15 from Hispailola or St. Domingo. It is in lat. 
20 20 , and long. 301 22 . 

MAITEN, a fountain of the province and cor- 
regimieiito of Santiago in the kingdom of Chile, 
much celebrated for its delicate and wholesome 
waters, which gush out cold during the hottest 
seasons. Jt has this name from a tree that is thus 



M A J 



427 



called, and which, amongst many others of the 
same kind, grows here just at the foot of a large 
table formed of the living rock, which is made use 
of as such by the numerous visitors who come from 
the city of Santiago, and are accustomed to take 
a collation here ; the same tree forming an arbour, 
for its bows spreading very widely is capable of 
shadowing many persons ; moreover it is green all 
the year round. At the foot of this tree passes the 
stream of the fountain, which takes its rise at a 
small distance higher up from a cleft rock ; from 
whence it winds its course through shady woods, 
and banks covered with a variety of herbs and 
flowers. 

MAIZ, VALLE DEL, a settlement of Indians, 
converted by the missions that are held by the re 
ligious order of San Francisco, in the district of 
the alcaldia mayor of Guadalcazar in the province 
and bishopric of Mechoacan, and kingdom of 
Nueva Espana. It contains 107 inhabitants of 
Spaniards, Muslees, and Mulattoes, and 1123 of 
Indians, who for the most part live out of the set 
tlement, in small farms which they have upon the 
mountains. It is 22 leagues from Tula, which is 
the capital of the missions. 

MAIZ, another settlement, in the head settlement 
of the district of Tamazunchale, and alcaldia 
mayor of Valles, in the same kingdom ; situate on 
the bank of a large stream, which divides this 
jurisdiction from that of Guadalcazar, in one of the 
valleys of Ostilipac, and at the entrance of a nar 
row defile. Its population consists of 29 families 
of Indians, and 150 of Spaniards, Mustees^ and 
Mulattoes. The temperature is cold, and nothing 1 
is cultivated but maize. The plough is used here, 
which is not the case in any other of the settlements. 
In its vicinity dwell upwards of 600 families of 
Fames Indians, who admit only the sacraments of 
baptism and matrimony. Besides these, are 29 
other families who dwell upon the said mountains, 
where they are in want of water and every other 
necessary, and causing a general surprise as to the 
manner by which they can possibly sustain them 
selves. It is 26 leagues from its head settlement. 

[MAJABAGADUCE, in the district of Maine, 
at the mouth of Penobscot river, on the e. side.] 

MAJADILLA, a settlement of the province and 
government of Tucnman in Peru ; situate on the 
shore and at the source of a river which enters the 
Dulce. 

MAJAGUA, a settlement of the province and 
government of Antioquia in the Nuevo Key no de 
Granada ; situate on the shore of the river Cauca, 
and on an island formed by this river. 

MA JATES, a settlement of the province and 
3 i 2 



rap, 




M A L 



government of Cartagena in the Nuevo Reyno de 
Granada. Near it is an estate of the same name. 
It formerly belonged to the Jesuits, and here it was 
that a certain Negro woman, a servant of the col 
lege, who up to the year 1738 had brought forth 
seven times, after having had intercourse with 
other Negroes, produced seven other children com 
pletely white, and with hair curly like the Negroes, 
but of a yellow colour. The Marquis of Villa- 
liermosa, who was governor of that place, brought 
to this court, in 1739, a woman of the same fair 
character and features, Dofta Maria Bejarano, wife 
of Don Dimisio de Alcedo, who was president of 
the royal audience of Quito, one of the ancestors 
of the author of this dictionary. This settlement 
is 12 leagnes to the n. of its capital. 

MAJIS, a settlement of the province and cap 
tainship of 8. Vicente in Brazil; situate on the 
shore and at the source of the river Paraiba del 
Sur. 

[MAKEF1ELD, UPPER and LOWER, town 
ships in Buck s county, Pennsylvania.] 

MALA, SAN PEDRO DE, a settlement of the 
province and corregimiento of Canete in Peru ; 
situate in a beautiful valley of the same name, ce 
lebrated from the differences between Francisco 
Pizarro and Diego de Almagro having been ad 
justed here, as well as by its abundance of salt 
petre, and the method used for its purification ; 
the same being taken to Lima for making gun 
powder. 

MALA, a river of this province and kingdom. 
It rises in the province of Yauyos, runs w. and 
enters the sea near the former settlement. 

MALA, a point or extremity of the coast of the 
province and government of Veragua in the king 
dom of Tierra Firme, where there is a shoal or 
string of rocks, which runs two leagues into the 
S. sea. 

MALA, another, in the bay of Panama, of the 
same kingdom, at a small distance from this city. 
One of the two which form the bay of the Rio 
Grande. 

{^MALABAR, Cape, or SANDY Point, a narrow 
strip of land projecting out from the s. e. part of 
cape Cod, in Massachusetts. Lat. 41 39 . 
Long. 69 55 a;.] 

MALABR1GO, a port of the S. sea, in the pro 
vince and corregimiento of Truxillo, and kingdom 
of Peru. It is bad, small, and unsecure, as its 
name denotes ; being exposed to all the winds, and 
consequently frequented only by vessels that are 
driven into it by stress of weather. It is also call 
ed Puerto Scco, or Dry Port. At its entrance is a 
mountain, which is called Morro de Malabrigo. 



M A L 

It is 14 leagues to the n. e. of the port of Guan- 
chaco, and 11 from Cherrepe, in lat. 7 48 *. 

MALABRIGO, a small river of the province and 
government of Buenos Ayres. It runs into the 
lake Cristal, and enters the Rio de la Plata. 

MALA-CARA, BAJOS DE, some shoals on the 
coast of the province and corregimiento of Quillota 
in the kingdom of Chile. They lie between the 
port of Herradura and that of Pichicay. 

MALACATEPEC, SANTIAGO DE, a settlement 
and head settlement of the district of the alcaldia 
mayor of Nexapa in Nueva Espana. It is of a 
cold temperature, and contains 32 families of In 
dians. 

MALACATEPEC, another settlement, with the 
dedicatory title of La Asumpcion. It is the head 
of the district of the alcaldia mayor of Metepec in 
Nueva Espana. It contains 1779 families of In 
dians, including those who live in the wards of its 
district. 

MALACATEPEQUE, SANTA MARIA DE, a 
settlement of the head settlement of the district of 
San Andres de Cholula, and alcaldia mayor of 
this name, in Nueva Espana. It contains 120 fa 
milies of Indians, and is two leagues s. of its ca 
pital. 

MALACATOS, a settlement of Indians, of the 
province and corregimiento of Loxa in the kingdom 
of Quito. It is situate on the n. shore of the river 
of its name, in a pleasant and cheerful spot. Its 
climate is hot, and it abounds in exquisite fruits, 
amongst which the chirimoya is held in high esti 
mation, and which thrives here better than in any 
other part. It produces also much sugar-cane, 
and has large breeds of cattle, owing to the rich 
ness of its pastures. In the state of Santa Ana, 
which is one league to the s. is a rich silver-mine, 
which is not worked through want of hands and 
money. This settlement is seven leagues from 
Loxa, in lat. 4 12 27" s. 

MALAGA, a city of the province of Chitareros 
in the Nuevo Reyno de Granada ; situate near the 
river Tequia. It was founded by Geronimo de 
Aguado in 1541, but was soon destroyed by the 
Indians. 

MALAGUAS, a barbarous nation of Indians, 
of the province and government of Esmcraldas in 
the kingdom of Quito. After the conquest they 
rebelled about the middle of the last century, 
(1700), and in the following betook themselves to 
the woods, where they live like wild beasts, be 
tween the rivers Tululvi to the s. e. Bogota to the 
s. and s. w. Motaje to the w. av i n. w. Puespi to 
the n. Mira to the n. e. and Camunixi to the e, 
Very little is known of these barbarians. 



M A L 

MALAGUETA, a port of the island of Cuba, 
on the n. coast, between the port of Manati and 
the point Del Padre. 

MALALHUE, a settlement of Indians, of the 
district of Guaclalabquen in the kingdom of 
Chile ; situate to the ??. of one of the lakes of 
Iluanahuo. 

MALAMB1TO, BARRANCO DE, a settlement 
of the province and government of Cartagena in 
the Nuevo Reyno de Granada ; situate on the 
shore of the Rio Grande de la Magdalena, in an 
island which this forms with the waters of the 
Dique, in lat. 10 42 n. 

MALAMBO, a settlement of the same province 
and kingdom as the former ; situate in the royal 
road which leads down to the Rio de la Magda 
lena. It is very small and poor, in lat. 10 21 n. 

MALAMBOS, a nation of Indians, of the same 
province and kingdom as are the former settle 
ments. These barbarians formerly extended them 
selves as far as the mouth of the Rio Grande de 
la Magdalena. At present they do not exist at 
all, and their name is preserved only in the afore 
said settlements. 

MALAM1N1CAN, a river of the province and 
government of Louisiana in N. America. It 
rises from the lakes of Los Ontaouaces, runs w. and 
turning to the s. w. unites itself with the Vieux 
Deserts to enter the Mississippi. 

MALBAL A, a barbarous nation of Indians, of 
the province of Chaco in Peru, who dwelt upon 
the shores of the Rio Grande. They arc well 
featured and of a good size ; they go naked, but 
are less brutal than others, since they cover the 
parts of shame with hides made ofckaguar; the 
women also covering the whole of the body with a 
sort of cloak. Until they marry, the women arc 
very tolerable to behold, for before this they are 
not allowed to paint themselves. The manner of 
painting their faces is by straight blue lines drawn 
from the forehead down to the chin, and the men 
will form squares, crosses, and other figures, in 
painting themselves. These may only have one 
wife ; and the bridegroom is required to solicit the 
hand of his intended from her parents, and gains 
her, having first received all their consents sepa 
rately. The men and women are mutually re 
gardful of fidelity to each other; and should the 
woman commit adultery, she is severely and pub 
licly chastised by her own relations. The widows 
who will not marry again, become public strumpets, 
and after this their character is looked upon as 
completely lost, and no one would think of taking 
them to wife. The hair is accustomed to be worn 



M A L 



429 



flowing down to the shoulders ; but the widows, 
by way of mourning, have it much longer; and 
they further shew their sorrow by not admitting 
it to be cut, and also by abstaining from fish as 
long as their widowhood may last. These Indians 
use the same arms as do the other nations, excepting 
that the dart maybe carried solely by the caciques 
and captains. They have a war declared against 
all the other nations, and profess a union and 
friendship with no others than the Chinupies and 
the Velelas. They have nothing to do with agri 
culture, but subsist entirely by fishing and the 
chase. They have some breeds of sheep, not for 
the purpose of eating the flesh, but for profiting by 
the wool; of which they make belts, dyed red and 
adorned with spangles of little shells : these they 
put upon their heads as diadems, and, adorning 
their waists with plumes of various colours, they, 
thus decked, celebrate their festivals and drunken 
entertainments. Then it is they assert that the 
devil is accustomed to appear, though only to the 
oldest drunkards, in the dress of a Spaniard, when 
he is so good as to reveal to them future events. 
They, nevertheless, have no kind of religious ob 
servance, being entirely atheists ; and being fully 
persuaded that, when they die, all is finished. They 
are yet very superstitious, and believe that the 
singing of birds, the howling of dogs, &amp;c. are 
prognostics of either good or evil that will await 
them ; and by these they uniformly direct their 
actions. The warriors are interred standing, but 
others in a recumbent posture. Like the other 
Indians, these do not put into the grave of the de 
funct eatables, &amp;c. ; but they abstain from touch 
ing the arms of those who die in war, as well as 
from passing the place where their misfortune hap 
pened, considering it a bad augury so to do. They 
celebrate in the dawn of many days successvely 
the exequies of the defunct with great howlings 
and lamentations, and after this he is no more re 
membered. Amongst these Indians are found 
some caciques, whose names have a strong resem 
blance to the Judean names, such as Jonais, Jo- 
napain, Jonastete, and Jonaiso ; and from thence 
some have endeavoured to prove the population of 
America from the Hebrews. The governor of Tu- 
cuman, Don Esteban deUrizar, made a peace with 
these Indians, and obtained that they should come 
to Buenos Ayres to be instructed in the Catholic 
faith; but we find, that passing through the city 
of Santiago del Estero, they rose against the Spa 
niards, put many to death, and returned to their 
territory : the greater part, however, settled at 
Buenos Ayres. The Father Pedro Lozano, of the 



430 



M A L 



company of the Jesuiis, says, that the nation of 
these Malbalus or Malbalaes consisted of upwards 
of 500,000 souls. 

MALE AS A, a settlement of the province and 
government of Popayan in the Nuevo Reyno do 
Granada ; situate in a territory of Indians, from 
whom it took its name, and who were discovered 
in 1536 by Sebastian Velalcazar. They were 
by nature barbarous, treacherous, and cruel, but 
are now entirely extinguished. The territory is 
fertile, and has some gold mines ; but neither are 
these worked, nor the former cultivated, being 
without inhabitants, save those dwelling in a poor 
miserable village. It lies on the shore of the river 
Plaza, in the royal road which leads down to Santa 
Fe, to the n. of the capital. 

MALBASA, a river of this province and king 
dom, which rises from the lake of Guanacas, to 
the e. n. e. of Popayan, runs s. and enters the Rio 
Blanco, and, united with this, empties itself into 
the Cauca. 

MALBAYE, a settlement of the French, in 
New France or Canada ; situate on the shore of 
the river St. Lawrence. 

MALBOROUGH, NEW, a settlement of the 
province and colony of Virginia in N. America; 
situate on the shore of the river Potowmack. 

MALCHINGU1, a settlement of the kingdom 
of Quito, in the corregimiento of the district of 
Las Cinco Leguas de la Capital . 

[MALDEN, a town in Middlesex county, Mas 
sachusetts, on the e. post-road, four miles n. of 
Boston, containing 1033 inhabitants. It is con 
nected with Charlestown by a bridge over Mystic 
river, built in 1787.] 

MALDONADO, a small city of the province 
and government of Buenos Ay res in Peru ; with a 
good port, which is in a beautiful bay, but unfor 
tunately exposed to the s. w. winds, which are 
here very strong and prevalent. On each side it 
has a guard, called of S. Carlos, as also a signal 
tower. Here dwell some fishermen, and some 
who gain their livelihood by dressing leather. 

MALDONADO, a small river of the same pro 
vince and kingdom. It runs s. and enters the sea 
in the bay mentioned in the above article. 

MALDONADO, an island of the N. sea; situate 
near the coast of Buenos Ayres, and at the en 
trance of the Rio de la Plata, opposite the city 
which gives it its name. 

MALE, GRAND, a river of Nova Scotia or 
Acadia in N. America. It rises in the mountains 
called De Notre Dame, runs n. and enters the 
rher St. Lawrence. 



M A L 

MALEBUYES, an ancient province of the 
Nuevo Reyno de Granada, to the n. extending it 
self from the shore of the Rio Grande de la Mag- 
clalena. It was discovered by Luis de Santa Criiz 
in 1539 ; is full of woods, inhabited by many bar 
barous and warlike Indians, is of a hot climate, 
and contains many gold mines. 

MALECITAS, a nation of Indians of New 
France or Canada in N. America ; reduced to the 
faith by the missionaries of the extinguished regu 
lar order of Jesuits. 

MALES, a settlement of the province and go 
vernment of Pasto, in the district and jurisdiction 
of the audience of Quito. 

MALES, another settlement, in the province and 
government of Venezuela, and Nuevo Reyno de 
Granada ; it belongs to the district of the city of 
Caracas, situate e. of the lake of Tacarigua. 

MALFIN, VALLE DEL, in the province and 
government of Tucuman and kingdom of Peru ; 
at the foot of the cordillera of the kingdom of 
Chile. 

MALICON, a small river of New France or 
Canada. It runs w. and enters the lake Michigan, 
between the rivers Blanche and Grand. 

MALIFLITOS, a barbarous nation of Indians 
of the Nuevo Reyno de Granada, to the n. n, e. of 
the mountains of Bogota, and in the vicinity of 
the river Tame. They are descendants of the 
Betoyes, and inhabit the woods and swamps, main 
tain themselves by the chase, and are bounded by 
the Lolacos to the s. and the Quilifayes to the 
n. n. w. 

[MAL1GASH, a small creek on the 5. side of 
Chaleur bay, about three leagues from Jaquit 
river, where are erected saw-mills and pot-ash 
works. Several ships and brigs have been built 
at this place. Opposite to it, and covering its 
front, lies 1 isle aux Herons, or Heron island, 
about two leagues long and one wide. It lies e. 
and w. and about two miles in some places from the 
main.] 

MALIGNE, or SABLONIEIIE, a large river of 
the province and government of Louisiana. It 
rises in the settlement of the Choumans Indians, 
runs s. e. with a much augmented stream, and en 
ters the sea in the bay of San Bernardo. 

MALIN, a settlement and asiento of the silver 
mines of the province and corregimiento of Gua- 
macucho in Peru. 

MAL1NALCO, the jurisdiction and alcaldia 
mayor of the kingdom and bishopric of Mechoa- 
can. Its boundaries are confined, being no more 
than 15 leagues long from e. to w. and 14 wide 



M A L 

w. s. though it is nevertheless one of the most po 
pulous jurisdictions. The territory is very fertile 
and pleasant ; it abounds in seeds, fruits, garden- 
herbs, and flowers. The temperature is generally 
hot. Here are 21 very luxuriant estates, in which, 
besides the population of the settlements, dwell 70 
families of Spaniards, Mustees^ and Mulattoes, 
and this without reckoning any of the Indians. 
Near the settlement of Ocuila the regulars of the 
company of Jesuits had one of these estates, in 
which there were no less than 50,000 sheep. The 
women of the settlements of Malinalco and Tenan- 
zingo are so industrious and laborious, that they 
universally maintain themselves by weaving a cloth 
called de rebozo, of silk and cotton mixed ; as also 
by cultivating the quapaxtle, which is a well- 
scented herb, much prized at Mexico. The set 
tlements comprehended in this alcaldia arc the 
following : 

Malinalco, 

S. Nicolas, 

S. Sebastian, 

Santa Maria, 

S. Juan, 

Santa Monica, 

Santa Maria, 2. 

S. Martin, 

S. Guillermo, 

S. Pedro, 

S. Andres, 

Santiago, 

Thecomatlan, 

Xalmolonga, 

S. Simon, 

Zumpahuacan, 

Asumpcion, 

S. Martin, 2. 

S. Agustin, 

Ascencion, 

S. Pedro, 2. 

S. Francisco, 

S. Gaspar, 

S. Miguel, 

MALINALCO, the capital, is the settlement of the 
same name ; situate in a llanura of great extent, 
as it were in a hollow. The territory, being hem 
med in on the s. by dry and barren hills, is very 
unpleasant and dangerous to pass; but the hills 
on the e. side are covered with trees, such as 
ocotales or pine-trees, which are carried to be 
sold at Mexico, since they are used by the Indians 
for their lights. From the quarries are cut large 
portions of stone for building. In the ward of 
San Juan, to the s. e. are many springs of water ; 



M A L 



431 



S. Juan, 2. 
S. Pablo, 
Santo de Ocuila, 
S. Gaspar, 2. 
Santa Maria, 3. 
Santa Monica, 2. 
Santa Ana, 
S. Sebastianj 2. 
S. Ambrosio, 
S. Juan, 3. 
Quatepec, 
S. Lorenzo, 
Zoquizingo, 
Tepozozuca, 
Tenanzingo, 
Natividad, 
Santa Cruz, 
S. Nicolas, 
Asumpcion, 2. 
Santa Ana, 
Santa Barbara, 
S. Lucas Evange- 
lista. 



and here is also a pleasant defile formed by the 
aforesaid hills. The inhabitants are composed ot 
770 families of Mexican Indians. Much wheat is 
sown here ; and the gardens, which are well irri 
gated, abound in fine fruit-trees. Another spring 
of water rises in the ward of Pala, and fertilizes 
an extensive plain, which is also surrounded by 
lofty eminences. The waters of this spring are 
drank by the inhabitants of the place, and are 
brought thither by an aqueduct which terminates 
in the Plaza. It has a convent of the religious 
order of St. Augustin, which is a house having a 
vote in the province, also a curate of the same 
order. Annexed to it are 1 1 small settlements or 
wards in the district De Una Legua, and in these 
dwell 80 families of Spaniards, Mustees, and Mu- 
lattoes, It is 20 leagues s. e. of Mexico. 

MALINALTENGO, a settlement and head 
settlement of the district of the alcaldia mayor of 
Tlapa in Nueva Espaiia, in which dwell 100 fami 
lies of Indians. 

MAL1NALTEPEC, an ancient province of 
New France or Canada, conquered and united to 
the empire by Montezuma in the ninth year of his 
reign. At the present day it is divided into other 
provinces, through the arrangement of the Spa 
niards after the conquest. 

MALL A, a large, fertile, and well-peopled 
HannTa, of the province and corregimiento of Cuzco 
in Peru, towards the w. It was one of the ancient 
conquests made by Pachacutec, tenth emperor of 
the Incas. 

MALLABAUQUEN, a great lake of the king, 
dom of Chile, to the e. of the Villa Rica, from 
whence it lies four leagues distant. It is four 
leagues long from e . to w. and two wide n. s. It 
is formed from two canals, which run at the foot of 
the volcano of Villa Rica, and which form the 
river Tolten near this settlement. 

MALLAI, a settlement of the province and cor 
regimiento of Guailas in Peru; annexed to the 
curacy of Churin. 

MALLAMA, an ancient and extensive province 
of Peru, to the s. of Cuzco, and to the e. of the 
Andes. The barbarians by whom it is inhabited 
were very valorous and warlike, but were subjected 
by Maita Capac, fourth emperor of the Incas. 
At present it is confounded in the division of the 
other provinces made by the Spaniards ; but some 
part of it, which still remains uncultivated and un 
known, is the resort of some infidel refugees. 

MALLAMA, a settlement of the province arid go 
vernment of Pasto, in the district and jurisdiction 
of the audience of Quito. 



M A L 



MALLOA, a settlement, of tlic province and cor- 
reghniento of Colchagua in the kingdom of Chile; 
situate to the s. of the town of Triana. 

MALLOA, a river of this province and kingdom. 
It rises in the mountains of the cordillcra, and 
unites itself, with the Tinguirica to enter together 
into the Rapel. 

MALOMINES, a settlement of Indians of New 
France or Canada, in the territory of the Foxes, on 
the shore of the bay of Puanto in the lake Michigan. 
MALOQUES, a river of the province and 
country of Las Amazonas, in the territory of Mato- 
groso. It rises close to the town of Oro, runs s. 
and enters the Itenes or Guapore, close to the town 
of San Francisco Xavier. 

MALOYA, a province and alcaldia mayor of 
the kingdom of Nueva Vizcaya ; bounded e. by 
the province of Rosario or Chametlan, and by that 
ofTepeguana, from which it is divided by the 
river Del Rosario. Its situation is on the skirt of the 
sierra of Topia. It is of a mild temperature; and 
although it does not yield wheat, produces maize 
in abundance, besides honey and wax made by the 
swarms of bees found in its mountains, the same 
being the principal and almost only branch of the 
commerce of its inhabitants. These are few, ow 
ing to the reduced state of the population, which 
consists of only four settlements of Mexican In 
dians, of one real of some mines, from whence some 
silver is obtained, and also of some estates, in which 
there are some small breeds of cattle. It was an 
ciently part of the alcaldia mayor of Tepeguana ; 
but this latter being considered of sufficient extent 
by itself, the former was separated from it about 
70 years since, and made an alcaldia mayor by it 
self, though at the same time considered as one of 
the least lucrative in the whole kingdom. The 
capital is the real of mines of Santa Rita. 

MALPAIS, a rough and craggy pass of the 
serrama in the province and government of La 
Sonora. 

MALPAIS, a province in the llanos of San Juan, 
of the Nuevo Reyno de Granada ; discovered by 
Jorge de Spira in 1536, who gave it this name, on 
account of its being a barren, uneven, and moun 
tainous country. It was thinly inhabited with In 
dians. As many, however, as there were, proved 
themselves very valorous in the battles fought 
against the invading Spaniards, and had well-nigh 
caused these to quit the country, not without great 
peril of being entirely destroyed. 

MALPEC, a small island of the N. sea, near the 
e. coast of the island of St. John in Nova Scotia or 
Acadia. 



M A L 

MAL-PELO, a small isle, or, to speak more 
correctly, a rock, surrounded by smaller ones, in 
the S. sea. It is composed almost entirely of stone, 
and in it are two very lofty peaks. It is barren, 
80 leagues distant from the gulf of Panama, in the 
kingdom of Ticrra Firme, in lat. 4 48 n. In na 
vigating these parts, it is necessary to keep clear of 
this island, as it is of that of Gorgona, from which 
it is difficult to steer clear, owing to the very strong 
currents and contrary winds ; and thus, when a 
vessel is caught in this manner, it is called engor- 
gonarse, or to be engulphed ; but, indeed, of two 
evils it is certainly more convenient to suffer this 
misfortune, which at the worst only retards the 
voyage, than to run to certain destruction on the 
island of Mal-Pelo. 

MALTOIS, a port of the coast of Nova Scotia 
or Acadia. 

MALTRATA, SAN PEDRO DE, a principal and 
head settlement of the district of the alcaldia mayor 
of Orizava in Nueva Espana. It contains 300 fa 
milies of Mexican Indians, and 50 of Spaniards, 
Mustees, and Mulattoes. It is surrounded by dif 
ferent wards or small settlements, and in these are 
produced seeds and fruits, and there are many 
herds of goats and swine. It is four leagues to the 
w. of its capital. 

MALTRATA, a sierra, which is the Nevada or 
Snowy, in the llanuras of Perote and Azumpan in 
Nueva Espana. The Spaniards gave it this name, 
from their having been ill-treated here on its dis 
covery. The Indians, in their language, are called 
Poyauhtecati. This sierra is very lofty, and may 
be seen 30 leagues at sea, and serves as a land 
mark, being the first land seen before the sierras of 
San Martin. It is 20 leagues distant from the 
coast, vomits smoke, and according to Diego Mu 
noz, once, for 10 years, never smoked at all. The 
Indians used to assert in their ancient songs, (hat 
when these sierras should vomit smoke, there would 
be great mortalities and plagues. In. fact, in 1545, 
there really did happen the plague, which afflicted 
the kingdom, and in which an infinite number of 
souls perished, though not without the said moun 
tains having first ominously vomited much smoke, 
and continuing to do the same for 20 years ; after 
which time they ceased, save at intervals, when a 
little smoke was seen to rise. 

MALUAS, a settlement of the province and cor- 
regimiento of Guailas in Peru ; annexed to the cu 
racy of Cotaparazu. 

MALUAS, a bay of the country or land of La 
brador in N. America. It lies between the Snowy 
river and Narrow cape, of that coast. 



MAM 

MALUCA, a point of the coast of the province 
and corregimiento of Piura in Peru ; close to cape 
.Blanco. 

["MALU1NAS, a parish of the province and go 
vernment of Buenos Ay res, in lat. 5 1 32 s. Long. 
57 37 30" o&amp;gt;.] 

MALVINAS, or FALKLAND Isles, of the sea of 
Magellan, discovered by some French of S. Malo 
in 1706, who gave them this name, and afterwards 
called by the English, Falkland. They lie to the 
e. of the straits of Magellan, and are 180 miles 
from cape San Juan, and 315 from cape Horn. 
Their number is not rightly ascertained : the 
largest of them was reconnoitred in 1764 by the 
French captain Luis de Bouganville, who gave it 
and the port his name; and having discovered 
that the latter was very good, he established a co 
lony there, the same having been subsequently 
ceded to the king of Spain, who claimed it as his 
right. This island extends about 75 miles. In 
1767, it was taken possession of by the governor 
Don Felipe Ruiz Puente, a naval captain, and 
knight of the order of Santiago, the same having 
been nominated by the king. He was succeeded 
in his office by Don Francisco Gil y Lemus, knight 
of the order of San Juan, and who was also at the 
time a naval captain, and afterwards rear-admiral 
of the royal armada. These islands are full of 
swamps ; the climate and territory are very bad 
for the plants and fruits of Europe or America, the 
cold being excessive. [The Falkland islt s lie be 
tween lat. 51 5 and 52 46 s. Long. 57 40 and 
61 10 w. The soil of these islands is bad, arid the 
shores are beaten by perpetual storms. The Spa 
niards now send criminals to these inhospitable 
shores from their settlements in America.] 

MALVOILIN, some rocky shoals, near the s. 
const of Nova Scotia or Acadia, between the ports 
of Castors and Tangier. 

MAMA, SAN PEDRO DF, a settlement of the 
province and corregimiento of Guarochiri in Peru ; 
annexed to the curacy of San Juan de Matucana. 

MAMA, an abundant river of the province and 
government of La Guayana. 

MAMA-HUALLA, a river of the district of 
Guadalabquen in the kingdom of Chile. It runs 
n. n. w. and enters the Calla-calla. 

[MAMA-KATING, a township in Ulster 
county, New York, w. of Montgomery and Wall- 
kill, on Delaware river. It contains 1763 inhabi 
tants, including 232 electors and 51 slaves.] 

MAMALHUAZCO, an ancient city of Nueva 
Espana, which was given by the Emperor Xolotl 
to Cohuatlapal, one of t .ie Chichimecas lords of 
his court. At present it does not exist. 

VOL. II. 



MAM 



433 



MAMALHUAZOCAN, a city of Nueva Es 
pana, in the time of the gentilism of the Indians, 
peopled by the Chalcas nation, after the route that 
these experienced when they were conquered by 
Tizoc AxayacatI, emperor of Mexico. 

MAMALUCOS. See SAN PABLO. 

MAMALUCOS, or MAMELUCOS, some Mustces 
of the kingdom of Brazil, inhabitants of the pro 
vince and colony of San Pablo, whose origin is as 
follows : The Portuguese, the conquerors of Brazil, 
after that they had founded the city of San Vi 
cente on the sea-coast, detached from thence some 
colonies to form other settlements ; and amongst 
the most celebrated of these was San Pablo, the 
same being in the canton which the natives of 
the country call De la Piratininga. A short time 
after this, arrived the Father Manuel Nobrega, ot 
the abolished order of the Jesuits, first provincial, 
sent by San Ignacio de Loyola ; and he, consider 
ing this settlement as a most convenient place for 
founding a mission for the Indians, transferred 
hither the college which he had founded at San 
Vicente, on the evening of the conversion of St. 
Paul, in 1554, dedicating to this apostle of the 
gentiles this new college, the same being from that 
time forward called San Pablo de Piratinanga. 
The inhabitants, with the succour of the Jesuits, 
preserved for a considerable time a very orderly 
and decent behaviour, and the Indians, seeing 
that these religious brethren were the sureties for 
all good treatment at the hands of the Portuguese, 
easily embraced the Catholic faith ; but their 
virtue was of short duration, and the colony of 
San Pablo de Piratininga, in which the missiona 
ries had founded the greatest expectations, proved 
to be the greatest of all their obstacles to their 
spiritual conquests, and such as they could never 
after surmount. The evil communicated itself 
with a neighbouring colony, in which the Portu 
guese were living mixed amongst the Indians ; 
and finally, from a mixture of the Indians of San 
Pablo was produced a perverse race of Mustees, 
who were addicted to all kinds of disorderly ways, 
and who were called Mamelucos, from their re 
semblance to the ancient slaves of the Egyptian 
sultans. In spite of the endeavours of the go 
vernors, magistrates, the Jesuits, and the ecclesi 
astical judges to restrain the progress of the grow 
ing evil, the bonds of reconciliation became daily 
more relaxed, and the Mamelucoi, at once appear 
ed a race who trampled upon ali divine and human 
authority. Indeed, their numbers continued to be 
greatly increased by a vast accession of refugees 
of various nations, Portuguese, Spanish, Italian, 
and Dutch ; the same having fled from the justice 
3 K 



MAM 



that awaited their crimes. These, being joined by 
some Brazilian Indians, and all of them being 
&amp;lt; lamourcd with a sense of liberty, gave themselves 
up to every kind of vice, arid spread themselves 
over a large tract of country. There was now 
nothing more desirable than the total extirpation of 
these lawless people, and the same was equally 
an object of importance to the crowns of Spain 
and Portugal ; but the situation of the city of San 
Pablo, as it was upon the top a rock, prevented it 
from being conquered, save by famine ; and even to 
effect this, no small supply of troops would have 
been necessary, and these could not at the time be 
spared either from Brazil or Paraguay : add to 
this, that the city might have held a strong conflict 
with only a few determined defenders. The prin 
cipal cause, however, why steps were not taken 
against the Mamelucos, were that they never left 
their own territory, being much attached to it 
from its fertility, the great abundance of all the 
necessaries of life, and the pureness of the air, the 
sky being always serene and the climate tempe 
rate, notwithstanding that it is situate in lat. 24 s. 
Thelandsare fertile, and produce very good wheat, 
the sugar-cane grows in abundance, and the pas 
tures are very fine. When we consider these 
advantages, it must be evident that nothing but an 
innate love of mischief could induce these people 
to encounter imminent dangers and fatigues, in 
traversing those spacious regions, which they de 
populated of more than two millions of souls, 
suffering in their excursions, which oftentimes 
lasted for two years, the most miserable life, many 
of them perishing, and many finding, on their re 
turn, their wives married to others. Indeed, in 
all probability, they would by these means have 
become extinct, were not their numbers regularly 
replenished by the captives which they made in 
their wars. The great ascendancy which the 
Mamelucos had gained, was not less through the 
fault of the Spaniards of Paraguay than of the 
Indians ; for had the Spaniards not been remiss in 
aiding the converted settlements to throw off the 
bondage under which they were held by the Ma 
melucos, these would never have prevailed as they 
did : but the Spaniards were blinded by a false 
interest, and looked upon these new churches as a 
barrier opposed to their avaricious views; nor 
were they aware of their error until they discover 
ed their fine frontier entirely ruined and depopu 
lated. The Mamelucos discovered a greater spirit 
of resistance amongst the new-made Christians, 
than they expected, and finding themselves unable 
to destroy them, they had recourse to art and 
stratagem. One of these, which they practised for 



a long time with great effect, was as follows : 
They divided themselves into small parties, and 
the commander of each being dressed as a Jesuit, 
and being aware, from the crosses that had been 
stuck up in different parts by these fathers, of the 
places where they should find their prey, they 
began to introduce themselves to the attention of 
the Indians by making presents, curing their in 
firmities, and exhorting them to persevere in the 
faith they had been taught, or explaining to them 
in a few words ihe principal articles; and this 
they had a facility of doing, in as much as they 
were acquainted with the Guarani language. 
When by these means they had drawn together a 
considerable number, they proposed to them that 
they should go and setlle in some more convenient 
spot, where nothing might be wanting to them. The 
greater part would suffer themselves to be seduced 
by these wolves covered in sheep s clothing, when, 
the traitors dropping the mask, would seize upon 
their victims, and put those to death who offered 
resistance or attempted to fly. This stratagem 
was discovered by some who effected a return to 
their country ; but in the mean time the Indians 
were persuaded that the authors of these atrocities 
were truly Jesuits, so that the real fathers of this 
order were constantly in dread of their lives, nor 
could they, for a considerable number of years, 
make a single proselyte. In 1630, the Mamelucos 
destroyed various settlements of the missions, and 
in the following year the Villarica and Ciudad 
Real of Spaniards; but in 1641, in another irrup 
tion that they made, the Neofitos Indians sided 
with the converted settlements, and succeeded in 
routing the common enemy, who lost upwards of 
12,000 men. In 1645, the Mamelucos made 
another invasion against the Itatincs, when the 
Father Francisco Arias, the missionary, met with 
his death. In 1694, they entered the territory of 
the Chiquitos Indians, and were routed, which 
damped their spirits ; and after this time, for the 
purpose of greater security, it was allowed by the 
king that the Indians of the missions might carry 
fire-arms. 

MAMARA, a settlement of the province and 
corregimienfo of Cotabambas in Pern, where they 
make very good leather-soles, gloves, and dressed 
leather; with which the natives carry on a great 
commerce with the other provinces. 

[MAMARONECK, a township in W. Chester 
county, New York, containing 452 inhabitants, 
including 57 slaves. It is bounded s. by New 
Rochrlle, and e. by the Sound.] 

[MAMARUMI, a place on the road from 
Guayaquil to Quito, in S. America, where there 



MAM 

is a very beautiful cascade. The rock from which 
the water precipitates itself is nearly perpendicu 
lar, and 50 fathoms high ; and on both sides edged 
with lofty and spreading trees. The clearness of 
the water dazzles the sight, which is delighted, at 
the same time, with the large volume of water 
formed in its fall ; after which it continues its 
course in a bed, along a small descent, and is 
crossed over by a bridge.] 

MAMAS, a river of the province and corregi- 
miento of Coquimbo in the kingdom of Chile. It 
runs n. n. w. then turns its course w. and enters 
the sea at the port of Copiapo. 

MAMAS, three very large rocks, situate in the 
middle of the grand river Magdalena, in the 
Nuevo Reyno de Granada, between the cities of 
Anserma and Antioquia. They render the navi 
gation dangerous, and upon them have been lost 
many champanes^ the names of the vessels which 
are used in the traffic of the said river. 

MAMIA, Lake of, in the province and coun 
try of Las Amazonas, and in that part which is 
possessed by the Portuguese. It is formed by a 
river which rises in the territory of the Idemanais 
Indians, and enters the Maranon, first forming 
this lake. 

MAMISIA, a settlement of the province and 
corregimienlo of Arica in Peru ; annexed to the 
curacy of Tarapaca. 

MA MO, a settlement of the province and go 
vernment of Santa Marta in the Nuevo Reyno de 
Granada, near its capital. 

MAMO, a river of this kingdom, navigable for 
small vessels or canoes. It runs from n. to s. and 
enters the Orinoco on its n. side. 

MAMO, another, a small river of the province 
and corregimiento of Pataz in Peru. It runs 
nearly due e. in the limits AY Inch divide this pro 
vince from that of Lamas, and enters the Uca- 
yale. 

MAMO, a lake or pool of the river Orinoco, in 
the province and government of Guayana, and 
government of Cumana, formed by a bay of a 
semicircular figure which the river makes, and by 
a point or long strip of land, and having a very 
narrow mouth or entrance. It lies on the n. coast, 
a little before the river enters the sea ; and near to 
it stood a settlement of the missions which belonged 
to the religious order of San Francisco, but which 
was burnt arid destroyed by the Caribes Indians 
in 1735 ; at which time the Father Fr. Andres 
Lopez Gumilla suffered martyrdom at the hands 
of those infidels. The settlement had the title of 
Nuestra Sefiora de los Reraedios. 

MAMOL, or MABAL, a river of the province 



MAM 



435 



and country of Las Amazonas, in the Portuguese 
possessions. It is small, runs n. n. w. and enters 
the Grand pool formed by the different arms of the 
Madera. 

MAMONE, or MAMON, a lake of the province 
and government of Paraguay. It is formed by a 
desagiie or waste- water of this river, on the w. 
shore, opposite the cordillera of San Fernando. 

MAMON1, a river of the province and govern 
ment of Panama in the kingdom of Tierra Firrne. 
It rises in the mountains of the isthmus, laves 
spacious and fertile Hanuras^ and enters the Ba- 
yano, nearly where this runs into the sea ; the two 
forming a point of land, in which there is a beauti 
ful estate of sugar-canes, where there is made a 
considerable quantity of sugar, brandy, and honey. 
The waters of this river are very delicate and 
wholesome, and its shores are lined with several 
estates. It passes a quarter of a league from the 
settlement of San Christoval de Chepo. 

MAMORE, an abundant and navigable river 
of the province and government of Moxos in the 
kingdom of Quito. It flows down from the most 
lofty sierras ; according to some, from the lake of 
Cujabas, and to others, from a spot close to the 
port of Totore, of the province of Mizque in Peru. 
It runs many leagues to the n. and to the s. of the 
Maranon or Amazon, taking the different names 
of the countries and places through which it pas 
ses, and collecting in its course the waters of 
several other rivers, such as the Piraix, the Sara, 
and others which proceed from Los Tapucurus : 
after that it is joined by the Macobi and the Tima- 
chu, which increase it most abundantly. It enters 
the Madera on the w. side, at the same time that 
this river is entered by the Itenes. Monsieur de 
L ]sle, in his map of the kingdom of Peru, con 
founds this river with the Madera. In the part 
where it receives the river Chapare orParati it has 
a beautiful port, and its entrance or mouth is in 
lat. 11 55 s. 

MAMOIU:, with the addition of Chico, to dis 
tinguish it from the above, another river, of the 
province and government of Santa Cruz de la 
Sierra in Peru, which rises in the sierra oi the 
eminences of Itinuyo. It enters the Marmore 
Grande, in the province and government of Los 
Moxos. 

MA MORONI, a river of the province and 
country of Las Amazonas. It runs e. and, after 
wards inclining to the s. s. e. enters the Madera 
opposite the fall of Oranaya. 

MAMOS, a settlement of the province and go 
vernment of San Juan de los Llanos in the Nuevo 
Reyno de Granada, lying under the equinoctial 
3 K 2 



436 



M A N 



line, near the head and source of the river Napo. 
It has in Us neighbourhood many and abundant 
silver mines. 

MAMPATAR, a port of the island Margarita, 
in -which a castle has been built for its defence. 
It is four leagues from the city of La Ascension. 

MANAB1QUE, Point of, in the coast of the 
province and government of Yucatan, between the 
gulf of Honduras and the Triunfo de la Cruz. 

MANABO,or MAN A NO, CANO DK, one of those 
channels which form the islands at the entrance of 
the Orinoco. It is called Grande, as being the 
principal mouth, formed by the n. coast of the 
said islands, to distinguish it from another which 
is called Cano de Manabo, or Manano Chico. 

MANACASIA, a river of the province and go 
vernment of Guayana, which enters into the s. 
side of the Meta. In the woods of its vicinity 
dwell many barbarian Indians, of the Guaibas and 
Chiribocas Indians. 

MANACICAS, a nation of Indians of the pro 
vince and government of Paraguay in Peru, re 
duced at present to the Catholic faith. In the 
time of its gentilism it was composed of 22 vil 
lages, which formed as many other different can 
tons, independent of each other, and each having 
its own peculiar title, and the inhabitants of the 
first being called Igritucas, of the second Sibacas, 
&amp;c. The country which this nation then occu 
pied is two days journey to the n. of the settle 
ment of the missions, called San Francisco Xavicr, 
at the n. extremity of the country of the Chiqui- 
tos Indians. It forms the figure of a pyramid, 
the base being towards the s. ; and what is most sin 
gular is, that in this nation dwell other Indians, 
who are perfectly distinct from the Maiiacicas. 
This country is irrigated by many rivers, and is 
surrounded by woods, which extend for a great 
space from e. to w. and are so thick as to be im 
penetrable to the sun. Beyond these woods are 
large deserts, for the most part inundated. The 
territory produces many fruits without cultivation ; 
and the vaynilla is here equally common with a 
kind of palm totally distinct from that generally 
known, and the fruit of which is as large as a 
melon, and fixed to the trunk similar to the cocos. 
Amongst the animals of this country is one called 
famocosio, which has the head of a tiger, the body 
of a mastiff, and is without any tail, of an activity 
and ferocity unequalled. When attacked by this 
animal, it is impossible to avoid being torn to 
pieces, excepting you have the good fortune to be 
able to mount a tree for security ; though even 
this will not always avail, for the animal, not be 
ing able to climb, erects itself on its hind-legs and 



MAN 

makes a roaring noise, whereupon others of its 
own class arrive and begin to root up the tree, and 
very quickly bring it to the ground ; accordingly, 
if the person pursued should happen not to have 
any arrows, with which he may kill these animals 
whilst thus employed, he is sure to become their 
victim. That this dreadful beast may not multi 
ply, the Manacicas have invented means to destroy 
them, and one is as follows: Many Indians, after 
having surrounded themselves with palisades or 
strong paling, will make a noise to entice to them 
the famocosiosj and while these are occupied in 
rooting up the palisades to get at their prey, the 
Indians kill them with their arrows. The Mopo- 
sicas, who formed one of the most powerful can 
tons of the nation, were not so fortunate in ridding 
themselves of an enemy, though less formidable, 
thegavitan or sparrow-hawk, which used to pounce 
upon them with such fury as generally to kill them 
before they had time to prepare themselves for de 
fence ; and we are assured, that this little animal 
alone depopulated the whole canton. The Mana 
cicas are well made, of a dingy colour, and are 
subject to a kind of leprosy, which covers the 
whole of their body with a scurf resembling the 
scale of fish, though the same is attended with no 
pain or inconvenience whatever. They are of the 
same origin as arethe Chiquitos Indians, and were 
separated from them by some civil wars ; and again, 
their commerce with other nations has so changed 
their idiom that these two nations no longer under 
stand each other s language : indeed the only thing 
which they still retain in common of their origin 
is their valour. Idolatry, which was unknown to 
the Chiquitos, has been introduced amongst the 
Manacinas, together with the barbarous custom of 
eating human flesh ; but it is not known from, 
whence they have derived their deities, or what is 
the worship they pay them. The towns or settle 
ments are very handsome ; the streets are wide and 
straight, having various public places, and three 
or four large houses divided into saloons and cham 
bers, the latter for the lodging of the caciques, the 
former for the public assemblies and the cere 
monies to their deities, since they have no other 
temples. All these places are built of well-wrought 
wood, notwithstanding that they have no other in 
struments than the hatchet and flint-stones. The 
villages were at but a small distance from each 
other, and at the festivals drunkenness was univer 
sal. In the assemblies the cacique had the first 
place, the mapono the second, and the physician 
the third; in the fourth rank were the captains, 
and then followed the others successively in their 
order. To the caciques an absolute arid blind obe- 



MAN 

dience was paid, and their vassals repaired for 
them their houses, cultivated their fields, provided 
their tables with the best food that could be pro 
cured, and paid them a pole-tax. The caciques 
were alone allowed to have many wives, though 
they permitted to one alone the honour of being so 
considered; and this honour consisted in her re 
ceiving the same obedience and the like good of 
fices from the women of the settlement as the ca 
cique himself received from the men. She also re 
ceived with her husband a tribute, which was 
reduced to a tax of licences for fishing and hunt 
ing, no one being permitted, without these grants, 
to exercise the said employments. The dignity 
of the cacique was hereditary, and the presumptive 
heir had an absolute authority over all the unmar 
ried young men, in order to exercise himself in 
the art of governing ; and when he became suffi 
ciently experienced, it was usual for the father 
to resign in his favour, when, although he no 
longer mixed in affairs, he was continually treated 
with the highest veneration, and, when he died, 
deposited with great funeral pomp in a cavern, 
the entrance of which was firmly closed and ce 
mented. This nation was very superstitious. It 
had a tradition, that the apostle St. Thomas 
preached the gospel in their country. Certain it is, 
that in the midst of gross and impious fables and 
monstrous dogmas, they discovered traits of Chris- 
tianism, since they had an idea of a God who was 
made man for the salvation of the h uman race ; and 
further, one of their traditions was, that a very 
beautiful woman conceived without knowing man, 
and brought forth a male-child, who afterwards per 
formed vast prodigies, raising the dead, curing the 
deaf, giving sight to the blind, and who, having 
collected together in one society a numerous party, 
raised himself up into the air, and became trans 
formed into the sun which gives us light. Also 
the mapones assert, that were the sun not so far 
from them, he would distinguish their different mi 
litary exploits. These Indians used to pay wor 
ship to the devil, who, they affirm, has appeared 
to them under the most horrible shapes; they ac 
knowledged an infinite number of deities, but they 
distinguish three superior to the rest, which formed 
a trinity, composed of Father, Son, and Holy 
Ghost. To the first they gave two names, which 
were Omequaturipui and Uraffosorio, the second 
they called Urasana, and the third Urasso. The 
wife of the father was Quipoci, who, without loss 
of her virginal integrity, was the mother of Ura 
sana. The father, they said, spoke in a clear and 
high tone of voice, the son through the nose, and 
the holy ghost was to be heard like thunder. 



MAN 



437 



Quipoci was at times resplendent to behold ; the 
father was the god of justice, who chastised the 
wicked ; and the son, the mother, and the holy 
ghost, filled the office of intercessors and media 
tors ; moreover, these three divinities had one com 
mon name, which was Tiniamacus. The father 
Lucas Caballero, of the abolished order of Jesuits, 
entered to preach the gospel to these Indians, in 
1706, and reduced (hem to the faith, forming them 
into different settlements; the same having formed 
a principal part of the converted settlements of 
Paraguay. 

MANAGUA, a settlement of the province and 
kingdom of Nicaragua. 

MANAHATAN, an island of the N. sea; 
situate at the entrance of the river which traverses 
the province of New York in N. America. Here 
the Dutch founded the city of New Amsterdam ; 
the name of which the English afterwards converted 
into New York. This island is 15 miles long and 
one wide; it is very fertile, and abounds in fruits 
of the best quality, and at moderate prices. The 
advantage of its having in it the capital of the 
province, renders it a place important both from its 
population and its commerce. 

MANAHE, a settlement of the province and 
alcaldia mayor of Los Zoques in the kingdom of 
Guatemala. 

MANAHIGAN, Island of, on the coast of 
the province and colony of Sagadahock. There 
are many under this name, all of them small, and 
opposte Broad bay. 

MANALISCO, a settlement of the head settle 
ment of the district and alcaldia mayor of Cuquio 
in Nueva Espana ; situate to the n. of its capital. 

[MANALLIN, a township in York county, 
Pennsylvania.] 

MANAMA, or Island Dos MANGARES, an 
island of the N. sea, near the coast of Brazil, in 
the province and captainship of Maranan, between 
the great -shoal of Coroa and the channel of Buen- 
fondo. 

MANAMABOBOS, a barbarous nation of In 
dians, who dwell in the woods bordering upon the 
river Pachitca or Mamea, to the s. It was dis 
covered in 1673, and in 1675 the missionaries of 
the regular order of Jesuits formed the first reduc 
tion or settlement of converted Indians, with the 
name of San Nicolas do los Manamabobos. 

. MANANIAZU, a river of the province and 
country of Las Amazonas. It rises in the territory 
of the Motuanis Indians, between the rivers Cu- 
chivara and Madera, runs e. in a curved course, 
and enters the last of the aforesaid rivers. 

MANANT1AL, HEHIONDO, a founta in of the 



438 



MAN 



island of St. Domingo, in the French possessions, 
near the w. coast. Its water is fetid, and it runs 
e. and forms a small river, which enters that of 
the Indians, just before this joins the Artibonito. 

MANAPA, a settlement of the province and 
alcaldia mayor of Gueguctenango in the kingdom 
of Guatemala ; annexed to the curacy of Santa 
Ana Ctiilco. 

MANAPIARA, a large river of the province 
and government of La Guayana or Nueva Anda- 
lucia. It rises near the sierra Maiguatida, runs, 
much increased, to the s. and enters the Ven- 
tuavi. 

MANAPIRE, a river of the province and cap- 
taincy of Caracas. It flows down from the Alta of 
Gracia, runs a s. course, collecting the waters of 
several other rivers, and enters the Orinoco near 
where this river is entered by the Apure. 

MANAP1RI, NUESTJIA SENORA DE, a town 
of the province and government of Gumana ; 
founded by Don Juan de Urpin, in 1634, that it 
might serve as an arsenal for arms in the conquest 
and reduction of the Cumanagotos Indians, &amp;gt;vho 
capitulated with the king. 

MANARE, a settlement of the province and 
government of San Juan de los Llanos, in the 
Nuevo Reyno de Granada ; founded upon the 
river Ariporo, upon a lofty, spacious, and plea 
sant table-land. It consists of Cocatios Indians, 
who formerly called it Pauto, and it is of the best 
temperature of any place in the province ; since, 
from its lofty situation, it experiences less heat, and 
is consequently very healthy : besides this, it has 
all the fruits of the other settlements, and from its 
mildness produces figs, cabbages, lettuces, and 
different sorts of pulse not to be met with in the 
settlements of the llanos. It likewise produces 
cotton, of which are fabricated many various and 
curious woven articles. The natives also make 
pitchers, pots, and other vases, of beautiful work 
manship, the same being much valued at Santa 
Fe and other parts. It is 138 miles n. e. of Santa 
Fe, in lit. 5 46 n. Long. 72 14 w. 

MANATI, a settlement of the province and go 
vernment of Cartagena in the Nuevo Reyno de 
Granada ; situate on the shore of the channel of 
the Dique. 

MANATI, a small river of the island of St. Do 
mingo. It rises near the coast, at the w. head, 
and in the French possessions. It runs n. n. w. 
and enters the sea between the port of Leogan and 
the Trou Bordet. 

MANATI, another, of the island of Jamaica, 
which runs into the S. sea, of the n. coast, between 
Mantica and Dry Lopez. 



MAN 

MANATI, a port of the n. coast of the island of 
Cuba, between the port of New Bahama and that 
of Malegueta. 

M ANAUMARI, a mountain of the province of 
La Guayana, in the French possessions, and at its 
skirt these have an establishment. 

MANAZO, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Lampa in Peru. 

[MANGA, a town of W. Florida, on the e. 
bank of the Mississippi, at the mouth of Hona 
Chitto river.] 

MANCAPRA, a river of the province and go- 
vernment of Venezuela, in the territory which 
divides this jurisdiction from that of Cumana. It 
forms in its mid-course a large lake, and then runs 
to enter the Guarico, about 28 miles before this 
river enters the Orinoco. 

[MANCEN1LLA, a large bay on the n. side 
of the island of St. Domingo ; about 4000 fathoms 
long from w. to e. and 2800 broad from n. to 5. 
The s. e. part of the bay is very wide, and affords 
excellent anchorage, even for vessels of the first 
size. In other parts it is too shallow. The river 
Massacre, which was the point of separation of 
the French and Spanish colonies on the n. of the 
island, runs a n. course, towards its mouth n. w. 
and enters the e. part of the bay. The bay of 
Mancenilla, though a very fine one, is not so use 
ful as it might be, if its bottom were well known. 
There are several shallows in it, owing to the over 
flowings of the Massacre, which rolls into it wood, 
sand, and stones, in great quantities ; so that it 
seems necessary to sound the bay annually, after 
they are over. In general, it is prudent, on en 
tering, to keep closer to the point of Ycaque, than 
to the s. side of the bay, because the sandy point 
has no rocks. The bottom of the bay is muddy. 
The river Massacre is, during a league, from five 
to 12 feet deep, and pretty wide; but its bed is 
often full of the wood which the current brings 
down. It swarms with fish ; and here are found 
those enormous mullets which are the pride of the 
table at cape Fran9ois. In the times of the 
floods, these fish are driven towards the bay, where 
Negroes, well practised in the business, fish for 
them. Fishing in the bay is difficult enough, on 
account of the drifted wood ; but the Negroes are 
good divers, and are often obliged to go to the bot 
tom and disengage the seine ; but when it gets 
near the beach, it is a singular and striking spec 
tacle, to see the Negroes, the fish, and the alligators, 
all flouncing about in the water together. The 
Negroes kill the alligators, knock out their teeth, 
and sell them to make corals, the garniture of which 
serves to mark the degree of luxury or pride of 



MAN 

those who hang them to the necks of their children. 
The plenty offish often attracts ships of war to this 
bay. The mouth of Massacre river lies in lat. 19 
50 n. Long. 71 50 a&amp;gt;.] 

MANCERA, an island of the kingdom of Chile, 
near the coast of the province and government of 
Valdivia, at the entrance of the river of this name. 
It is two leagues long, and in it is a settlement that 
was founded by the Marquis of Mansera, who was 
then president of that kingdom. It has a magni 
ficent parish church, and a good castle to defend 
the entrance of the river, which was improved and 
completed by the brigadier Don Manuel Amat, in 
his presidency. Both the castle and the settlement 
maintain the same name as the island. 

[MANCHAC, a town on the Missisippi, two 
mites below the Indian town of Alabama. The 
banks of the river at Manchac, though frequently 
overflowed by vernal inundations, are 50 feet 
perpendicular height above the surface of the wa 
ter ; and the river, at its lowest ebb, is not less than 
40 fathoms deep, and nearly a mile in width. The 
Spanish fortress on the point of land below the 
Ibberville, close by the banks of the river, has a 
communication with Manchac, by a slender, nar 
row, wooden bridge, across the channel of Ibber 
ville, and not a bow-shot from the habitations of 
Manchac.] 

MANCHAC, Canal of, in the province and go 
vernment of Louisiana. It runs from the Red river 
25 leagues above New Orleans, is oftentimes dry, 
and empties itself into the lake of Maurepas. 

MAN CHE, a district of infidel Indians, of the 
kingdom of Guatemala, consisting of eight settle 
ments, who were reduced to the Catholic religion 
by the monks of the order of St. Domingo. 

MANCH ES, a nation of Indians of the province 
and kingdom of Guatemala. They take this name 
from the province of Manche, which is altogether a 
rough and craggy serrania; from whence, in 1606, 
proceeded certain Indians to the city of Guatemala, 
for the purpose of procuring some missionaries who 
might come and instruct them in religion. Accord - 
ly, at the instance of the president of that kingdom, 
the provincial of the order of St. Domingo dis 
patched on this errand the fathers /V.Juan de 
Esquerra, and Fr. Salvador Cipriano, who reduced 
many of these infidels to the faith, and founded 
eight settlements. 

[MANCHESTER, a small fishing-town, situ 
ated on the sea-coast between cape Ann and Be 
verly, in Essex county, Massachusetts. The 
fishery is carried on from this port chiefly in the 
vessels, and for the account, of the merchants in 
Boston and other places. The township lies 5. e. 



M A IN 



439 



of Wenham, and 18 miles n. e. of Boston. It 
was incorporated in 1645, nnd contains 965 in 
habitants.] 

[MANCHESTER, a post-town of Vermont, in 
Bennington county, on Battenkill. It is 16 miles 
n. by e. of Bennington, and 44 n. e. of Albany in 
New York. This township contains 1276 inha 
bitants. In the s. part of the town, in a hill a little 
w. of the Battenkill. is a deep stratum of friable 
calcareous earth, of the whiteness of chalk, and 
apparently composed of shells, which requires but, 
little burning to produce good lime.] 

[MANCHESTER, a township in Vork county, 
Pennsylvania.] 

[MANCHESTER, a small town of Virginia; situ 
ated on the s. side of James river, opposite to 
Richmond, with which it is connected by a bridge. 
In 1781, this town suffered much during Arnold s 
destructire expedition.] 

[MANCHESTEU, a town of Nova Scotia, 10 
leagues n. w. of cape Canso. It contained 250 fa- 
miles in 1783.] 

[MANCHESTER House, one of the Hudson baj 
company s factories, lies ]00 miles w. of Hudson s 
house, and 65 s. e. of Buckingham house. It 
stands on the s. w. side of Saskashawan river, in 
the n. w. part of N.America. Lat. 53 14 18" n. 
Long. 109 20 o&amp;gt;.] 

MANCICHE, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Truxillo in Peru ; situate in a 
beautiful and spacious valley called De Chimo. 
It was a population of Indians from the time of 
their gentilism, and after the arrival of the Spa 
niards, the number of its inhabitants increased so 
greatly that they amounted to upwards of 3000 
persons ; the same having collected for the most 
part from different quarters of the said valley. It 
is at present reduced to a very scanty population 
of Indians, who employ themselves in raising pulse 
for the consumption of the capital, to which the 
settlement lies very close. 

MANCORA, a large strand of the district of 
Tumbez, in the province and corregimiento of 
Piura in Peru. In it the valleys of the coast of 
the Pacific sea, and which extend for a distance 
of more than 400 leagues, have their origin. Thif 
part is barren and sandy, and the only production 
is the carob tree. It belongs to the religious order 
of the Bethlemites of Piura, and is in lat. 3 53 s. 

MANCORNADO, a settlement of the province 
and government of Santa Marta in the district of 
the Rio del Hacha ; situate on the shores of this 
river, to the s. of the city. 

[MAN DANS, very friendly and well-dis 
posed Indians of N.America, inhabiting the Mis- 

2 



440 



MAN 



s ouri. They are brave, humane, and hospitable. 
About 25 years since they lived in six villages, 
about 40 miles below their present villages, on 
both sides of the Missouri. Repeated visitations 
of the small-pox, aided by frequent attacks of the 
Sioux, have reduced them to their present num 
ber. They claim no particular tract of country. 
They live in fortified villages, hunt immediately 
in their neighbourhood, and cultivate corn, beans, 
squashes, and tobacco, which form articles of traffic 
with their neighbours the Assinniboin : they also 
barter horses with the Assinniboins for arms, am 
munition, axes, kettles, and other articles of Euro 
pean manufacture ; these last they obtain from the 
British establishments on the Assinniboin river. 
The articles which they thus obtain from the As 
sinniboins and the British traders who visit them, 
they again exchange for horses and leather tents 
with the Crow Indians, Chyennes, Wetepahatoes, 
Kiawas, Kanenavich, Stactan, and Cataka, who 
visit them occasionally for the purpose of traffic. 
Their trade may be much increased. Their coun 
try is similar to that of the Ricaras. Population 
increasing.] 

MANDINGA, a small settlement of the province 
and .government of Panama, and kingdom of Tierra 
Fume. It is situate on the shore of the river of 
this name, near its entrance into the sea, upon the 
height of a mountain, where there is a watch-tower 
or signal-house, to give notice to the governor of 
Panama of the vessels that may appear. 

HANDING A. The aforesaid river rises in the 
mountains of Chepo, and runs e. until that it enters 
the bay, to which it gives its name. Its course is 
only four leagues, and its navigation is prohibited 
on pain of death, from the ease with which, by this 
means, a pass might be effected into the S. sea ; 
the same having actually been put into execution, 
in 1679, by the pirates John Guarlem, Edward 
Blomen, and Bartholomew Charps. 

MANDINGA. The aforesaidbay, which is on the 
coast of the province and government of Darien, 
and theN. sea, is large, handsome, and sheltered. 
It is 10 leagues wide, and somewhat more long. It 
is full of small isles, as well in its centre as on either 
side of its coasts. 

MANDINGA, a pointer cape of the island of La 
Puna in the province ancl government of Guaya 
quil, and kingdom of Quito. To the s. it has the 
promontory of Bocaca, and on its n. e. side the 
mouth of the rivers Naranjal and Guya. It is low 
and barren, and covers the port of La Puna, which 
it has on the w. In lat, 2 38 30" s. 

MANDOZOU, a small river of the province 
.and government of Buenos Ayres. It runs e, and 



MAN 

enters the Uruguay, between those of the Mocoreta- 
mini and the Salto Grande. 

MANENCURA, a small river of the province 
and government of Cumana. It rises in the ser- 
rania of Imataca, runs s. and enters the Cuyani on 
the n. side. 

[MANETOPA, OSEEGAH, MAIITOPANATO, 
Indians of N. America, descendants of the Sioux, 
and partake of their turbulent and faithless dispo 
sition : they frequently plunder, and sometimes 
murder their own traders. The name by which 
this nation is generally known was borrowed from 
the Chippeways, who call them Assinniboan, 
which literally translated is Stone Sioux; hence 
the name of Stone Indians, by which they are 
sometimes called. The country in which they 
rove is almost entirely uncovered with timber, 
lies extremely level, and is but badly watered in 
many parts ; the land, however, is tolerably fer 
tile and unencumbered with stone. They might 
be induced to trade at the river Yellow Stone ; 
but we do riot think that their trade promises much. 
Their numbers continue about the same. These 
bands, like the Sioux, act entirely independent of 
each other, although they claim a national affinity, 
and never make war on each other. The country 
inhabited by the Mahtopanato possesses rather 
more timber than the other parts of the country. 
They do not employ themselves in cultivating the 
land.] 

MANETUBA, a river of the province and cap 
tainship of Seara in Brazil, which enters the sea be 
tween those of Gororasu and Persi. 

MANG, a village of the Portuguese, in the pro 
vince and captainship of Maranon, and kingdom 
of Brazil ; situate on the shore of the bay which 
forms the mouth of the river Maranon, and on the 
banks of the river of its own name. 

MANG. This river runs ;;. and enters the sea in 
the aforesaid bay, between the rivers Maizeta and 
Tapicuru. 

MANGACHES, a cast of Zambos, descendants 
of the Indians and Negroes. They live retired, on 
the n. side of the Guayaquil, and on the n. w. 
of the river Daule, in a territory consisting of spa 
cious llanuraS) but little known ; but being bounded 
on the n. by the province of Esmeraldas, and &amp;. by 
the district of Puerto Viejo. These natives live 
dispersed in cabins, and maintain themselves by 
fruits and the flesh of cow.s, providing themselves 
with the latter from the large droves of neat cattle 
which are found in the llanuras. They sow maize, 
radishes, and tobacco, which they afterwards carry 
for sale to the settlement of Balsar, in change for 
other things that they may want. 



MAN 



441 



MANGAS, a settlement of the province and 
corregimicnto of Caxatambo in Peru. 

MANGAUEIRA, a settlement of the province 
and captainship of Rey in Brazil ; situate on the 
shore of the grand lake of Los Patos, between this 
lake and the sea-coast, near the mouth of the river 
San Pedro. 

MANGERA, an island of the S.sea. It is 
nearly of a round figure, and is two leagues long. 
Its coasts are surrounded with rocks covered by 
the water, and the shoals about it are innumerable. 
On the n. e. it has a small bay, which is fit only 
for the accommodation of small vessels ; and here 
the Indians always keep their canoes, for the pur 
pose of carrying themselves over to the continent. 
The territory is lofty and uneven, but covered 
with large and beautiful trees. The settlement, 
which is situate nearly in the centre of the island, 
is large, and has a good church. All the inhabi 
tants are Indians ; and these cultivate quantities of 
maize and plantains. 

MANGLAR, PUNTA DE, a point on the n. 
coast, and in the French possessions, in the island 
of St. Domingo, between the point of Salina Pe- 
qnena and the Puerto de la Granja. 

MANGLARES, PUNTA DE, a point on the 
coast of the province and government of Atacamcs, 
and the S. sea, in Peru, to the w. of the cape of San 
Francisco. 

MANGLARES, another point, in the province 
and kingdom of Tierra Firme, also of the S. sea, 
opposite the islands of Rey or of Las Perlas in the 
bay of Panama. 

MANGLARF.S, some isles of the N. sea, near the 
coast of the province and government of Hondu 
ras. They are many and small. 

MANGU1, a river of the province and govern 
ment ot Mainas in the kingdom of Quito. It runs 
to the t. n. e. and empties itself into the great lake 
Nacheeo, in lat. 528 s. 

[MANHATTAN, the ancient name of Long 
island, and also of York island.] 

[MANHEIM, u town of Pennsylvania, in the 
county of Lancaster. It contains about 60 houses, 
and a Dutch church. Glass works were erected 
here previous to the revolution, but they are fallen 
to decaj. It is 11 miles n. by w. of Lancaster, 
and 62 nc. by . of Philadelphia. Also the name 
of a town in Lincoln county, Maine. There is 
another of the same name in York county, Penn 
sylvania.] 

MAN1, a settlement of the province and cor- 
regimitnto of Caxatambo in Peru ; annexed to the 
curacy of Cochamarca, 

VOL, II. 



MANI, a province so called in the time of the 
gentilism of the Indians, but which at the present 
day is called Yucatan. It formerly was under a 
monarchical government, and the principal pro 
vince of the same, and the place where stood the 
capital of Mayapan. This was the court of the 
kings, and was the only palace left when the in 
surrection took place amongst the vassals of the 
other provinces, and when they made for them 
selves certain regulations, according to the testi 
monies of the friars Diego Cogolludoand Don Juan 
de Villagutierre. 

MANIALTEPEC, SAN BARTOLOME DE, a 
settlement and head settlement of the district of 
the alcaldta mayor of Tepozcolula in Nueva 
Espana. It contains 116 families of Indians, and 
lies four leagues between the e. and s. of its 
capital. 

MANICARAO, a settlement of Indians of the 
island of Cuba, taken possession of by Hernan 
Cortes, previous to his proceeding to the conquest 
of Nueva Espana. Gomara calls these Indians 
Manicaras. 

MANI COLA, a large and extensive tract in 
the country called Tierra Austral or De Quiros, 
called also Tierra del Espiritu Santo : but much is 
not known concerning it, and indeed its very 
existence is even doubted. Fernando Quiros dis 
covered a piece of coast in 1606 ; and from the ac 
counts he received from certain Indians, he states 
that there were many islands on the said coast, the 
principal of which were called Taumaco, Tucopia, 
and Guatopo, the same being filled with inhabitants, 
and most fertile. The geographers in their maps 
describe nothing more than what may be signified 
by certain lines drawn at their own discretion, 
near the temperate zone, towards the polar circle. 
See TIERRA AUSTRAL. 

[MANICOUAGAN, or BLACK River, rises 
from a lake of its name, in Lower Canada ; runs a s. 
course, and falls into the St. Lawrence, 85 miles 
n. e. of Tadousac.] 

[MANIEL, or rather BAHORUCO, mountains 
in the island of Hispaniola or St. Domingo, 20 
miles in circumference, and almost inaccessible. 
They have been for 80 years past the place of 
refuge of the fugitive Spanish and French Negroes. 
These brigands have as yet always defied their 
pursuers. The soil of these mountains is fertile, 
the air temperate, and the streams in them abound 
with &amp;lt;rold dust.] 

MANIKOUAGANE,alakeof New Britain, or 
country of Labrador, in N. America, called also 
Barnabas. On its w. side it has another small 
3 L 



442 



MAN 



lake, of the name of Manikovanicli, with which it 
communicates. 

MANILE, a small river of the province and 
country of Las Amazonas. It runs n. and at a 
small distance from its source enters the Maranon, 
opposite the settlement of San Fernando. 

MAN ILIA, a settlement of the province and 
corrcgimicnto of Copiapo in the kingdom of 
Chile, to the 5. of the city of Rioja del Tucuman. 

[MANILLA. The chief trade of this place is 
in Indian goods, which it exports to Acapnlco, to 
the value of 12 or 13,000 dollars, in a vessel which 
sails annually to that place, and brings back silver 
in exchange, with a very small quantity of Ame 
rican produce and some European goods ; situate 
in the island of Luzon, one of the Philippine islands, 
in Int. 13 35 n. Long. ]20 57 &amp;lt;-.] 

[MANILLON, a township in Fayette county, 
Pennsylvania.] 

MAN1NALTEPEC, a settlement of the head 
settlement of the district of Latani, arid alcaldia 
mayor of Villalta, in Nueva Espana. It contains 
63 families of Indians, and is 16 leagues from its 
capital. 

MANIORE, a great lake of the province and 
government of Paraguay, to the w. of the river of 
this name, and 49 leagues from the mouth of the 
river Boinboy. It is six leagues long, and almost 
three wide. No fish live in it, and its waters are 
of a disagreeable savour. 

MANIPOS, a barbarous and ancient nation of 
Indians, of the province and government of Popay- 
iin in the Nuevo Reyno de Granada, in the llanos 
of Saldana ; bounded by the nations of the Paeces 
and the Pejaos. In former times these barbarians 
were formidable, and destroyed many settlements 
of Spaniards ; but they are at present much re 
duced. 

MANIQUE, a river of the province and go 
vernment of Moxos in the kingdom of Quito. It 
rises from different rivulets, which rise in the moun 
tains that lie between the rivers Beni and Mar- 
more. It runs e. and enters the Mato by two 



arms. 



MANIQU1, a river of the province of Moxos, 
and government of Quito, it rises in the moun 
tains lying to the s. e. of the nation of Roamanos 
Indians, runs n. to the settlement of San Borja, 
which it laves, passes the territory of the Cha- 
manos, then turns its course n. e. for the distance 
of 28 leagues, until it joins the Yactima or Ja- 
cunia, then passes the nation of the Mobimas, and 
on the w. confounds itself with the Mamore, in lat. 
13 25 s. 



MANITOUAL1N, a large island of New 
France, in lake Huron, very close to the n. coast. 

[MANITOI/ALIN, a cluster of islands near the 
n. shore of lake Huron ; considered as sacred 
by the Indians.] 

[MANLIUS, a township in Onondago county, 
New York, incorporated in 1794, and is the seat 
of the county courts. It is well watered by But 
ternut, Limestone, and Chittencngo creeks, which 
unite at the n. e. corner of the town ; and the stream, 
assuming the latter name, runs n. to Oneida lake, 
which is 10 miles n, of the centre of the town. It 
comprehends that part of the Onondago reserva 
tion bounded s. by the Genessee road, and r#. 
by Onondago creek and the Salt lake. Of its in 
habitants 96 are electors, according to the state 
census of 1796.1 

[MANMIC, Indian villages on the Picaway fork 
of the Manmic, or Miami of the Lake, and St. 
Mary s river. See MIAMI.] 

[MANN 1NGTON, a township in Salem county, 
New Jersey.] 

MANO, a river of the district of Babahoj o, in 
the province and government of Guayaquil, and 
kingdom of Quito. It enters by the s. into the 
Oxiba, in lat. 1 36 5. 

MANOA, a fabulous and imaginary city, called 
also Dorado, and which has existed only in the 
maps of certain geographers, who were equally 
wanting of information and of sense, and in the 
ideas of certain impostors, who by their inventions 
have deceived very many Spaniards and English. 
They place it on the zo. shore of the lake Parime, 
and at the mouth of a great river which empties it 
self into this lake, pretending that it is exceedingly 
large, rich, and populous. This fable began to 
gain credit in J534, and many were the stories in 
vented by Juan Martinez, a Spaniard, who, 
amongst other things, asserted that he had lived a 
long time in this country, and that he left it by the 
permission of the chief who commanded it, and 
who was descended from the ancient Incas of Peru; 
that this same chief gave orders that he should be 
accompanied by Indians till he reached the Spanish 
frontiers ; that they took care to lead him blindfold, 
lest that he might observe the way by which to re 
turn ; with several other things equally vague and 
foolish, but so as to induce at first many expedi 
tions to this fair-reputed city, at the expence of 
large sums of money and many lives. Although 
the Jesuit Gumilla, in his " Orinoco lllustrudo," 
agrees to the existence of this city, yet the falsity 
of his ideas have been lately most clearly evinced, 
by the statement of the admiral Don Joseph do 



MAN 

Iturriaga, and by the information acquired by the 
missionaries of San Francisco from the Indians, as 
may be seen in the History of Nueva Andalucia, 
by the Father Fr. Antonio Caulin. Juan Jan- 
sonio, who also held this country to be fabulous, 
placed it in his map of Guayana, three miles from 
lake Parime, in lat. 154 s. [But this is certainly 
erroneous, as it is, at all events, n. of the line four 
or five degrees.] 

MANOA, a settlement of the missions held by the 
monks of San Francisco in the province and cor- 
regimiento of Caxamarquilla, and kingdom of Peru, 
the same being the only one in this part which they 
reduced in 1703 ; though even this at the expence 
of the life of one of those missionaries, who was 
shot by an arrow from the Indians. From this 
settlement the missionaries made a further entry 
into the interior of the mountainous parts in 1764, 
and met with a nation of infidel Indians, who gave 
indications of being easily converted, and of afford 
ing an opportunity of extending still farther the 
blessings of the divine faith. In this settlement are 
350 Indians. 

MANOCAN, a city of the province and colony 
of Virginia in N. America ; situate in Cumberland 
county, and on the shore of James river. 

[MANOR, a township in Lancaster county, 
Pennsylvania.] 

MANP1TUBA, a small river of the province 
and captainship of Rey in Brazil. It runs e. form 
ing a curve, and enters the sea close to the point of 
Itapeta. 

MANPORAL, a settlement of the province and 
government of Venezuela in the Nuevo lieyno de 
Granada ; situate on the coast, between cape Co- 
dera and the river Tuy. 

[MANSEL, an island in the n. e. part of Hud 
son s bay, between Southampton island and the 
coast of Labrador.] 

MANSERICHE. See PONGO. 

MANSFIELD, a small island of N.America ; 
situate at the mouth or entrance of Hudson s bay. 

[MANSFIELD, a township in Sussex county, 
New Jersey, containing 1482 inhabitants, includ 
ing 35 slaves. It is situated on Muscouecunk 
river, about seven miles 5. e. of Oxford, and as far 
w. of Greenwich.] 

[MANSFIELD, a township in Bristol county, Mas 
sachusetts ; situated 30 miles s. of Boston. It was 
incorporated in 1770, and contains 983 inhabi 
tants/] 

[MANSFIELD, a township in Chittenden county, 
Vermont, between La Moille and Onion rivers, 
about seven miles distance from each, and 111 
miles n. by e. of Beunington.] 



MAN 



443 



[MANSFIELD, a township in Burlington county, 
New Jersey, on the s. side of Black s creek, con 
sisting of 19,000 acres, of an excellent soil, noted 
for its fine pastures and large dairies. It is eight, 
miles w. by n. of Burlington, and 12 s. by e. of 
Trenton. The inhabitants are mostly Friends.] 

[MANSFIELD, a township in Windham county, 
Connecticut, about 30 miles n. of New London, 
and as far e. of Hartford.] 

MANSO, MERCEDES DE, a town of the pro 
vince and corregimiento of Maule in the kingdom 
of Chile; situate at the source of the river Tiru- 
ben, founded by Don Joseph Manso, Count of 
Superunda, the then existing president, and who 
gave it his name. Near it is a very fertile estate 
called Ninhue. 

MANSO, LLANOS DE, some extensive llanuras of 
the kingdom of Peru, in the province of Chaco ; 
surrounded by the rivers Pilcomayo and Bermejo. 
They stretch out for many leagues, and are inha 
bited by many nations of Indians. They have 
their name from Captain Andres Manso, who 
founded here the city of Santiago de Guadalcazar, 
which was destroyed by the infidels. See article 
CHACO. 

MANTA, a settlement of the district of Puerto 
Viejo, in the province and government of Guaya 
quil, and kingdom of Quito, founded by Francisco 
Pacheco in 1535. It has a good port, much fre 
quented by vessels, which go backwards and for 
wards between Peru and Tierra Firme, to take in 
water from a small river whick runs from a place 
called Toalla, the said water being of the colour of 
mastich, but very sweet and wholesome. In the 
principal church is venerated a very miraculous 
image of Nuestra Senora de Monserrat, and ves 
sels at entering and leaving the port make a salute, 
and sing the Litany in honour of the Blessed 
Virgin, whom this image represents. . In this port 
are three particular places, called Salango, Salan- 
guiilo, and El Morro, abounding in all kinds of 
shell-fish of excellent quality, and which are 
washed up by the sea ; and in the last century, 
(1700), there were some fisheries of pearls as fine 
as any of those found in Margarita or the Rio del 
Hacha ; but these fisheries were abandoned, from 
the number of divers who perished, being suffo 
cated by the fish called manta^ which abounds here, 
and gives the name to the settlement. This fish is 
of the figure of a mantle, of three or four yards long 
and two wide ; it is about a yard thick, and so 
inimical to man, that it darts at the unfortunate 
diver immediately that he submerges, and so en 
velops and devours him. Some have escaped by- 
carrying with them a sharp two-edged knife, with 
3 L 2 



444 



MAN 



MAP 



which to divide the enemy, and so extricate them 
selves from its embrace; but these are very few. 

This settlement has been taken several times by 
strange pirates, and it was on this account re 
moved to the foot of a hill, where it now stands, 
bearing the name of Monte Cliristi or Manta la 
Nueva. La Matiniere says, that it is nine leagues 
from the bay of Caracas, meaning Cara, from 
whence, however, it is 10 : he then names the 
river, Choropoto, instead of Charopoto, asserting 
that vessels going from Panama to Peru touch at 
this port, in order that those who are going to 
Lima may disembark here and proceed by land ; 
in all of which he is, as in general, erroneous ; 
since it would be egregious folly to disembark at 
Manta, in order to make a circuitous route to Gua 
yaquil, then toembark here for Tumbez, and so to 
pass by land to Piura. It is evident that he took 
Manta for Paita, a port on the coast of Peru, where 
those who proceed by land to Lima disembark. 
Again, the ex-jesuit Coleti, in attempting to do 
away this error, falls into that of asserting, that no 
vessel going to Peru ever touches at Manta, al 
though, as we have before observed, it is common 
for vessels so to do, for the purpose of taking in 
water. Some assert, that in its vicinity was a fa 
mous mine of emeralds, from whence the Jndians 
extracted one so large as to induce them to adore 
it as a deity, many coming from distant parts for 
this purpose. 

The ancient Mantas were excessive voluptu 
aries and sodomites. At present their numbers are 
greatly diminished, and all of them are reduced to 
the Catholic faith. The Mantas in ancient times 
used also to adore the sea, and fishes, tigers, lions, 
snakes, and insects ; but above all, the emerald 
before-mentioned, which was kept in the valley of 
Manta, and said to be as large as an ostrich-egg : 
this they used to expose to public admiration on 
their festival days, presenting to it other emeralds 
of less size, a practice which the priests and the 
cacique Manta would maintain was highly accept 
able to the object of their adoration, since this con 
sidered the small emeralds as its daughters. The 
Spaniards consequently found, on their arrival, 
great quantitcs of these stones, though they could 
never procure a sight of the large one, the Indians 
having taken particular care to conceal it. In 
theii matrimonial alliances they had the barbarous 
custom, thnt the relations and friends of the bride 
groom should anticipate the privileges of the hus 
band. The prisoners that they took in war they 
fleed, and filling their skins with ashes, so as that 
they should appear in their perfect form, they sus 
pended them in their temples and places wherein 



they celebrated their festivals, as trophies of their 
victories. The Inca Huayna Capac intimated to 
them that he expected they should submit them 
selves to his empire, or otherwise that he should 
oblige them by force. These Indians, for some 
time, withstood the Inca s power; but although they 
were not without allies to support them in their 
views of independence, they were at last obliged 
to submit themselves under his dominion. The 
settlement is 18 miles from Puerto Vie jo, 88 from 
Guayaquil, and If from the S.sea; in lat. 58 s. 
and lonjr 80 26 w. 

MANTEOUEC, a river of New France or 
Canada. It runs s. e. and enters the Maskoutens. 

MANTICA, a settlement of the island of Ja 
maica ; situate on the n. coast. 

MANUA, or PACIUTEA, a large and abundant 
river of the province and corregiiiiiento of Gua- 
nuco or Huanuco in Peru. It rises from the 
mountains to the s. runs n. n. e. collecting the wa 
ters of the Yapati and Balsa. In the woods on its 
borders dwell the Panos, Piros, and Chipeos Jn 
dians ; some of whom have been reduced to settle 
ments by the religious order of San Francisco de 
Lima. This river, Manua, enters on its w. side 
into that of Ucayale. 

MANZANARES, a river of the province and 
government of Cumana. It rises in the mountains 
of Bergantin, runs n. and enters the sea close to, and 
passing before the city of Cumana. 

M ANZANILLO, a settlement of the island of 
Cuba; situate on the s. coast. 

M ANZANILLO, a bay of the n. coast in the island 
of St. Domingo, close to port Delfin, 14 leagues 
from that of Guarico. 

MANZANiLLO,a point of land of the coast of the 
province and government of Cartagena in the 
Nuevo Reyno de Granada ; one of the two which 
form the bay of Rada. 

MAORIO, a settlement of the province of Gua- 
yana, in the French possesions ; situate at the 
fort of mount Argent, near the coast, between the 
rivers Aprovague and Oyapoco. 

MAPALL/Y, a large and convenient bay on the 
coast of the S.sea, of the province and government 
of Nicaragua, near the lake of this name, in the 
kingdom of Guatemala. Here a very severe com 
bat was had in 1685, between the Spaniards and 
some pirates. 

MAPAN, a river of the district of Baba, in the 
province and government of Guayaquil and king 
dom of Quito. It runs s. between the river Pirna- 
cha to the e. and the Estero de Garrapatos on the 
10. and empties itself into the river Caracol on the 
n. side, in hit. 1 59 s. 



MAP 

MAPANDI, a river of the kingdom of Brazil. 
It rises in tiie mountains, runs w. and enters the 
Parana opposite the Acorupebe. 

MAPARINAS, SAN JOSEPH DE, a settlement of 
the missions that were held by the regulars of the 
company of Jesuits, in the province and govern 
ment of Mainas of the kingdom of Quito. 

MAPIMI, a settlement and garrison of the 
province of Tepeguana, and kingdom of Nueva 
Vizcaya, in N.America, being the residence of a 
captain, a serjeant-major, and 21 soldiers, as a de 
fence against the incursions of the Indians. To- 
wards the n. is a tract of unpeopled country, ex 
tending upwards of 100 leagues from s. to n. as 
far as the borders of the Rio Grande ; the same is 50 
leagues wide in the middle, and grows narrower in 
the parts confined between the rivers San Pedro and 
De Conchos, until it is bounded by the province of 
Coaguila. Its territory, although formerly inha 
bited by many barbarian nations of Indians, such 
as the Tobosos, Gavilanes, Tripas Blancas, Jaca- 
rillas, and others, is peopled now only with a mix 
ture of all these, who are dispersed, and consist of 
the apostates, who fly from the missions and inte 
rior garrisons, and come to occupy the deserts for 
the purpose of carrying on the trade of a banditti. 
There were formerly in this presidio or garrison 
some abundant silver mines, which were worked to 
great profit, and were the residence of an alculdia 
mayor; but at present they cease to be useful. 
[The present population is 2400], and it is 54 
leagues to the w. of the capital, Guadiana. 

M APINASA, a river of the province and go 
vernment of Quixos and Macas in the kingdom of 
Quito. It rises in the territory of Los Xibaros, 
runs s. and enters, by the n. side, into the Santiago. 

MAPlRfCORO, a small river of the province 
and government of Cumana, which runs s. and en 
ters the Orinoco, close to the torrent of Camiscta. 

MAP1TE, a settlement of the missions that are 
held by the religious order of San Agustin, in the 
country of Paititi, in the province and corregimi- 
ento of Larecaja, and kingdom of Peru. 

[MAPLETON, a name given to a pleasant 
range of excellent farms, three miles e. of Prince 
ton in New Jersey.] 

MAPOCHO, a river of the province and corrc- 
gimiento of Santiago in the kingdom of Chile. It 
rises from the Cordillera of the Andes, runs w. 
leaves the city of Santiago, where it is also known 
by this name, and, being divided into many stream 
lets and pools, it irrigates and fertilizes the sur 
rounding country, and the spacious llanura of its 
name, which is 10 leagues long and 10 wide, de 
serting its native channel. Shortly after this, it 



M A Q 



445 



hides itself beneath the ground, and forms above it, 
as it were, a bridge for a distance of more than 
three leagues ; and when it appears again, gushes 
out, apparently boiling, from amidst some sedges, 
and its waters appear as clear as crystal. Two 
leagues from this spot it has upon its banks an an 
cient and beautiful convent of the religious order 
of San Francisco, which, from ils immcdiation to 
some extensive woods, is called San Francisco del 
Monte, and is one of the first convents founded in 
that kingdom. This river afterwards enters the 
Maipo. [The Mapocho gives its name to certain 
Indians; for an account of whom, see Index to 
additional History of CiiiLr., Chap. II.] 

MAPORAL, a settlement of the missions that 
were held by the regulars of the company, in the 
province and government of San Juan de los Lla 
nos of the Nuevo Reyno de Granada. 

MAPORICHE, a river of the Nuevo Reyno de 
Granada; which rises in the sierra of the n. and 
enters the Grande de la Magdalena. 

MAPOTO, a rapid and abundant river of the 
jurisdiction and corregimiento of Ambato or Ham- 
bato in the kingdom of Quito. It runs s. and tra 
verses the road which leads from the baths of Pa- 
tate, as far as the country of Los Canelos, and en 
ters by its n. shore into the river Pastaza or Pas- 
taca, in lat. 128 *. 

MAPOYES, SAN JOSEPH DE, a settlement of 
the missions that were held by the regulars of the 
company of Jesuits in the Rio Orinoco; situate on 
the shore of the Paruasi, a little before this runs 
into the above river. All the natives of the nation 
of this name, since they are called by the same as 
is the settlement, are docile, of good manners, and 
were easily reduced to the faith by the aforesaid 
company, in 1732. 

MAPUARES, a settlement of the province and 
government of Venezuela in the Nuevo Reyno de 
Granada ; situate near the river Seco, to the s. of 
the city of Coro, that river dividing the city from 
the settlement. 

MAPURA, a small settlement of the jurisdiction 
of Anserma in the Nuevo Reyno de Granada, 
where are the best gold mines ever discovered in 
America, although but little worked for want of 
hands. 

MAPUTEYAPES, a barbarous nation of In 
dians of the kingdom of Peru, to the n. of the pro 
vince of Guanuco, in the territory of the ancient 
Panataguas. They live in the woods, and extend 
themselves from s. w. as far as the Andes. 

MAQUEGUA, a district of the kingdom of 
Chile, in the territory of the Araucanos Indians. 

MAQUILAPA, a very lofty mountain of the 



446 



MAR 



cordillera or mountains of Quellenes, in the pro 
vince and alcaldia mayor of Chiapa, of the king 
dom of Guatemala. 

MAQU1LI, a settlement and head settlement of 
the district of the alcaldia mayor of Motines in 
Nueva Espaiia. It contains 94 families of In 
dians. 

MAQU1PO, a beautiful and extensive valley 
of the province of Cinaloa in N. America. 

MAQUIRITARI, an abundant river of the 
province and government of Guayana or Nueva 
Andalucia. It rises from the lake Clavija in the 
sierras of Parime, runs s. forming different wind 
ings ; and collecting in its course the waters of 
several other rivers, until it enters the Orinoco, 
arrives in the country of the Atures Indians with 
a most copious stream. 

[MAQUOIT, a bay of shoal waters in Casco 
bay, in the district of Maine, about 18 miles n. e. 
of cape Elizabeth, frequently mentioned in the 
history of Maine ; where the Indians were used to 
land with tlieir canoes, and from thence carry them 
to Pejebscot falls on Androscoggin river. This 
was done with the toil of only four hours walk. 
From these falls they went down into Kennebeck 
river ; and from thence continued their route up 
that river to Wesserunsett, and thence over to St. 
.Lawrence; or turned and went down through 
Monseag bay, towards Penobscot; or from the 
falls they continued their progress up Androscog 
gin river, beyond the White mountains, and over 
to Connecticut river, and from thence to lake 
Memphremagog, and down to the limits of Ca 
nada.] 

MAR ATLANTICO, or ATLANTIC Ocean, a 
sea of very large extent, but of uncertain limits, 
in as much as geographers do not agree in affix 
ing them. We, however, consider it as occupy 
ing the space lying between the Canary and Cape 
Verde isles, opposite the coast of Africa, as far as 
the equinoctial line, that is to say, lat. 30 n. and 
long. 50, as far as the Lesser Antilles, and the 
coast of the Dutch and French colonies ; from 
which point we distinguish the ocean by the Mar 
del N. or N. sea, in order to avoid any confusion 
in the description of ports, capes, islands, &amp;c. 

MAR AUSTRAL, MERIDIONAL or ANTARCTIC 
Sea, which begins in the straits of Magellan, and 
extends as far as the Antarctic pole, encompassing 
the extreme land of America or the Tierra del 
Fuego, and being determined by an imaginary 
line drawn from e. to w. above the aforesaid strait. 
It is distinguished from the sea of Magellan and 
the Pacific, or more properly from the Chilian sea. 
At the beginning of this century, (1SOO), itsnavi- 



M A R 

gation began to be frequented by the French, and 
the strait of Magellan was abandoned as a pass 
into the S. sea. Some fix its polar limits at the 
Tierra Austral or De Qniros, but nothing has been 
"with certainty determined. 

MAR BRAZILICO, or BRAZILIAN Sea, which 
\vashesthecoasts of the kingdom of Brazil, begin 
ning at the mouth or entrance of the river Maranon 
under the equinoctial line, and terminating in the 
mouth of the river La Plata, in lat. 35 30 s. and 
towards the e. in the first meridian, taken in the 
island of Ferro, according to the determination of 
King Luis XIII. of France, in 1634. In it is 
found the island of Los Picos, the last belonging 
to America, under the same tropic of Capricorn. 

MAR CHILENO, 6r Sea of CHILE, begins at 
the w. mouth of the straits of Magellan, in lat. 52 
49 s. and terminates in the island of SanArnbrosio, 
in lat. 25 s. ; laves all the coast of the kingdom 
of Chile, and that of Los Patagones. This sea 
is also comprehended under the name of the Pa 
cific, and some geographers will call it the S. sea, 
the same as they do the Peruvian sea. 

MAR MAGALLANICO, or Sea of MAGELLAN. 
Its limits are, n. by the mouth of the river La 
Plata, in lat. 55 30 s. where it is bounded by the 
Brazilico or Brazilian sea, s. by the e. mouth of 
the straits of Magellan, in lat. 52 21 s. and being 
thus divided from the S. sea. It laves the coasts 
of Las Pampas and the Tierras Magallanicas. 

MAR DEL NORTE, or NORTH Sea. As this sea 
respects S. America, it extends from the coast of the 
isthmus of Panama, or of Tierra Firme, that is to 
say, from 294 long, as far as the Lesser Antil 
les, in 318 long.; laves the coast of Nueva 
Andalucia, Venezuela, Santa Marta, Cartagena, 
Darien, and Tierra Firme. It extends n. as far as 
lat. 18 n. and is distinguished by an imaginary line 
drawn from n. e. to s. w. that is, from the island of 
St. Thomas, the last of the Little Antilles, to the 
n. as far as the mouth or entrance of the river 
Chagre. 

MAR PACIFICO, or PACIFIC Sea, called also 
SOUTH Sea, or DEL SUR. This, speaking more pro 
perly, should, with regard to America, be called W. 
sea. Vasco Nunez, a Portuguese, and Nuno de Bal 
boa, a Spaniard, were the first who discovered 
and came into this sea in 1512, and not in 1503, 
as according to Martiniere. With respect to S. 
America, it extends from the straits of Magellan, 
as far is the isthmus of Panama or Tierra Firme, 
lat. 66 46 48" ; that is, lat. 52 49 s. and lat. 8 
57 48" n. which make somewhat more than 1286 
leagues. It extends from e. to w. as far as the 
Solomon iiles, the which are at an uncertain dis- 



MAR 

tance, their longitude not having yet been justly 
determined. It takes the name of Pacific from the 
frequency of the calms which reign in different 
parts of it. Both the Chilian and the Peruvian 
sea form part of the Pacific. 

MAR PERUANO, or PERUVIAN Sea, is part of 
the Pacific, extending from the island of San Am 
brosia as far as White cape, from lat. 4 io 25 s. 
that is to say. an extent of 21 or 420 leagues. It 
laves the coasts of Peru, and its currents from s. to 
n. are very rapid. 

MAR PERUANO, with the addition of Chiquito, 
a lake on the coast which lies between the river 
La Plata and the straits of Magellan, close to cape 
De Lobos. 

MARA, a settlement of the province and corre- 
gimiento of Cotabambas in Peru. 

MARA, a settlement of the missions that were 
held by the Carmelite fathers of Portugual in the 
country of Las Amazonas ; situate on the shore of 
the river Negro. 

MARABI, or, according to others, MARAui,a 
lake of the province and government of Guayana, 
near the limits which divide this province from the 
territory of the Portuguese. It empties itself by 
a considerable and copious arm into the river 
Yarupa. 

MARACA, an island of the province and coun 
try of Las Amazonas ; situate near the coast, close 
to the N. cape. 

MARACA I, a settlement of the province and 
government of Venezuela in the Nuevo Reyno de 
Granada ; situate on the shore of the lake Taca- 
rigua or De Valencia, on the n. part. 

"[The village of Maracai, on the e. part of the 
lake of Valencia, is situated in the famous valley of 
Anagua, sufficiently near the lake to enjoy all its 
benefits, and far enough off to avoid the insalu 
brious effects. The sandy soil renders it healthy 
but cold. This village, what thirty years ago 
would hardly deserve the name of hamlet, is a most 
enchanting spot. Three-fourths of the houses are 
built with composition, and are as elegant as they 
are strong and solid: they appear to be all of the 
same, and that a very recent, date. The streets are 
not paved ; this is perceptible when the sand is 
blown about by the wind, and incommodes the 
sight. A new, spacious, and regular building 
serves as a parish church : the only clerical per 
son is a curate, and the only civil authority is 
represented by a magistrate, who is a justice of 
peace, and of easy access. 

The inhabitants of this village, to the number of 
8400, have no little claim to our admiration ; they 
are not infected with the pride of ancestry, nor 



M A R 



417 



the vanity of distinction. Industry and activity 
form the basis of their affections, and a fortunate 
spirit of emulation renders agriculture the reigning 
passion among them. Numerous plantations oi 
cotton, indigo, coffee, corn, &amp;c. made with 
judgment and worked with care, at once proclaim 
thoir industry, and are the cause of their prosperity. 
These are also found scattered all over the pro 
vince of Aragua. Whether the traveller enters 
this country by Valencia, or by the mountains of 
San Pedro, which separate it from Caracas, he 
fancies himself transported into another nation, and 
into a land possessed by a people the most indus 
trious and agricultural. His eye surveys the 
valley extending 15 leagues from e. to w. and be 
holds the land richly covered with colonial pro 
duce, artificially watered, and having water-mills 
and superb buildings erected by the industrious 
people for the manufacture and preparation of the 
fruits of their labour. The free people, who every 
where else, are listless, inactive, and indolent, arc 
here found to be laborious, and for moderate daily 
wages ; and thus the planter has occasion for but a 
few slaves, and these merely for domestic uses.] 

MARACAIBO, or NUEVA Z AMOR A, a city 
of the province of Venezuela and Nuevo Reyno 
de Granada, founded on the shore of the lake of 
its name, by Captain Alonso Pacheco, in 1571, 
and not by Ambrosio de Alfinger, in 1530, as ac 
cording to Coleti. It is of an extremely hot tem 
perature, but healthy. It is so dry that for up 
wards of 20 leagues towards the serrania there is 
no other water than such as is obtained artificially 
from the rain, and preserved in xahueyes or wells 
dug for the purpose ; the same furnishing with 
drink the cattle which graze in this country. In 
deed the lands of this district are beginning to be 
somewhat barren, although through the conve 
niences offered to trade by the lake, there is no 
want of necessaries ; but these are, on the contrary, 
brought from other cities and settlements. 

The buildings are of stone, are convenient, 
cheerful, and well-disposed. The parish church 
is large, and of fine architecture. Here are four 
convents, which are of the following orders : San 
Agustin, La Merced, Santo Domingo, and San 
Francisco, the last being the finest arid largest of 
all; also four monasteries for nuns, and a good 
hospital of San Juan de Dio s, with the dedicatory 
title of Santa Ana. 

This city belonged to the government of Caracas 
until the year 1678, when it was subjected to that 
of Merida ; and it is the head city, and the place 
where the governor resides. It lies six leagues 
from the sea or entrance of the lake, for the de- 
2 



448 



MARACAIBO. 



fence of which there have been built three castles 
or forts. Jt has a very cood, secure, and conve 
nient port, and fit for building vessels, on account of 
the abundance of timber in its neighbourhood ; and 
indeed, there are always vessels building in itsdoek. 
Its principal commerce consists in cacao, woods, and 
leather of the hides of animals of infinite variety, 
which breed in the surrounding country. Amongst 
its population are enumerated several illustrious 
families, and some who are descended from the 
first conquerors, the Germans of Augusta. The 
French pirate Lolonois sacked this city in 1668, 
Francis Drake in J669, and the French in 1678. 
In its church is venerated a miraculous crucfix, 
against which the Quiriquis Indians discharged 
six arrows, when they rose against the Spaniards, 
in the year 1600, and sacked and burnt the city of 
Gibraltar. Now it has been a constant tradition 
amongst the Indians, that previous to that time the 
image had its head erect, as though for inspira 
tion, (there appearing to be no mark of the wound 
on the side to represent the suffering), and that 
upon being hit by one of the arrows in the eye 
brow, it drooped its head, and has ever since re 
mained in that posture. 

[At an average of four years, from 1799 to 1803, 
the quantity of cacao exported from Maracaibo 
and Venezuela amounted to 145,000 fanegas. The 
population of its province is, according to Depons, 
100,000 souls. This city is in lat. 10 42 n. and 
long. 71 17 w. 

[ADDITIONAL INFORMATION RESPECTING 

MARACAIBO. 

1. Government. 2. City, further account of. 
3. Population. 

1 . Government. Maracaibo, settled by the 
orders of the governors of Venezuela, for a long 
time was under their command. Afterwards a 
new division of the governors was made ; and the 
government was vested in Merida with Maracaibo 
as a dependency. At length Maracaibo became 
the capital, and then was given the district the title 
of province. 

This government extends very little from e. to w. 
but it runs more than 100 leagues towards the s. 
where it is bordered by Santa Fe. It is bounded 
on the w. by the government of Rio de la Hacha, 
a dependency of Granada ; to the n. by the sea, 
and according to the new circumscription, by 
Venezuela to the e. 

The territory for a certain distance round the 
capital is sterile. All the e. shore of the lake is 
dry, unwholesome, and covered with raquettes 
and cierges, (plants peculiar to the place), where 
a tides of commerce cannot thrive, nor even man 



subsist. On the w. shore the land does not become 
fertile for more than 25 leagues to the s. of the city. 
The whole of the land to the s. of the lake Magrival 
is, for fertility, the best soil in S. America : labour 
and a sufficient population are all that are wanted 
to render this province flourishing, and to furnish 
for exportation as much goods as would load 2000 
vessels of 300 tons. 

2. City. This city is situated on the left bank 
of the lake Maracaibo, and at six leagues from 
the sea. The foundation is sandy and without any 
stratum of vegetative earth. The climate is warm, 
on account of the breezes being weaker and uncer 
tain, the land not being watered by any running 
stream, and the rain so seldom falling. The heat 
is excessive, chiefly from the month of March to 
October, but during July and August it is in 
supportable; the air appears to issue from a fur 
nace. The only means of preventing the effects 
of this scorching atmosphere is bathing in the 
lake. It is in this water that the inhabitants effec 
tually moderate the heat, and correct the acrimony 
of the blood, inflamed by the rays of the sun. 

But although the heat is here so great and coil 
stant, yet Maracaibo is wholesome. There are 
seldom any endemical diseases, and a person ac 
customed to the climate preserves a brtter state of 
health than is common in places where it is not so 
hot, and the means of avoiding the heat more 
numerous. 

The trade-winds commonly blow here from 
March to June and July : August and September 
are seasons for calms, unless thoy are interrupted 
by the s. winds, which are called in the country 
virus on, on account of their insalubrity. It is 
observed that when the winds are moderate, there is 
a great deal of rain, and when they are high they 
are followed by great droughts : violent storms are 
frequent ; the thunder is* dreadful, and the bolts 
frequently fall, destroying houses, ships, and every 
thing that cither attracts them, or is. in their way. 
However terrific and destructive these storms may 
be, the inhabitants are reduced to the necessity of 
desiring them ; for if they do not happen, earth 
quakes, yet more dreadful, are likely to be ex 
perienced in their stead. Some of these storms 
are attended with heavy showers, which with an 
amazing rapidity flow through the town, sweeping 
away trees, and injuring the houses which may 
stand in the way. Happily these catastrophes are 
never of very long continuance. 

The principal part of the city is on the banks of 
a little gulf, of a league deep, and formed by the 
lake to the w. The other part is to the n. on the 
famous neck of the lake which extends -.three] 



1VI A R A C A I O. 



449 



[leagues, and tbcn takes a s. direction. The point 
at which the town begins is called Point Mara- 
caibo ; that at the commencement of the gulf is 
named Point of Arieta, and is situated nearly 
opposite the point St. Lucia. 

There are a great number of houses at Maracaibo 
built with chalk and sand, and with a great deal 
of taste ; but in spite of the efforts of government, 
the cheapness of tiles, and the frequency of con 
flagrations, which often consume entire streets, the 
people are of opinion that tile roofs render the 
dwellings so many furnaces, destructive of the in 
habitants, and persevere in the custom of covering 
their best houses with a sort of reed which grows 
on the banks of the lake, and which the Spaniards 
call enca. This mixture of tile and thatch gives 
the town a mean appearance, and puts it in con 
stant danger from fire. The greater part of the 
houses are indeed entirely built of this thatch and 
reed, peculiar to the country. 

As there are neither fountains, wells, nor rivers, 
no other water is drunk but that of the lake, the 
taste of which is not agreeable, although the quality 
is not bad, except in the strong winds of March 
and April, which causing an influx of the sea, 
render the water of the lake so brackish as to be 
scarcely potable. The poor avoid this inconve 
nience by making excavations in the rocks, but 
the water procured by this means is of a bad taste, 
and very unwholesome. The rich have cisterns 
in their houses to catch the rain water, and the 
middling classes keep jars for the same pur 
pose. 

3. Population. According to a census made 
in 1801, the number of inhabitants was 22,000; 
but the Spaniards, who about this time fled here 
from the Spanish part of St. Domingo, from 
whence they were driven by the black chief Tons- 
saint, increased the population of Maracaibo to 
24,000, divided into four classes ; the nobles, the 
wealthy commoners, the slaves, and the enfran 
chised people. 

The noble families are those who have descended 
from the first conquerors of the country, or from 
some governors or war officers "who have married in 
the country, or from any other government officer; 
for an employment under the crown is considered 
in America an authentic title of nobility. There 
are more than thirty of these families ; and but 
few of them enjoy a moderate competency : in 
almost the whole of them misery is so severely felt 
that the idea of a noble origin is perhaps the 
truest satisfaction they ever experience. When 
once a Spaniard fulls into poverty, it is for his life. 
The shame of industry and the love of idleness 

VOL. II. 



makes him heroically brave all the horrors of 
want. 

The plebeian whites are Europeans or Creoles. 
This is the class that lives most comfortably, for it 
is the only one that works. The slaves are very 
few, on account of the small importation of blacks ; 
they do not exceed in nwmber 5000. 

The enfranchised people are also very few ; they 
follow every trade. 

The custom the people of Maracaibo contract 
from their infancy, of sailing on the lake, gives 
them an early propensity to navigation. They re 
pair by water in numerous bands to Porto Caballo, 
La Guaira, and other ports to which trade or 
amusement may invite them. When war sus 
pends mercantile voyages, these people serve on 
board corsairs ; but whatever side they take, they 
always sustain the appellation of being as good 
soldiers as they are sailors. The proximity of the 
lake renders them also good swimmers and excel 
lent divers. 

Those who resist the attractions of a nautical 
life either establish pens, or watch those of their 
fathers. Nothing proves more their fitness for 
this sort of occupation than the immense number 
of cattle that cover the savannas of Maracaibo : the 
principal ones are those of Jobo, Ancun, Palmores, 
and Cannades. It should be remarked that there is 
more merit in keeping cattle in this neighbourhood 
than in any other of the provinces ; for the coun 
try being without rivers or marshes, in the dry 
seasons a number always perish, in spite of the 
precautions taken in such cases, to drive them to 
wards the places where they can be watered. 

But what does yet more honour to this people, is 
their singular lively tempers, their application to,and 
progress in literature, in spite of the bad state of 
public education. Whilst the Jesuits had the 
charge of instructing the youth, their scholars 
spoke Latin with uncommon elegance and facility ; 
they understood perfectly rhetoric and the rules of 
poetry, wrote their own language with remarkable 
correctness ; and in short, were adept in every 
thing that constitutes and makes the scholar 
and the gentleman. The expulsion of these learn 
ed instructors deprived the youth of every branch 
of knowledge. 

It must be allowed that the inhabitants of Mara 
caibo have activity, courage, and genius ; but 
there is scarcely any thing else to be said in their 
favour. They are reproached with a want of sincerity 
and veracity , and they never think themselves bound 
by their signatures until they have tried in vain to 
set them aside in their courts of law. Their repu 
tation for this is so established, that the strangers] 
3 M 



450 



MAR 



[repairing hither upon business, affirm that it is 
better to form connections, in affairs of importance, 
with the ladies than with the men ; for they have 
exclusively that solidity and honour, which every 
where else are the special perquisites of the male 



sex. 



The women here are, in their youth, patterns of 
chastity and delicacy &amp;gt; and when married, they 
make faithful wives and excellent mothers : affec 
tion for their husbands, household cares, and the 
education of their children, are the objects of their 
solicitude, and their only occupation. Music is 
almost their sole amusement as well before as after 
marriage ; and the favourite instrument is the 
harp. Every evening and on feast days, the har 
monious sounds of this instrument are to be heard 
from every house. 

The lat. is 10 30 , the long. zs. of Paris 74 
6 , and the distance from Caracas is about 140 
leagues.] 

MARACAIBO, a great lake of this same province 
and kingdom, which took its title from a cacique 
of this name, who was living at the time of the 
entrance of the Spaniards. It is about 132 miles long 
from n. to s. and 90 wide at the broadest part, though 
Coleti reduces it to 33. It is formed by many 
rivers, viz. by the Pamplona or Z alia, the Chama, 
which flows down from the sierras of Mcrida, and 
consisting of the melted snows ; by the San Pedro, 
the Motatan, the largest of any, and which rises in 
the mountain desert of Serrada. On the w. it is 
entered by the Paurate, which flows down from the 
sierras of Ocaiia, the Catumbo by three mouths, 
the Arinas, the Rico de Oro, the Torondoy of 
salutary waters, the Sucui which descends from 
the cordillera lying behind the river Del Hacha, 
and the Astillero, celebrated for its rich woods, 
with many others of less consideration. This fresh 
water gulf is navigated by many frigates, bilandcrs, 
and other vessels ; and even the largest might 
plough through the bottom, if the bar at the en 
trance would permit. In it are two small islands 
called, the one De las Palomas, the other De la 
Vigia. In the high sea-tides the waters of the 
gulf of Venezuela enter this lake, and then its 
waters are somewhat brackish. Its first discoverer 
was Bartholomew Sailler, a German, lieutenant of 
the General Ambrosio de Alfinger, who entered it 
in 1529, and who, from having found a number 
of houses built in the same manner as they are at 
Venice, gave it the name of Venezuela, a title 
which was afterwards extended to the whole of the 
province. At the present day there are not more 
than four very small settlements, and the beams of 
timber on which the houses are built are converted, 



as far as relates to the parts in the water, into 
stone. At a small distance from the lake dwell 
the barbarous nations of the Quiriquires, Zaparas, 
Pocabuyes, Alcoholades, and Bohures or Bo- 
bures Indians. It abounds in excellent fish, and 
especially in manaties or marine cows, of an ex 
traordinary size. Near the e. shore is an island 
called De las Borricas, very fertile and delightful, 
in which are large breeds of cattle. It is four 
leagues w. of the city of Coro. 

MARACAIBO, SACO DE, a bay of the coast of 
the same province and Idngdom, very large and 
capacious, lying to the right hand of the entrance 
or mouth of the lake. 

MARACANA, a settlement of the province and 
captainship of Para in Brazil ; situate on the sea- 
coast, at the point of Latigioca, one of those 
points which form the mouth of the arm of the 
Maranon with the island of Marajo. 

MARACAPANA , a settlement of the province 
and government of Venezuela in the Nuevo Reyno 
de Granada ; situate on the coast of the N. sea, 
and bounded by the province on the e. part. It 
has a good and secure port, and the best of any in 
that coast, the same having been discovered by 
Geronimo de Hortel in 1511. The climate is 
warm, and the whole territory is very plain and 
unpeopled. In this place, which takes its name 
from a cacique, the Indians killed Alonso de 
Ojcda and six other Spaniards, who fell into an. 
ambush prepared for them by the said cacique. 

MARACAPUCU, a river of the province and 
captainship of Para in Brazil. It runs s. s. e., and 
enters the Maranon or Amazon, where this runs 
into the sea, between the rivers Anourarna and 
Camaipi. 

MARACAPURA, an island of the province 
and country of Las Amazonas, in the territory of 
the Portuguese, formed by an arm of the river 
Maranon or Amazon, the same running to form 
several pools and lakes, and then returning to enter 
its mother stream. 

MARACAPURU, a river of the province and 
government of La Guayana or Nucva Andalucia, 
in the Portuguese possessions. It forms a large 
lake, and enters the Rio Negro. 

MARA CARD, PUNT A DE, a point on the 
coast of the province and government of Vene 
zuela, opposite the island of Buen A ire. 

MARACAS, a port of the island of Trinidad. 

MARACASI, an Island of the S. sea, near the 
coast of the province and corregimiento of Chan- 
cay in Peru. 

MARAUAYU, a settlement of the province 
and government of Buenos c^yres; situate on the 



MAR 

shore of the river Xexuy, between those of Pa 
rana and Paraguay, to the n. e. of Villa Rica. 

MARACAYU, a cordilleru of very lofty moun 
tains, of the province and government of Paraguay, 
which run from e. to w. oil either side of the river 
Parana. 

MARACU, a river of the kingdom of Brazil, 
which flows down from the mountains of the Ta- 
puyes Indians, and running from 5. to n. passes 
through the province and captainship of Maranan. 
Its shores are covered with ill-shaped trees, which 
form some thick and impenetrable woods. It runs 
into the sea in the gulf of San Luis de Maranan, 
in lat. 3 40 s. 

MARACU, a lake of the province and captain 
ship of Maranan in the same kingdom. It is form 
ed by the river Maranon. 

- MARAD1, a small river of the province and 
captainship of Maranan in Brazil. It runs n. n. e. 
and enters the Mang. 

[MARAGNAN. See MARANAN.] 

[MARAGNON. See MARANON.] 

MARAGUA, a settlement and aslento of the 
silver mines of the province of Chayanta or Char- 
cas in Peru ; annexed to the curacy of Moro- 
raonaa. 

MARAGUAZE, a settlement of the province 
and captainship of Para in Brazil ; situate on the 
s. shore of the river of Las Amazonas, between 
those of Parana and Paraguay, to the n. e. of 
Villa Rica. 

MARAH1. See INAVABU. 

MARAI, a settlement of the province and cor- 
regimiento of Andahuailas in Peru ; annexed to 
the curacy of the settlement of Chincheros. 

MARAIS, GRAND, a settlement of New France 
or Canada in N. America; situate on the s. coast 
of lake Superior. 

MARA IS AS, a large island of the river Ori 
noco. It is one of the largest which, at the en 
trance of this river, form the different channels. 

MARAJO, a large island of the river of Las 
Amazonas or Maranon, also called De Joanes, and 
Del Sol. On the n. it is washed by the waters of 
the sea, mixed with those of this river, and on 
its other sides by the river itself, being divided 
from the continent by a very narrow strait, called 
Tagipura. To the n. n. w. it has two isles, call 
ed Caviana and Machiana, and to the e. it looks 
upon the city of Gran Para, on the shore of the 
Maranon or Amazon. 

This island is 28 leagues in circumference, and 
not 10, as according to Mr. Martiniere, who 
situates it 12 miles from Para instead of 24. It is 
about 92 miles wide from w. to s. and about 142 at 



M A R 



451 



its greatest length. It took its name from a nation 
of barbarian Indians, called Marayos, which 
word has since been by the Spaniards corrupted 
into Marajo. Some relate the fable that these In 
dians have their feet reversed, that is to say, with 
the heels before. The island is much cultivated, 
and produces maize, plantains, sugar-canes, and 
other vegetable productions peculiar to the country 
in great abundance. The climate is rather hot, 
but the sea winds are very refreshing. 

MAR A jo, a small river of the province and 
captainship of Para in Brazil. It runs n. between 
the rivers Areas and Detreas, and enters the Ama 
zonas opposite the former island of its name. 

MARAJON, a settlement of the island of Joanes 
or Marajo in Brazil ; situate on the e. coast, on the 
shore of the arm of the river of Las Amazonas, op 
posite the city of Gran Para. 

MARA MBA YA, an island situate near the 
coast of the province and captainship of Rio Ja 
neiro in Brazil, to the e. of Isla Grande. 

MARAMEG, a river of the province and go 
vernment of Louisiana. It rises from three lakes, 
runs w. w. e. and enters the Mississippi. On its s. 
shore are some rich silver mines, which gave origin 
to the celebrated plan of the Mississippi, from the 
mouth of which river it is 1100 miles distant. 
Mr. de Lochon, who was sent hither by the French 
India company, in 1719, was the author of the 
riches of the Mississippi. He did, in fact, find 
mines of silver, but in such small quantities that 
they were not worth the trouble of digging ; they, 
however, soon proved to contain no other metal than 
lead ; and, in consequence, Mr. de Lochon, much 
chagrined and deceived, returned to France. The 
company attributed the failure of their enterprise 
to the ignorance of Lochon, sent a Spaniard, a 
man who had been taken in Pensacola, and who 
had worked in a mine of New Spain. He, how 
ever, succeeded as little as the former ; and the 
same ill success waited upon the exertions of a 
company of miners, who were sent at the expence 
of Mr. Renaudiere. These, however, did in time 
turn even the lead mine to some account. 

MARANAN, or MARANHAM, a province and 
captainship of the kingdom of Brazil, which com 
prehends the island of its name, or of San Luis, 
and the immediate continent ; bounded e. by the 
province of Seara, n. by the Brazilian sea, w. by 
the captainship of Para, and s. by the country in 
habited by the barbarian Indians, especially the 
nation of the Tapuyes. There arc in this province 
three considerable rivers, besides some others of 
inferior note ; the three are the Itapienni, Miarim, 
and Monyi, which empty themselves in the gulf 



452 



M A R 



of Maranan or San Luis. The larger islands 
are Sipotuba, Santa Ana, and Ygarapatoe, besides 
tliat of Maranan or Maranham, in which is the 
capital. To the e. and w. of this island are many 
sand banks formed by the river, which empties 
itself into the sea in front of it. It is well peopled, 
and the land lies high, with beautiful hills and 
mounts, from which flow down streams of limpid 
waters, which fertilize the llanuras. The climate 
is pleasant and healthy, produces all kinds of 
grain and fruits, and the crops of maize are ga 
thered twice in the year. The city of San Luis 
was founded by the French in 1612, and ceded to 
the Portuguese in the following year, 1613. It is 
small, but populous, cheerful, rich, and well forti 
fied. It was taken by the Dutch in 1611 ; but in 
1643, recovered by the Portuguese, to whom, at 
the present day, it belongs. It has a good castle, 
upon a small eminence, and two other forts, called 
San Francisco and Santiago ; also a large suburb, 
called San Andres. This city is the head of a 
bishopric, suffragan to the archbishop of San Sal 
vador of the bay of Todos Santos, erected by the 
Pontiff Innocent XL in 1677. The port is of dif 
ficult ingress, but is large and secure, and has a 
good bottom. Lat. 2 30 s. [See the Captainship 
PARA.] 

[MARANAN, a large island at the mouth of 
the noted rivers Miarim, Itapienni, and Monyi, on 
the n. side of the province of Maranhao or Ma- 
ranham in Brazil. The island is oblong, about 
31 miles long, very fertile, and well inhabited. 
The French, who seized on it in 1612, built a 
town here, called St. Louis de Maranham, but it 
is now in the hands of the Portuguese, and is a 
bishop s see. It is very strong, and has a stout 
castle built on a rock, towards the sea, which 
commands a very convenient harbour. The island 
itself is very difficult of access, by reason of the 
rapidity of the three rivers which form it ; so that 
vessels must wait for proper winds and seasons to 
visit it. Besides the town mentioned here, are 
two smaller ones, viz. St. Andero, on the most n. 
point, and Santiago on the s. The natives have 
about 27 hamlets, each consisting of four large 
huts, forming a square in the middle; all being 
built of large timber, and covered from top to bot 
tom with leaves, so that each may contain 200 or 
300 persons. The inhabitants are strong and 
healthy, and live to a great age ; bows and arrows 
are their only Aveapons, with which they arc very 
dexterous ; but they are fierce and cruel, especially 
to their enemies. The continent, three or four 
leagues from the island, is inhabited by the Ta- 
poutapares and Tupinambes nations, who are 



MAR 

wild and fierce, and divided into 15 or 20 such 
hamlets as have been described above. Contigu 
ous to these are the territories of Cumaand Gayeta, 
inhabited by nearly the same sort of people. The 
capital St. Louis Maranham lias a harbour at the 
mouth of the river St. Mary, on the Atlantic ocean ; 
492 miles n. w. of cape St. Hoque. Lat. 2 30 s. 
Long. 43 37 o&amp;gt;.] 

MAUAXAN, a river of this province and king 
dom . It runs in a large stream to the n. and enters 
the sea in a great mouth or bay full of islands. 

MARANGANI, a settlement of the province 
and corregimiento of Tinta in Peru ; annexed to 
the curacy of Sicuani. 

MARANGUAN, a settlement of Nova Scotia 
or Arcadia in N. America ; situate on the shore 
and at the innermost part of the bay of Fundy. 

MARANLAO, a river of the kingdom of Bra 
zil, which waters the country of the Guayazas In 
dians. It rises near the town of Minas Gencrales, 
runs n. and then turning its course to the w. enters 
the Tambo de Oro, and the port of Fr. Reynaldo. 

MARANON, AMAZONAS, ORELLANA, or So- 
LIMOES, a river of all the above names, and the 
largest not only that is known in America, but in 
the whole world. It is said to rise from the lake 
Lauricocha, in the province of Tarma, of the 
kingdom of Peru, in lat. 10 29 s. ; but its most 
remote source is the river Beni, which rises in the 
Cordillera De Acama, about 35 miles from La Paz, 
in the province of Sicasica. It runs from n. to s. as 
far as the province of Yaguarsongo in the kingdom 
of Quito. From thence it forms the strait of Gua- 
racayo, follows its course from w. to e. running 
a distance, from its rising to where it enters the 
sea, of 1SOO leagues. The mouth or entrance of 
this river is about 180 miles wide ; the tide-water 
ends at Obidos, which is about 400 miles from its 
mouth. The river at this place is 905 fathoms wide, 
and the violence with which this river flows is so 
powerful that it repels the waters of the ocean, and 
retains its own stream pure and unimpregnated for 
a distance of 80 leagues within the sea ; [a cir 
cumstance the more wonderful, in as much as from 
the above distance of Obidos to its mouth, 400 
miles, it has a foil of only four feet.] Innume 
rable are the rivers which it receives in its long-ex 
tended course, but the larger and more consider 
able are, to thew. the Santiago, Morona, Pastaza, 
Tigre, Napo, Negro, Putumayo, Yupura, Ya- 
guapiri, Curupatuba, arid Yari ; and to the s. 
the Guullaga, Ucayale, Cuchivara, Yahuari, 
Yutay or Yotau, Cayari or Coyari, Madera, 
Topayos, Tocantines, Xingu, Guanapu, Muju, 
and others. 



M A R A N O N. 



453 



The first who discovered the mouth of this im 
mense river was Vicente Yanez Pinzon, in 1498. 
It was afterwards reconnoitred, in 1541, by Fran 
cisco do Orellana, lieutenant of Gonzaio Pizarro ; 
in 1560, by Pedro de Ursna, by order of Don An 
dres Hurtado de Mendoza, Marquis of Canete, 
viceroy of Peru ; in 1602, by the Father Rafael 
Ferrer, of the abolished order of Jesuits of the 
province of Quito, and missionary amongst the 
Cofanes Indians; and in J616, by order of Don 
Francisco de Borja, prince of Esquilache, viceroy 
of Peru ; also, in 1725, by Juan de Palacios, in 
company with the Fathers Domingo Breda and 
Andres de Toledo, by the command of San Fran 
cisco. Besides these, Pedro Texeira, a Portu 
guese, undertook, in the name of Santiago Rai- 
mundo de Norona, governor of San Luis de Ma- 
raiian, the farther navigation of this river, arriving 
by the Napo as far as the port of Payamino, in 
the province of Moxos. In 1639, Don Geronimo 
Fernandez de Cabrera, Count of Chinchon, and 
viceroy of Peru, sent as far as Para the Fathers 
Christoval de Acuna and Andres de Artieda, Je 
suits of the province of Quito, and also the Father 
Samuel Fritz, a German, and of the same extin 
guished company, a great missionary and pro 
found mathematician. He it was that took the 
most exact observations as far as Para r in his voy 
age made in the years 1689 and 1691, and who 
gave to the world the first geographical chart of 
the Maranon, made and publised in Quito in 1707. 
Subsequently to this, [mother map was published by 
Don Carlos de la Condamine, of the royal academy 
of sciences at Paris ; he being one of the persons 
commissioned to make astronomical observations 
under the equinoctial line. This last map is the most 
correct, and was made in the voyages he took in 
Ihe Marafion, in the year 1743 and 1744, although 
it was much amended and enlarged by another 
map which had been formed by the Father Juan 
Magnin, of the aforesaid company, and then mis 
sionary of the city of Borja, of the province of 
Mainas, and an honorary academician of the 
sciences at Paris, 

The shores and innumerable islands of this large 
river were peopled and inhabited by many bar 
barous nations of Indians, which have, for the 
most part, at the present day, either become ex 
tinct, or retired to the wilds of the mountains. 
The name of Amazonas is derived to this river 
from some warlike women who attacked and op 
posed the Spaniards on their first arrival, and 
more especially the discoverer Orellana. Some 
hold this as fabulous, but others maintain that 
there not only were, but are at this time, such wo 



men as those of whom we speak ; and these people 
recount of them the same stories that are told of 
the Asiatic Amazons in the Termodonte. 

The fact, however, is, thot the women here call 
ed Atnazonas were nothing more than women 
who assisted their husbands in battle ; a practice 
very prevalent amongst the greater part of the na 
tions of the barbarian Indians. Such was the case 
when Gonzaio had to encounter women in the king 
dom of Tunja, Sebastian de Bcnalcazar in Po- 
payan, Pedro de ^ ^ aIdivia in Chile, as also other 
Conquerors in different provinces. The Amazonas 
of the Maranon, of which we treat, and who made 
front against Orellana, were of the nation of the 
Omaguas, dwelling in the islands and on the shores 
of the river. The historians who paint the go 
vernment and customs of this fictitious race, are 
nothing but idle dreamers and fabulists, publish 
ing wonders to accredit their voyages and his 
tories. 

From the mouth of the river, as far up as the 
Yavari, on the s. shore, and as far as the settle 
ment of Loreto de Los Ticunas on the n. including 
the river itself, and the adjacent territories, the 
Portuguese possessions are considered at the pre 
sent day to extend ; and from thence upwards is 
claimed by the crown of Spain. The latter powei 
has founded many settlements of Indians, who 
have become Christians ; as also certain reducciones, 
which form the mission called Do Mainas, the 
same having had its origin, and having since 
flourished, under the discipline and management 
of the regulars of the company of Jesuits of the 
province of Quito, until that this order was sup 
planted, in 1767, by the president Don Joseph 
Dibuja, who sent various priests in the place of 
the former ; these banishing the Jesuits from the 
dominions of the king. Other missionaries were 
also sent of the religious orders of San Francisco, 
to the shores of the rivers Manua, Putumayo, and 
Caqueta. 

The woods of the Maranon are immense ; full 
of tigers, dantas, bears, leopards, wild boars, and 
an infinite variety of venomous snakes and ser 
pents ; the most formidable of which arc those 
called yacumamaS) sarammies, corales, exis, casca~ 
bcles, canelas, tigrj/las, buhos, and intiyityns. 

The waters swarm with alligators or crocodiles, 
fine fish of various kinds, the same being peculiar 
to the lakes in its vicinities, some sorts exceedingly 
rare, and especially those called chctrapas or tor 
toise, the manati or sea-cow, the same being call 
ed also pexe-buey or ox-fish, from its great re 
semblance to this animal, and which feeds upon 
grass and suckles its young. 



M A R A N O N. 



The multitude, variety, and beauty of the birds, 
are truly striking to foreigners ; and amongst the 
most noted are the piurics, quacamayos^ loros, 
chiriclascs. paujies^ preticadores, trompeteros, 
mountain fowl, partridges, pheasants, quails, and 
the rest. 

Here are an infinite variety of apes of different 
figures, and of the most extravagant and ridicu 
lous appearances. The vegetable productions 
which grow wild, are cacao , cinnamon, bainilla, 
zanaparittO) and pines ; and those which are in 
part wild and generally cultivated are coffee, su 
gar-canes, rice, maize, plantains, pitajai/as, le 
mons, limes, oranges, &amp;c. also wax, storax, ca- 
payce, carana, oil of Maria, copal, and other bal 
sams, resins, and medicinal drugs. The woods 
are extremely precious, of every kind, colour, and 
size; such as cedar, red-wood, (pah-rojo), holy 
wood, (palo-santo), pine, basin, and chonta, which 
resembles ebony. The herbs and roots, although 
they are in very great abundance, are but little 
known, as are the different coloured mineral 
earths. 

Throughout the whole country washed by this 
mighty river, from the point or strait of Manse- 
riche to its mouth, there is to be found no kind of 
stone, gold, or other metal. Its current has great 
violence and rapidity, and its depth is unfathom 
able. The swellings and freshes are usually very 
great; and when these happen, the country is in 
undated for many leagues, the whole of the islands 
are covered with water, and are made to change 
their situation, or new ones are formed by the 
fresh channels which the river in its boundless im 
petuosity is accustomed to procure itself. 

In the parts called Pongo de Manseriche 
and Pauxis, its stream is confined in a narrow 
channel of about three leagues across. The water 
here is pure and well tasted, but very turbid and 
thick, owing to the number of trees and pieces of 
earth which it draws down with it in its course ; 
and these impediments render its navigation here 
somewhat dangerous to canoes, although not so 
to the larger vessels, or piraguas, of the Portu 
guese. 

This river is navigable from the city of Jaen, in 
the kingdom of Quito, as far as its entrance into 
the sea, which is nearly its whole course. The 
climate of the countries that it irrigates, from the 
province of Yaguarsongo to its mouth, is hot, 
moist, and unhealthy, especially on its shores, 
which have also the disagreeable molestation of 
.musquitoes of a thousand kinds, as well as of many 
other venomous insects. The history of this river 
was written and published in a folio volume by the 



Father Manuel Rodriguez, of the extinguished 
company of Jesuits. 

[The communication between the Spanish colo 
nies on the borders of the river has ever been at 
tended with considerable difiiculty and danger, on 
account of some pirates who infested the S. and N. 
seas, and intercepted their navigation. The gal 
leons, richly laden with the treasures of Peru, &amp;c. 
were captured in great numbers by these daring- 
freebooters. Things were in this situation when 
an account of the successful attempts which had 
been made to explore the course of the Amazonas 
reached the court of Madrid, and gare rise to the 
project of transporting thither, by means of the 
numerous navigable rivers which flow into it, the 
riches of New Granada, Popayan, Quito, Peru, 
and Chile itself. After proceeding down the river, 
galleons were to be stationed in the harbour of 
Para, in order to receive the treasures ; and these 
being joined by the Brazil fleet, it was supposed 
they might navigate in security in latitudes little 
known and frequented by these formidable pirates. 
The revolution, however, which placed the Duke 
of Braganza on the throne of Portugal, put an 
end to these important projects. Each of the two 
nations was then only intent on securing to itself a 
settlement on that part of the river which best 
suited its own situation. 

Thus while the Spanish missionaries were endea 
vouring to form a settlement in the country lying 
between the banks of the Amazonas and of the 
Napo, as far as the confluence of these rivers, 
some Jesuit fathers were occupied in performing 
the same service for the Portuguese government. 
These indefatigable enthusiasts, patient of toil, of 
fatigue, and of hardships of every kind, at length 
succeeded in establishing St. Paul and numerous 
other villages, about six or seven days journey be 
low St. Ignacio dc Pevas, the last of the Spanish 
settlements in the vicinity of the Amazonas. Had 
a free intercourse been permitted between these in 
fant states, the greatest advantages would most 
certainly have accrued to each. In this way the 
Spanish settlements might have been supplied with 
many articles from their Portuguese neighbours, 
which they could not receive from Quito, as they 
are effectually separated from it by the Cordilleras. 
Brazil is besides poor, from being unable to dis 
pose of the overplus of those very commodities 
which cannot be obtained at Peru. If, therefore, 
the national antipathies and jealousies subsisting 
between the courts of Lisbon and Madrid had not 
led them to prohibit all communication between 
their settlements in the New World, these two 
provinces, by an interchange of commodities, by 



MAR 

means of the Napo and the Amazonas, might have 
attained to a degree of opulence and prosperity 
which they cannot otherwise enjoy, and which 
might ultimately have even proved beneficial to 
the mother countries.] 

Catalogue of the barbarous Nations and princi 
pal Places of the River Maranon. 



MAR 



Nations. 
Abacaris, 
Agazos, 
Aguanos, 
Aguas, 
Ahives, 
Anamaris, 
Apantos, 
Aperas, 
Apotos, 
Aracaries, 
A rasas, 
Aunalas, 
Ayacore?, 
Aysuares, 
Banomas, 
Barbudos, 
Burais, 
Cachiguaras, 
Cahuapanas, 
Camabos, 
Cambas, 
Ganicuaris, 
Carabuyabas, 
Carupfirabas, 
Caumares, 
Cenos, 
Chamicuros, 
Chingacuchascas, 
Chipeos, 
Gocamas, 
Cocamillas, 
Cuchiguaros, 
Cunivos, 
Cunuries, 
Curanaris, 
Curuzicares, 
Guacares, 
Guaranacacos, 
Guarinumas, 
Guayazis, 
Gusmagis, 
Incuris, 
Maraguas, 
Marayus, 
Mariaves, 
Mainas, 



Mayorunas, 

Omaguas, 

Oroquaras, 

Ozuanas, 

Pacoxas, 

Paguaros, 

Pandabeques, 

Panos, 

Papunacas, 

Paranos, 

Pevas, 

Piros, 

Punobis, 

Quirabas, 

Roamainas, 

Sapas, 

Tagaris, 

Tapagazus, 

Ticunas, 

Tocantines, 

Tontones, 

Topayos, 

Topinambos, 

Umuranas, 

Urarchais, 

Urarinas, 

Uspas, 

Xeveros, 

Xibaros, 

Yacaretis, 

Yacariguaras, 

Yameos, 

Iquitos, 

Ituccales, 

Yurimaguas, 

Yurusnies, 

Zeunas, 

Zimarrones, 

Zurinas. 

Cities. 
Gran Para, 
Nieva, 
S. Borja, 
Santiago de las 

Montanas. 

Jfivers. 
Apena, 



Apzaga, 

Aunala, 

Beni, 

Bioboma, 

Blanco, 

Cahuapanas ; 

Casavatay, 

Cayari, 

Chamicuros, 

Chanussi, 

Chillay, 

Chipanga, 

Chipurana, 

Chuchunga, 

Chuchivara, 

Cunuri, 

Curupatuba, . * 

Cussiquina, 

Guallaga, 

Guanapu, 

Hechicero, 

Huerari, 

Jacuada. 

Lorito-yacu, 

Madera, 

Massa, 

Morona, 

Muyu, 

Nanay, 

Napo, 

Negro, 

Nucaray, 

Paracasa, 

Paranapitinga or 

Yaguapiri, 
Paranaiba, 
Pastanza, 
Piguena or Tigre, 
Potro, 



455 

Purus, 

Putumayo or Iza, 

Santiago, 

Sciquita, 

Tocantines, 

Topayos, 

TrompetaSj 

Ubay, 

Ucayale, 

Unghi-yacu, 

Urubuquara, 

Xingu, 

Yaguapin, 

Yari, 

Yavari, 

Yotau or Yutay, 

Yupura, 

Yurubesa. . 

Lakes. 
Arabanate, 
Cocama, 
Laguna, 
Mahuati, 
Marahi, 
Nachego, 
Parime, 
Rimachuma, 
Turatini, 

Islands. 
Caviana, 
Machiana, 
Marajo, 
Solitaria. 

Straits. 
Bragas, 
Curnbinama, 
Evirathoa, 
Manseriche, 
Pauxis, 



MARAPA, a settlement of the province and 
government of Tucuman in Peru; situate between, 
two small rivers which enter the Choromoros. It 
is s. of the city of Tucuman. 

MARAPOU, a fall of the river Aprouack, in the 
province of Guayana. It is near a quarter of a 
league long, and very dangerous for canoes. This 
part is inhabited by Nouragues Indians. 

MARAQUA, a part of the same river and pro 
vince as is the former fall, being the place where 
the canoes arrive, and can proceed no farther, ow 
ing to a stoppage in the river, occasioned by large 
trees. It is consequently and of necessity a place 
for disembarking. 

MARAQUIN, a small river of the province and 



436 



M A R 



M A R 



colony of Surinam, in the part of Guayana pos 
sessed by the Dutch. It is one of those which en 
ter the Cuyuni by the n. side. 

MARARA, a small river of the province and 
government of Guayana or Nueva Andalucia, 
which enters the Arui by the e. side. 

MARAS, a settlement of the province and cor- 
rcgimiento of Urubamba in Peru ; in the district of 
which, at half a league s distance, is a sanctuary of 
Nuestra Senora, with the title of La Asuncion, on 
a plain much exposed to the air ; where is recorded 
the prodigy of the Blessed Virgin having appeared 
to a little lame Indian girl, who invoked her, and 
who was cured ; and the image of the Holy Vir 
gin has ever since remained engraven on the wall. 
MARASMA, a settlement of the province and 
government of Venezuela in the Nuevo Reyno de 
Granada ; situate near the coast, in the bay formed 
by cape Codera, on the e. 

MARATICA, a river in the province of Guay 
ana, in the part possessed by the Dutch. 

MARAVATIO, an alcaldia mayor and juris 
diction of the province and bishopric of Mechoacan 
in Nueva Espana. Jt is of a cold temperature, 
very fertile, and one of the most populous, being 
full of estates and sugar-mills, especially in two 
spacious valleys of upwards of 12 leagues in length. 
It abounds in mines of copper, arid this metal is 
worked by the natives to tolerable profit. In the 
part called Parua is a fountain, with this peculiarity, 
namely, that wood put into its water sinks to the 
bottom, and that upon its surface grows a thick 
petrified crust, which continues enlarging and 
growing thicker. These bezar-stones have a 
great diaphoretic virtue, and are much esteemed 
throughout the whole kingdom, according to the 
relation of Don Joseph Villasenor, in his " Teatro 
Americano." In the fields of this jurisdiction 
grows the herb dictamo real, and the stags who feed 
upon it have bezar-stones found in their intestines, 
the same being the case in some parts of Peru. 
The district, the capital of which is of the same 
name, consists of the following settlements : 
S. Miguel el Alto, Yrimbo, 

Tupataro, Ccnguyo, 

Tarimangacho, Epungueo, 

Tungareo, Apozo, 

Taximaroa, Zingareo, 

S. Lorenzo, Tux pan, 

S. Mateo, Xnngape"o, 

S. Lucas, Tziraguato, 

S. Bartolome, Turandeo, 

S. Pedro, Guariimoro, 

S. Sebastian, Zitaquaro, 



Tinguineo, 

Cotapeque, 

Chichimequilla, 

Nadio, 

Apaceo, 

S. Felipe, 

S. Mateo del Rin- 



S. Bartolome, 9 f 
S. Francisco, 
Tuzantla, 
Tiripitio, 
Jnzantla, 
Tiquicheo, 
Copandaro, 

con, Susupuato. 

The capital of this jurisdiction is of the same 
name, and is situate on the shore of a large river 
which comes from the city of Lerma, and runs to 
that of Guadalaxara in Nueva Galicia. On the e. 
and n. it is bounded by the real of the mines of 
Tlapujagua, but being six leagues distant from the 
same. Its climate inclines rather to cold lhan 
temperate, and it is much subject to high winds, 
which make the country very cold and disagree 
able. It is inhabited by 195 families of Indians, 
75 of Spaniards, and 90 of Mustees and Mulattoes. 
It is in lat. 19 25 n. and long. 100 3 . 

MARA VIA, a river of the province and country 
of Las Amazonas, in the part possessed by the 
Portuguese. It runs from n. to s. s. w. and enters 
the Rio Negro before this is joined by the first arm 
thrown out by the abundant stream of the Parime. 

MA RAVI A, a lake of this province and country, 
formed by a channel or arm of the river Guatuma, 
between this and the channel of the lake Jamenda. 
which runs to join the Maranon. 

MARAVIN1, a large and abundant river of the 
province of Guayana, in the Dutch possessions, and 
in the colony of Surinam. It runs n. and enters 
the sea near the Wiamia. At its mouth or en 
trance the Dutch have formed a guard for the se 
curity of their possessions. 

MARAYO, a river of the province and go 
vernment of La Trinidad. It rises from a lake on 
the e. coast, runs s. and enters the sea, forming a 
good port. 

MARBELLA, a town of the province and go 
vernment of the Rio de Hacha in the Nuevo 
Rcyno de Granada ; situate on the sea-coast, to the 
e. of the capital. 

MARBLE Fort, a fort in the province of Con 
necticut ; one of those of New England ; situate 
near the coast, between the forts of Corkain and 
New Boston. 

[MARBLEHEAD, a port of entry and post- 
town in Essex county, Massachusetts, four miles 
s. e. of Salem, IS n. e. of Boston; containing one 
Episcopal and two Congregational churches, and 
5661 inhabitants. The harbour lies in front of the 
town s. e. extending from s. w. to n. e. about one 
mile and a half in length, and half a mile broad. 



MAR 

It is formed by Marblchead neck on the s. and e . 
and is protected by a sea-wall, which before its 
late repairs was in imminent danger of giving 
way, to the great detriment, if not ruin of the port. 
A battery and citadel were erected here in 1795, 
for the defence of the place, by order of congress. 
The bank fishery employs the principal attention 
of the inhabitants, and more is done of this busi 
ness, in this place, than in any other in the state. 
The exports of the year 1794 amounted to 184,532 
dollars. Marblehcad was incorporated in 1649, 
and lies in lat. 42 27 n. Long. 70 50 o&amp;gt;.] 

[MARBLE Town, a township in Ulster county, 
New York ; situated on the w. side of Hudson s 
river, and some distance from it ; eight miles *. w. 
by s. of Esopus, and near 68 n. of New York city. 
It contains 2190 inhabitants, including 374 slaves. 
By the state census of 1796, 374 of the inhabitants 
are electors.] 

[MARC;ST. See MARK.] 

MARCA, a settlement of the province and cor 
regimiento of Guailas in Peru. 

MARCABAL, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Guamachuco, in the same king 
dom as the former ; one of the four principal dis 
tricts of the curacy of Estancias. 

MARCACONGA, a settlement of the province 
and corregimiento of Quispicanchi, in the same 
kingdom as the former ; annexed to the curacy of 
Sangarara. 

MARCAGUASI, a settlement of the province 
and corregimiento of Abancay, in the same king 
dom as the former ; 17 leagues from the city of 
Cuzco. 

MARCAN, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Tarma in Peru ; annexed to the 
curacy of Hunriaca. 

MARCA PATA, a settlement of the province 
and corregimienfo of Qnispicanchi in Peru ; situ 
ate on the further side of the coidillera of Villca- 
nota. 

MARCAUILLA, an ancient province of the 
kingdom of Peru ; part of the Huanca nation, and 
one of the three divisions into which this nation 
\vasseparated by the Inca Capac Ynpangui, w hen 
he conquered it by mild and insidious words ; 
giving to the other two parts the names- of Xauxa 
and Llacsapallanca ; he further ordered, that they 
might in future be readily distinguished, that each 
of them should wear upon their heads an ornament 
of a distinct colour. 

[MARCELI/US, a military township in Onon 
dago county, New York ; situated on Skaneatetes 
lake, 11 miles w. of Onondago castle. Marcellus, 
as incorporated in 1794, comprehends also the 

VOL. n. 



MAR 



457 



township of Camillus, part of the Onondago reser 
vation, and part of the reserved lands lying s. w. 
of the Salt lake. In 1796, 65 of its inhabitants 
were electors.] 

MARCELO, S. a settlement of the province 
and government of Sonora; situate on the bank of 
a river. 

MARCHAN, or SUTA, as it was called in the 
time of the Indians, a settlement of the province 
and corregimiento of Tunja in the Nuevo Reyno 
de Granada. It is of an healthy, benign, and 
pleasant climate, and its territory is very fruitful 
and cheerful. It is 14 leagues from the city of 
Tunja, and eight from the settlement of Chiquin- 
quira. 

MARCIAL, S. a settlement and real of the 
silver mines of the province of Ostimuri in N. 
America. It is 28 leagues n. n. w. one fourth to 
the n. of the real of Rio Chico. 

MARCO, a settlement of the province and cor- 
regimiento of Canta in Peru ; annexed to the curacy 
of Guamantanga. 

MARCOS, S. a settlement of the head settle 
ment of the district of Tlacotepec, and afcaldia 
mayor of Tepeaca, in Nueva Espana. It contains 
43 families of Indians, and is three leagues from its 
head settlement. 

MARCOS, S. another, of the head settlement of 
Ahuacatlan, and alcaldia mayor of Zacatlan, in the 
same kingdom ; one league distant from its head 
settlement. 

MA ucos, S. another, of the head settlement and 
alcaldia mai/or of Cuiceo in the same kingdom ; 
situate on the shore of the lake. It contains 22 
families of Indians, and lies a league and an half 
to the s. of its capital. 

MARCOS, S. another, of the head settlement of 
the district of Amaqucca, and alcaldia mayor of 
Zayula, in the same kingdom ; situate in a llamtra 
at the foot of a mountain, having to the w. a great 
lake of sweet water, but totally void of fish. This 
settlement contains 35 families of Indians, and is 
three leagues to the e. of its head settlement. 

MARCOS, S. another, of the head settlement of 
the district of Tlacolula, and alcaldia mat/or of 
Xalapa, in the same kingdom ; one league to the 
s. w. of the same head settlement. 

MARCOS, S. anot her, of the province and corre- 
gimiento of Conch ncos in Peru. 

MARCOS, S. another, of the province and corre* 
gimiento of Caxamarca in the same kingdom. 

MAKCOS, S. another, of the province and go 
vernment of Antioquia in the Nuevo Reyno de 
Granada ; situate in the sierras of Guanuico, on 
the bank of a river. 

SN 



458 



MAR 



MARCOS, S. another, of the province and go 
vernment of Sonora in Nueva Espana ; situate in 
the territory of the Apaches Indians, on the shore 
of a river between the settlements of Rosario and of 
San Salvador. 

MARCOS, S. another settlement, which is a 
parish of the French, in the part which they pos 
sess in the island of St. Domingo ; situate on the 
coast of the w. head, and of the hay of its name. 
See MAHK, ST. 

MARCOS, S. another, of the province and cor- 
regimiento of Cuenca in the kingdom of Quito. 

MARCOS, S. another, of the province and go 
vernment of Florida in N. America ; situate on 
the coast, with a good fort for its defence. 

MARCOS, S. another settlement, of the province 
and government of Paraguay ; situate s. of the city 
of La Asuncion, where there is a fort and garrison 
for its defence. 

MARCOS, S. another, of the head settlement of 
the district of Izatlan, and alcaldia mayor of this 
name, in Nueva Espaiia. 

MARCOS, S. another settlement and real of the 
mines of the province of Ostimuri in Nueva Es 
pana. It is 19 leagues to the n. of the real of Rio 
Chico. 

MARCOS, S. another, of the province and cor- 
regimiento of Quanta in Peru. 

MARCOS, S. a cape or point of land on the coast 
of the gulf of California or Mar Roxo de Cortes ; 
one of the two which form the bay of Concepcion, 
to the e. of the cape of Las Virgines. 

MARCOS, S. another cape, of the coast of the 
island of St. Domingo ; one of those which form 
the bay of its name. 

MARCOS, S. some lakes of salt water, on the 
coast of the province of Cinaloa. 

MARCOS, S. a bay on the w. coast of the island of 
St. Domingo, in the French possessions, between the 
cape of its name and the Morro del Diablo. 

MARCOS, S. a river of the province and govern 
ment of Sonora in Nueva Espafia. 

MARCOS, S. another river of Nueva Espana, 
which rises near the settlement of Tulanzinco, and 
running s. divides the jurisdictions of the alcaldias 
mayores of Papantla and Guauchinango, and enters 
into the sea at the bar of Corazones. 
[MARCOS, S. See MARK, ST.] 
[MARCUS HOOK, a town in Chester county, 
Pennsylvania, on the w. side of Delaware river, 20 
miles below Philadelphia. It contains about 30 
families. Here are two rows of piers, or long 
wharfs, to defend vessels from the driving of ice in 
winter.] 
MARDAY. See SANTA MONICA. 



MAR 

MARECHAL, a point of the s. coast of the 
French possessions in the island of St. Domingo, 
between cape Jaqiiemcl and the point of Belle 
Roche. 

[MARECH1TES Indians inhabit the banks of 
the river St. John, and around Passamaquoddy 
bay. They are estimated at 140 fighting men.] 

MA REG U ARE, a small river of the province 
and government of Guayana or Nueva Andalucia. 
It rises near the river Adavaquina, runs parallel 
with it to the e. and enters the sources of the river 
Canra. 

MARET, Islands of, near the coast of French 
Guayana and Cayenne island, opposite the island 
of Mont du Pont. 

MARFIL, a large settlement of the jurisdiction 
and a/caldia mayor of Guanajuato in the province 
and bishopric of Mechoaain, and kingdom of 
Nueva Espana. It contains 1500 families of Spa 
niards, Mustfd^ and Mulattoes, and some Indians, 
and is five leagues from its capital. 

[MARGALLAWAY, a river which rises in 
the district of Maine, and crosses the New Hamp 
shire line between lake Umbagog and a mountain 
on the n. and runs s. w. to Amariscoggin river. Its 
month is 10 rods wide.] 

[MARGARET S Bay, ST. a port on the s. coast 
of Nova Scotia, between Prospect harbour and 
Mahone bay ; from which last it is separated by a 
promontory, on which is the high land of Aspota- 
goen.] 

[MARGARET S Islands, in the N. Pacific ocean, 
were discovered by Captain James Magee, in the 
ship Margaret of Boston, in his voyage from 
Kamschatka in 1780. Their latitude is 27 40 n. 
Long. 145 40 .] 

[MARGARETTSVILLE, a village in Wash 
ington county, Maryland, about 10 miles s. by e. 
of Elizabeth town, and six n. e. of William s port."] 

MARGARITA, an island of the N.sea; one 
of the Less Antilles, opposite the coast of Nueva 
Andalucia, and divided from the same by an arm 
of the sea eight leagues wide. This island was 
discovered by Christopher Columbus in his third 
voyage, in 1498. Marcelo de Villalobos, to whom 
and to whose heirs it was granted by the Emperor 
Charles V. in 1524, peopled it in the following 
year, founding a city, and shortly afterwards a fort 
for its defence. The town was, however, attacked 
and destroyed by the Dutch in 1662, arid since 
that *ime the splendour and riches which Mere ac 
quired to it from its pearl fisheries have much di 
minished. A pearl was found here which was 
carried to the king, and which was valued at 
100,000 dollars. 



MAR 

This island is 38 miles long from &amp;lt;;. to w. 18 
wide. It is very fertile, and abounds in good pas 
tures for breeding cattle; but it has no fresh water, 
and this article has always been supplied from the 
continent. This evil, together with the aforesaid 
plunder of the pirates, induced many of its inha- 
tants to pass over and establish themselves on the 
mainland. [According to Depons, its present 
population may be estimated at 14,000 souls.] 
The commerce carried on in cacao, tallow, and 
hides, and now and then, some pearls, is altogether 
trifling. 

[Instead of a vegetative earth, the upper stratum, 
of nearly a foot deep in this island, is composed of 
sand, mixed with a rotten cellular marine plant. 
A little cotton, and a quantity of sugar hardly suf 
ficient for the consumption of the inhabitants, com 
poses the whole produce of the island. The place 
however by its local position can excite the envy 
of every commercial and maritime nation ; for, 
being separated from the mainland of Tierra 
Firme by a channel of only eight leagues wide, 
and lying in the direction of the prevailing winds, 
it might become, under a government which would 
allow a free trade, the magazine of Cumana, Bar 
celona, Caracas, La Guaira, and of all the cities in 
the interior. The island of La Trinidad, which is 
much less favourably situated for the purpose, af 
fords the Spanish contraband trade all the neces 
sary support and accommodation, and by this 
channel is sold an incredible quantity of merchan 
dise. There would be no other place of export 
but Guayana, if the e. part of Tierra Firme found 
at this island, free of navigation and near at hand, 
those things which it is now obliged to buy at 
places more distant. There are other no less im 
portant advantages attached to this island. The 
channel which separates it from Tierra Firme 
has, in the middle, the island of Coche, which 
makes a passage between it and Margcrita of but 
two leagues broad, through which the navigator 
must indispensably pass. Every ship coming from 
Europe to Cumana, Barcelona, and even to La 
Guaira, is obliged to sail along the jr. side of La 
Margarita. If the island were therefore in posses 
sion of the enemies of Spain, the commerce with 
Europe, and the communication with the neigh 
bouring islands, would be the more easily inter 
cepted, as the vessels that would endeavour to 
avoid the channel would be taken by the cruizers, 
which would find arsenals in Magarita. An enter 
prising enemy would find also in tiie situation of 
Margarita, the means of easily directing his mili 
tary expeditions against whatever part of Tierra 
Firme he might wish to invade. 



MAR 



459 



Spain is therefore induced to keep possession of 
the island, not because she can draw any positive 
advantage from it, but from the mischief it might 
do her, were it to pass under the power of another 
government ; and for this reason every possible 
means are taken, in time of war, to protect it. 

On the whole coast of the island there are but 
three ports. The principal one is that of Parnpatar, 
to the e.s. e. ; the second, called Pueblo de la Mar, 
lies a league to leeward of this ; and the third is 
on the 72. side, and is called for that reason Pueblo 
del Norte, i. e. North village. In each of these 
ports there is a village, the most important of 
which is that of Pampatar, where all the fortifi 
cations thought necessary for defence have been 
built. 

The capital is the town of Asuncion ; situated 
nearly in the centre of the island. There are three 
villages which bear the names of the valleys where 
they are built, viz. the Valley of St. John, Marga 
rita, and De los Rubles, or ot the Oaks. The po 
pulation is 14,000, of which there are 5500 whites, 
2000 Indians, and 6500 slaves and free people. 
There is scarcely any part of the island cultivated, 
the industry of the people being directed towards 
the fisheries at the island of Coche, in the middle 
of the channel. The fishermen are the Indians of 
Margarita, who are obliged to transport themselves 
to Coche, and fish there during three months of 
the year, for the pitiful salary of one real a day, 
and the miserable and only food of bread made of 
maize. In J803, the fisheries were conducted by 
five individuals of Margarita : they yield a great 
quantity of tortoises and fish, which is salted and 
sold for the consumption of the continent and the 
neighbouring islands. 

They manufacture at Margarita cotton ham 
mocks, of a better fabric than those made at other 
places. They make also cotton stockings of an 
extremely fine quality ; but they are too dear to be 
used save but by the rich. The island abounds in 
paroquets and other curious birds. The poor raise 
poultry, and sell their turkey-cocks and fowls to 
the foreign islands. The check against smuggling- 
being less active here than in other places, indivi 
duals procure mules from Tierra Firme, under the 
mask of their being for their own use, and clan 
destinely export them for the foreign colonies. 

In 1804, there was no other mercantile firm in this 
island than that of the eldest brother of D. Fran 
cisco Maneyro. It is 127 miles to the w. of the 
island of La Trinidad, and 25 from the city of Cu 
mana in Tierra Firme; in lat. 11 n. and long. 64 
9*w.] 

MARGARITA, a settlement of the head settle- 
SN 2 



MAR 



ment of the district of Coatlan, and alcaldia mayor 
of Nexapa, in Nueva Espafia ; situate at the top of 
a mountain. It contains 25 families of Indians, 
who live by the commerce they carry on in cotton, 
and the seeds and fruits that they cultivate. It is 
three leagues e. by n. of its head settlement. 

MARGARITA, another, of the alcaldia mayor of 
Tepeaca, in the same kingdom as the former. It 
contains 55 families of Indians, who serve as la 
bourers in the estates of its district. It is little 
more than a league from its head settlement, of the 
district of San Salvador el Scco. 

MARGARITA, another, of the province of Bar 
celona and government of Cumana ; situate on the 
shore of the river Unare, and on the skirt of the 
serrania. 

MARGARITA, a river of New Britain or land of 
Labrador in N. America. It runs s. forming vari 
ous lakes or pools in its course, and afterwards 
enters the river St. Lawrence. 

MARGARITA, a bay on the coast of Nova Scotia 
or Acadia, to the s. between the island Verde and 
the point Blanc. 

MARGARITA, another bay, on the w. coast of 
the island of Newfoundland, at the entrance of the 
strait of Belleisle, by the gulf of St. Lawrence. 

MARGARITA, another bay. See HOCKHOCKEN. 

MARGASTA, a settlement of the province and 
government of Tucuman in Peru, of the jurisdic 
tion of Santiago del Estero ; situate on the shore of 
the river Dulce. 

MARGOS, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Tarma in Peru, annexed to the 
curacy of Banos in the province of Guamalies. 
It is situate on the shore of the lake Lauricocha. 

M ARGOT, a settlement and parish of the 
French, in their possessions in the island of St. 
Domingo ; situate on the n. coast, and at the point 
of its name. It has a good though small port ; arid 
this it was that induced the French to establish 
themselves here under the guidance of Mr. Oger- 
ton, the governor of Tortugn, in 1660. There is 
in this port a small isle, which may be about half 
a league in circumference, and upon it arc some 
houses. This settlement is seven leagues from 
Toituo-a, and has been the ordinary refuge for 
pirates. 

[M ARGOT. The river and heights of Margot 
are on the e. side of the Mississippi. The river 
lias a z0. course, and is said to be navigable for 
batteaux a number of miles. The ground below 
its junction with the Mississippi, in lat. 35 28 n. 
afibrds a commanding, airy, pleasant, and exten 
sive situation for settlements ; the soil is remark 
ably fertile. About three miles below this the 



MAR 

French built Assumption fort in 1736, when at vVar 
with the Chickasaws, but the year after it was de 
molished, when a peace was concluded. It is 44 
miles from the river St. Francis, and 109 from the 
Arkansa river.] 

MARGOT, a port of this island, on the n, coast, 
between the Prison of Ogeron and the river of 
Limbo. 

MARGOT, a point of land or cape of the same 
island and coast, between those of Feste and Belle- 
Roche. 

MARIA, a town of the province and govern 
ment of Cartagena in the Nuevo Reyno de Gra 
nada ; founded by Pedro de Heredia in 1534, in a 
spacious and fertile llanura. It abounds in cacao 
of an excellent quality, and also in cattle ; is of an 
hot, moist, and unhealthy temperature ; and is, at 
the present day, reduced to a miserable village. 
It has been rendered famous by a kind of resin, 
which is taken from the trees in its district, of the 
name of Azeyte de Maria, the same being highly 
esteemed in all parts for its medicinal virtue in 
strengthening the stomach. It is 32 leagues from 
Cartagena. 

MARIA, a settlement of the missions that were 
held by the regulars of the company of Jesuits, in 
the province and government of Mainas, of the 
kingdom of Quito ; situate on the shore of the 
river Guallaga, and founded by the Father Rai- 
mundo de Santa Cruz, in 1638. It is a reduction 
of Cocamas Indians, and the third settlement that 
was made. 

MARIA. See MARIE, Cape DAME. 

[MARIA. See ST. MARY.] 

MARIA, SANTA, a settlement of the head settle 
ment of the district of Tamazunchale, and alcaldia 
mayor of Valles, in NuevaEspaiia; annexed to the 
settlement of Talacun. It is a population of Pa- 
mes Indians, who live in a state of gentilism, and 
frequently retire to the sierra, abandoning the 
settlement. At the end of the last century, (1700), 
the missionaries of San Francisco resided here; 
but upon an insurrection of the Indians, at the in 
stigation of a certain Mulatto, the church was set 
fire to and burnt to the ground. The territory of 
this settlement produces maize, French beans, and 
some fruits. 

MARIA, SANTA, another settlement, in the same 
head settlement, alcaldia, and kingdom ; annexed 
to the curacy of Tamapasquin, and one league dis 
tant from its head settlement. 

MARIA, SANTA, another, of the head settlement 
of the district of Santa Ana, and alcaldia mayor of 
Zultepec, in the same kingdom ; situate at the 
foot of some elqvated rocks, in the place called La 



MAR 

Goleta. It contains 67 families of Indians, who 
live by the commerce of cotton manufactures. It 
is annexed to the curacy of Amatepec, and is seven 
leagues to the w. of its head settlement. 

MARIA, SANTA, another, of the head settlement 
of the district of TIachicotnula, and alcaldia mayor 
of Tepeaca, in the same kingdom ; situate on the 
shore of the great lake of Alchichica, which ex 
tends so far that it reaches the bounds of the settle 
ment of Perote, of the jurisdiction of Xalapa; thus 
spreading itself over a distance of 20 leagues. This 
settlement contains 60 families of Indians, and is 
half a league from its head settlement. 

MARIA, SANTA, another, of the head settlement 
of the district of Arantzan, and alcaldia mayor of 
Valladolid, in the province and bishopric of Me- 
choacan. It contains 66 families of Indians, who 
live by cultivating seeds, cutting wood, fabricating 
delft and saddle-trees. 

MARIA, SANTA, another, of the head settlement 
of the district of Nopaluca, and alcaldia mayor of 
Tepeaca, in Nueva Espana. It contains only 17 
families of Indians. 

MARIA, SANTA, another, of the head settlement 
of the district of Acahuatlan, and alcaldia mayor 
ofZacatlan, in the same kingdom, distant some 
what more than a league from its head settlement. 

MARIA, SANTA, another, of the head settlement 
of the district and alcaldia mayor of Tlapa in the 
same kingdom. It is of a cold temperature, con 
tains 210 families of Indians, and is one league to 
the s. of the Metlatono. 

MARIA, SANTA, another, which is a small ward 
of the head settlement of the district of Mistepec, 
and alcaldia mayor of Juxtlahuaca, in the same 
kingdom. 

MARIA, SANTA, another, also a small settlement, 
of the alcaldia mayor of Guauchinango, in the 
same kingdom ; annexed to the curacy of Tlacui- 
lotepec. 

MARIA, SANTA, another, of the head settlement 
of the district of Huahutla, and alcaldia mayor of 
Cuicatlan, in the same kingdom. It contains 70 fa 
milies of Indians, and in its vicinity are two small 
wards, in which are 1JO other families. One of 
these is distant a league, and the other half a 
league n. of their head settlement. 

MARIA, SANTA, another, of the head settlement 
of the district of Tepacaltepec, and alcaldia mayor 
of Nejapa, in the same kingdom ; situate at the 
top of a mountain. It contains 58 families of In 
dians, and is four leagues from its head settle 
ment. 

MARIA, SANTA, another, of the head settlement 
of the district of Pinotepa, and alcaldia mayor of 
Xixayan, in the same kingdom. It contains 54 



MAR 



461 



families of Indians, who employ themselves in the 
cultivation of cochineal, tobacco, and seeds. It i 
five leagues n. w. of its head settlement. 

MAUIA, SANTA, another, of the head settlement 
of the district and alcaldia mayor of Tequepexpa 
in the same kingdom. It is of a cold temperature, 
contains 36 families of Indians, and is five leagues 
to the n. of its capital. 

MARIA, SANTA, another, of the head settlement 
of the district and alcaldia mayor of Juchipila in 
the same kingdom. Eight leagues w. of its head 
settlement. 

MARIA, SANTA, another, of the head settlement 
of the district and alcaldia mayor of Colotlan in the 
same kingdom. It is 2| leagues to the n. of its 
head settlement. 

MARIA, SANTA, another, of the head settlement 
and alcaldia mayor of Marinalco in the same king 
dom ; situate at the foot of a lofty mountain, and 
at the distance of somewhat more than a league 
from its capital. 

MARIA, SANTA, another, of the head settlement 
of the district of Papalotipac, and alcaldia mayor 
of Cuicatlan, in the same kingdom. It contains 
23 families of Indians, employed in cultivating 
cochineal, cotton, and preparing saltpetre. 

MARIA, SANTA, another, of the head settlement 
of the district and alcaldia mayor of Marinalco in 
the same kingdom, distinct from the other that we 
have mentioned, and at some distance from it. 

MARIA, SANTA, another, which is a small ward 
of the head settlement of the district of Ocuila, and 
of the same alcaldia mayor and kingdom as the 
former. 

MARIA, SANTA, another, of the head settlement 
of the district and alcaldia may or of Octupan in the 
same kingdom. 

MARIA, SANTA, another, of the head settlement 
of the district of Tlacotepec, and alca/dia mayor of 
Tepeaca, in the same kingdom. It contains 40 
families of Indians, and is three leagues from iti 
head settlement. 

MAUIA, SANTA, another, of the province and 
alcaldia mayor of Zacapula in the kingdom of 
Guatemala. 

MARIA, SANTA, another, of the missions that 
are held by the religious order of San Francisco, 
in the district of the alcaldia may or of Guadalcazar, 
of the kingdom and bishopric of Mechoacan. It 
is six leagues to the c. of Santa Clara. 

MARIA, SANTA, another, of the jurisdiction and 
alcaldia mayor of Nata, in the province and go 
vernment of Tierra Firme; situate on the shore of 
a small river, which disembogues itself into the S. 
sea, and has the same name. 

MARIA, SANTA, another, of the province and 



MAR 



government of Maracaibo in the Nuevo Reyno de 
Granada ; situate on the shore of the lake and of 
the river Chicama, to the s. of the lake. 

MARIA, SANTA, another, of the province and 
government of Cumana ; situate on the shore of 
the river Aren, in its head settlement, to the s. of 
the city of Cariaco. 

MARIA, SANTA, another settlement and parish, 
of the French, in the island of Martinique, a curacy 
of the monks of the order of St. Domingo ; situate 
on the n. e. coast, between the bay of San Jacques 
or Santiago, and the small island of LaHaye. 

MARIA, SANTA, another settlement, which is a 
parish and head of a district of the island of Ja 
maica, in the n. part. 

MARIA, SANTA, another, which is the parish 
and head settlement of the district of the French, 
in the island of Guadalupe ; situate on the e. coast, 
on the shore of the Abra de Gonyabes or Gua- 
yabes. 

MARIA, SANTA, another, with the surname of 
Ucayala, of the province and government of Mai- 
nas in the kingdom of Quito; founded in 1670 by 
the Father Lorenzo Luzero, of the extinguished 
company of Jesuits, on the shore of the river Ma- 
ranon, opposite to the city of San Francisco de 
Borja. 

MARIA, SANTA, another, of the jurisdiction and 
alcaldia mayor of San Miguel el Grande, in the 
kingdom and bishopric of Mechoacan. 

MARIA, SANTA, another, of the island of Cuba; 
situate on the w. coast. 

MARIA, SANTA, another, of the province and 
alcaldia mayor of Chiapa in the kingdom of Gua 
temala. 

MARIA, SANTA, another, with the surname 
of Miguel, in the province and government of 
Cartagena, and Nuevo Reyno de Granada ; si 
tuate on the shore of the Rio Grande de la Mag- 
dalena. 

[MARIA, SANTA, DE FE, a settlement of Indians, 
of the province and government of Paraguay ; si 
tuate on a branch of the Tubiquany Guaze, in lat. 
26 48 12", and long. 56 58 54" a&amp;gt;.] 

MARIA, SANTA, another, with the surname 
of La Mayor, of the missions that were held by 
the regulars of the company of Jesuits in the 
province and government of Paraguay ; situate on 
the shore of a small river, running s. into the Uru 
guay, between the settlements of La Concepcion 
and San Francisco Xavier. [Lat. 28 7 s. Lons:. 
55 54 w. ] 

MARIA, SANTA, a town of the province and 
kingdom of Tier; a Firme, founded on account of 
the rich gold mines that had been discovered in its 
district. Jt abounds in seeds and swine. It is si- 



MAR 

tuate in the most interior part of the gulf of San 
Miguel, near the coast of the S. sea, and at the 
entrance of the river Tuira. In 1680, it was pil 
laged by the pirates Bartholomew Charps, John 
Guarlem, and Edward Bolmen; when they de 
stroyed the fort which had been built for the de 
fence of the mines and of the town. 

MARIA, SANTA, another town, of the district of 
Puchacay in the corregimiento of Itata, and king 
dom of Chile; situate on the shore of the river 
Heuda, near that of Itata and the sea-coast. 

MARIA, SANTA, a river of the province and go 
vernment of Darien in the kingdom of Tierra 
Firme. It rises in the mountains of the n. coast, 
and enters the Bayano. 

MARI \, SANTA, another, of the province and 
government of Venezuela in the NUJCVO Reyno de 
Granada. It rises in the e. part, and enters that 
of La Portuguese. 

MARIA, SANTA, another, a small river of the 

i&amp;gt;rovince and captainship of Portoseguro in Brazil, 
t rises at the foot oftheCerro Frio, near the coast, 
runs n. n. w. and enters the river of Picdras. 

MAR;A, SANTA, another small river, of Nova 
Scotia or Acadia in N.America. It runs e. near 
the coast, turns s. and enters the sea in the port 
of Frankland. 

MA r.iA, SANTA, a bay on the coast of the pro 
vince of Cinalo.i, of the gulf of California or Mar 
Roxo de Cortes, between the rivers Cinaloa and 
Del Fuerte. 

MARIA, SANTA, another, on the w. const of 
Nova Scotia or Acadia, between Long island and 
Horn bank. 

MARIA, SANTA, another, on the s. coast of the 
island of Newfoundland. 

MARIA, SANTA, a port of the province of 
Cinaloa. 

MARIA, SANTA, another, of the island of Cu- 
ranzo, in the s. coast, opposite the coast of Tierra 
Firme. 

MARIA, SANTA, another, of the n. coast of the 
island of Jamaica. 

MARIA, SANTA, a lake of the province and go 
vernment of Venezuela in the Nuevo Reyno de 
Granada, being formed by an arm of the river Por- 
tuguesa. 

MARIA, SANTA, a cape or point of land, called 
De Dona Maria, at the o&amp;gt;. head and extremity of 
the island of St. Domingo, in theFrench possessions. 
It lies between the points of Las Ballenas and Ge- 
ringa. 

MARIA, SANTA, another, on the coast of Nova 
Scotia or Acadia ; one of those which form the 
entrance of the bay of All Islands. 

MARIA, SANTA, another, on the s. coast of the 



MAR 



MAR 



island of Newfoundland, between the bay of ifs 
name and that of Plaisance. 

MARIA, SANTA, another, which is the extremity 
of the coast of Brazil, and one of those which 
form the entrance or mouth of the river La Plata. 

MARIA, SANTA, an island situate near the coast 
of Brazil, in the province and captainship of the 
Rio Janeiro, between the city of this name and the 
Punta Ncgra. 

MARIA, SANTA, another island, also situate near 
the coast, of the kingdom of Chile, opposite the 
heights of Villagran. 

MARIA, SANTA, a fall of the waste-water of the 
lake Superior in New France or Canada, at the 
entrance of the Huron. 

[MARIAGALANTE. See MARIGALANTE.] 

MARIANA, a town of the kingdom of Brazil ; 
situate between the sources of the rivers Doce or 
Dulce, and the San Francisco, to the e. and very 
near to Villa Rica. 

MARIANA, a port of the n. coast of the island of 
Cuba, between the bay of Honda and the Havana. 

MARIANA, a point of land or cape of the coast 
of the S. sea, in the district of Barbacoas, and pro 
vince and government of Choco, where begin the 
mouths of the river Patia. 

[MAR1ANNA was the name given to the dis 
trict granted by the Plymouth Council to Captain 
John Mason in 1621. It extended from the river 
Naumkeag, now Salem, round cape Ann, to Mer- 
rimack river, and from the sea to the heads of these 
rivers, with the islands lying within two miles of 
the coast.] 

MARIARA,a large, fertile, and beautifid valley 
of the province and government of Venezuela, in 
the Nuevo Reyno de Granada. 

MARIAS, a settlement of the province and cor- 
regimiento of Guamalies in Peru ; annexed to the 
curacy of the settlement of Banos. 

MARIAS, TRES, so many rocks or small isles, 
near the n. coast of Caico Grande or Del Norte. 

MARIAURES, a barbarous and warlike nation 
of Indians, who inhabit the woods on the e. shore 
of the river Yetau. It is not well known. 

MARIBANI, a river of the province and go 
vernment of La Guayana. It runs s. and enters 
the Orinoco. 

MAR1BISCA, an ancient province of Peru, se 
parated from that of Xauxa by Huana Capac, 
thirteenth emperor of the Incas. It is thinly 
peopled, since its climate is very severe. The In 
dians, who live in it, are descendants of the an 
cient nation of Los Guanchos. 

MARICANA, a small island ivar the coast of 
the province and captainship of Todos Santos in 



Brazil. On its coasts a great fishery is car 
ried on. 

MARICHES, a nation of Indians, who gave 
name to a province comprehended at the pre 
sent day in that of Venezuela, of the Nuevo 
Rcyno de Granada. It was bounded, at the time 
of the arrival of the Spaniards, by the valley of 
San Francisco on the w. and covered an extent of 
10 leagues in length. The territory is rough, 
broken, and full of s&amp;lt;rrcwias ; but the temperature 
is mild, and it was formerly thickly peopled with 
Indians. It was discovered by Diego de Losada 
in 1567; at present it is destroyed, without a 
population, and preserves nothing but the name 
of what it was. 

MAR1C1T ANAS, SAN JOSEPH DE LOS, a fort 
of the province and government of Rio Negro; 
situate on the shore of the Rio Negro, about 47 
miles from S. Carlos Fte. Espintiol, in lat. i 1 n. 
and long. 67 27 w. 

[MARIE, Cape DAME, the w. point of the 
island of St. Domingo, which with cape St. Nicho 
las, forms the entrance of the bay of Leogane. 
Lat. 18 37 n. Long. 74 27 30" w. The town 
of this name, situated on the cape, is on the n. 
westernmost part of the s. peninsula, 17 miles w. 
of Jeremic, and 20 w. of Port au Prince. The 
towns and villages, along the n. coast of the penin 
sula, and in the bay or bite of Leogane, between 
the cape and Port au Prince, are Petit Trou, Anse 
a Veau, Maragoane, Petite Goave, Grand Goave, 
&amp;c.] 

[MARIE, Straits of, connect lakes Superior and 
Huron, which will permit boats to pass, but not 
larger vessels. Near the upper end of these straits, 
which are 40 miles long, is a rapid which (though 
it is impossible for canoes to ascend) may be na 
vigated by boats without danger, when conducted 
by able pilots. The straits afford one of the most 
pleasing prospects in the world. On the left, lead 
ing to lake Superior, may be seen many beautiful 
little islands that extend a considerable way before 
you ; and on the right an agreeable succession of 
small points of land which project a little way into 
the water, and contribute with the islands to render 
it delightful.] 

[MARIEL, Port, a harbour on the n. side of 
the island of Cuba, which will admit frigates of SO 
guns.] 

MARIEL, Bay of, on the coast of the island of 
Cuba, on thew. side, between that of Mosquitos and 
Dominica. 

MARIEN, a kingdom of the island of St. Do 
mingo, before that it was discovered by the Spa 
niards, and one of the four into which the island 



464 



MAR 



was divided by the Indians. It comprehended 
the whole n. coast, from the w. extremity of the 
island, in which is the cape San Nicolas, as far as 
the river Yaqne, known to-day by the name of 
Monte Cbristi, as also all the part of La Vega Real, 
called to-day cape Frances or French cape ; and 
in this part it was that stood the chief town, the 
same being the residence of the goacanarico or In 
dian king, whose name the Spaniards abbreviated 
into goarico, a title by which he is at present 
known. The bishop Don Fr. Bartolome de las 
Casas, says that this kingdom of Marien was 
larger and more fertile than that of Portugal. 

[MARIETTA, a post-town and settlement of the 
N. W. Territory ; situated on the Ohio, at the 
month of the Muskingurn. The Campus Martins 
in this town is an elevated public square, founded 
by the Ohio company in the year 1788. The 
fortification is all of hewn timber, and for appear 
ance, convenience, and defence, of superior ex 
cellence. It is more than 30 feet above the high 
banks of the Muskingurn, and oiily 159 yards dis 
tant from that river, with a beautiful natural glacis 
in front. The town consists of 1000 house-lots of 
90 by 180 feet ; the spacious streets intersect each 
other at right angles, and there are necessary 
squares reserved for use, pleasure, and ornament. 
There are but few houses yet erected. It is 12 
miles above Bel-Pre, 59 s. w. of Wheeling, 104 
*. w. of Pittsburg, 159 n. e. of Lexington in Ken 
tucky, and 300 w. by s. of Philadelphia. In lat. 
39 16 n. Long. 81 57 w.~] 

And the quantities of the principal articles imported into Great Britain were, in 



MAR 

MARIGALANTE, an island of the N. sea, 
one of the Less Antilles, between Guadalupe tothe 
w. n. ay. and Dominica to the s. It was thus named 
by Christopher Columbus, who discovered it in 
141 3; this being the name of the vessel in which 
he was sailing ; and he sent an officer on shore to 
take possession of it in the name of the king of 
Spain. It is so covered with wood, as to appear 
nothing but a large forest. The French established 
themselves here in 1648, and built a fort for their 
defence; but the town was twice sacked and de 
stroyed by the Dutch ; by the English in J691, 
and again in 1765 ; but they restored it afterwards 
to the French in the following year, 1766. 

[It again fell into the hands of the English in the 
present war, together with the rest of the French 
colonies.] The climate of this island isple;is;mt,and 
the soil, if cultivated, would be excellent. As it is, 
however, it produces a sufficient quantity of to 
bacco, cotton, indigo, and sugar-cane. 

[Marigalante lies 11 miles s. e. of Guadaloupe: 
about half its surface is barren mountains. There 
are only two parishes, the principal at the s. de 
fended by a fort called Basseterre. It is indif 
ferently watered, but produces 800,0001b. of cof 
fee, 100,000lb. of cotton, and l,0()0,0001b. of 
sugar. Lat. 15 56 n. Long. 61 19 w. 

The official value of the imports and exports of 
Marigalante were, in 

Imports. Exports. 

1810, ..7832, - 



Coffee. 


Sugar. 


Rum. 


Cotton Wool. 


Brit. Plant. 


For. Plant. 


Brit. Plant. 


For. Plant. 


Cwt. 
1809, 
1810, 


Cwt. 

1491 


Cwt. 


Cwt. 
1322 


Galls. 


Lbs. 

1810 



The capital is Santa Ana, where resides a judge 
nominated by the king, and who is also the gover 
nor. It is ill supplied with fresh water; and ex 
posed, as are all the other islands, to furious hurri 
canes."] 

MAJIIGOT, a settlement and parish of the 
island of Martinique ; situate on the n. e. coast, be 
tween the river and bay called Carpenter and the 
river Mace. 

MAKiGoT,abay of the island of St. Christopher; 
one of the Antilles ; serving as a port to the capital 
of this island. 

[MAR1GUENU, a mountain in the kingdom of 

2 



Chile, on the Araucanian frontiers ; famous for 
the defeats of the Spaniards ; for account of which, 
see Index to additional History, &amp;c. of CHILE. 
Chap.lVJ 

MAR1GUITAR, a settlement of the province 
and government of Cumana ; situate on the shore 
of the coast of the gulf of Cariaco, to the n. of the 
city of Cumariagoto. 

MARILEB, a settlement of Indians, of the pro 
vince and government of Valdivia in the kingdom 
of Chile ; situate on the shore of the river Valdivia. 

MAR1MAN, a settlement of Indians, of the 
same province and kingdom as the former. 



MAR 



465 



MARIMARUTA, or MARIMAIIOTA, as some 
call it, an ugly rock on the shore of the river Ori 
noco, hut of singular feature and character. It is 
more than six miles in circumference, and is of 
one entire piece, covered with wild trees, and hav 
ing only one difficult ascent on its e. side, the 
which it is necessary to climb bare-footed. It is 
126 fathoms in perpendicular height. The plain 
is more than 40 paces long and 80 wide, and is 
elevated 14 yards above the level of the sea. The 
Jesuits, the missionaries of the Orinoco, built in 
1736, a fortress on this rock, with three batteries to 
guard the river against the navigation of the 
Caribes Indians, and to secure from the attacks of 
these infidels the settlements of the missions, which 
extend from thence upwards. This they suc 
ceeded in doing, owing principally to the natural 
advantages and strength of the position ; for such 
is the narrowness of the pass here, owing to the 
whirlpools and numerous other rocks, that vessels 
may only pass one by one ; and, indeed, even then 
it is difficult for them so to master the current as to 
avoid being driven against the foot of this large 
rock. 

MARIN, CUL DE SAC, a settlement and parish 
of the island of Martinique ; situate on the n. w. 
coast, on the shore of a great bay or port, much 
frequented by vessels. It is a curacy of the reli 
gious order of St. Domingo ; and upon the shore of 
the same bay stands a chapel, with the dedicatory 
title of Santa Ana. 

MARIN, a river of this island, which runs s. w. 
and enters the sea in the aforesaid bay. 

MARIN A BO, a point of the n. coast of the 
island of Cuba ; off which, in 1713, was lost a ship 
of war of the Windward armada, on its passage to 
Spain with great wealth, and commanded by Don 
Diego de Alarcon. On this point there is a tower 
with a guard which keeps a constant look-out. 

MARINALTENANGO, a settlement and head 
settlement of the district of the alcaldia mayor of 
Zaqualpain Nueva Espana. It contains 185 fa 
milies of Indians. 

MARINA LTEPEC, a settlement and head set 
tlement of the district of the alcaldia mayor of 
Atlatlauca, in the same kingdom as the former. It 
is of an hot temperature, and contains 104 families 
of Indians, including those of the wards of its dis 
trict. It abounds in trees ; and in it is found one 
bearing a fruit called chico-zapote, like to medlars, 
the same being much esteemed, and an article of 
great profit to the inhabitants, who carry it for sale 
to Oaxaca and other parts. It is two leagues s. w. 
of its capital. 

MA RIO U A, a settlement of the province and 
VOL. n. 



country of Las Amazonas, in the part possessed by 
the Portuguese ; situate on the shore of the river 
Negro, between the settlement of Cumaru, and the 
city of Barcellos or Sari Cayetano. 

MARIOUA, a river of the province of Guayann, 
which runs n. and enters the Orinoco, a little be 
fore this runs into the sea. 

MARIPARU, a lake of the province and coun 
try of Las Amazonas, or part of Guayana pos 
sessed by the Portuguese. 

MARIPE, a small river of the province and 
captainship of Maranan in Brazil. It rises near 
the coast, runs w. between the rivers Perguicas and 
Canachug, and enters the sea close to the bay of 
the Maranori. 

MAR1PISANA, a small rirer of the province 
and country of Las Amazonas, in the Portuguese 
possessions. It runs from n. to s. s. w. and enters 
the river Negro. 

MAR1QU1NA, a settlement of the missions 
that were held by the company of the Jesuits in 
the province and government of Valdivia and 
kingdom of Chile; situate on the shore of the 
river Valdivia. 

MAR1QU1TA, a city of the Nuevo Reyno de 
Granada , and capital of the corregimiento ; erected 
into a seat of government in 1776, and founded by 
Francisco Pedroso with the name of San Sebastian 
del Oro, in 1550, in the country of the Cacique 
Marqucta, from whence came the corruption of 
Mariquita. It was afterwards, in 1553, translated 
into a llfinura, where it now stands, at the skirt of a 
mountain near the river Guali, three leagues from 
the spot where this river enters the Magdalena. 

This city lias been rich and celebrated from its 
fine mines. It is bounded on the zo. in part, by 
the gold mines of Bocaneme and San Juan de 
Cordova, the which are bordering on those of 
IJarve, Malpaso, Guarino, and Puano ; and on. 
the e. by the silver mines of Santa Ana, Las Lajas, 
and San Joseph de Frias ; and in these mines the 
silver metal is almost constantly found mixed with 
the very purest gold, in the separating of which 
from each other many foreigners have employed 
themselves, and with success. The business of 
these mines is at the present day all but abandoned, 
and the city has in consequence fallen into great 
decay, its population being now reduced to 300 
housekeepers, although it was formerly one of the 
most rich and opulent cities in the kingdom. 

Its temperature is very hot, and it abounds in .Ml 
kinds of fruits. It has a very good parish church, 
and some other beautiful edifices, some convents 
of the religious orders of San Francisco and S. Do 
mingo, an hospital of San J uan de Dios, and three 
So 



MAR 



MAR 



very good hermitages. It had a house for found 
ing metals, and officers of the royal revenue, sub 
ordinate to those of Santa Fe. Its arms, which 
were granted by the Emperor Charles V. are a 
bundle of arrows tied together by a noose, with 
the points upwards. 

The natives who, throughout the kingdom, en 
joy the character of being very clever and ingeni 
ous, are much subject to the epidemic disorder of 
the coios, or swellings on the throat ; the same 
being equally common to both sexes, and attri 
buted, perhaps with good reason, to the effects of 
the water. This city once contained the remains 
of the conqueror of the Nucvo Reyno de Granada, 
Gonzalo Xirnenez de Quesada, who died in it 
in 1597 ; but they were afterwards removed to the 
cathedral of Santa Fe, which is 59 miles to the s. e. 
This city is in lat. 5 15 n. and long. 74 50 w. 

MARIQU1T ES, a barbarous and ferocious na 
tion of Indians of the kingdom of Brazil, to the e. of 
Olinda. They dwell in the woods which are to 
the n. of the river of San Francisco : they are can 
nibals, and naturally treacherous, but all, both 
men and women, dexterous in war, of great agility 
in running, and in this they are much aided by 
being very slender. They have no house or even 
fixed spot of abode, and maintain themselves on 
wild fruits, and on the flesh of the animals that they 
kill. 

MARIS, a settlement of the province and colony 
of Maryland in N. America ; situate at the mouth 
of the river Patowmack. 

MARTS, an island or rock of the N. sea, close 
upon the coast of the island of S. Christoval. 

MARIUNA, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Cuenca in the kingdom of Quito ; 
situate about 15 miles to the s. of the capital, in 
the road which leads to Loxa. 

MAR1URUN ACA, a river of the province and 
country of Las Amazonas, in the Portuguese pos 
sessions. It runs s. in a serpentine course, and 
enters the Matari a little before this runs into a lake 
of this name. 

MARIUSAS, CANO DE, an arm of the river 
Orinoco ; one of those which form the mouths 
and islands which it has at its entrance into the 
sea. 

[MARK, ST. a town of E. Florida, at the head 
of the bay of Apalachy, to the w. of St. Augus 
tine.] 

[MARK, ST. or ST. MARCOS, a jurisdiction in 
the w. part of the island of St. Domingo, contain 
ing four parishes. Its exports, shipped from the 
town of its name, from Jan. 1, 1789, to Dec. 31, 
of the same year, were 3,065,047 Ibs. white sugar, 



7,931,710 Ibs. brown sugar, 7,041,852 Ibs. coffee, 
3,250.890 Ibs. cotton, 349,819 Ibs. indigo, and: 
various articles to the value of 2250| livres : the 
total value of duties on exportation, 116,974 dol 
lars 4 cents. The town of St. Mark lies at the 
head of a bay of its name, which is at the head of 
the bay or bite of Leogane. The bay is formed 
by cape St. Mark on the s. and Morne au Diablo 
on the n. This town, although small, is rec 
koned the pleasantest in the island . Its commerce 
is considerable. It owes a great deal of its em 
bellishments to the attention of M. de Marbois 
during his administration. It is 41 miles n. w. of 
Port au Prince, 24 5. by w. of Les Gonaives, 52 
s. of port de Paz, and 53s. TO. of cape Francois. 
Lat, 19 4 n. Long. 72 45 o&amp;gt;.] 

MARKLAND, a settlement of the island of 
Barbadoes ; situate near the s. coast. 

[MARLBOROUGH, a county in the n. e. 
corner of Cheraws district, on the Great Pedee 
river, S. Carolina, 25 miles long, and 19 broad.] 

[MARLBOROUGH, NEW, a township in Berk 
shire county, Massachusetts, containing 1550 in 
habitants. It was incorporated in 1759.] 

[MARLBOROUGH, an ancient and wealthy town 
ship in Berkshire county, Middlesex county, Mas 
sachusetts, (the Okommakamesit of the Indians), 
was incorporated in 1660, and contains J554 in 
habitants. It is 26 miles w. of Boston. A mode 
of manufacturing Spanish brown from a kind of 
earth or loam said to resemble bed-ore, though 
not impregnated with particles of iron, has lately 
been discovered in this town by an ingenious gen 
tleman. He constructed an air furnace, at a tri 
vial expence ; and in the year 1794, could cal 
cine and prepare for the mill a ton in 24 hours, 
six days in succession, without great expence of 
wood. Connoisseurs in paints acknowledge it is 
good. His first attempts in making spruce yellow 
were likewise flattering.] 

[MARLBOROUGH, a township in Windham 
county, Vermont, having Newfane on the n. Ha 
lifax s. Brattleborough e. and Wilmington on the 
w. It contains 629 inhabitants.] 

[MARLBOROUGH, a post-town in Cheshire 
county, New Hampshire, four miles from Keene, 
16 n. w. of Winchendon, and 22 from Ashburn- 
ham in Massachusetts. It was incorporated in 
1776, and contains 786 inhabitants.] 

[MARLBOROUGH, NEW, a township in Ulster 
county, New York, on the w. side of Hudson s 
river, n. of Newburgh. It contains 2241 inha 
bitants ; of whom 339 are electors, and 58 slaves.] 

[MARLBOROUGH, the name of three town 
ships in Pennsylvania, the one in Montgomery 



MAR 

county, and E. and W. Maryborough in Chester 
county.] 

[MARLBOROUGH, LOWER, a town of Mary 
land ; situated in Calvert county, on the e. side of 
Patuxent river, 24 miles .. e. of Washington city. 
It contains about 60 houses, and a warehouse for 
the inspection of tobacco. The river is navigable 
for ships of burden for some miles above the 
town.] 

[MARLBOROUGH, UPPER, the chief town of 
Prince George s county, Maryland. It is situated 
on the s. w. side of Hatavisit, one of the two 
principal branches of Patuxent river. It contains 
about 120 houses, a court-house, and a ware 
house for the inspection of tobacco. It is 29 miles 
s. s. w. of Baltimore, and about 14 s.e.of the city 
of Washington.] 

[MARLOW, a township in Cheshire county, 
New Hampshire, settled in 1761. It contains 313 
inhabitants.] 

MARM1LLOS, a river of the province and 
country of Las Amazonas. It rises in the terri 
tory of the Unuriaos Indians, runs . and enters 
the Mad era. 

MARMOUSETS, PAN DE, an isle or rock of 
the N. sea, near the n. coast of the island of St. 
Domingo, between the Red cape and port De 
Plata. 

MARONES, a barbarous nation of Indians of 
Cayenne or Equinoctial France. They live in 
the woods, "without any fixed habitation, and 
maintain themselves by the chase. They are de 
scendants of the Terrcstres or Mediterraneos Caribes, 
and dwell to the s. w. of Cayenne ; being 45 
leagues distant from thence, and 15 from the 
mouth of the river Arabony. 

MARONI, or MAROWINE, the largest river in 
Cayenne. It runs n. for more than 70 leagues, 
and enters the Atlantic near the Dutch colony of 
Surinam, forming some isles at its entrance, in 
lat. 5 56 n. Long. 54 3 w. 

MAROT, a small island near the coast of Nova 
Scotia or Acadia. 

MARQUES, PUNTA DEL, a point on the coast 
of the province and corregimiento of Cercado, in 
the S. sea, and kingdom of Peru, near the port of 
Callayo. 

MARQUES, a port on the coast of the gulf of 
California, or Mar Roxo de Cortes; a name which 
was given it by this renowned conqueror, he being 
at that time Marquis of Valle, in memory of his 
having entered it at its discovery. 

MAUQUES, an isle or shoal near the coast of 
Florida; lying between the extremity of the coast 
and the Martyr isles. 



M A R 



467 



MARQUES, a settlement of the province and 
government of Venezuela in the Nuevo Reyno de 
Granada; founded in the serrania by the com 
pany Guipuzcoana, in this century (1800). 

MARQUESADO, VILLA DEL, the capital of 
the akaldia mayor of Quartro Villas, and the 
estate of the Marquis del Valle, in Nueva Espana. 
It is of a hot and dry temperature, contains 108 
families of Indians, and some Spaniards, with a 
convent of the religious order of St. Domingo. 
It produces, in abundance, tobacco, wheat, co 
chineal, maize, and fruits. Very near to it. runs the 
river Atoyaque. It is 48 leagues s. e. of Mexico, 
in lat. 18 2 . Long 277 10 . 

[MARQUESAS. These islands are five in 
number, viz. La Magdalena, St. Pedro, La Do 
minica, Santa Christina, and Hood s island; 
situate in the S. Pacific ocean, between the iat. 
of 8 and 10 25 s. and between the long, of 138 
47 and 140 30 w. They were first discovered 
by Mendana and Quiros in 1595; and in 1774, 
Capt. Cook ascertained their situation more parti 
cularly, which before was different in different 
charts. La Dominica is about 16 leagues in cir 
cuit. Hood s island was discovered by Capt. 
Cook in 1774. The inhabitants of these islands, 
taken collectively, are, without exception, the 
finest race of people in these seas ; and for good 
shapes and regular features, they perhaps surpass 
all nations. They are thought to be of the same 
origin as those of Otaheite and of the Society 
islands. They have hogs, fowls, plantains, and 
other vegetables and roots ; likewise a few bread 
fruit and cocoa trees. N. n. w. of these islands, 
from 35 to 50 leagues distant, are the seven isles 
called ING RAH AM s Isles, which see.] 

MARQUET, a small river of New France or 
Canada. It runs w. between the rivers Oulama- 
natie and San Nicolas, and enters the lake Mi 
chigan. 

MARQUETA, a settlement of the province and 
government of Valparaiso in the kingdom of 
Chile ; situate n. of t lie town of Melipilla. 

MARQUETONES , a barbarous nation of n- 
dians of the Nuevo Reyno de Granada, who 
dwell in the woods on the mountains of Bogota, to 
the n. They have some rich gold mines, which 
they formerly worked with considerable pro/it to 
the Spaniards ; but they are at present abandoned. 

MARRE, Rio DK LA, a river in the island of 
Martinique, one of the Antilles. It runs s. w. 
and enters the sea between the Petit Roy and Ca- 
nawille sound. 

[MARROWYNE, a river of Dutch Guayana, 
in S. America.] 

3 o 2 



468 



MAR 



MARSHAL, a settlement of the island of Bar- 
badoes, in the district and parish of S. Joseph, near 
the e. coast. 

[MARSHFIELD, a township in Plymouth 
county, Massachusetts, bounded s. by Duxbo- 
rough ; and 19 miles *. e. of Boston. It was in 
corporated in 1640, and contains 1269 inhabi 
tants.] 

[MARSHFTELD, a township in Caledonia county 
in Vermont, adjoining to Calais on the n. za. and 
Peach urn n. e.~T 

[MAKSHPEE, by several writers called Mash- 
pee, an ancient Indian town in Barnstable county, 
Massachusetts, containing 308 inhabitants. There 
is still an Indian church here, but not more than 
40 or 50 persons are pure Indians. The whole 
consists of about 80 families, principally of a 
mixed race, being 280 souls in all. They have 
greatly decreased since 1693, when there were 214 
adults, besides stragglers in the plantation arid 
places adjacent ; under the care of Mr. Rowland 
Cotton, minister of Sandwich.] 

[MARSHY HOPE, the n. w. branch of Nanti- 
coke river in Maryland. Federalsburgh lies on 
the e. side, 13 or 14 miles from its mouth.] 

MARTA, SANTA, a province and government 
of the Nuevo Reyno de Granada ; bounded n. n. w. 
and s. w. by the province of Cartagena, the Rio 
Grande de la Magdalena serving as the limit ; on 
the n. e. by the province and government of the 
Rio del Hacha, and n. by the coast of the ocean. 
It is 80 leagues in length from n. to s. It was dis 
covered by Captain Alonso de Ojeda in 1505, and 
it was conquered by Rodrigo Bastidos. It is for 
the most part of a warm and moist temperature, al 
though it is not without cold spots in the neigh 
bourhood of the Snowy sierra. The country is 
mountainous and rugged, and full of forests, in 
which are woods of exquisite kinds ; also abun 
dance of animals and birds of different species. 
Here are considerable breeds of cattle, the fat and 
hides of which produce to the natives greater pro 
fit than the carcase ; also some mules. Here is 
plenty of cotton, indigo, cacao, tortoise-shell, Bra 
zil-wood, sugar, honey, ba milla, and some wheat. 
Indeed, its vegetable productions alone might make 
this province the richest of any in America, had 
it but a proportionate commerce. Neither is it 
without its mines of gold, silver, and precious 
stones, but they arc not worked. It has some 
abundant saline grounds, producing a peculiarly 
white salt, and is famous for the growth of the 
herb com, which is here called hnyp, and culti 
vated by the Indians, with whom it is continually 
used , since they assert, that in taking it as food 



MAR 

they become exceedingly invigorated. The In 
dians, who are reduced to the faith, make vessels of 
marble with great ingenuity ; also woven cotton 
stuffs, and different curiosities of straw dyed of 
various and beautiful colours. Many infidel na 
tions of Indians dwell in the srrraniasof this pro 
vince. The first who entered to preach the gospel 
here was San Luis Beltran, accompanied by Fr. 
Luis Vero. Amongst other rivers that irrigate this 
province are the Magdalena, the Santa Marta, and 
the Cesar, or Pompatao. It is divided into five cor- 
regimientos of Indians, few of which contain more 
than 1000 each, and these are divided into six 
cities, one town, and 19 settlements. 

[For account of the late revolutions, sec VE 
NEZUELA.] 

Catalogue of the barbarous Nations and principal 
Places of the Province of Santa Marta. 

Nations. Of Upar. 

Bodiguas, Ports. 

Boh u res, Ceneganga, 

Bond as, Santa Marta. 

Chimilas, Zinto. 

Guaranis, Rivers. 

Guaxiros, Babillo, 

Motilones, Magdalena, 

Quiriquires, De Piedras, 

Taironas, De Santa Marta, 

Xuruaras. Perebera, 

Cities. Pira, 

Los Reyes, Pompatao, 

Ocana, Zinto. 

S. Sebastian, Promontories. 

Santa Marta, Conca, 

Tamalamequc, Del Ago, 

Tenerife. Guarica, 

Mountains. Guya, 

Of Santa Marta, S. Joseph. 

The capital is the city of the same name 
founded on the sea-coast by Rodrigo Bastidas, in 
1525, with a good port, defended by two castles, 
called San Juan and San Vicente. It is of an hot 
temperature, very reduced and poor ; the greater 
part of the houses being covered with straw, with 
the exception of the cathedral and some other edi 
fices. It is the head of a bishopric, erected in 
1529, and suppressed by the Pontiff Paul IV. in 
1562, but established again, in 1577, by Gregory 
XIII. This city was made the military depot by 
the Spaniards at the conquests of the Nuevo Reyno 
de Granada, and from hence sallied forth Gonzalo 
Xiuiinez de Quesada. In 1543, it was sacked by 
the pirate Robert Baal ; in 1555, by the French 
privateer of Peter Braque.s ; and in 1596, by 
Francis Drake, who reduced it to ashes. It was 



M A R T A. 



469 



again attacked in 1629 by Adrian Juanes Pater, 
who carried away the artillery from the castle of 
San Juan, a thing which had been formerly at 
tempted, though ineffectually, by Christoval Cor- 
dello; again in 1655, by William Ganson, who, 
with a strong squadron, and after disembarking 
2000 men, succeeded in destroying it entirely. 
The last time that it was besieged was in 1672, 
namely by two privateers, one English and the 
The other French, when it was completely pillaged, 
and even the bishop was carried away, he being at 
that time Don Lucas Fernandez de Piedrahita. 
He was, however, generously delivered up by 
the leader of these outlaws, together with all that 
had been taken from him, and sent in a vessel to 
Panama, just time enough to be promoted to the 
cathedral of this place. The fort is clean, con 
venient, and so capacious as to be capable of re 
ceiving large fleets. It is of a great depth, and 
lies as it were in a cavity of a most lofty sierra, 
and having, in front, a great mountain, which 
serves as a kind of defence to the city by the 
Snowy sierra, from whence it is three leagues dis 
tance. It enjoys a temperature which is healthy 
and less hot than that of Cartagena; and it is re 
freshed by an abundance of sweet water flowing 
from the river Gaira, which passes very near the 
city, and lends a pleasing prospect from the num 
ber of beautiful trees that grow upon its banks. It 
has a convent of the monks of St. Francisco, and 
another of S. Domingo; the latter having had the 
honour of having been inhabited by S. Luis Bcl- 
tran. On the shore of the aforesaid river grows a 
tree called " palo de manteca" from the gloss 
upon its leaves, and from the circumstance of these 
being used for washing, in as much as they lather 
like soap. The same plant is held extremely good 
for the expulsion of worms, and the draught is 
made of a decoction of its bark in water. It is 
in lat. 1 1 15 30" n. Long. 74 8 w. 

Bishops who have presided it Santa Marta. 

1. Don FT. Tomas de Ortiz, of the order of St. 
Domingo, native of Calzadilla, in the bishopric of 
Coria. He passed over to Nueva Espana with 
others of his order, returned to Spain, and again 
returned to the Indies with the title of protector of 
the Indians of Santa Marta, in 1529; and, whilst 
exercising this office, was made bishop of this dio 
cese ; he afterwards died. 

2. Don Alonso de Tobes, native of Medinaceli, 
collegiate of the colleges of Siguenza, Alcala, and 
San Bartoloine de Salamanca, professor in this 
university; he died before he embarked to fill the 
bishopric. 

3. Don Fr. Cristoval Brochero, of the order of 



Santo Domingo, prior of the convent of Santa 
Marta de Villatada ; elected bishop of Santa 
Marta, which office he did not accept. 

4. Don Juan Fernandez de Angulo, collegiate 
of Santa Maria de Jesus, a man of great literature 
and an excellent preacher ; he entered the bishop 
ric of Santa Marta in 1537, and died in 1542. 

5. Don Fr. Martin de Calatayud, of the order 
of San Gcronimo, a great scholar and celebrated 
in the pulpit, native of the city of his appellation 
in Aragon ; he was elected bishop in 1543, went 
to be consecrated at Lima, assisted the Licentiate 
Pedro de la Gasca in the pacification of Peru, for 
which he obtained the thanks of his Majesty in a 
royal cedule ; and died in 1549. 

6. Don Fr. Juan de los Barrios y Toledo, na 
tive of the town of Pedroche in Estrernadura, of 
the order of San Francisco, and of the first of that 
order who came over to Peru ; nominated first 
bishop for the city of La Asuncion del Rio de la 
Plata ; promoted to Santa Marta in 1552 ; he died 
in 1569, having been first removed to the bishop 
ric of Santa Fe, from the former having been ex 
tinguished and converted into an abbey. 

7. Don Fr. Juan Mendez, of the order of St. 
Domingo, native of Villa Franca of Estremadura ; 
elected bishop of Santa Marta, when this bishop 
ric began to be re-established in 1574. 

8. Don Fr. Sebastian de Ocando, of the order 
of San Francisco ; one of the first of his order 
who passed over to the Nuevo Ileyno de Granada ; 
he was guardian of the convent at Tunja, returned 
to Spain, and was presented to the bishopric of 
Santa Marta, where he laboured much for its 
church ; this he governed four years, and died 
in 1619. 

9. Don Leonel de Cervantesy Caravajal, native 
of Mexico, maestre-escuela and archdeacon of 
Santa Fe ; commissary of the holy office and of 
the crusade, provisor of the archbishop Don Fer 
nando Arias de Ugarte ; he was elected bishop in 
1620, and promoted to the archbishopric of Cuba 
in 1626. 

10. Don Luis Garcia de Miranda, curate of 
the parish of San Salvador de Madrid, a great 
literary character ; elected bishop of Santa Marta 
in 1627 ; he died in 1629. 

11. Don Fr. Antonio de Corderina, a monk of 
the order of S. Agustin, native of Bilvao, calif, 
cador of the holy office; elected bishop in I6i&amp;gt;0; 
he governed 10 years, and was promoted to Gua- 
manga in 1640. 

12. Don .Fr. Juan de Espinary Orozco, a monk 
of the order of St. Domingo, in live of Lima, vi 
sitor and vicar-general of Ins order in the proviuc 



470 



A R T A. 



f Quito; presented to this bishopric of Santa 
Marta in 1640 ; he died in 1632. 

15. Don Francisco de Velasco y Molina, na 
tive of the town of this name in Aragon ; lie passed 
over to America, being a canon of Truxillo, was 
dean of Arequipa, penitentiary canon and chan 
ter of the church of Lima, morning lecturer of 
theology in its university, provisor of the arch 
bishop Don Pedro de Villagomez ; and was pre 
sented to the bishopric of Santa Marta in 1653, 
which, however, he did not accept. 

14. Don Fr. Francisco de la Cruz, of the order 
of St. Domingo, visitor of his order in the province 
of San Antonio, of the Nuevo Reyno de Granada, 
provincial in Lima; elected bishop of Santa Marta 
in 1653, but did not take possession, owing to his 
death. 

15. Don Fr. Francisco dc la Trinidad y Arrieta, 
of the order of St. Domingo, Bascongado ; pro 
moted to the bishopric of Popayan ; he died in 
1664. 

16. Don Melchor de Linan y Cisneros, native 
of Tordelaguna, collegiate in the college of Alcala, 
curate of his country, and of his native place, and 
of the parish of San Salvador de Madrid, califica- 
dor of the holy office in La Suprema ; presented 
to the bishopric of Santa Marta by King Philip 
IV. in 1664 ; promoted to that of Popayan in 1666. 

17. The Doctor Don Lucas Fernandez de Pie- 
drahita, native of Santa Fe in the Nuevo Reyno 
de Granada, doctrinal curate of the settlements of 
Fusagasuga and Paipa, an excellent preacher, 
treasurer of the church of Popayan, racionero of 
Santa Fe, and afterwards treasurer, maestre- 
escuela and chanter, provisor in the vacant seat, 
and afterwards provisor of the archbishop Don Fr. 
Juan de Arguinao ; he was called to Spain, by or 
der of the king, through complaints lodged by 
the visitor-general, returned to the bishopric of 
Santa Marta in 1669, and was from thence pro 
moted to Panama in 1682. 

18. Don Diego de Baiios y Sotomayor, native of 
Lima ; he studied at Santa Fe, where his father 
was oidor, came to Spain, and was honorary chap 
lain and preacher to the king ; elected bishop of 
Santa Marta in 1684 ; he was promoted to Cara 
cas in 1687. 

19. Don Gregorio de Xaimez y Pastrana, na 
tive of the town of San Christoval, in the Nuevo 
Reyno de Granada, collegiate in the college of 
San Bartolome dc Santa Fe, a great moralist ; he 
was elected curate, in one of the curacies of the 
cathedral, and magisterial canon and archdeacon 
of the same ; made bishop of Santa Marta ; he 
died in 1690. 



20. Don Fr. Bernardo de la Torre, of the order 
of San Francisco, native of Cartagena in the Nuevo 
Reyno de Granada ; was provincial of his order, 
and elected bishop of Santa Marta, but died before 
he received news of his promotion. 

21. Don Fr. Luis de Gayoso, of the order of 
San Bernardo, abbot of the monastery of Madrid ; 
elected in 1704. 

22. Don Fr. Antonio de Monrroy, of the order 
of La Merced, elected in 1714 ; he was most san 
guine in the conversion of the Indians, and per 
sonally employed himself in the reduction of the 
Guajiros ; he governed his church 40 years with 
out seeking for another mitre, and died in 1744. 

23. Don Joseph Nieto Polo del Aguila, native 
of Quito, canon of this holy church ; elected bi 
shop of Santa Marta in the year J 744, diligently 
undertook the conversion of the Guajiros Indians ; 
and, whilst consulting the king on the subject, was 
promoted to the bishopric of Quito, his native 
place, in 1749. 

24. Don Joseph Xavier de Arauz, canon of the 
cathedral of Quito ; elected bishop of Santa Marta 
in the aforesaid year, and was promoted to the 
archbishopric of Santa Fe in 1753. 

25. Don Fernando Comacho y Roxas, native of 
Tunja in the Nuevo Reyno de Granada, canon of 
the holy metropolitan church of Santa Fe ; elected 
bishop of Santa Marta ; he died whilst going to 
take possession in 1754. 

26. Don Nicolas Gil Martinez Malo, who be 
came bishop of Santa Marta in 1755, and died 
there in 1764. 

27. Don Fr. Agustin Camacho y Roxas, of the 
order of St. Domingo, native of Tunja in the 
Nuevo Reyno de Granada, brother to the aforesaid 
Don Fernando ; he was promoted to the arch 
bishopric of Santa Fe in 1770. 

28. Don Francisco Xavier Calvo, elected bishop 
in 1770 ; he died in 1773. 

29. Don Francisco Navarro, native.of Cartagena 
in the Nuevo Reyno de Granada, canon of its holy 
cathedral church ; elected bishop in the aforesaid 
year, 1774. 

MARTA, SANTA, some very lofty mountains, 
called also Sierra Nevada, inasmuch as they are 
constantly covered with snow, in the former pro 
vince and government. They are a branch of the 
cordillera of the Andes, and, giving a pass to the 
Rio Grande de la Magdalena, follow a course as 
far as the N. sea. The woods of these mountains 
are inhabited by some nations of barbarian Indians, 
the Taironas, Chimilas, and others, who live in 
continual war with the Spaniards. Hidden in their 
bowels, lie many very rici mines of gold, silver, 



MAR 

emeralds, and various other precious stones and 
metals, in the power of no one, save those Indian 
savages. These mountains may be seen at sea at 
more than 100 leagues distance, and the last point 
which runs towards the sea is in lat. 10 43 n. 

MARTA, SANTA, a river of the same province 
and government. See CAUGA. 

MARTA, SANTA, a settlement of the head settle 
ment of the district and alcaldia mayor of Mexil- 
caltzingo in Nueva Espana. It contains 81 fami 
lies of Indians, and lies on the shore of the lake, 
three leagues from Mexico. In its vicinity is a 
famous quarry of stone, which when cut (called 
tezontl) is very soft, but afterwards hardens, and 
is, in fact, the same that is used at Mexico for all 
the works and buildings ; so that its expenditure 
is of course very great. This population was one 
of the doctrinal establishments of the religious order 
of San Francisco. 

MARTA, SANTA, another, of the head settlement 
of the district of Cuilapa, and alcaldia mayor of 
Quatro Villas, in the same kingdom. It contains 
60 families of Indians, employed in the cultivation 
and commerce of cochineal, seeds, fruit, coal, and 
in cutting woods. It is 10 leagues to s.s.e. of 
its head settlement. 

MARTA, SANTA, another, of the head settlement 
of the district of Tlapacoya, and of the same alcaldia 
and kingdom as the former. It contains fourteen fa 
milies of Indians, and produces the same fruits as 
the former. Four leagues n. w. of its head settle 
ment. 

MARTA, SANTA, an island of the straits of Ma 
gellan, one of those called Pinguinas. This is also 
called San Bartolome. 

MARTA, SANTA, a marsh or salt lake, of the 
province and government of its name ; nearly on 
the same coast. 

MARTA, SANTA, another island, called also 
Duke s County, near the county of Barnstable, of 
New England ; from whence it is only eight miles 
distant to the $. w. and 76 s. of Boston. The in 
habitants, as well as those of Nantucket, another 
island in the vicinity, are all fishermen, a trade 
which they carry on to great profit. The settle 
ments in this island are, Sherbon, Chilmark, Tis- 
bury, and Edgar, the capital of the county ; and 
this belongs to the province of Massachusetts. The 
land lies in the figure of a triangle, and is defended 
on the n. w. and n. e. by some strong mountains. 
It is well peopled, and is an establishment of note j 
in lat. 41 20 , and long. 70 40 . 

MARTA, SANTA, MORROS DE, some mountains 
in the province and captainship of San Vicente in 



MAR 



471 



Brazil. They are upon a point of land on the 
coast, to the s. of La Villa Nueva de la Lagtina. 

[MARTHA BRAT, a small town having a har 
bour, seven leagues w. of Montego point. It is 
frequented only by such vessels as are particularly 
destined for this place. There is a bar with 16 or 
17 feet water in going in ; and the passage, in com 
ing out between the Triangle rocks, is not more 
than 60 feet wide with 6 or 7 fathoms water. See 
FALMOUTH.] 

[MARTHA, River, ST. See MAGDALENA.] 

[MARTHA S VINEYARD, an island belonging 
to Duke s county, Massachusetts, called by the In 
dians Nope or Capawock ; is situated between 
lat. 41 16 and 41 27 n. and between long. 70 
25" and 70 46 w. about 15 miles long and seven 
broad, and lies a little to the w. of^Nantucket. 
Martha s Vineyard, Chabaquiddick, Neman s 
island, and the Elizabeth islands, which contain 
about 16,500 acres of valuable land, constitute 
Duke s county; containing 3265 white inhabi 
tants, and between 400 and 500 Indians and Mti- 
lattoes, who subsist by agriculture and fishing. 
Cattle and sheep are raised here in great numbers ; 
and rye, corn, and oats, are the chief produce of 
the island. White pipe-clay, and yellow and red 
ochre, are found in Martha s Vineyard. The ra 
vages of war were severely felt in this industrious 
spot. In September, 1778, the British made a re 
quisition of their militia arms, 300 oxen, and 2000 
sheep, which were delivered up. See GAY 
Head.] 

[MARTICK, a township in Lancaster county, 
Pennsylvania.] 

MARTIN S, S. an island of the N. sea, one of 
the Smaller Antilles ; situate n. w. of S. Bartholo 
mew, and s. zi). of S. Augustin : 18 leagues in cir 
cumference, without any port or river whatever, 
but abounding in saline earths. It was discovered 
by the Spaniards, who remained in possession until 
they were ousted by the Dutch. These were in 
their turn dislodged in 1633 by the Marquis of 
Cadreita, admiral of the galleons, who constructed 
a fort, and left a strong garrison for its defence. It 
was thus preserved in the possession of the Spa 
niards until 1645, when the king ordered it to be 
abandoned, as being unprofitable and useless, as it 
was barren of water, and produced nothing. From 
that time it was peopled by the Dutch and French, 
who possessed it ; and had many dissensions re 
specting right of establishment. 

[In this island are good salt-pits, and lakes of 
salt-water, which run a great way within the land; 
but it has no fresh water but what falls from the 



472 



MAR 



clouds, and is saved by the inhabitants in cisterns. 
The salt-lakes abound in good fish, particularly 
turtle ; and the salt-water pools are frequented by 
vast numbers of birds. In the woods are wild hogs, 
turtle-doves, and parrots innumerable. Here are 
several trees producing gums ; and plenty of the 
candle-tree, splinters of which, when dry and 
lighted, emit a very fragrant smell. Its tobacco, 
the chief commodity cultivated, is reckoned the 
best in the Car i be islands. 

At the abandonment of this island by the Spa 
niards, the French and Dutch afterwards shared it 
between them ; but in 1689, were attacked arid 
plundered by Sir Timothy Thomhill, and in July 
1744, were driven out by the British forces, and 
did not return till after the peace of 1763. They 



MAR 

now enjoy about 35,000 acres, out of the 55,000 
which the whole island contains. The two colo 
nies breed poultry and .sheep, which they sell to 
the other islands. They also cultivate a little cot 
ton and coffee. About 30 years ago the French 
part contained 400 white families, and 10,000 
slaves ; the Dutch part no more than 60 fami 
lies, and about 200 slaves. 

This island, together with the other French co 
lonies, was taken by the English in the present 
war. In lat. 18 4 n. and long. 63 8 w. 

The official value of the imports and exports of 
St. Martin s were, in 

Imports. Exports. 

1810, ..18,361, Nil. 



And the quantities of the principal articles imported into Great Britain were, in 



Cotlee. 


Sugar. 


Ram. 


Cotton Wool. 


Brit. Plant. 


For. Plant. 


Brit. Plant. 


For. Plimt. 


Cwt. 
1809, 
1R1O, 


Cwt. 


Cwt. 


Cwt. 

13,89 


Galls. 


L\)*. 
5081 



MARTIN S, S. a settlement of the head settle 
ment of the district of Teutitlan, and alcaldia 
mayor of Ctiicatlan, in Nueva Espana. It con 
tains 22 families of Indians, well exercised in the 
cultivation of gardens abounding in fruit, and in 
the growing of maize and French beans, an em 
ployment carried on in the farms of its district. 

MARTIN S, S. another, a head settlement of the 
district of the alcaldia mayor of Tonala, and of the 
lame kingdom as the former. It is of a mild tem 
perature, and contains 30 families of Indians, who 
trade in seeds and fruits of the country. It is close 
on the w. of its capital. 

MARTIN S, S. another, of the head settlement 
of the district of Cacula, and alcaldia mayor of 
Zayula, in the same kingdom. It contains 80 fa 
milies of Indians, and from it is provided the 
greater part of the lime used in its jurisdiction for 
building. It is 2| leagues zo. of its head settlement. 

MARTIN S, S. another, of the head settlement of 
the district and alcaldia mayor of Theotihuacan in 
the same kingdom. It is three quarters of a league 
from the capital. 

MARTIN S S. another, of the head settlement of 
the district of QucchohVnanco, and alcaldia mayor 
of Chilapa, in (lie same kingdom. It contains 32 
families of Indians, and is two leagues to the w. of 
its head settlement. 

MARTIN S S. another, of the head settlement 



of the district and alcaldia mayor of Marinalco in 
the same kingdom ; distant one short league from 
the capital. 

MARTIN S, S. another, of the head settlement of 
the district of the alcaldia mayor of Tochirnilco in 
the same kingdom. It contains 68 families of In 
dians, whose commerce consists in sowing and cul 
tivating wild grain. It is two miles s. w. of its 
head settlement. 

MARTIN S, S. another, of the head settlement of 
the district of San Francisco del Valle, and alcaldia 
mat/or of Zultepec, in the same kingdom. It con 
tains 26 families of Indians, accustomed to agricul 
ture and to cutting of wood. It is 10 leagues n. 
of its head settlement. 

MARTIN S, S. another, of the head settlement 
of the district of Xonotla, and alcaldia mayor of 
Tetela, in the same kingdom. It is one league to 
the s. of its head settlement. 

MARTIN S, S. another, of the head settlement 
of the district of Toxtepec, and alcaldia mayor of 
Tecali, in the same kingdom. It contains 67 fa 
milies of Indians. 

MARTIN S, S. another, of the head settlement of 
the district and alcaldia mayor of Justhihuaca in 
the same kingdom. 

MARTIN S, S. another, of the head settlement 
of the district of Tecomaxtlahuaca, and alcaldia 
mayor of Juxtlahuaca, in the same kingdom. 



MAR 

MARTIN S, S. another, of the head settlement 
of the district of Coronango, arid alcaldia mayor 
of Cholula, in the same kingdom. It contains 30 
families of Indians, and is three fourths of a league 
to the n. of its capital. 

MARTIN S, S. another, of the province ami go 
vernment of Moxos in the kingdom of Quito ; si 
tuate on the shore of the river Baures. 

MARTIN S, S. another, of (he province and go 
vernment of Mainas, in the same kingdom as the 
former. It is one of those which were established 
and held by the Jesuits ; is near the source of the 
river Madera, and of the lake Cajubabas. 

MARTIN S, S. another, of the province and al- 
caldia mayor of San Salvador in the kingdom of 
Guatemala. 

MARTIN S, S. another, of the province and 
kingdom of this name. 

MARTIN S, S. another, of the province and al- 
caldia mayor of Chiapa, in the same kingdom as 
are the former. 

MARTIN S, S. a city of the province and govern 
ment of San Juan de los Llanos in the Nuevo 
Reyno de Granada ; situate in a spacious and 
beautiful plain. 

MARTIN S, S. a river, with the surname of 
Grande, in the province and government of Y r era- 
gua, and kingdom ofTierra Firme. It rises in 
the mountains which lie nigh to the city, on the s. 
and forming a curve, enters the Pacific sea in the 
bay of La Soledad, and opposite the island of Los 
Leones. 

MARTIN S, S. another river, with the surname 
of Chico, to distinguish it from the former ; in the 
same province and kingdom. It rises at a small 
distance from the former river, follows a nearly 
parallel course, and incorporates itself with it be 
fore it enters the sea. 

MARTIN S, S. another river, with the same sur 
name of Chico as the former, in the province and 
government of Buenos Ayres, and kingdom of 
Peru. It runs *. s. e. from the lake of Cristal, 
where it rises, and enters the Parana. 

MARTIN S, S. another river, of the province and 
government of Florida. It runso). and enters the 
sea in the bay of Apalache, opposite the islands of 
its name. 

MARTIN S, S. some mountains, called Sierras de 
San Martin, in the alcaldia mayor of Tuxta, and 
Reyno de Nueva Espana, being also known by the 
name of Tuxta. They are 42 leagues from Vera 
Cruz, in lat. 18 8 . Long. 277 36 . 

MARTIN S, S. some more mountains of the island 
of Cayenne ; on the skirts of which the French had 
a settlement. 

VOL. II. 



MAR 



473 



MARTIN S, S. some more, of the island of Marti 
nique, one of the Antilles. They lie on the sea 
shore, between the river Potiche and the bay of 
Culcbra. 

MARTIN S, S. some islands of the coast of Flo 
rida. They arc four, and are situate in Apalache 
bay. 

MARTIN S, S. some islands, called Cayos de * 
San Martin, near the coast of Florida ; opposite 
the mouth of the river San Pedro. 

MARTIN S, S. another cayo or isle of the N. sea, 
near the province and government of Tierra 
Firme. Upon it was wrecked, in 1741, a frigate of 
the squadron of Admiral Vernon, as he was carry 
ing to Jamaica the artillery which he took from 
the forts he had destroyed at Portobelo. 

MARTIN S, S. an island of the S.sea, near the 
coast of the province andcorreginnento of Chancay 
in Peru. 

MARTIN S, S. a bay on the s. coast of the straits 
of Magellan, opposite cape Quade. 

MARTIN S, S. a port of the coast of Nueva Es 
pana, in the province of Ostimuri, and gulf of 
California or Mar Koxo de Cortes, between the 
rivers Mayo and Hiaqui. 

MARTIN S, S. another port of the S. sea, on the 
coast of the straits of Magellan. 

MARTIN S, S. a point of the same coast as is the 
former port, and one of those by which the port is 
formed. 

MARTIN S, S. another point of the coast of the 
province and alcaldia mayor of Tabasco in the 
Reyno de Nueva Espana. 

[MAKTIN GARCIA, a parish of the province 
and government of Buenos Ayres ; situate on a 
small island at the mouth of the Parana, in lat. 34* 
1 1 5" s. Long. 58 13 40* w.~] 

MARTINGAU, a port of the coast of Nova 
Scotia or A cad ia, between the island of Portland 
and the port of the Islands. 

MARTINICO, an island of the N. sea, one 
of the Larger Antilles, belonged to the French, who 
established themselves in it in 1635, transporting 
colonists from the island of San Christopher, but 
which now belongs to the English. It is about 36 
miles long, and about \1 wide. In some parts it 
abounds in shelving mountains, from the which 
flow down in an interrupted course some streams, 
which render the island extremely fertile and 
abundant in every thing found in the other Ame 
rican islands. Its principal production, and which 
forms its chief commerce, is sugar; but it yields 
also much cotton, indigo, pepper, ginger, cacao, 
aloes, plantains, maize, olives, and every sort of 
European herb. The wheat and the grapes have 
3r 



474 



MARTINICO. 



never answered the expectations that had been 
formed of them, but the coffee is of the most ex 
cellent quality. The air here is hotter than iti 
Guadalupe, but the hurricanes are less frequent 
and not so violent as in the other islands. 

It \vas possessed by the French W. India com 
pany till 1651, when it was sold with other islands 
to the Scfior Parquet ; but in 1664 it was repur 
chased by the company, and in 1674 ceded to the 
crown, and incorporated with the other dominions 
of the same. This island is the best that France 
possesses. It is divided into five parts, besides 
another sixth, possessed by the barbarians, the 
same being more craggy and uneven. 

It is watered by no less than 40 rivers ; some of 
which are navigable for a great extent through the 
country ; such are the Pilot, Capat, Salado, and 
Trinidad : besides these there are many torrents 
which in the rainy seasons inundate the fields and 
meadows. Many of the mountains are cultivated, 
and others are covered with woods, which serve as 
an asylum for many animals, snakes, arid insects ; 
and the tobacco which grows upon the hills of the 
mountainous parts is preferred to that growing else 
where. 

On the coast are various bays and ports very 
convenient, and capable of receiving large vessels ; 
and the best of these is between Carbet and fort St. 
Pierre. The forts of the greatest note are St. Pierre, 
fort Royal, Trinidad, Marigot, and La Rade. It 
contains 28 parishes, the same number of settle 
ments, and two cities, which are the follow 
ing: 

S. Pierre, Robert, 

Predicateur, Cul de Sac Fran9ois, 

Carbet, Vauclain, 

Maison Pilot, Fort Royal, 

Anclaje, Trou du Chat, 

Macouba, Ances d Arlet, 

Basse Point, El Diamante, 

Ance Grand, Cul de Sac a Vache, 

Marigot, Lamcutin, 

S. Marie, Cul de Sac Marin. 

La Trinite, 

In this island dwells the governor-general not 
only of the other French islands, but of this in 
particular, the dependencies of which are St. Lu 
cia and Granada. It is inhabited by many rich 
merchants, and is much frequented by vessels, 
especially those from Nantz, the cargoes of which 
meet a ready sale. The port is a secure place of 
shelter during hurricanes, and lies to the wind 
ward of the-ether islands ; this being a circum 



stance very favourable for those who are proceed 
ing to Europe. 

This island has suffered much from the insur 
rections of the native Indians ; also in 1727, by a 
dreadful earthquake, which lasted 11 hours with 
out ceasing ; and in 1767, in which it was almost 
utterly destroyed, no less than 16,000 souls perish 
ing j in 1766, by a strong hurricane ; and in 1772, 
by another earthquake, which destroyed the forti 
fications. 

Its first consequence is to be dated from the 
reign of Louis XIV. who sent to it many protes- 
tants, in order to extirpate this sect from France. 
It is, at the present day, in a very flourishing 
state, well fortified and capable of putting under 
arms 10,000 men, besides from 40 to 50,000 Ne 
groes. 

By the returns made in 1767, its inhabitants 
amounted to 12,450 whites, 1840 Negroes and 
free Mulatoes, 70,553 slaves, and 443 Cimarrones, 
or such as had fled from their masters, forming al 
together 84,817 souls : likewise it contained 3776 
horses, 4214 mules, 293 asses, 12,736 bulls and 
cows, 975 pigs, and 13,544 sheep. The planta 
tions consisted of 11,444 quadras or square plots, 
the which were sowed with 6, 638,757 coffee plants, 
861,043 of cacao, 1,764,807 of cotton, and 59,966 
of cassia. The pastures or sabanas occupied 10,972 
quadras; there Avere 11,966 covered with woods, 
and 8448 uncultivated and abandoned. In all the 
plantations there were 1 16 water-mills, 12 wind 
mills, and 184 horse-mills. The product of this 
island is computed, at the present day, at 
23,000,0001bs. of sugar, 3,000,0001bs. of coffee, 
and 40,0001bs. of cacao ; the third part of which 
belongs to foreigners, and the rest to the French. 
In the exportation of the above produce in 1776, 
143 vessels were employed. 

The Dutch, commanded by their admiral, Mi 
chael Adrian Ruiter, attacked this island in 1674, 
when he disembarked, but was routed with great 
loss. The same fate also happened to the English 
under the command of Admiral William Penn in 
1695 ; [but it was ceded to the English in the 
present war, together with Guadaloupe and the 
other French colonies, through the successful en 
terprises of Lieutenant-colonel Bcckwith, in Feb. 
1809. 

The official value of the imports and exports of 
Martinico were, in 

Imports. Exports. 

1809, rf.5 19,817, - ..496,360 

1810, rf.635,664, - ,,791,773 



M A R 



M A R 



475 



And the quantities of the principal articles imported into Great Britain were, in 



Coffce. 


Sugar. 


Rum. 


Cotton Wool. 


Brit. Plant. 


For. Plant. 


Brit. Plant. 


For. Plant. 


Cwt. 

1809, 
1810. 


Cwt. 

24,495 
31,991 


Cwt. 
9 


Cwt. 
251,469 
?00,934 


Galls. 
1,110 
13,617 


Lbs. 

57,45:? 
296,52? 



It is 22 miles s. e. of Dominica, and 90 n. K\ of 
Barbadoes, in lat. 14 37 . and long 61 w. The 
capital is St. Pierre. 

MARTI NICO, a river of the province and govern 
ment of Cartagena, in the district of Sinu. It 
runs w. and enters the sea in the gulf of Darien. 

MARTINS, PUNTA DE, a point on the coast of 
the province and captainship of the Rio Grande in 
Brazil. It lies between the point Potetinga and 
the cape San Roque. 

[MARTINSBOROUGH, a town of N. Caro 
lina ; situated on the s. side of Tar river, and 20 
miles above Washington.] 

[MART1NSBURG, a post-town of Virginia, 
and capital of Berkeley county ; situated about 
eight miles s. of the Patowmack, in the midst of a 
fertile and well cultivated country, and 25 miles 
from the mineral springs at Bath. It contains up 
wards of 70 houses, a court-house, gaol, and Epis 
copal church ; and contiguous to the town is one 
for Presbyterians. It is 10 miles from Shepherds- 
town, 22 from Pittsylvania court-house, 15 from 
Rocky Mount or Franklin court-house, 22 n. e. of 
Winchester, 78 n. w. of Raleigh, and 296 from 
Philadelphia.] 

[MARTIN 7ILLE, a post-town, and the ca 
pital of Guilford county, in N. Carolina, is agree 
ably situated on the e. side of Buffalo creek, a 
branch of Haw river, and contains about 40 houses, 
a court-house and gaol. It lies n. e. of Bell s 
mill, at the head of Deep river; 40 miles n. w. of 
Ilillsborough, and 22 e. of Salem. 

It was near this town that General Greene and 
Lord Corn wall is engaged in one of the best fought 
fictions in the late Avar, on the 15th of March, 
1781 : and although the Americans were driven 
off the field, the British suffered so great loss, that 
they could not pursue the victory. The greatest 
part of the country in which the action happened 
was a wilderness, with a few cleared fields inter 
spersed. The American army, when the action 
commenced, was posted on a rising ground about a 
mile and a half from Guilford court-house.] 
MARTIN UA Z. See VAZ. 
MARTI R, GHA.V, one of the islands on the 
coast of Florida, and the largest of the same, be- 
1 



tween the point of Los Mart ires and the rocks of 
the same name. 

MART1RES, CABEZA DE LOS, the extremity 
of the coast of Florida, opposite the island of Cuba. 
It takes this name from five isles or rocks which lie 
before it, surrounded with shoals and reefs, on 
which many vessels have been wrecked ; the same 
fate having also occurred to the fleet of Nueva 
Espafia, which was commanded by Rodrigo de 
Torres in 17S2. It is 58 leagues from the point 
of Canaveral. 

MARTIRES, with the addition of Japon, a settle 
ment of the missions that were held by the Jesuits 
in the province and government of Mamas, and 
kingdom of Quito; situate on the shore of an 
abundant river. 

MARTI RES, another, of the missions that were 
held by the Jesuits in the province and govern 
ment of Buenos Ayres ; situate between the Parana 
and Uruguay, on a small stream which flows into 
the latter river, between the settlements of Los 
Apostelesand San Francisco Xavier ; in lat. 27 47 
31" s. and long. 55 20 2" w. 

MARU, a river of the province and captainship 
of Para in Brazil. It runs w. and turning n. n. w* 
enters the large arm of the river of Las Amazonas, 
which forms the island of Marajo, opposite that of 
Sumauna. 

MARUILLE, a bay in the Malvine or Faulk- 
land isles, towards then. 

[MARY, Cape ST. forms a s.e. head-land at the 
mouth of Placentia bay, Newfoundland island.] 

[MARY S River, ST. a branch of the Miami, 
which empties into lake Erie. See GIRTY S 
Town.] 

[MARY S River, ST. forms apart of the s. boun 
dary line of the United States. It in part divides 
Georgia from E. Florida, and is very crooked, 
with a wide open marsh on each side, from Us 
mouth upwards 30 miles, where the marsh is ter 
minated by thick woods. It is nearly straight for 
30 miles farther, up to Allen s, an Indian trader at 
the head of navigation ; where it is like a dead 
creek, four fathoms deep, and 10 rods wide. It 
rises in the Great Okafonoka or Ekanfanoga 
swamp, which extends s. into E. Florida. It is 



470 



MAR 



A 



MAR 



thought to be. what is called May river, discorered 
by John Ribalt in 1562. Between this and Nas- 
snu river, lies the low even coast of Amelia island. 
The harbours of both rivers are spacious, but St. 
Mary s is the safest. It has nine feet of water at 
low spring tides. It runs a course of 150 miles, 
and enters the ocean between the points of Amelia 
and Talbert s islands, in lat. 30 44 , and is navi 
gable for vessels of considerable burden for 90 miles. 
Its banks afford immense quantities of fine timber, 
suited to the W. India market. Along this river, 
every four or five miles, are bluffs convenient for 
vessels to haul to and load.] 

[MARY S, ST. a post-town and port of entry of 
Georgia ; situated on St. Mary s river, a few miles 
from its mouth. It is a small place, and has little 
trade. It is 84 miles s. of Savannah. Lat. 30 
45 n. Long. 81 40 o&amp;gt;.] 

[MARY S, ST. a county of Maryland, on the 
peninsula between Patowmackand Patuxent rivers, 
39 miles in length, and 15 in breadth. It con 
tains J 5,544 inhabitants; of whom 6985 are 
slaves.! 

MARYLAND, a colony of the English in N. 
America, and at the present day one of those com 
posing the United States. It was originally part 
of the province and colony of Virginia, until the 
time of Charles I. of England, who granted it to 
George Calvcrt Lord Baltimore, to hold to him 
self and his successors ; but he having died before 
the patent could be sent to him, the right devolved 
iipon his son Cecil Calvert; the same, who being 
A catholic, had fled from the persecutions which 
this body were then suffering in England. He 
spent immense sums in founding the colony in 1632. 
This colony, at first, consisted of 200 Catholic 
persons ; but the party of the Protestants prevailing, 
the founder was deprived of his right, and the 
Catholics were kept under. 

Maryland is bounded n. by Pennsylvania, e. 
by Delaware state and the Atlantic ocean, s. and a&amp;gt;. 
by Virginia. The territory near the coast is low, 
but it continues rising by degrees, until it termi 
nates in the Apalachian mountains. The greater 
part of this province was covered with thick woods ; 
and these were cut away by the first settlers, who 
opened certain plains or sabanas^ which were ir 
rigated by many streams. 

Maryland, as well as Virginia, has no city 
whatever of consideration; though the number of its 
navigable rivers is great. But we must not forbear 
to mention the city of Annapolis, the seat of go 
vernment ; for although it be but small, it is hand 
some, situate on the shore of the river Patuxent, 
and contains 150 houses, besides the house of as 



sembly. The inhabitants are of the same religion 
as those of Virginia, namely, of the reformed 
church of England, although the clergy here have 
much greater liberty. 

The principal fruits that are cultivated are to 
bacco similar to that of Virginia ; and the planters 
dwell by their store-houses, where the ships have 
the convenience of coming up to their very doors 
to unlade, by means of the rivers and of the bay. 
The tobacco called Oroonoko is stronger than 
that of Virginia, on which account it is more in 
request in Europe, where it is preferred to that 
coming from the parts bordering on James and 
York rivers. This tobacco is produced to the 
quantity of 40,000 loads (car gas) annually. 

The white inhabitants amount to 10,000, and 
the Negroes exceed 260,000. Here are no wool 
len manufactoriessavethoseof the county of Somer 
set. Mr. de Stivenerith established here not only 
manufactories for weaving cotton and making silk 
stockings, but also for all kinds of hardware and 
fire-arms, at an immense expence and labour ; and 
these, although they were at first confined only to one 
spot, soon became propagated amidst various parts 
of the province. The common drink is cider, which 
is very good, and when well made resembles the best 
white wine. There is no deficiency of this last 
mentioned article ; but it is all brought from Ma 
deira, as is the rum from Barbadoes. There are 
also wines of other kinds, beer, and other liquors, 
brought from England ; for although there are 
abundance of grapes growing wild in the woods, 
no wine is made of them. 

The greater part of the Indians live on the e. 
coast, and some pass the winter in the w. parts, 
occupying themselves in hunting deer, a mode of 
life to which they are much addicted by inclina 
tion. The number of those who embrace a civi 
lized mode of life, and the principles of Chris 
tianity, have been always few ; and even these 
have been diminished by the frequent discords that 
have arisen amongst themselves. 

The commerce which it carried on previous to 
the establishment of the United States was very 
considerable, on account of its many ports and 
navigable rivers ; and it was computed that an 
hundred vessels arrived here annually. The want 
of fortifications have rendered it liable to much 
injury in the time of war, from the facility with 
which the enemy might enter the ports; and this 
circumstance has produced infinite desolation in 
its finest parts. The capital is Annapolis. 

[Maryland lies between lat. 37 56 and 39 44 n. 
and between long. 75 8 and 79 38 w. It is 
about 170 miles in length, and 105 in breadth-, 



MARYLAND. 



[and contains 14,000 square miles, one-fourth of 
which is water. It is divided into 19 counties, 
H of which are on the w. and eight on the e. 
shore of Chesapeak bay. Those on the a?, shore 
are Hartford, Baltimore, Ann Arundel, Frederick, 
Allcghany, Washington, Montgomery, Prince 
George, Calvert, Charles, and St. Mary s, which 
contain 219,089 inhabitants ; those on ther. shore 
are Cecil, Kent, Queen Ann, Caroline, Talbot, 
Somerset, Dorchester, and Worcester, containing 
107,639 inhabitants. 

The whole number of inhabitants in the state 
amounted, by the last census but one, to 319,728, 
of whom 103,036 were slaves ; and by the census 
of 1810, to 380,546 souls. Each of the counties 
sends four representatives to the house of delegates ; 
besides which the city of Annapolis, the metropo 
lis, and the town of Baltimore, send two each. 
The chief towns of the state, besides these two, 
are Georgetown bordering on the city of Wash 
ington, on the river Patowmack, Fredericktown, 
Hagarstown, and Elkton. The city of Washington, 
or the Federal city, was ceded by the state of Vir 
ginia and Maryland to the United States, and by 
them established as the seat of their government, 
after the year 1800. 

Chesapeak bay, which, as has been observed, 
divides this state into e. and w. divisions, is the 
largest in the United States. From the e. shore 
in Maryland, among other smaller ones, it receives 
Pokomoke, Nanticoke, Choptank, Chester, and 
Elk rivers. From the . the rapid Susquehannah ; 
and from the w. Pntapsco. Severn, Patuxent, and 
Patowmack, half of which is in Maryland, and 
half in Virginia. Except the Susquehannah and 
Patowmack, these are small rivers. 

The climate of this province, the soil, product 
and trade are the same, in a great measure, with 
those of Virginia : bo!h here and there the English 
live at large at their several plantations, which 
hinders the increase of towns ; indeed every planta 
tion is a little town of itself, and can subsist itself 
with provisions nnd necessaries, every considerable 
planter s warehouse being like a shop, where he 
supplies not only himself with what he wants, but 
the inferior planters, servants and labourers, and 
has commodities to barter for tobacco, or other 
goods, there being little money in this province, 
and little occasion for any, as long as tobacco 
answers all the uses of silver and gold in trade. 
There are few merchants or shop-keepers, who 
may properly be so called, we mean who are not 
planters also, but live wholly by their trades. 
The tobacco of this province, called Oroonoko, is 
stronger than that of Virginia, and no Englishman, 
has not a very coarse relish in his smoke, will 



bear it; yet it is as profitable to the planter, a/id to 
the trade of the nation in general, being in demand 
in the e. and n. parts of Europe, where it is 
preferred before the sweet-scented tobacco of James 
and York rivers in Virginia. The planters in 
Maryland finding so good vent for their commoditj 
in foreign markets, have cultivated it so much, that 
the province is thought to produce as much or 
more tobacco than that of Virginia. The soil is 
here at least as fruitful, the country being a large 
plain, and the hills in it so easy of ascent, and of 
such a moderate height, that they seem rather an 
artificial ornament to it, than one of the accidents 
of nature. The abundance of rivers and brooks is 
no little help to the fertility of the soil ; and there 
is no grain, plant, or tree, which grows in Virginia, 
but thrives as well here. The product, the animals, 
and every thing, is the same here as there, only the 
black and yellow bird, called the Baltimore bird, 
goes by another name in Virginia. It had that 
given it, because the colours of the field of the 
Lord Baltimore s coal of arms are Or and Sable. 

If the reader has the curiosity to know more of 
this country in any of the particulars respecting its 
soil, products, animals, trade, and inhabitants, let 
him see the history of VIHGIMA on the same 
heads, and there is nothing there which may not 
also be said of Maryland. 

The air of the two provinces has the same agree 
ment ; and if there is any difference in the health 
of the one country and the other, Virginia perhaps 
has the advantage. The province of Maryland, 
however, thrives in a great degree, though it is the 
younger colony ; and that is a plain proof of the 
profit of the coarse tobacco, preferable to the sweet, 
scented, or rather that which is sold to a foreign 
market turns to a better account every way, than 
what is made for a home consumption with more 
labour and cost, and at last with less gain. 

As to the Indians, their language, manners, and 
customs are the same with those of Virginia. At 
the first settling of Maryland there were several 
nations of them, governed by petty kings; but, it is 
thought there are not more than 500 fighting men of 
them in all the province, if the account Mr. Hugh 
Jones transmitted to the Royal Society of it be 
true ; for Mr. Glover, who some years before sent 
the same society an account of Virginia, says, 
the Indians in the Lord Baltimore s territories, at 
the head of the bay, where the English were later 
seated, are more numerous, there being 3000 of 
them still in some towns ; but these being in con 
tinual wars with each other, are likely soon to be 
reduced to a small number ; which justifies Mr. 
Jones s relation of the number in Maryland, since 
in Mr. Glover s time there was not above 3000] 



478 



MARYLAND. 



[Indian souls in nil Virginia ; out of which one 
cannot reckon (here were many more than 500 
fighting men. The same Mr.. Jones gives us a 
large account of several tilings ia this province 
worth notice. 

The ground is uniformly level and low in most 
of the counties on the e. shore, and consequently 
covered in many places with stagnant water, ex 
cept where it is intersected by numerous creeks. 
Here also are large tracts of marsh, which, during 
the day, load the atmosphere with vapour, that 
falls in dew in the close of the summer and fall 
seasons, which are sickly. The spring and sum 
mer are most healthy. 

The soil of the good land in Maryland is of such 
n nature and quality as to produce from 12 to 16 
bushels of wheat, or from 20 to 30 bushels of In 
dian corn, per acre. Ten bushels of wheat, and 
)5 bushels of corn, per acre, may be the annual 
average crops in the state at large. Tobacco is 
generally cultivated in sets, by Negroes, in the 
following manner : The seed is sown in beds of 
fine mould, and transplanted the beginning of 
May ; the plants are set at the distance of three or 
four feet from each other, and are hilled and kept 
continually free of weeds : when as many leaves 
have shot out as the soil will nourish to advantage, 
the top of the plant is broken oft , which prevents 
its growing higher : it is carefully kept clear of 
worms, and the suckers, which put out between the 
leaves, are taken off at proper times, till the plant 
arrives at perfection, which is in August : when the 
leaves turn of a brownish colour, and begin to be 
spotted, the plant is cut down and hung up to dry, 
after having sweat in heaps one night. When it 
can be handled without crumbling, which is always 
in moist weather, the leaves are stripped from the 
stalk, and tied in bundles, and packed for expor 
tation in hogsheads containing 800 or 900 pounds. 
No suckers nor ground leaves are allowed to be 
merchantable. An industrious person may manage 
6000 plants of tobacco, (which yield 1000 Ib.) and 
four acres of Indian corn. 

All the low-land is very woody, like one continu 
ed forest, no part cleared, but what is cleared by the 
English ; who, though they are seated pretty close 
one to another, cannot see their next neighbour s 
house for trees. Indeed it is expected that it will 
be otherwise in a few years ; for the tobacco trade 
destroys abundance of timber, both for making of 
hogsheads and building tobacco houses, besides 
clearing of ground yearly for planting. 

Maryland is for the most part of a soil sandy, and 
free from stone, which makes it very convenient 
for travelling, and there is no occasion for shoeing 
their horses, except in frosty weather ; and what 



with the goodness of their little horses, and the 
smoothness of the roads, people, upon occasion, 
can travel 50 miles in a summer s afternoon, and 
sometimes 100 miles in a day ; but then their miles 
are not accounted so long MS in England. 

The rich and plentiful gifts of Nature add much 
to the happiness of the place ; the three elements 
affording plenty of food for the use of man, as 
deer, fowl, both water and land ; and for the 
preservation of health, many excellent herbs and 
roots, the discovery of whose virtue is chiefly owing 
to the Indians. 

They have timber of several kinds, good for 
building, and of them several sorts of oak ; as 
red, white, black, chesnut, water, Spanish, and 
line oaks, (which last bears a leaf like a willow), 
cedar white and red ; the latter serves only for 
posts and ground-sels ; the white to rive or split 
into boards, that being the freest from knots, and 
goes under the name of cypress, though it is falsely 
so termed. There is a tree called cypress, which 
is extraordinarily large in bulk, and bears a leaf 
like the sensitive plant. It is soft, spongy, will not 
rive, and is fit for no use. Their black walnut is 
mightily esteemed by the joiners for its grain and 
colour. There is a sort of poplar that makes good 
white plank. It is a large tree, and bears a flower 
like a tulip. They have plenty of pine and 
dogwood, which is a fine flower-bearing plant, 
sassafras, locust, a tree of quick growth, and very 
durable in building ; hickory, of which there 
are two sorts, red and white ; the latter serves 
chiefly for fire-wood, being the best for that use. 
There isabundance of chesnuts and chinquapines^ an 
other species of chesnuts ; a sort of elm like a Dutch 
elm ; and the sugar plants and other trees, shrubs, 
and fruits, mentioned in the history of Virginia. In 
Maryland is a kind of elder, whose bark is closely 
guarded with prickles, like a briar ; the tulip- 
bearing laurel and myrtle of several sorts, one of 
which bears a berry that is worked up, in the 
e. shore, to a kind of grren wax, very proper 
to make candles with, if mixed with tallow. The 
staples are wheat and tobacco ; and in the interior 
country, on the uplands, considerable quantities of 
hemp and flax are raised. 

The humming-bird and mocking-bird are the 
most curious birds in this province, and the rattle 
snake is the most noted of reptiles. 

The air is now more wholesome than formerly, 
which proceeds from the opening of the country, 
the air having by that means a freer motion. The 
summers now arc not extremely hot, as in the first 
settling ; but the winters are generally severe. 
The n. e. wind is then very sharp, and even cools 
the air very much in the heat of the summer, when J 



MARYLAND. 



479 



[a sudden n. a&amp;gt;. blast too often strikes the la 
bourers with fevers, if they are not careful to 
provide for it, by putting on their clothes while 
they arc at work. 

It is observable in the Indians, that though they 
are a people very timorous, and cowardly in fight, 
yet when taken prisoners, and condemned, they 
will die like heroes, braving the most exquisite 
tortures that can be invented, and singing all the 
time they are upon the rack. 

The inhabitants, except in the populous towns, 
live on their plantations often several miles distant 
from each other. To an inhabitant of the middle, 
and especially of the e. states, which are 
thickly peopled, they appear to live retired and 
unsocial lives. The Negroes perform all the 
manual labour. The inhabitants of the populous 
towns, and those from the country who have inter 
course with them, are in their manners and customs 
genteel and agreeable. 

The inhabitants are made up of various nations, 
of many different religious sentiments ; few general 
observations, therefore, of a characteristical kind, 
will apply. It may be said, however, with great 
truth, that they are in general very federal, and 
friends to good government. They owe little 
money as a state, and are willing and able to dis 
charge their debts. Their credit is very good ; 
and although they have so great a proportion of 
slaves, yet a number of gentlemen of influence have 
evinced their humanity and their disposition to 
abolish so disreputable a traffic, by forming them 
selves into a socieJy for the abolition of Negro 
slavery. 

The trade of Maryland is principally carried on 
from Baltimore, with the other states, with the W. 
Indies, and with some parts of Europe. To these 
places they send annually about 30,000 hogsheads 
of tobacco, besides large qualities of wheat, flour, 
pig-iron, lumber, and corn ; beans, pork, and flax- 
seed in small quantities : and receive in return 
clothing for themselves and Negroes, and other 
dry goods, wines, spirits, sugars, and other W. 
India commodities. The balance is generally in 
their favour. 

The total amount of exports from Baltimore in 

Dollars. Cts. 

1790 was - - 2,027,777 64 

Value of imports for the same year 1.945,899 55 

1791 - mjJrS H;rf to - 2,239,69096 

3792 .-*-), i, -,&amp;lt; - - 2,623,808 33 

1793 - . .,vV - 3,665,055 50 

1794 - 5,686,190 50 

1795 - - .-*, - 5,811,379 55 
la the year 1791, the quantity of wheat exported 



was 205,571 bushels; Indian corn 05,613 c!o. ; 
buck-wheat 4286 do. ; peas 10,619 do.; besides 
151,445 barrels of wheat flower; 4325 do. In 
dian meal; 6761 do. bread; and 3104 kegs of 
crackers. 

The Roman Catholics were the first settlers in 
Maryland. Besides these, there are Protestant 
Episcopalians, English, Scotch, and Irish Presby 
terians, German Calvinists, German Lutherans, 
Friends, Baptists, Methodists, Mennonisls, Nico- 
lites or New Quakers ; who all enjoy liberty of 
conscience. The seminaries of learning are as 
follow : Washington academy, in Somerset county, 
which was instituted by law in 1779. Washington, 
college, instituted at Chestertown, in Kent county, 
in 1782. By a law enacted in 1787, a permanent 
fund was granted to this institution of J250/. a 
year, currency. St. John s college was instituted* 
in 1784, to which a permanent fund is assigned,, 
of 1750/. a year. This college is to be at Anna 
polis, where a building is now prepared for it. 
Very liberal subscriptions were obtained towards 
founding and carrying on these seminaries. The 
two colleges constitute one university, by the 
name of the University of Maryland, whereof 
the governor of the state, for the time being, is 
chancellor, and the principal of one of them, vice- 
chancellor. The Roman Catholics have also 
erected a college at Georgetown, on Patowmack 
river, for the promotion of general literature. In 
1785, the Methodists instituted a college at 
Abington, in Hartford county, by the name of 
Cokesbury College. 

The legislature of this state is composed of two 
distinct branches, a senate and house of delegates, 
and styled the General Assembly of Maryland. On 
the second Monday in November, annually, a 
governor is appointed by the joint ballot of botlt 
houses. The governor cannot continue in office 
longer than three years successively. 

It has been already shewn, that the government 
was vested by charter in the proprietary of Lord 
Baltimore. In the year 1689, it was taken out of 
his hands by the grand convention of England ; 
and in 1692, Mr. Copely was appointed governor, 
by commission from William and Mary. In 1692, 
the Protestant religion was established by law. In 
1716, the government of this province was restor 
ed to the proprietary, and continued in his hands 
till the late revolution, when, though a minor, his 
property in the lands was confiscated, and the 
government assumed by the freemen of the pro 
vince, who, in J 776, formed the constitution now 
existing. At the close of the war, Henry Harfbrd, 
Esq. the natural son and heir of Lord Baltimore)} 



480 



MARYLAND. 



[petitioned the legislature of Maryland for his 
estate ; but his petition was not granted. Mr. 
Harfbrd estimated his loss of quit-rents, valued at 
twenty years purchase, and including arrears, at 
259,488/. 5s. dollars at 7*. Gd.~ and the value 
of his manors and reserved lands, at 327, 44 1/, of 
the same money. 
List of Governors of Maryland, with the dates 

of their appointments. 
Hon. Leonard Calvert, Esq. appointed 
governor - - 1637 

Hon. Thomas Green, Esq. - - 1647 
Hon. William Stone, Esq. - 1649 

The government remained in the hands 
of the parliament commissioners during 
the time of Oliver Cromwell s usurpa 
tion - - 1651 

The commissioners, by certain articles 
of agreement then entered into, delivered 
up the government into the hands of 
Jonah Fendall, Esq. then governor - 1658 
Hon. Philip Calvert, made governor J660 
Charles Calvert, Esq. - 1662 

Upon the death of Cecilius, the go 
vernment descended to Charles Lord 
Baltimore, who came into the province 1675 
Thomas Notly, Esq. governor 1678 

Who continued till his Lordship return 
ed a second time to the province in - 1681 

King William and Queen Mary took 
upon them the government, and appoint 
ed Lyonel Copley, Esq. governor - 16S2 
Francis Nicholson, Esq. 1694 

Upon the death of Queen Mary, the 
government was altogether in the hands 
of King William III. - - 1696 

Nathaniel Blackiston, Esq. governor 1699 
By the death of King William 111. 
Queen Ann took upon her the govern 
ment ; and the same governor was 
continued - - 1701-2 

Thomas Finch, Esq. president 1703 

John Seymore, Esq. governor 1704 

Edward Lloyd, Esq. president - 1704 

John Hart, Esq. governor - 1714 

Upon the death of Queen Ann, King 
George I. took upon him the govern 
ment ; and the same governor was con 
tinued ... 1715 

The government was restored to 
Charles Lord Baltimore, who issued a 
new commission to John Hart, Esq. - 1716 
Charles Calvert, Esq. governor - 1720 

Benedict Leonard Calvert, Esq. gover 
nor 1727 

2 



The proprietor came into the province 
in - 1733 

And returned to England - 1734 

Samuel Ogle, Esq. governor 1737 

Thomas Bladcn, Esq. governor - 1742 

Samuel Ogle, Esq. governor 1747 

By the death of Charles Lord Balti 
more, the province descended to his son 
Frederick. Governor Ogle died the 
same year 1751 

Benjamin Tasker, Esq. president - 1751 
Horatio Sharp, Esq. governor 1753 

Robert Eden, Esq. governor 1769 

Frederick, Lord Baron of Baltimore, 
died - - - 1771 

Robert Eden, Esq. governor 1773 

Some of the governors since the revolution have 
been : 

Thomas Johnson, Jun. William Smallwood, 
William Paca, John Eager Floward, 

Thomas Sim Lee, George Plater.] 

[MARYLAND Point is formed by a bend in 
Piitowmack river, K:. of port Tobacco.] 

MASA, or MASHA, a large river of the country 
of Las Amazonas, to the *?. of the Marafion. It 
runs from ze. n. w. to e. s. e. and turning after 
wards to e. enters by the s. ii.to the Napo. In 
the forests and woods in its vicinity dwell the na 
tion of the barbarian Massamaes nation, and on the 
n. that of the Ardas. 

MASACRE. See DELFINA. 
MASAGUA, SAN Luis DE, a settlement of the 
province and alcaldia mayor of Guazacapan in the 
kingdom of Guatemala ; annexed to the curacy of 
Nuestra Senora de la Concepcion de Escuintlo. 

MASAGUA, another settlement, with the dedi 
catory title of Santa Catalina, in the province and 
corregimiento of Sonsonate in the same kingdom ; 
annexed to the curacy of San Justo Navizalco. 

MASAGUA, another, with the dedicatory title of 
La Candelaria, in the province and corregimiento 
of Santa Ana, in the same kingdom ; annexed to 
the curacy of San Esteban de Texistepeque. 

MASAGUA, another, with the dedicatory title of 
San Pedro, in the province and alcaldia mayor of 
San Salvador. It contains 1120 Indians, including 
those of some other seven small settlements annexed 
to its curacy. 

MASAI A, a settlement of the province and go 
vernment of Nicaragua in the kingdom of Guate 
mala ; situate on the shore of the great lake, at 
tht, mouth which leads to the Estero or Salt 
lake! 

MASAIA, a volcano of this province and king 
dom, which the Spaniards called Infierno de 



MAS 

Masaya or de Nicaragua. It lies in (he sierra, 
which is three leagues from two very large lakes, 
and not distant from the former settlement, on a 
round eminence. The parts surrounding it are 
full of caverns, and the ground, resounding under 
the step, indicates that it is hollow. The access 
to the volcano is not difficult, and it is possible 
to pursue the journey to its summit on horse-back, 
the distance being somewhat more than half a 
league. It is open at the top, and the crater, 
which is round, is about 1500 paces wide, and more 
than 200 fathoms deep, according to the Bishop 
JFV. Bartolome de lasCasas : on one side the ground 
is sloped off to a spot where there is a well, and 
has much the appearance of a hat with the crown 
downwards. 

On the top of the mountain are some teocales 
or altars, on which the Indians used to invoke 
and offer sacrifices to their deities ; and if, occa 
sionally, there should be a drought, they would 
throw som e boys headlong down from the top of 
the mountain, thinking that thereby they should 
be sure of securing the necessary rain. In this 
well, which, according to the aforesaid author, is 
from 25 to 35 paces in diameter, is found the mat 
ter of the volcano, which appears to be a melted 
and burning metal, and whicli may be seen very 
easily from the side of the well. This mass of 
matter is here, as in the chief crater, in continual 
motion ; there is a noise of water boiling most 
furiously, and sometimes, all in an instant, a wave 
will burst out as high as a tower, and dash back 
again with a great noise, exactly similar to that 
when a sea breaks upon a rock. The light, at the 
same time, is such, that in the darkest night a per 
son may see to read at a league s distance; and the 
same may be distinguished 25 leagues at sea. 

The Spaniards thought that the melted metal 
was gold, and for the purpose of catching some 
they invented, in 1538, a machine, Avhich was a 
sort of iron caldron, attached and suspended over 
the crater by a large chain ; this, however, broke, 
and the greater part of the caldron was torn away, 
though lo that \\hich remained were found amal 
gamated certain particles of metal, the virtues and 
qualities of which no alchymtst has been able to 
discover, or even to soften, so as to work on the 
anvil. 

MASA1N1TLA, a settlement of the head set 
tlement and alcaldia mayor of Zapotlan in Nueva 
Espafia. Its population is large, and it contains 
a convent of the religious order of San Francisco. 

MASAMAES, a barbarous nation of Indians, 
who dwell to the s, s. w. of the river Napo, and 

VOL. II. 



MAS 



481 



n. n. e. of the Nanny . They take their name from 
the river Masa, which laves their territory ; bounded 
by some of her barbarian nations, and on the n. n.e. 
by the Ardas. They had formerly a settlement, 
of the name of Santa Maria de Masarmies, in the 
missions of Napo, of the regulars of the company, 
in the province of Quito ; but the natives who 
composed it having dwindled away, the rest were 
transferred to the settlement of San Francisco Regis. 
The former settlement was in lat. 2 38 .? . 

[MASANETTE, Point, on the s. side of Cha- 
leur bay, lies about w. by n. above a league and a 
half from Caraguil island, between which and the 
island runs the main channel.] 

MASAPONAX, a small river of the province 
and colony of Virginia in N. America. It runs 
e. and enters the Rapahanock. 

MASCA, a nation of Indians of the kingdom of 
Peru, one of the first which formed settlements 
agreeably to the order of the first Emperor Manco 
Inca. They were established to the n. of the city 
of Cuzco, and at last became confounded with 
the other Indians. Indeed, we know nothing 
more of them than what is related by the Inca 
Garcilaso. 

[MASCO MY, a considerable pond in New 
Hampshire, in the s. w. part of Grafton county, 
lying partly in Lebanon and partly in Enfield 
townships. This pond is from 30 to 40 fathoms 
deep. The surrounding land bears evident marks, 
that the surface of this pond was once 30 or 40 
feet higher than its present level. By what cause 
the alteration was made, and at what time, is un 
known ; but appearances indicate a sudden rup 
ture, there being no sign of any margin between its 
former and present height. About a mile distant 
from its outlet, there is a declivity of rocks, 40 
feet higher than the stream, as it now runs. By 
the situation of these rocks, it appears that they 
were once a fall, over which the water flowed ; but 
it has now made for itself a very deep channel, 
through solid earth, nearly a mile in length, where 
it seems confined for futurity.] 

MASCOTA, a settlement of the head settlement 
and alcaldia mayor of Ostotipac in Nueva Es- 
pana ; five leagues to the s. of the same head set 
tlement. 

MASCOUTINS, a barbarous nation of Indians 

of New France or Canada, who dwell to the s. of 

the bay of Puantos. Some French geographers 

call this territory Land of Fire, and its inhabitants 

Nation of Fire. Tin s mistake appears to have 

arisen from the similarity of the Indian terms Mas- 

coutcnec and Mascoutens. In fact, Mascoutenec 

3 Q 



MAS 



is the proper name, a word signifying a plain open 
country, with little wood ; but the Pouteovatimis 
Indians pronouncing this word Mascoutins, and 
the French having beard of a very similar sound 
used by the savages to express fire, concluded 
that such was the name of the nation of which \ve 
are treating. 

It is bounded by the nation of the Kickapous, 
and with these it has preserved a continual friend 
ship and alliance. In 1672, the Father Aloucz 
and Dablon, of the abolished order of Jesuits, en 
tered here to preach the gospel. These were fol 
lowed in their labours by others, and particularly 
the Father Mennet, who, being persuaded by 
Mr. Juchereau, native of Canada, undertook their 
converson in 1700. All, however, met with little 
success, such was the indocility and superstition 
of that nation. 

MASEDAN, a bay of N. America, between 
Acapulco and Aquara, near the cape of Cali 
fornia, and where Sir Thomas Cavendish anchored 
after he had passed the straits of Magellan. 

MASE1TA, a small river of the province and 
captainship of Masanan in Brazil. It rises near 
the coast, runs n. between the rivers Tapicura and 
Maradi, and enters the sea in the bay which forms 
the mouth ot the river Marafion. 

MASHAMAYO, a small river of the province 
and government of Mainas in the kingdom of 
Quito. It rises in the country of the Iquitos In 
dians, runs e. and enters the Napo. 

[MASHEET. See HANCOCK S River.] 
MASI, a settlement of Indians of N. Caro 
lina ; situate on the shore of the river Albama. 

MASIUAR1BEN1S, a barbarous and nume 
rous nation of Indians, who dwell in the llanuras 
of the river Mela, to the s. w. They first began 
to be reduced to the Catholic faith with great 
success in the year 1726, when several flourishing 
settlements were established, which continued to 
increase under the direction of the Jesuits of the 
province of Santa Fe, until 1767. 

MASKOUTENS, also MASCOUTINS, and call 
ed by Mr. de la Potherie, MASCOUTECIIS, a river 
of New France or Canada in N. America. It 
runs s. e, and enters the lake of Kitchigamin. 

[MASON, a county of Kentucky, on the s. side 
of Ohio river. It contains 2267 inhabitants, of 
whom 208 are slaves.] 

[MASON, a township in Ilillsborough county, 
New Hampshire, on the Massachusetts line, about 
70 miles w. of Portsmouth, and 50 n. w. of Bos 
ton. It was incorporated in 1768, and contains 
922 inhabitants.] 



MAS 

MASPA, a settlement of the province and go 
vernment of Quixos y Macas in the kingdom of 
Quito. It is much reduced and poor, and four 
leagues from the settlement of Papallacta. 

MASPA lillO, a river of the province and go 
vernment of Maracaibo. It rises near the city of 
Barinas Nueva, runs s. s, e. and enters the Apure 
by the n. side, after that of the St. Domingo. 

MASPII1S, a nation of barbarian Indians of 
New France or Canada : the only ones who as 
sisted the American colonies, now the United 
States, in the war against Great Britain, by which 
those colonies became independent. The answer 
which this nation returned to the American depu 
ties is very singular, " Here (said they) are 16s. 
the whole of our revenue ; we had, indeed, in 
tended to buy brandy with it, but we will drink 
water ; we will sally forth to the chase, and we 
will sell the skins of the beasts that we kill, that 
we may give you the produce." 

[MASQUE POCONA, a jurisdiction of Charcas 
in Peru, extending above 30 leagues. Its air is 
hot, but not too great for vines. The city of the 
same name, where the bishop of Santa Cruz de la 
Sierra resides, is very thinly inhabited ; but there 
are in other parts of the jurisdiction several popu 
lous towns. It produces all kinds of grain and 
fruits ; honey and wax constitute a principal part 
of its trade.] 

[MASQUES, or CHILQUES AND MASQUES, a 
jurisdiction of Cusco in Peru, which begins about 
seven or eight leagues from Cusco, extending 
about 30 in length. See CHILQUES.] 

MASQU1NONGE, a river of New France or 
Canada. It rises from the lakes in the country of 
the Algonovins Indians, runs s. e. and enters the 
river St. Lawrence, in the Like or pool which this 
river forms, and known by the name of San Pierre. 

[MASS AC, a fort built by the French, on the 
n, w. side of the Ohio, about 11 miles below the 
mouth of Tennessee river. Its remains stand un a 
bank, in a bealthy agreeable situation.] 

MASSACHUSETTS, a province of N. Ame 
rica, one of those which compose the republic of 
the United States. It is included in New England, 
and is a principal of the four parts into which this 
republic is divided ; bounded n. by New Hump- 
shire, e. and.v. by the Atlantic ocean and the pro 
vince of Connecticut, and w. by New York. Jt 
is 170 miles in length, arid 1*4 at ifs greatest 
width. It had from its first establishment, when 
it was only a colony of England, the privilege of 
electing its magistrates, governor, and assembly ; 
as also to form and establish such laws as it might 



MASSACHUSETTS. 



483 



think necessary for its government, without being 
subject either to the approbation of the king or 
parliament ; but its inhabitants having been ac 
cused of certain abuses which they had made of 
this liberty, they were at last divested of these 
rights in the latter part of the reign of Charles II. 
This led to an insurrection; but they some time 
afterwards succeeded in obtaining another patent 
of privileges, which, although very favourable, was 
nevertheless inferior to that which they before pos- 
sessesed, since now the court had reserved to itself 
the authority of nominating the governor and prin 
cipal officers of the republic, and of the militia ; 
and even although the council was elected by de 
puties of the people, yet did the governor reserve 
to himself the right of disapproving their choice, 
a system which was sufficient to do away in toto 
their accustomed prerogative. 

The appeals which concerned 300/. and up 
wards, were to be referred to the king and his 
council, a practice both legal and constitutional ; 
but if they were not disapproved by the end of 
three years, they were considered valid and au 
thorised. There existed a dispute for many years 
with the English court respecting the salary of the 
governor of this province. 

This state abounds in neat cattle, pigs, birds, 
and fish. The inhabitants employ themselves in 
making manufactures of flax, wool, and skins. 
On account of abundance of the timber requisite 
for ship-building, a considerable number of vessels 
are constructed. Here are mines of iron and cop- 

{&amp;gt;er, and some of the former have been worked. 
&amp;lt;s manufactures, and especially those of hats, 
have fallen off considerably, owing to the policy 
adopted by the English. 

This province provides salted ineat, and fish to 
the Antilles islands, receiving in exchange sugar 
and molasses. Here are stills for making mm, 
also some sutrar-mills. It was the most powerful 
colony the English had. Its inhabitants amounted, 
previously to the war of their independence, to 
400,000, 80,000 of whom were capable of bearing 
arms; and all had the liberty of following their 
own religion. 

In 1721, this province suffered much from the 
epidemic disorder, the small-pox , and, the deaths 
being very numerous, a celebrated physician 
adopted the plan of inoculation, practising it not 
only upon his wife and children, but also upon 
himself; when such was the ignorance and fanati 
cism of the people, that they declared the practice 
to be something monstrous, and to have had its 
origin in the infernal regions^; and, accordingly, 
having ascertained that a certain person had under 



gone the process, a large party convened at mid 
night near his house, and breaking open one of the 
windows, threw in a lighted granade full of com 
bustibles. Indeed, the whole people being thus 
averse to this new mode of practice, the magis 
trates found it necessary to prohibit it tor fear of 
a general sedition ; they therefore convened the 
physicians, who, either from fear or other policy, 
declared inoculation to be prejudice I ; and, in con 
sequence of this, a bill was passed to its prohibi 
tion, with a degree of universal satisfaction that 
has never been equalled. But the folly of this 
measure has been out-done by the cruelty of an 
other, which offered a specific reward to any one 
who should put to death an Indian ; and, in 1724, 
a sum of 2250 /. sterling was paid to John Love- 
well, from his having, in a company of wretches 
formed for the purpose of hunting doAvn those un 
happy creatures, after the same manner as the 
chase of Avild beasts, put to death 10 whilst they 
were sleeping round their hut. With this black 
act cast into their teeth, let the English vaunt of 
their humanity, and declaim against the pretended 
cruelties of the Spaniards in America; for these, 
even were they true, have never come up to such, 
barbarism as we have just related ; a barbarism 
which cannot find its equal in any other nation 
whatsoever. 

[In Massachusetts are to be found all the varie 
ties of soil, from very good to very bad, capable of 
yielding all the different productions common to 
the climate, such as Indian corn, rye, wheat, bar 
ley, oats, hemp, flax, hops, potatoes, field beans 
and peas, apples, pears, peaches, plums, cherries, 
&amp;c. That part of the state which is distinguished 
by the name of the Old or Plymouth Colony, in 
cluding the counties of Barnstable, Duke s, Nan- 
tucket, Bristol, and Plymouth, in point of soil, is 
the poorest part of the state, being generally sandy 
and light, interspersed, however, with many excel 
lent tracts of laud. The n. middle, and w. parts 
of the state have, generally speaking, a strong, 
good soil, adapted to grazing and grain ; very si 
milar to the soil of JNew Hampshire and Vermont 
on one side, and to that of Rhode Island and Con 
necticut on the other. It has been observed that 
the effects of the e. winds extend farther inland than 
formerly, and injure the tender fruits, particularly 
the peach, and even the more hardy apple. The 
average produce of the good lands, well cultivated, 
has been estimated as follows: 40 bushels of com 
on an acre, of barley, 20 of wheat, 30 of rye, 
]00 of potatoes. The staple commodities of this 
state are fish, beef, lumber, &amp;c. 

The country is well watered by a number of 
3d 2 



484 



MASSACHUSETTS. 



[small rivers, some of which fall into Connecticut 
river, which passes s. through the w. part of the 
state ; others run n. to Merrimack river, which 
enters from New Hampshire, and waters (he n. e. 
corner of the state ; others pass into Connecticut 
and Rhode Island ; My .-tick and Charles rivers 
fall into Boston bay ; others fall into the Atlantic 
ocean in different parts of the sea-coast. The chief 
capes are Ann, Cod, Malabar, Poge, Gay head, 
&amp;c. The most noted bays are Massachusetts, Ips 
wich, Boston, Plymouth, Barnslable, and Buz 
zard s. There are many other bays of less note. 
The chief islands are Plumb Island, Nantucket, 
Martha s Vineyard, Elizabeth islands, and nume 
rous small isles in Boston bay. 

The chief iron manufactures in this state are de 
scribed in the account of Plymouth and Bristol 
counties, and their towns Taunton, Bridge water, 
Middleborough, &amp;c. where nails have been made 
in such quantities as to prevent, in a great mea 
sure, the importation of them from Great Britain. 
Nail-making was not an object of considerable at 
tention, until the general court laid a duty on im 
ported nails of every size. This soon u gave 
nerves to the arm, and motion to the hammer ; and 
from 400 to 500 nails indifferently made by one 
hand in one day, JOOO are now well made in the 
same time." The machine invented by Caleb 
Leach of Plymouth, will cut and head 5000 nails 
in a day, under the direction of a youth of either 
sex. There is a machine for cutting nails at New- 
bury port, invented by Mr. Jacob Perkins, which 
will turn out 200,000 nails in a day. The nails 
are said to have a decided superiority over those of 
English manufacture, and are sold 20 per cent, 
cheaper. There are duck manufactories at Bos 
ton, Salem, Haverhill, and Springfield, which are 
in a promising way. Manufactories of cotton and 
woollen have been attempted with various success 
at Beverley, Worcester, Boston, and Newbury. 
There are in this state upwards of 20 paper mills, 
which make more than 70,000 reams of writing, 
printing, and wrapping paper, annually. It was 
estimated in 1792, that 20,000 /. worth of paper 
was yearly made by these mills. The other manu 
factories for cotton and wool cards, playing cards, 
shoes, lace, wire, &amp;c. are noticed under the de 
scription of Boston, Lynn, Ipswich, Dcdham, &amp;c. 
There are several snuff, oil, chocolate, and powder 
mills, in different parts of the state, and a number 
of iron works and slitting mills, besides other mills, 
in common use for sawing lumber, grinding grair&amp;gt;, 
and fulling cloth. There were, in 1792, 62 distil 
leries in this state, employed in distilling from fo 
reign materials : 1,900,000 gallons have been dis 



tilled in one year, which at a duty of II cents a 
gallon, yields a revenue to the government of 
209,000 dollars. There are indeed few articles 
which are essentially necessary, and minister to the 
comfort and convenience of lite, that are not manu 
factured in this state. This commonwealth is re 
markable for its literary, humane, and other socie 
ties, which are noticed in iheir pioper places. 

Massachusetts is divided into the following coun 
ties, whose polls, proportion of the public tax of 
J()(0/. and number of senators in 1793, were as 
follows : 



Polls. 


Counties. 


On the Thorn and. 


Senat. 


3742 


Suffolk 


.W$ 14 9| 


4 


6142 


Norfolk 


68 17 3 


3 


12376 


Essex 


133 19 7 


5 


I0109| 


Middlesex 


104 13 41 


4 


13912 


Hampshire 


J1I 18 Of 


5 


13762 


W orcester 


127 5 0| 


5 


6912 


Plymouth 


59 9 Of 


2 


3759 
763 
1121 


Barnstable 
Duke s County 
arid Nantucket 


20 15 1H) 

5 9 8iV 
6 13 8|&amp;gt; 


1 


6547 


Bristol 


53 19 6i 


2 


6265 


Berkshire 


52 3 3| 


2 


64*4 


York 


50 1 9 


2 


5723 


Cumberland 


43 6 5| 


2 


6349 


Lincoln 


50 13 10* 


2 


1967 


Hancock 


13 17 1 &amp;gt; 




493 


Washington 


3 1 1 $ 


1 



The five counties of the district of Maine, in 
cluded in the above, belong to Massachusetts. The 
town of Boston is rated at 3631 polls ; and is to 
pay 91/. I6s.8|d. on the 1000/. From the above 
schedule, some opinion may be formed of the sup 
posed value of the rateable estates in each county. 
A committee of the general court reported the above 
in June 1793; which report was referred to their 
next session. 

The militia of Massachusetts is composed of all 
the able-bodied white male citizens from J8 to 45 
years of age, excepting from the enrolment, within 
these ages, clergy, school-masters, civil officers of 
importance, either under the state or federal go 
vernment, and also those who have held any mili 
tary commission whatever. The whole is formed 
into 10 divisions and 21 brigades, and consists of 
82 regiments of infantry ; 48 troops, composing 12 
squadrons or battalions, of cavalry ; and 36 com 
panies of artillery, generally two to each brigade. 
These, together, compose a body of about 50,000 
infantry, 2000 cavalry, and 1500 artillery ; the] 



MASSACHUSETTS. 



latter are furnished with 60 field-pieces, and with 
tumbrils and apparatus complete. Tins state, in 
cluding the district of Maine, owns more than three 
times as many tons of shipping as any other of the 
states, and more than one third part of the whole 
that belongs to the United States. Upwards of 
29,000 tons are employed in carrying on the fish 
eries, 46,000 in the coasting business, and 96,564 
in trading with almost all parts of the world. Pot 
and pearl ashes, staves, flax-seed, bees-wax, &amp;c. 
are carried chiefly to Great Britain, in remittance 
for their manufactures ; masts, provisions, &amp;c. to 
the East Indies ; fish, oil, beef, pork, lumber, 
candles, &amp;c. are carried to the West Indies for 
their produce, and the two first articles, fish and 
oil, to France, Spain, arid Portugal ; roots, vege 
tables, fruits, and small meats, to Nova Scotia and 
New Brunswick ; hats, saddlery, cabinet-work, 
men s and women s shoes, nails, tow-cloth, barley, 
hops, butter, cheese, &amp;c. to the s. states. The 
value of exports in the year ending September 50, 
1791, was 2,445,975 dollars, 53 cents ; in 1792, 
2,889,922 dollars; in 1793, 3,676,412 dollars; 
and in 1794, 5,380,703 dollars. 

The w. part of this state is somewhat moun 
tainous and hilly. See NEW ENGLAND. Wa- 
chuselt mountain in Princetown, Worcester county, 
is 2989 feet above the level of the sea, and may be 
seen 67 miles ; and by the census of 1810, the 
population of this state amounted to 472,040 
souls.] 

It was divided into 10 counties, which are, 
Hampshire, Bristol, 

Suffolk, Plymouth, 

Worcester, Barnstable, 

Essex, Duke or Isle Martha, 

Middlesex, Isle of Nantucket. 

In the above counties are included the following 
cities and towns : 



1. 

Canada, 

Pequiong, . 

Salem, 

Petersham, 

Naraganset, 

Greenwich, 

Brimfield, 

Kingston, 

Pelham, 

Sunderland, 

Hadley, 

Hadley, North, 

Northampton, 

North field, 

Hatfield, 



Deerfield, 
Bland ford, 
Grenville, 
Westfield, 
Springfield, the capital. 

2. 

Roxbury, 
Dorchester, 
Need ham, 
Medway, 
Billingham, 
Wrentham, 
Med field, 
Wai pole, 
Stoughton, 
Braintree, 



Wey mouth, 

Highani, 

Milton, 

Dedham, 

Boston, the capital. 

3. 

Dudley, 
Stourbridge, 
Western, 
Hard wick, 
New Ipswich, 
Dorchester, 
Lunemburg, 
Bolton, 
Shrewsbury, 
Westborough, 
Hopkinton, 
Gratton, 
Mend en, 
Uxbridge, 
Douglas, 
Oxford, 
Sutton, 
Gore, 
Brookfield, 
Braintree, 
West- Wing, 
Rutland, 
Holden, 
Worcester, the capital. 

4. 

Beverley, 
Middleton, 
Tapsfield, 
Andover, 
Bradford, 
Rowley, 
Newbury, 
Almbury, 
Averhill, 
Methuen, 
Dracut, 
Lynn, the capital. 

5. 

Townshend, 
Hollis, 
D unstable, 
Chelmsford, 
Reading, 
Maiden, 
Med ford, 
Groton, 
Billericay, 
Westfbrd, 
Bedford, 



485 

Tewksbury, 

Lexington, 

Woburn, 

Marborough, 

Stow, 

Concord, 

Waltham, 

Weston, 

Sherborn, 

Holliston, 

Charles Town, 

Cambridge, the capital. 

6. 

Attleborough, 
Barrington, 
Swansey, 
Dighton, 
Rainham, 
Easton, 
Norton, 
Berkley, 
Freetown, 
Dartmouth, 
Taunton, the capital. 

7. 

Hanover, 
Abingdon, 
Duxbury, 
Kingston, 
Halifax, 
Pembroke, 
Bridgewater, 
Middleborough, 
Rochester, 
Wareham, 
Plympton, 
Plymouth, the capital. 

8. 

Sandwich, 
Falmouth, 
Yarmouth, 
Harwich, 
Eastham, 
Silver Spring, 
Billingsgate, 
Truro, 
Chatham, 
Barnstable, the capital. 

9. 

Chilmack, 
Tisbury, 
Edgar, the capital. 

10. 
Sherborne, the capital. 



480 



MASSACHUSETTS. 



.[The Massachusetts colony may be considered as 
the parent of all the other colonies of New England. 
There was no importation of planters from England 
to any part of the continent n. of Maryland, except 
to the Massachusetts, for more than 50 years after the 
colony began. In the first 10 years, about 20,000 
souls had arrived in the Massachusetts. Since then, 
it is supposed more have gone from hence to Eng 
land, than have proceeded from thence hither. Pre 
viously to giving a more detailed history of Massa 
chusetts, we shall offer some accounts of the original 
state of this country, with respect to the inhabitants 
and soil. 

The Massachusetts first planters distinguished 
the natives by four divisions, eastern, western, 
northern, and southern. The e. people had the 
general name of Tarrateens or Tarrenteens ; they 
had their residence at Kennebeck, and the other 
rivers in the province of Maine, and country e. of 
it, and were part of the Indians called by the 
French Abenakis. The several subdivisions of 
these Tarrenteens or Abenakis, according to the 
rivers where they dwelt or generally resided, as 
St. John s, Pcnobscot, Norridgewock, Ameris- 
coggin, Saco, &amp;c. were not known to the English 
until many years after. There was great enmity 
between the Tarrenteens and Aberginians, or In 
dians of Massachusetts bay, who although they 
had been formerly a great people, yet were so re 
duced, that upon alarms, they would fly to the 
English houses as to asylums, where the Tarren 
teens durst not pursue them. The French traders 
were better known than the English to these Tar 
renteens, and early planted prejudices against the 
English, which could never be eradicated. These 
were the Indians who first used fire-arms, which, 
with ammunition, they obtained from the French. 
The second year after the Massachusetts planters 
arrived, the Tar-rent ems destroyed some of the 
English who went to trade with them, and prc- 
tended that they were drowned ; but the truth be 
ing discovered, sonic of the Indians concerned in 
the murder were taken and hanged. Although 
they refrained from open hostilities for above 40 
years, yet they kept no great correspondence with, 
nor shewed any aux-ctiou for, the English colonies, 
but at all times were attached to the French, who 
speak of them ; ,s the most mild and docile of any 
of the Indian tribes. The a\ Indians went by the ge 
neral name of Mohawks, and under this name were 
included all the Indians .w. of Quinnipiak, (New Ha 
ven), although the lndiansofHudson sriver,theMo- 
heganders or Mackhanders, were people of a dif 
ferent nation and language. The name of Mohawks 
struck terror into the Indians who lived e. of them. 



The s. Indians were divided into many distinct 
nations or tribes. Those upon Long island and 
the main-land opposite upon the sea-coast, were 
accounted among the most savage. The Massa 
chusetts Indians had but little knowledge of them. 
There was another subdivision, by the name of the 
River Indians, who had seated themselves iu 
several commodious places upon the banks of Con 
necticut river. The next to them were called 
Mohegins, between Connecticut river and the Pe- 
quod river, and upon some of the higher branches 
of the last-mentioned river. Then came the Pe 
quods, seated between and about New London 
and Stonington, near to the sea-coast. These 
were supposed to be among the most warlike, 
active, and daring, and made the Naragansets, 
though more numerous, stand in awe of them, 
and would have made the English do so likewise, 
if they had been owners of English arms, and un 
derstood how to use them. They were represent 
ed to have been under greater prejudices against 
the English, from the beginning, than any other 
tribe. Next to the Pequods were the Naragansets, 
who lived along the sea-coast from Stonington 
round point Judith, and on what is called the 
Naraganset bay. They consisted of several lesser 
principalities, but all united under one general 
ruler, called the chief sachem, to whom all the others 
owed some kind of fealty or subjection. The 
Nianticks were included, and considered as a 
branch of the Naragansets. The Nanigunsets 
must have been very numerous. None of the In 
dians were supposed to increase, but to be con 
tinually decreasing, not in the English colonies 
only, but among the French in Canada also, and 
yet in J675, at the beginning of Philip s war, it 
was generally agreed that the Narrganset tribe 
consisted of 2COO fighting men. They were the 
most curious coiners of the wampompcag, and 
supplied the other nations with money, pendants, 
and bracelets ; also with tobacco-pipes of .stone, 
some blue and some v&amp;gt;hite; they furnished the 
earthen vessels and pots for cookery and other do 
mestic uses. They were considered as a commer 
cial people, and not only began a trade with the 
English for goods lor their own consumption, but 
soon learned to supply other distant nations at an 
advanced price, and to receive beaver and other 
furs in exchange, upon \\hich they made a profit 
also. The Pequods jeered them for their indis 
position to war, and called them a nation of 
women. 

The Wamponoags were next to the Naraganscts. 
Their sachem was Massasoiet or Woosamequin, 
whose chief seat was sometimes at Pokanocket or] 



MASSACHUSETTS. 



487 



rSowam, and at other times at Namaskct, now 
Middleboro .igh. The Nipnets, who were seated 
upon some lesser rivers and lakes or large ponds, 
more within the continent, where Oxford now is, 
and towns near it, were supposed to be tributaries 
to Massasoiet. The Indians upon cape Cod, 
although not considered as part of the Wampo- 
rioags, yet were supposed to be also under some 
kind of subjection to Massasoiet. However, it is 
certain, that when Philip, -the son of Massasoiet, 
had engaged almost all the other Indians of the 
country in war with the English, his solicitations 
could not prevail with those of Manamet to join 
him, but they adhered to the English, and were a 
defence to Sandwich, and the towns further upon 
the cape. There seems to have been two cantons 
or sachemdoms of the Cape Indians, one extending 
from Eel river in Plymouth, to the ,?. shore of the 
cape, and comprehended what are now called the 
Mash pee Indians, and then extended upon the 
cape to the c. part of B irnstable, and as far z0. as 
Wood s (Jole, and divers petty sachems or saga 
mores were comprehended in this division, of 
which Mash pee was one ; the e. part of the cape 
from Nobskusset or Yarmouth made another sa 
chemdom, the capital of which was Nausit or 
East ham : these were known to the people of New 
Plymouth by the name of Nausit Indians. The 
Indians upon Nantucket, and those upon Martha s 
Vineyard, are supposed to have been distinct and 
separate tribes, having their own sachems and 
sagamores. The Nantucket Indians were a large 
body. 

The several scattered tribes from the Pocka- 
nockets to Piscutaqua river, were called the n. 
Indians, and by some Aberginians. There were 
many distinct settlements upon the lesser channels 
of Piscataqua or Newichewannock river. Merri- 
mack also had its receptacles, from the month 50 
miles or more, as Wainooset, Patueket, Amos- 
keag, Pennicook, &amp;c. ; and Newbury Falls was a 
noted plantation, th Te being plenty offish there at 
ail seasons. And for the same reason, and because 
of the great plenty of shell-fish, at Agawam 
(Ipswich) there was a noted tribe with their sa 
chem. Naumkeag (Salem and Marbiehead) and 
Sauirns (Lynn) made another division. Saugns 
Indians had a distinct sachem, known by the Eng 
lish name of George, who lived 40 years or more 
after the English came there. 

At Massachusetts, nc.ir the mouth of Charles 
river, there used to be a general rendezvous of In 
dians. That circle which now makes the har 
bours of Boston and Charlestown, round by Mai 
den, Chelsea, Nantasket, Iligham, Weymouth, 



Braintree, and Dorchester, was the capital of a 
great sachem, much reverenced by all the planta 
tions of Indians round about, and to him belonged 
Naponsct (Dorchester Mills, now Milton), Pun 
ka pog (Stoughton), Wcssagusset (Weymouth), 
and several places upon Charles river, where 
the natives were seated. At Mistick a sagamore 
was seated upon a creek which meets with t!ie 
mouth of Charles river. 

It is not possible to make a just computation of 
the number of Indians within the limits of New 
England. It is agreed that (hey looked with a 
jealous eye upon the English planters, and when it 
was too late, repenled that they had not, by a 
general union, discouraged and prevented the first 
aite npts of settlements among them. 

The life of hunters and fishermen is said to be 
averse to human society, except among the mem 
bers of single families. The accounts which have 
been transmitted of the natives, at the first arrival 
of the Europeans, represent them to have been as 
near to a state of nature as any people upon the 
globe, arid destitute of most of the improvements 
which are the usual effects of civil society. Some 
writers tell us, that husbands and wives, parents 
and children, lived always in one room or wig- 
wam, without any apartments, and made no 
privacy of those actions which nature teaches even 
some irrational animals to be ashamed of in pub 
lic. All agree, that a young woman was not less 
esteemed for having accompanied with a man, 
their usual practice being to live together upon 
trial, before they took one another for husband 
and wife. Charnplain, who lived a whole winter, 
about 1615, among the Algonquins, says, " They 
have a sort of marriage: when a young girl is 
arrived to II, 12, 13, 14, or J5 years, she will 
have suiters in proportion to her charms, and must 
apply to her father and mother ; although often, 
enough, except among the discrecter sort, the 
girls will not stay for their consent. The enamour 
ed Indian tenders to his mistress a few belts, 
chains, or bracelets of zmampom. If the girl likes 
him she will receive the present, and he comes 
and lodges with her three or four nights, without 

r* 

saying one word, where they enjoy the fruits of 
their affections. If, after a week or fortnight spent 
in this manner, they cannot agree, which is very 
often the case, she quits her lover, who leaves his 
tcanipom and other presents made her. Disap 
pointed, he seeks another mistress, and she another 
humble servant, and continues so to do until two 
meet together who are agreeable each to the other. 
There are some vho pass their youth thus with 
many such husbands, who have not the sole pos-^ 



488 



MASSACHUSETTS. 



[session, for as soon as it is night, the young women, 
although married, run from one wigwam to ano 
ther and favour whom they like ; but no violence is 
offered to the women, all depending on their con 
sent. The husband takes the like liberty, without 
raising any jealousy, or but little, between them ; 
nor is it any damage or loss of reputation to them, 
such being the custom of the country." 

It is thus not wonderful that we hear of no in- 
instances of refined conjugal affection. The su 
perior strength of the man to that of the woman, 
instead of being employed in the most laborious 
services necessary for their mutual support, was 
made use of to keep the wife in subjection, and 
oblige her to every kind of drudgery, not only to 
the carrying her children upon her back in all 
their removes, but to the carrying their provisions 
and packs of every kind, in their huntings and 
other marches. The women not only provided 
bark and stakes, the materials of their houses or 
cabins, but were the house-wrights who built 
them; and as often as the family moved, for the 
sake of fishing or hunting, the women took down 
the houses and carried them on their backs. They 
phmted, hoed, and gathered the corn, and pro 
vided barns (holes in the ground cieled with the 
rind of trees) for the reception of it. Not to 
mention their employments in providing shell-fish 
and other fish for the family, bearing burdens of 
wood and water, dressing their food, &amp;c. The 
men commended themselves for keeping their 
wives employed, and condemned the English hus 
bands for spoiling good working creatures. A fa 
mily seems necessarily to carry an idea of govern 
ment, but parents had no authority over their 
children. There was no great degree of affection 
observed towards their young by the parents, and 
no return was made On the part of the child; but, 
as soon as it was capable, it was as ready to resist 
and oppose its parent as any other person. 

Every nation or tribe had one whom they ac 
knowledged as the head or chief. The son suc 
ceeded to the father: if no son, the queen ruled ; 
if no queen, the next of kin of the blood royal. 
They gave the title of sachem to the chief, and 
sometimes that of sagamore. Some suppose these 
two titles to be indifferent!} used, others that the 
sagamores had a small territory, and perhaps were, 
in some degree, dependent upon a sachem. There 
were several sagamores in the Massachusetts bay, 
S igamore George at Saugus or Lynn, John at 
Medford, Passaconaway at Merrimack, his son at 
Weclmset, Shawanon at Nashaway, and many 
others. Massasoiet, the chief of the Wampo- 
noag Indians, was always called sachem, so was 



Myantinomo, chief the Naragansets, and Saccus 
of the Pequods. 

What power and authority the sachems and 
sagamores had, it is more difficult to determine. 
Murder, and a bare attempt upon the life of their 
chief, are said to have been capital offences. Such 
a malefactor being apprehended, (an escape to 
another nation was not very difficult), the sachem 
called some of his Aviscst men together, and the 
offender being pronounced guilty, his brains were 
beat out with a tomahawk. Other punishments 
they had not. We hear of no laws. Where they 
had no idea of property, but few laws were neces 
sary. They had nothing to lose, worth even any 
corporal punishment, much less the life of a 
subject, where they were not overstocked. Of 
personal injuries and affronts every man was his 
own avenger ; they had no religion which forbad 
rendering evil for evil. Military authority they 
had none ; every man fought and ran away at his 
pleasure ; for this reason, they never could stand a 
body of English, and their wars between them 
selves were extremely precarious : Uricas, with an 
inferior number of Mohegins, and of no repute, 
beat Myantinomo at the head of the Naragansets, 
who held the Mohegins in contempt. Their arms 
were bows and arrows, their captains only carried 
a spear. Their bow-strings were made of moose 
sinews : their arrows were pointed with a small 
flat stone, of a triangular form, the basis of which 
they fastened with a leathern string into a cleft 
made in the end of a young stick of elder wood ; 
and simple as they were, they did execution upon 
naked bodies. Many of these stones or heads of 
arrows are found to this day in the earth, in places 
where the Indians used to resort. After the arrival 
of the English, they made the heads of their ar 
rows of brass, fastened them to a small stick six or 
eight inches long, formed to fix into the end of 
the pithy elder, which they bound round to 
strengthen it. They seldom missed their mark, 
when they aimed at a beast or bird, running or 
flying. In their wars they are said to have always 
engaged in a loose disorderly manner, and as soon 
as their artillery was spent, to have taken to their 
heels. The Mohawks secured their bodies against 
the arrows of other Indians by a covering of sea 
horse skins. Their principal weapon was the 
tomahawk, a club two or three feet long, with a 
knob at the end, (since they knew the use of iron,) 
improved by the addition of a sharp-pointed 
hatchet opposite to the knob. Roger Williams 
says it was their constant practice to strike off the 
heads of their dead enemies, at which they were 
very expert. J 



MASSACHUSETTS. 



[They were remarkable for firm well-compacted 
bodies, strong 1 and active, capable of enduring 
the greatest hardships and fatigues, regardless of 
cold whilst travelling- in the severity of winter. 
Having made holes in the ice, they would sit 
round them, upon their naked bottoms, catching- 
pickerel, breams, perch, and other fresh- water 
fish. A small pouch of parched corn, ground or 
rather pounded into meal, and called nuich trite, 
which is well enough translated nocake, would 
support them several days in their travelling-, 
when they could get no other provisions ; and 
sometimes they were destitute even of this; but 
after abstinence they never failed of a propor 
tionable indulgence, the first opportunity they had 
for it, and would make up at one meal for all they 
had missed. Their clothing- was of the skins of 
wild beasts; after flic English came they began to 
use woollen, and in a few years wholly laid aside 
skins. One of their old garments of skins would 
purchase a new one of woollen, and a good quan 
tity of strong water or sack into the bargain. The 
jnen threw a light mantle or covering over them, 
and although they wore a small flap, called Indian 
breeches, yet they were not over nice in conceal 
ing their nudities. The women were more mo 
dest, and wore a coat of cloth or skins, wrapt like 
a blanket about their loins, and reaching down 
to their hams, which they never put off in com 
pany ; and if the husband had a mind to sell the 
wife s beaver petticoat, he must hare provided 
another of some other sort, before he could pre 
vail with her to part Avith it. In winter, the old 
men sometimes wore a sort of trowsers of skins, 
fastened under their girdles with buttons. Their 
shoes without heels, which they called mockassins, 
were cut out of a moose s hide. Their ornaments 
were pendants in their ears, carved of bone, shells, 
and stone, in the form of birds, beasts, or fishes, 
belts of wampompeag upon tlieir arms, and hang 
ing down over their shoulders. Their hair was 
cut into various forms and stuck with feathers 
Upon their cheeks, and in many parts of their 
bodies, some of them, by incisions into which they 
conveyed a black unchangeable ink, made the 
figures of bears, deer, moose, wolves, eagles, 
hawks, &amp;c. which were indelible, and lasted as 
long as they lived. 

Their food in winter was birds and beasts of all 
sorts, fish from the ponds, and shell-fish. In 
summer they had fish from the sea, but no way to 
save that or their meat from putrefaction ; berries 
of all sorls, green corn, beans, and squashes. 
They boiled their victuals in earthen pots; their 
spits were sticks fastened in the ground, cleft at 

VOL. II. 



top, where they fixed their meat, and placed them 
round a fire, until they had sufficiently toasted it. 
The earth was their table ; trenchers, napkins, or 
knives they knew not the use of. Salt they had 
none, nor bread. Indian corn boiled was the 
nearest akin to bread. They had no set meals, eat 
Avhcn they Mere hungry as long as victuals lasted, 
and being improvident, not caring for the morrow, 
they and their families would sometimes keep a 
fast of two or three days together. Water was 
their only drink. Their household furniture was 
very small : a skin or mat was their bed : they 
never used a chair or stool, always sitting on the 
ground : a few earthen and wooden vessels answer 
ed all the purposes of a family. As they had no 
metals of any kind, what few tools they had were 
of stone: their hatchet and chisel are kept as curiosi 
ties ; the former somewhat in shape like an iron 
hatchet, and this, instead of having an eye for the 
handle, was furnished with a neck, where they fast 
ened a withe. Their arts and manufactures lay in a 
very narrow compass. Their skins they dressed by 
scraping and rubbing, and sometimes stained or 
coloured them with odd sort of embroideries. 
They had a sort of cordage or lines, from the 
wild Indian hemp, with which they made nets, 30 
or 40 feet long, for taking sturgeon. They had 
two sorts of canoes, one of pine or chesnut trees, 
which they burned hollow, and then scraped the 
inside with clam-shells and oyster-shells, and hew 
ed the outside with stone hatchets. Those were 
generally two feet wide, and about 20 feet long; 
the other sort were made of the bark or rind of the 
birch tree, with knees or ribs, and though easily 
broken upon the rocks or shore, yet were tight 
and secure against the waves. Some of these were 
very neat, and the most ingenious of any part of 
their manufactures. 

They that speak most favourably give but an 
indifferent idea of the qualities of their minds. 
Mr. Wilson speaks of them, but with compassion, 
as the most sordid and contemptible part of the 
human species. Mr. Hooker says, they are the 
veriest ruins of mankind upon the face of the earth. 
Perhaps, the Indians about the Massachusetts bay 
were some of the lowest of the American nations. 
We hear nothing of that formality and order in 
their counsels, and little of those allegories and 
figures in their speeches and harangues, which 
the French have observed among the (roquois and 
other nations, at the beginning- of their acquain 
tance with them. Indeed, in their discourses to 
gether upon any matter which they deemed im 
portant, they seldom used any short colloquies, 
but each spake his mind at large without interrup-1 





490 



MASSACHUSETTS. 



j tion, the rest of the company giving attention, 
and when he had finished some other gave as large 
an answer. They shewed courtesy to the English 
at their first arrival, were hospitable, and made 
such as could eat their food welcome to it, and 
readily instructed them in planting and cultivating 
the Indian corn ; and some of the English who 
lost themselves in the woods, and must otherwise 
have perished by famine, they relieved and con 
ducted home. Their manner was to come into the 
English houses without knocking, and to sit down 
without ceremony. R. Williams compared the 
Quakers to them. There was no trading with 
them but for ready pay : he that trusted them lost 
his debt and his customer. 

The principle or persuasion that all things ought 
to be in common might cause hospitality, where 
the like was expected in return, without any great 
degree of virtue. Some appearances there were of 
compassion, gratitude, and friendship, and of 
grief at the death or distress of their children or 
near relations. Some degree of these social affec 
tions is inseparable from human nature. Vices 
they had many. They were false, malicious, and 
revengeful. The least injury caused in them a 
deadly hatred, which could never be allayed. 
They were infinitely cruel to their enemies, cutting 
and mangling their bodies, and then broiling them 
alive upon hot embers, and inflicting the most ex 
quisite torments they could invent. They were 
not known to feed upon the flesh of their enemies 
after the English came among them. The men 
were lazy and idle, never employing themselves 
about any other business than what was of absolute 
necessity for their support, and such as the women 
were not capable of. More dirty, foul, and sor 
did than swine, they were never so clean and sweet 
as when they were well greased. Drunkards they 
were not, but the only reason was they had no 
thing that would intoxicate them. As soon as 
they had a taste of the English sack and strong 
waters, they were bewitched with them, and by 
tint means more have been destroyed than have 
fallen by the sword. The English women had 
nothing to fear, as to any attempt upon their 
honour. The same observation is made of the 
Canada Indians, with respect to the French women. 
La Hontan, a French author, who has given a 
different account, is charged with a fondness for 
embellishing his memoirs, and being very credu 
lous. These Indians had their choice among their 
own women; but we have but little reason to 
wonder that so few Englishmen incline to cohabit 
&amp;gt;vith such disgusting objects. 

They had some sports and games with which 



they sometimes diverted themselves : foot-ball was 
the chief, and whole cantons would engage one 
against another. Their goals were upon the hard 
sands, as even and firm as a board, and a n-ile or 
more in length ; their ball not much larger th-ui a 
hand-ball, which they would mount in the air 
with their naked feet, and sometimes would be two 
days together before either side got a goal They 
had two principal games of chance, one they called 
puim, this was much the same with a game Char- 
levoix mentions among the Miami s, which he calls 
jcu des pail/es, or the game of straws. They took 
a number of packets of small sticks or straws, un 
equal in number but near of a size, and shuffling 
them together, he to whose lot the highest num 
ber fell, was the for ward &amp;lt;\st in the game. Another 
game they called hubbub, the same the French 
called jeu du plat, the game of the dish, among the 
Hurons. They took five small pieces of bone, 
flatter than a die and longer, black on the one 
side and white on the other, the.MMhey put into a 
small wooden tray or platter, and giving it a stroke 
on the ground the bones all flew into the air, and 
the gamesters whisk their hands to and fro among 
the bones, and then smite themselves on the breast 
and thighs, crying out hub, Jmb^ hub, so as to be 
heard at a great distance. According as the bones 
happened to be more or less of one colour, so they 
won or lost: whilst any one continued to win he 
held the tray, and upon his losing gave it to the 
next. The Negroes in Guinea have a game of 
the same sort, which they call paw-paw. Shoot 
ing at marks was diversion for their children, as 
soon as they were capable of drawing a bow. 
Swimming, running, and wrestling, they were as 
early accustomed to. Their hunting and fishing 
being all they did which could be called labour, 
for their maintenance or support, served also as 
diversions : deer, moose, and bears were their 
chief objects ; wolves, wild cats, raccoons, otters, 
musquashes, and even beavers, were not much re 
garded until the English, from the value they set 
upon their skins or furs, encouraged the pursuit 
oi them. Besides their bows they had other de 
vices to take their game, sometimes by double 
hedges a mile or two in length, and a mile wide at 
one end, and made narrow by degrees until they 
came to a gap of about six feet, against which 
they lay hid to shoot the deer as they came through 
in the day-time, and at night they set deer-traps, 
being springs made of young trees: they had their 
traps also for beavers and otters. Their ordinary 
fishing was with hooks and lines : tliey made their 
hooks of bones, their lines of wild hemp, stronger 
and neater than the English lines. They had a] 



MASSACHUSETTS. 



[way of taking sturgeon by lighting a torch made 
of birch bark, which waving to and fro by the side 
of their canoe, would delight the sturgeon, and 
cause them to come tumbling and playing, throw 
ing up their white bellies, into which the Indians 
struck their spears or darts : the sturgeons backs 
were impenetrable. They had grand fishings at 
the several falls of the rivers, at most of which a 
canton or company of Indians had their chief re 
sidence, and at fixed seasons the several neighbour 
ing cantons met by turns, partly for recreation 
and partly to make provison for the year. During 
these meetings all that came were at home, and had 
all things in common, and those who had enter 
tained their neighbours expected the like kind 
ness. 

Religion they had as little as can well be imagin 
ed. Some notions they had of a future state. A 
Mahometan paradise where they were to solace 
themselves in fruitful corn-fields and fine flowery 
meads, with pleasant rivers to bathe in ; curious 
wigwams provided for them without any labour 
of their own ; hunting, fowling, and fishing with 
out any weariness or pains to molest them ; but at 
the door was a snarling animal, who denied a 
peaceful entrance to all unworthy of it. This 
caused them to bury the bows and arrows of the 
deceased with their bodies, to affright or repel 
Cerberus, and good store of wampompag to pur 
chase some peculiar favours or privileges. Their 
enemies, and others unworthy the joys of Elysium, 
they consigned to an eternal habitation and place 
of torment. However cold some of their imagina 
tions might be, it is agreed that in general no peo 
ple had greater fears of death, as was evident by the 
distress and despair of the dying person, and the 
sighs and groans of the surviving parents or near 
friends, who mourned without hope. Idolatry 
there were no signs of among them. They ac 
knowledged a God, whom they mentioned by the 
word Ketan ; he gave them rain in time of drought, 
and fair weather after great rains. Upon him they 
had their first dependence for recovery from sick 
ness, but if he failed them they applied to their 
powows, which it is most likely brought upon 
them the charge of worshipping the devil. The 
pozuovss the English call their priests. We have 
many idle stories of the intercourse they had with 
the devil. Their craft was in danger from the 
preachers of the gospel, who condemned their 
cheats and juggles as diabolical, and they were 
great opposers of the gospel, and threatened the 
new converts with death and destruction, and many 
were so intimidated that the povcows were sup 



posed to have fascinated or bewitched them. Pas- 
saconaway, a great sagamore upon Merrimack 
river, was the most celebrated powow in the coun 
try : he made the Indians believe strange things ; 
that he could make water burn, rocks move, and 
trees dance, and metamorphose himself into a 
flaming man ; that in winter he could raise a green 
leaf out of the ashes of a dry one, and produce a 
living snake from the skin of a dead one. 

When the powow was sent for in any malady, 
after a hideous bellowing and groaning he made 
a stop, and all the auditors with one voice uttered 
a short note, and then the poizow renewed his 
roaring, smiting his naked breast and thighs, and 
jumping about until he foamed at the mouth. The 
patients were frequently cured of imaginary dis 
tempers by these ridiculous pranks, and such in 
stances of recovery worked upon the credulity of 
the Indians, so far as to make them suppose the 
powows could heal them and poison them when 
they pleased : the latter was the easiest, and it is 
not unlikely that they had enough of the devil in 
them to do ; t, in order to carry on the fraud and 
raise their characters. These poor deluded crea 
tures were soon convinced that the English medi 
cines had a healing virtue beyond all the charms 
of the powows. Some of them were jugglers, and 
without arriving to any great degree of perfection, 
they might raise the admiration of the generality 
of their blockish countrymen. However, the 
contemporaries of the aboriginals all say, that be 
sides the Ketan or their good spirit, they had 
some notions of an evil spirit, which is some 
times called Chepian, but generally Aboniocho y 
lord of those infernal regions to which they con 
signed their enemies. Mr. Mayhew, in a letter 
dated in 1650, relates a conversation between Hia- 
coomes, a Christian Indian, and Moyo.vco, a chief 
man of a place at the Vineyard. Moyoxco de 
manded how many gods the English worshiped, 
and being answered one, he reckoned up about 37 
principal gods he had ; " and shall I," said lie, 
" throw away these 37 gods for one ? * 

The Indians of Canada, according to Charle- 
voix, had an infinite number of genii or subaltern 
spirits, good and bad, who had their particular 
worship. Very circumstantial accounts have been 
published, by the French writers, of the religious 
rites and ceremonies of the n. Indians, their feasts 
and fasts, their priests, and even their nuns or 
vestal virgins ; which accounts have either been 
too easily received, or else the n. differed much 
from the more s. Indians, who, at best, gave them 
selves but liltleconcern upon any point of religion.] 
3*2 



492 



MASSACHUSETTS. 



[A deep inquiry into futurity could not consist with 
that indolent state of mind, which they made the 
sumrp.it of all happiness. An Indian convert dis 
coursing with Woosamaquin, the great sachem, he 
inquired of the convert, what worldly good thing s 
he had gained by his new religion ; and not re 
ceiving a satisfactory answer, gave himself no 
further thought about it. It is said, that upon the 
first proposals of religion to them, they generally 
made these three inquiries: 1. What earthly 
riches they should get? 2. What approbation 
they should have from other sagamores and go 
vernors ? 3. How they should come off from the 
poicows? 

Many people pleased themselves with a conjec 
ture, that the Indians in America were the de 
scendants of the ten tribes of Israel. There was as 
little affinity between the Indian and the Hebrew 
language, as bet ween the languages of any two nations 
upon the earth, and the New England Indians had 
no one custom peculiar to the Israelites, except that 
of the separation of the women on certain occa 
sions: this custom obtained among most of the 
nations upon the continent. The French speak of 
others, viz. that at certain repasts they never 
make use of knives ; now it is not probable they ever 
had any to use on any occasion, until they were 
brought to them from Europe, for they called the 
first English knifernen : they never broke the bones 
of the beasts they eat, and in some of their songs, 
it is said you might distinguish the word hallelu 
jah. One Captain Cromwell, a rich bucanier, 
who died at .Boston about 1646, assured Governor 
Dudley, that he had seen Indians to the s. circum 
cised : this increased the faith of many. The 
authors of the Universal History seem to have as 
little grounds for the conjecture, that the Indians 
are the posterity of the ancient Scythians, and that 
Massachusetts, a compound Indian word, might 
be derived from Masagetes. 

Our ancestors attempted to account for the first 
peopling America, consistent with the sacred his 
tory of the creation, but were obliged to leave the 
matter in the same uncertainty as all others have 
done who have since made the like attempt. 

The language of the Indians, from Piscataqua 
to Connecticut, was so nearly the same, that they 
could tolerably well converse together. It was 
observed, that without the greatest difficulty, they 
could not be brought to pronounce the le(ters L or 
II; for Lobster, they said Nobstan. The Tar- 
renteens sounded the It easily. Labials they used 
with freedom. It is observed of the ?. Indians, 
particularly the Six Nations, that they have no 



labials in all their language, and they and the 
Nipnets, who lived lit!lt&amp;gt; more than 100 miles from 
them, could not better understand one another than 
the English and Chinese. 

At the beginning, our planters promised them 
selves great things from the soil, and imagined 
they were rich, having the property of so great 
an extent of territory. The general court allov/ed 
no more than 200 acres of land in the first dividend, 
for 50/. sterling advanced for the plantation. A 
Mr. Johnson, in a will made in 1629, supposes 
his interest, as a proprietor, worth 600/. sterling ; 
but many years had not passed before an ingenious 
writer observed, that the planters had found by 
experience, that their improved lands were of no 
greater value (in many places not so great) than 
the labour and expence in subduing them. Several 
accounts of the opinions which at first prevailed, 
both of the soil and climate, have been preserved. 
Wood, a writer of a fertile imagination, who 
lived in the country four years, which, from some 
passages in his history, appear to have been be 
fore the year 1636, or the Pequod war, says, 
" The soil is, for the general, a warm kind of 
earth, there being little cold spewing land, no 
moorish fens, no quagmires ; the lowest grounds 
be the marshes, over which, every full and change, 
the sea flows ; these marshes be rich ground and 
bring plenty of hay, of which the cattle feed, and 
like as if they were fed with the best upland hay 
in New England, of which likewise there is great 
store, which grows commonly between the marshes 
and the woods. This meadow ground lies higher 
than the marshes, whereby it is freed from the 
overflowing of the seas, and besides this, in many 
places where the trees grow thin, there is good 
fodder to be got amongst the woods. There be 
likewise in divers places near the plantations great 
broad meadows, Avherein grow neither shrub nor 
tree, lying low, in which places grows as much 
grass as may be thrown out with a scythe, thick 
and long, as high as a man s middle, some as 
high as the shoulders, so that a good mower may 
cut three loads in a day. Many object this is but 
coarse fodder: true it is, that it, is not so fine to 
the eye as English grass, but being made into hay, 
the cattle eat it as well as ley-hay, and like as well 
with it. The worst that can be said against the 
meadow grounds is, that there is but little edish or 
after-pasture, which may proceed from the late 
mowing more than any thing else. For the more 
upland grounds, there be different kinds, in some 
places clay, some gravel, some a red sand, all 
which are covered with a black mould, in some] 



MASSACHUSETTS. 



493 



["places a foot deep, in others not so much. Such 
is thertinkness of the ground, that it must be sown 
the first year with Indian corn, which is a soaking 
grain, before it will be fit to receive English seed. 
For the natural soil, I prefer it before the counties 
ofSurry o" Middlesex, which, if they were not 
enriched with continual manurings, would be less 
fertile than the meanest grounds iu New England ; 
wherefore it is not impossible, nor much impro 
bable, that upon improvements the soil may be as 
good in time as England. If any man doubt of 
the goodness of the ground, let him comfort him 
self with the cheapness of it ; such bad land in 
England, 1 am sure, will bring in store of good 
money. There hath as good English corn grown 
there as can be desired, especially rye, oats, and 
barley : there hath been no great trial of wheat 
and beans, only thus much 1 affirm, that these two 
grains glow well in gardens." 

This author s account of the country is not 
unfavourable. An anonymous manuscript, which 
was sent to England in the beginning of the year 
1657, gives us a different idea. 

" The soil, it is for the nature of it, mixed ; the 
upland rather participates of sand than clay, yet 
our rye likes it not, an argument it is both cold 
and barren, yet I find some of it manured to yield 
some increase, but not to answer expectation ; the 
low lands are for the most part covered with un 
derwoods, the soil, which is a mixture of clay and 
sand, seems to have been fattened by the continual 
fall of leaves from the trees growing thereon. This 
soil is like your woodland in England, best at first, 
yet afterwards grows more barren. This raised 
the report of so rich a soil, but we that came after 
found, by dear experience, that affection not 
judgment was the author of it ; for after five or six 
years, it grows barren beyond belief : and whereas 
after the land in England proves fertile for grass, 
this yields none at all, but like the land about 
Dunstable puts on the face of winter in the time 
of summer. I do believe that if we had marl, lime, 
or other manure, this barrenness might, in part, 
be cured, but as yet, we are destitute of these sup 
plies. The natural coldness confutes the opinion 
of those who did conceive it to be originally fer 
tile, and experience confirms this to be true, for 
beans, millet, and fitches, and roots which delight 
in a cold soil, prosper here alike. For the pre 
sent, we make a shift to live, but hereafter when 
our numbers increase, and the fertility of the soil 
doth decrease, if Cod discover not means to en 
rich the land, what shall become of us 1 will not 
determine ; but it is probable, we must either dis 



band ourselves, like beasts straitened in their 
pasture, and so be liable to destruction from the 
natives, (I mean the Pequods), or else, continuing 
together, be made the subject of some fearful fa 
mine and the misery that accompanied) it. Hay 
we have here of the low lands, such as it is, which, 
in my opinion is inferior in goodness to our reed 
and sedge in England, for it is so devoid of nu 
tritive virtue, that our beasts grow lousy with 
feeding upon it, and are much out of heart and 
liking ; besides, it breeds among them sundry 
diseases which we know not how to cure. Some 
have learned to make better provision by burning 
the grass Avlien it is near ripe, and so suffering a 
new crop to spring out of the ashes of the old : 
this they cut down before it be half ripe, and 
make it into hay, but this proves like your after- 
. meath in old England, not fit to labour with, 
yielding a faint nourishment, which brings our 
cattle so low, and many times to diseases of which 
they hardly ever recover." 

A gentlewoman, a few years after, in another 
manuscript, sends the following account : u VV hen 
I remember the high commendations some have 
given of the place, and find it inferior to the re 
ports, I have thought the reason thereof to be this,, 
that they wrote surely in strawberry time. When 
I have thought again of the mean reports, and 
find it far better than those reports, I have fan 
cied the eyes of the writers were so fixed on their 
old English chimney tops, that the smoke put 
them out. The air of the country is sharp, the 
rocks many, the trees innumerable, the grass little, 
the winter cold, the summer hot, the gnats in &amp;gt;. 
summer biting, the wolves at midnight howling, &amp;c. 
Look upon it as it hath the means of grace, and if 
you please, you may call it a Canaari.-r-I perceive 
some among you have imagined they might en- 
large their estates by coming here, but I am taught 
that great men must look to be losers, unless they 
reckon that gain which, by the glorious means of 
lite, comes down from heaven. Men (by what I 
hear) of your rank and worth, will be welcome on 
New England s coasts; he only can advise you 
best,. who," &amp;c. &amp;c. 

Mr. Hubbard, whose manuscript history was 
wrote about 1680, could make a better judg 
ment. 

" As for the soil, it is, for the general, more 
mountainous and hilly than otherwise, and in many 
places very rocky and full of stones, yet inter 
mingled with many plains and valleys, some of 
which are sandy and inclinable to barrenness, es 
pecially those which abound with pitch pines,] 



494 



MASSACHUSETTS. 



["and there are many such, as likewise man y swamps 
or boggy places, full of small bushes and under 
woods. But here and there are many rich and 
fruitful spots of land, such as they call intervale 
land, in level and champaign grounds, that often 
times are overflown by the channels of water which 
run beside them, which is supposed to enrich thesoil 
that is so watered ; and thus also the fatness of the 
earth washed by the rains and melting of the snow 
from the surface of the higher parts of the country, 
is by those floods cast upon the levels which lie 
by the sides of those greater streams. In many 
such places, their land hath been known to be 
sown or planted full forty years together, without 
any considerable abatement of the crop, never 
failing of 30 or 40 bushels per acre. But for the 
generality of the soil, it is of a lighter sort of earth, 
whose fruitfulness is more beholden to the influence 
of the heavens, advantage of the season, skill and 
industry pf the tiller, than to the strength of its 
own temper. Such as came hither first upon dis 
covery, chanced to be here in the first part of the 
summer, when the earth was newly adorned with 
its best attire of herbs and flowers, flourishing with 
such early fruits as weather-beaten travellers are 
wont to refresh themselves with beholding ; as 
strawberries, gooseberries, rasberries, cherries, 
and whorts, as they observed who first landed 
about Martha s Vineyard, from whence they pro 
mised themselves and their successors a very flou 
rish ing country, as they did who landed first upon 
the coast of Florida. All sorts of grain sown in 
the spring, are found to grow pretty naturally 
here. The cold oftentimes proves so extreme 
as to kill that which is committed to the ground 
before winter." From these several accounts, 
some judgment may be made of the opinion our 
forefathers had formed of the country. Experience 
convinced many of them, that the value of the 
land when cleared would make but poor wages 
for their labour in clearing it. It is a happy 
thing that a fondness for freeholds to transmit to 
posterity, with privileges annexed to them, ex 
cited so many of the first planters of America to 
hard labour, and supported them under hard fare. 
A great part of this vast continent, filled with wild 
beasts and savage men scarcely superior to them, 
now affords the necessaries and conveniences of a 
civilized life, equal to the like tracts of improved 
country in other parts of the globe. History 
affords us no instance of so great improvements in 
so short a time. The same passion still continues, 
and affords a prospect of the like happy effect for 
ages yet to come. 



A natural history of the country would afford a 
volume of itself, and it is a work much wanted, 
and would entertain the curious. The botanical 
part would be very useful. 

In addition to what we have already said in 
regard to this article, we shall add a recapitula 
tion of the rise and progress of the Massachusetts 
colony, as containing facts intimately connected 
with other states, and such as cannot fail to be 
important to the politician and historian : we di 
vide these historical accounts into the following 
periods, viz. 

INDEX TO ADDITIONAL, HJSTOIIY CONCERNING 
MASSACHUSETTS. 

CHAP. I. The, history of the colony of Massa 
chusetts bay from the first settlement to the year 
1660. 

CHAP. II. Historical occurrences from the resto 
ration of King Charles the Second to the year 
1686, zohen the charter was vacated. 
CHAP. III. From the dissolution of the charter, 
1686, until the arrival of the promised charter 
in 1691. 
CHAP. IV. From the charter in 1691, until the 

arrival of Governor Dudley in 1702. 
CHAP. V. From the arrival of Governor Dud 
ley in 1702, to the arrival of Governor Shute 
in 1716. 

CHAP. VI. From the arrival of Governor Shute 
in 1716, to the arrival of Governor Belcher in 
1730. 

CHAP. VII. From the arrival of Governor Bel 
cher in 1730, to the reimbursement of the 
charge of the expedition against Cape Breton, 
and the abolition of paper money, in 1749. 
The succeeding history is incorporated with the 
information contained in the article UNITED 
STATES. 

CHAP. I. 

The history of the colony of Massachusetts bay 
from the first settlement until the year 1660. 
(Anno 1602.) The discovery of America by 
Columbus, and of the n. continent by the Cabots, 
in the 15th century, and the several voyages of 
English and French in the I6th, we pass over, 
and begin with the voyage made by Bartholomew 
Gosnold, an Englishman, in the year 1602, to 
that part of N. America since called New Eng 
land. It is not certain that any European had 
been there before. Hackbut mentions the land 
ing of some of Sir H. Gilbert s men upon some 
part of the continent; but it is probable, that 
was farther e. upon what is now called Nova] 



MASSACHUSETTS. 



495 



Gosnokl landed first on tlie e. coast, 
which he calls Mavoshen, in about 43 n. After 
some commerce with the natives lie sailed s. and 
landed upon one of the islands called Elizabeth 
Islands, a litle s. of cape Cod. He gave them 
that name in honour to Q. Elizabeth, who was 
living when he left England, and they have re 
tained it ever since. He built a fort, and intended 
a settlement upon the island, or the continent near 
it; but he could not persuade his people to remain 
there, and they all returned to England before 
winter. This, we suppose, is what Josselyn, and 
no other author, calls the first colony of New Ply 
mouth, for he says it was begun in 1602, and near 
Naraganset bay. 

In 1603, De Mo its obtained a patent from 
Henry IV. of France, for all the country, from 
the 40 to the 46, by the name of Cadie or Aca- 
dia. In 1601, De Monts ranged along the sea- 
coast from St. Lawrence to cape Cod, and to the 
s. of it. He went far up Kenuebeck river, and 
into divers other rivers, bays, and harbours. 
Champ observes, he did not go into the Massa 
chusetts bay, but struck over from some part of 
the e. shore to cape Ann, and so to cape Cod, and 
sailed futher s. 

In 1606, King James I. granted all the conti 
nent, from 34 to 45 ; which he divided into two 
colonies, viz. the s. or Virginia, to certain mer 
chants of London ; the n. or New England, to 
merchants of Plymouth. 

In 1607, some of tin; patentees of the n. colony 
began a settlement at Sagahedoc. They laid the 
plan of a great state. The president died the first 
winter, which was extremely cold. Sir John Pop- 
hum, his brother, the great promoter of the de 
sign, and Sir John Gilbert, the admiral s brother, 
died the same year in Europe ; and the next year, 
1&amp;08, the whole number which survived the winter 
returned to England. Their design of a planta 
tion was at an end. Both English and French 
continued their voyages to the coast, some for fish 
ing, and some for trade with the natives : and 
some feeble attempts were made by the French 
towards plantations, but they were routed by the 
English in 1613. There was no spirit in the 
people of either nation for colonizing. Favour-- 
able accounts were published of the continent by 
Capt. Smith and others; but who would remove 
and settle in so remote and uncultivated a part of 
the globe if he could live tolerably at home? The 
country would afford no immediate subsistence, 
arid therefore was not fit for indigent persons. Par 
ticular persons or companies would have been dis 
couraged from supporting a colony by the long- 



continued expence and outset, without any return. 
No encouragement could be expected from the 
public. The advantages of commerce from the 
colonies were not then foreseen, but have been 
since learned by experience. Virginia in its in 
fancy was struggling for life; and what its fate 
would have been, if the fathers of it in England 
had not seen the rise and growth of other colonies 
near it, is uncertain. Whether Britain would have 
had any colonies in America at this day, if reli 
gion had not been the grand inducement, is doubt 
ful. One hundred and twenty years had passed 
from the discovery of the n. continent by the 
Cabots, without any successful attempt. After 
repeated attempts had failed, it seems less probable 
that any should wish to engage in such an affair, 
than it would have been if no attempt had been 
.made. It is to the different views of religion 
which prevailed in those days that we must ascribe, 
if not the settlement, yet at least the present flou 
rishing state of N. America. Persecution drove 
one Mr. Robinson and his church from England 
to Holland, about the year 1608. They remained 
about a year at Amsterdam, and then removed to 
Leyden. In 1617, they began to think of removing* 
to America. They laid great stress upon their pe 
culiar tenets, but this did not lessen their regard to 
morality. The manners of the Dutch were too 
licentious for them. Their children left them ; 
some became soldiers, and others sailors, in the 
Dutch service. In a few years their posterity 
would have been Dutch, and their church extinct. 
They were at a loss whether to remove to Guay- 
ana, the fame of which part had been raised by 
Sir Walter Raleigh about this time, or to Vir 
ginia ; but the majority were in favour of the latter. 
The Dutch laboured to persuade them to go to 
Hudson s river, and settle under their W. India 
company ; but they had not lost their affection for 
the English, and chose to be under their govern 
ment and protection. They applied to the Vir 
ginia company for a patent for part of the country. 
To render it probable that their undertaking would 
not, like ill former, be abortive, they gave, among 
others, these special reasons: u That they were 
well weaned from the delicate milk of their mother 
country, and inured to the difficulties of a strange 
land. That they were knit together in a strict 
and sacred bond, by virtue of which they held 
themselves bound to take care of the good of each 
other, and of the whole. That it was not with 
them as with other men, whom small things could 
discourage, or small discontents cause to wish 
themselves at home again." The Virginia com 
pany were very much pleased with the applica-] 



496 



MASSACHUSETTS. 



[tion, and some of the chief of them addressed the 
king- to grant the petitioners liberty in religion, 
under the great seal ; but this was refused. lie pro 
mised to connive, and not molest them : but this 
would not do for them at that time. They laid 
aside the design for that year. 

In 1619, they renewed their application, and re 
solved to venture, though they could not have a 
special grant from the king of liberty of con 
science. They hoped their remote situation would 
put them out of danger of the ecclesiastical courts. 
The affairs of the Virginia company were in great 
confusion, and it was the latter end of the year 
before the patent was granted. It was taken out, 
under the company s seal, to John Wincob. He 
lived in the family of the Countess of Lincoln, and 
not removing with the rest, they never took any 
benefit from the patent. Mr. Weston and other 
merchants of London engaged, some to adventure 
their money, and some to go over with them. 
They therefore made the necessary preparations, 
and in July 1620 the principal of them went over 
to Southampton, where two ships were ready to 
take them on board. They sailed the beginning 
of August, but were obliged repeatedly to put 
back, and to leave one of their ships behind, with 
part of their company at last. They intended to 
have made for Hudson s river or the coast near to 
it ; but the Dutch had bribed their pilot, and he 
carried them farther n. so that they fell in about 
cape Cod, and arrived in that harbour the llth of 
November. The harbour is good, but the country 
is sandy and barren. This was discouraging, but 
it was too late in the year to put to sea again. They 
eoiistcd about in their boat, until they found a 
place more agreeable to them for a plantation, 
though not so good a harbour. Here they brought 
their ship, and determined to take up their abode. 
They gave it the name of New Plymouth. Cap 
tain Smith happened to give the name of Ply 
mouth to the same place, in 1614. A very cir 
cumstantial account of the beginning and progress 
of this colony, wrote by Mr. Edward Winslow, 
one of the principal undertakers, is to be found 
among Purchase s collections. 

The project of settling America revived again, 
and a new patent was granted, bearing date Nov. 
3, 1620; incorporating the adventures to the n. 
colony, by the name of the Council for the Affairs of 
New England ; the bounds of the country were 
expressed, between 40 and 48 . ; Sir Ferdinando 
Gorges and Captain John Mason were two of the 
most active members of this council. All the sea- 
coast, at one time or oilier, has been granted or 
pretended to be granted by this council, and some 



parts several times over, partly from defects in 
form in preceding grants, and partly from an ig 
norance of the geography of the country. 

(Anno 1622.) The" first grant, within the 
bounds of the Massachusetts, was obtained by Mr. 
Weston, who in the summer of 1662, sent over 
two ships with 50 or 60 men, to begin a plantation 
at Wessagusset, since called \Vcy mouth. They 
were sickly when they arrived, and received ne 
cessaries and refreshment from their neighbours at 
New Plymouth . They were a dissolute crew, soon 
brought themselves to poverty, then robbed the 
Indians, and offered other abuses to them. The 
Indians made their complaints to the co!ony of 
New Plymouth ; but the abuses continuing, the 
next year they laid a plot for the destruction of all 
Weston s company. It was this plantation which 
gave occasion to the author of Iludibras to make 
merry with New England in general, for hanging 
a bed-rid weaver, instead of a useful cobler. The 
above plot was discovered to the New Plymouth 
people, who sent some of their men and prevented 
the execution of it, by the surprisal of those who 
were to be the principal actors. Mr. Weston 
coming over to visit his plantation, Avas cast away 
in Ipswich bay, and stripped by the Indians of 
every thing but his shirt. Being thus rendered 
incapable of affording any relief to his colony, it 
came to an end, after one year s continuance. 

Captain Robert Gorges obtained a patent from 
the council of Ply mouth, dated December 13, 1622, 
10 miles in breadth, and 30 miles into the land, on 
the n. e. side of Massachusetts bay. This was 
loose and uncertain, and no use ever made of it. 
He was son to Sir Ferdinando, and employed by 
the council, in 1623, as lieutenant-general, to 
restrain interlopers and regulate all affairs. He 
made some attempts to revive Weston s planta 
tion, but returned home the same year, without 
success. Francis West came the same year as 
vice-admiral, but made no stay. The Earl of 
Warwick had a patent for Massachusetts bay 
about the same time, but the bounds are not 
known. 

In 1624. Lyford, the minister of New Ply 
mouth, and one John Oldhain, stirred up a faction 
there, and were banished that colony. They be 
gan a settlement at Nantasket. The same year, 
some persons belonging to Dorchester in England, 
sent, over fishermen, and made necessary provision 
for a fishery at cape Ann ; and Hoger Conaut, 
(several of whose descendants are remaining, 
some of distinction, in the colony of Connecticut), 
who with John Oldham had left Plymouth, and 
removed with the rest to Nantasket, was appointed] 



MASSACHUSETTS. 



49? 



[their overseer. A grant was made by one of the 
Gorges, it is not said which, to Oldham and 
others of part of Massachusetts bay, which occa 
sioned some dispute between them and the Massa 
chusetts grantees. 

In 1625, one Captain Wollaston, with about 
30 persons, began a plantation near Weston s. 
They gave it the name of Mount Wollaston. It 
was known by that name some years after, but at 
length the name was lost in that of Braintree, of 
which town it is a part. No mention is made of 
a patent to Wollaston. One Morton, of Furnival s 
inn, was of this company. He was not left in 
command, but contrived to make himself chief, 
changed the name of Mount Wollaston to Merry 
Mount, set all the servants free, erected a May 
pole, and lived a life of dissipation, until all the 
stock, intended for trade, was consumed. He 
was charged with furnishing the Indians with guns 
and ammunition, and teaching them the use of 
them. At length he made himself so obnoxious to 
the planters in all parts, that at their general de 
sire, the people of New Plymouth seized him by 
an armed force, and confined him until they had 
an opportunity of sending him to England. In 
the fall of 1626, Roger Conant and some, if not 
all, of his company removed from cape Ann to a 
neck of land upon Naumkeak river. We find 
mention made of planters at Winsimet about the 
same time, who probably removed there from 
some of the other plantations. This is all the ac 
count we have of any settlements, or attempts for 
settlements, in the Massachusetts bay, until the 
year 1627. Mr. White, the minister of Dorches 
ter, had encouraged Conant and his company to 
remain in New England, and promised them men, 
provisions, &amp;c. 

In 1627, March 19, the council of Plymouth 
sold to Sir Henry lloswell, Sir John Young, 
Thomas Southcoat, John Humphry, John Endi- 
cot, and Simon Whetcomb, who lived about 
Dorchester in England, their heirs and associates, 
all that part of New England, three miles to the 
s. of Charles river, and three miles to the n. of 
Merrimack river, from the Atlantic to the S. sea. 
All the lesser grants which have been mentioned 
within those limits (the settlement of the country 
being entirely neglected by the grantees) were, 
without doubt, looked upon to be forfeited or void. 
The conditions or tenor of none of them appear at 
this day. It is very likely the three persoas first 
named in this grant, had nothing more in view 
by the purchase than a settlement for trade with 
the imtives, or for fishery, or other advantageous 
purposes. As soon as the colony for religion was 

VOL. II. 



projected, we hear no more of them. The other 
three remained. Mr. White managed a treaty 
between Sir Richard Saltonstall, Matthew Cradock, 
and John Venn, Esquires, and divers others in 
and about London, and the original patentees. 
A purchase was made, and the same summer Mr. 
Endicot, (whose instructions were dated London, 
May 30, 1628), one of the original patentees, was 
sent over to Nanmkeak with planters and servants, 
and all the affairs of the colony committed to his 
care. The patent from the council of Plymouth 
gave a good right to the soil, but no powers of 
government. A royal charter was necessary. 
This passed the seals March 4, 1628. Matthew 
Cradock was appointed the first governor, and 
Thomas Goffe deputy governor. Two days be 
fore, March 2d, some affairs of the colony re 
quiring it, there had been a meeting of the com 
pany, at which both governor and deputy are 
named as such. The day for the annual election 
of officers by charter, being the last Wednesday 
in Easter term ; on the 13th of May 1628, Mr. 
Cradock was chosen governor by the company, 
and Mr. Goffe deputy governor, and Sir Richard 
SaUonstall, Isaac Johnson, Samuel Aldersey, 
John Venn, John Humfrey, Simon Whetcomb, 
Increase Nowell, Richard Perry, Nathaniel 
Wright, Samuel Vassal, Theophilus Eaton, Tho 
mas Adams, Thomas Hutch ins, George Fox- 
croft, William Vassal, William Pincheon, John 
Pocock, and Christopher Coulson, assistants. 
William Burgis was chosen secretary in the room 
of John Wash burne. At this court it was deter 
mined, that every one of the company, who had 
subscribed 50T. should have 200 acres of land 
assigned, and in proportion for a greater or lesser 
sum as the first dividend. The names of all the ad 
venturers and the sums subscribed were sent over 
to Mr. Endicot, who was appointed their governor 
in the plantation. A second embarkation 01 
planters and servants had been determined at a 
meeting, April 30, to be made with all speed. 
Four ministers were provided : three of them, 
Francis Higginson, Samuel Skelton, and Francis 
Bright, were readily accepted by the company, 
and had all due encouragement promised them ; 
the fourth, Ralph Smith, was required to give 
under his hand, that he would not exercise his 
ministry within the limits of the patent, without 
the express leave of the governor upon the spot. 
Five ships were provided for this embarkation. 
Mr. Higginson says in his journal, that he sailed 
from the isle of Wight the llth of May, and 
arrived at cape Ann the 27th of June, and at 
Naumkeag the 29th. They found at Naunikea&amp;lt;r] 
3s 



498 



MASSACHUSETTS. 



[about 100 planters, eight houses, besides a fair 
Louse built for Mr. Endicot. The old and new 
planters together were about 300, of which 100 
removed to Charlestown, where there was a house 
built; the rest remained at Salem. Mr. Endicot 
had corresponded with the settlers at Plymouth, 
who satisfied him that they were right in their 
judgments of the outward form of worship, being 
much like to that of the reformed churches in 
France, &amp;c. On the 20th of July, Mr. Higgin- 
son and Mr. Skelton, after fasting and prayer, 
were first elected by the company for their minis 
ters, the first, teacher, the other, pastor ; each of 
them, together with three or four grave members, 
laying their hands on the other, with solemn 
prayer. Nothing is said of any church being then 
formed ; but on the 6th of August, the day ap 
pointed for the choice and ordination of elders and 
deacons, 30 persons entered into a covenant in writ 
ing, which is said to be the beginning of the church, 
and that the ministers were ordained or instituted 
anew. The repetition of this form they probably 
thought necessary, because the people were not in 
a church state before. It is difficult to assign any 
other reason. Messengers or delegates, from the 
church of Plymouth, were expected to join with 
them, but contrary winds hindered them in their 
passage, so that they did not arrive until the after 
noon, but time enough to give the right hand of 
fellowship. Two of the company, John Brown, 
and Samuel Brown, one a lawyer, the other a mer 
chant, both men of good estates, and of the first 
patentees and of the council, were dissatisfied. 
They did not like that the common prayer and 
service of the church of England should be wholly 
laid aside, and therefore drew off, with as many as 
were of their sentiments, from the rest, and set up 
a separate society. This offended the governor, 
who caused the two members of his council to be 
brought before him ; and judging that this prac 
tice, together with some speeches they had ut 
tered, tended to sedition, he sent them back to 
England. The heads of the party being removed, 
the opposition ceased. 

Whilst these things were doing in the colony, 
the company in England were projecting a much 
larger embnrkation, and the transfer of the corpo 
ration itself from Old England to New. Several 
gentlemen of figure and estate, Isaac Johnson, 
John W r inthrop, Thomas Dudley, and divers 
others, who were dissatisfied with the arbitrary 
proceedings both in church and state, pleased 
themselves with the prospect of liberty in both, to 
be enjoyed in America, and proposed to the com 
pany at London to remove with their families ; bat 



upon this condition only, that the patent and 
charter should remove with them. This proposal 
was first communicated July the 28th, 1629. A 
committee tras appointed to consider of it, and to 
advise with counsel learned in the law, and to 
make report. The adventurers had been at great 
expence, without any returns made to them, and 
had no rational prospect of any profit from the 
plantations in the way they were in. The princi 
pal objection seems to have arisen from a doubt 
whether such a transfer was legal. The report of 
the committee is not recorded. Mr. White, a 
counseller at law, was one of the company, and 
great stress was laid upon his opinion ; and, on the 
9th of August, it was determined, by the general 
consent of the company, " that the government 
and patent should be settled in New England." It 
is evident from the charter, that the original design 
of it was to constitute a corporation in England, 
like to that of the East India and other great com 
panies, with powers to settle plantations within the 
limits of the territory, under such forms of govern 
ment and magistracy as should be fit and neces 
sary. The first step, in sending out Mr. Endicot, 
appointing him a council, giving him commission, 
instructions, &amp;c. was agreeable to this construc 
tion of the charter. 

In consequence of this new resolution, the mem 
bers of the corporation, which remained in Eng 
land, were to retain a share in the trading stock 
and the profits of it, for the term of seven years. 
The management of it was committed to five per 
sons, who were going over, viz. J. Winthrop, Sir 
Richard Saltonstall, I. Johnson, T. Dudley, and 
J. Revel, and to five who were to remain, M. 
Cradock, N. Wright, T. Eaton, T. Goffe, and 
J. Young ; and, at the expiration of the term, the 
stock, with the profits, was to be divided to each 
man, in proportion to his adventure. All other 
powers and privileges were to remain with the 
planters upon the spot. We have no account of 
any dividend ever made, nor indeed of any trade 
ever carried on for the company. There was an 
other article, "that one half the charge of forti 
fications and support of the ministers should be 
paid out of the joint stock," but no notice was 
taken of it in the colony. 

The 20th of October, at a general court of go 
vernor, deputy, and assistants, and the generality, 
a new choice was made of governor, &amp;c. consist 
ing of such persons as had determined to go over 
with the patent. John Winthrop was elected 
governor, John Humfrey deputy-governor, Sir 
Richard Saltonstall, Isaac Johnson, Thomas Dud 
ley, John Endicot, Increase Nowell, William Vas-} 



MASSACHUSETTS. 



499 



[sail, William Pynchon, Samuel Sharp, Edward 
Rossiter, Thomas SJiarp, John Revell, Mat hew 
Cradock, Thomas Goffe, Samuel Aldersey, John 
Venn, Nathaniel Wright, Thcophilus Eaton, and 
Thomas Adams, assistants. They did not all go 
over. From time to time, until the general em 
barkation, as any one declined, some other person 
was chosen in his stead. First, Roger Ludlow 
was chosen, instead of Samuel Sharp. Whilst 
they were at Southampton, (March 18, 1630), Sir 
Bryan Jansen, William Coddington, and Simon 
Bradstreet, were chosen in the room of Mr. Wright, 
Eaton, and Goffe, and yet Sir Bryan never came 
to New England. Even after they had embarked, 
at a court on board the Arabella, Mr. Dudley was 
chosen deputy-governor, in the room of Mr. Hum- 
frey who staid behind. It is not matter of wonder 
that they discovered so great want of resolution : 
It is strange that so many persevered. It shews 
some little fortitude, in a man in health and vigour, 
who goes through the fatigues of a long voyage, 
and spends even a few months in a wilderness, 
among savages, and in a climate more severe than 
he had ever experienced. What must we think, 
then, of persons of rank and good circumstances 
in life, bidding a final adieu to all the conveni- 
encies and delights of England, their native coun 
try, and exposing themselves, their wives and chil 
dren, to inevitable hardships and sufferings, in a 
long voyage across the Atlantic, to land upon a 
most inhospitable shore, destitute of any kind of 
building to secure them from the inclemency of 
the weather, and of most sorts of food to which 
they had been always used at their former home? 
The sickness and mortality which prevailed the 
first winter, they did not foresee. It is an obser 
vation, since made, that most parts of America 
have proved unhealthy (except where the country 
is cleared) until persons have had a seasoning in it. 

Eleven ships, which sailed from different ports 
in England, arrived in New England before the 
end of July. Six more arrived before the end of 
the year ; they brought above 1500 passengers. 
The Arabella, on board which was the governor 
and several of the assistants, left Yarmouth be 
tween the 7th and 10th of April. On the 7th the 
governor, and divers others on board, signed a 
paper directed to their brethren of the church of 
England, to remove suspicions or misconstructions, 
and to ask their prayers. This paper has occa 
sioned a dispute, whether the first settlers of the 
Massachusetts were of the church of England or 
not. However problematical it may be, what they 
were while they remained in England, they left no 
room for doubt after they arrived in America. 



The Arabella arrived at Salem the 12th of June. 
The common people immediately went ashore, and 
regaled themselves with strawberries, which are 
very fine in America, and were then in perfection. 
This might give them a favourable idea of the 
produce of the country, but the gentlemen met 
with enough to fill them with concern. The first 
news they had, was of a general conspiracy, a few 
months before, of all the Indians as far as Nara- 
ganset, to extirpate the English. Eighty persons, 
out of about 300, had died in the colony the winter 
before, and many of those that remained were in 
a weak sickly condition. There was not corn 
enough to have lasted above a fortnight, and all 
other provisions were very scant. They were 
obliged to give all the servants they had sent over, 
to the number of 180, their liberty, that they might 
shift for themselves, although they had cost from 
16 /. to 20 /. a head. They had not above three 
or four months to look out proper places for settle 
ments, and to provide shelter against the severity 
of the winter. With this prospect of difficulties, 
great enough for them to encounter, sickness began 
among (hem. Being destitute of necessary accom 
modations, they dropped away one after another ; 
and, among others, the lady Arabella, who, to use 
Mr. Hubbard s words, u came from a paradise of 
plenty and pleasure, in the family of a noble earl, 
into a wilderness of wants, and who although cele 
brated for her many virtues, yet was not able to 
encounter the adversity with which she was sur 
rounded, and, in about a month after her arrival, 
ended her days at Salem, where she first landed." 
Mr. Johnson, her husband, highly esteemed fop 
bjs piety and wisdom, overcome with grief, sur 
vived her a short time only, and died at Boston 
the 30th September, to the great loss of the colony. 
Mr. Rossiter, another of the assistants, died soon 
after. Before December they had lost 200 of their 
number, including a few who died upon their pas 
sage. 

The governor and some of the principal persons 
left Salem the 17th of June, and travelled through 
the woods to Charlestown, about 20 miles, to look 
out for a convenient place for their chief town, 
which they had determined should be in some part 
of the bay or harbour between Nantasket and 
Cambridge. At first, they pitched upon the n. 
side of Charles river, or rather n. w. by the major 
voice ; but a number of the principal gentlemen 
having fixed their cottages (shelters intended for 
one winter only) upon the opposite side of the 
river, the governor and most of the assistants re 
moved to them in November. They were, how 
ever, undetermined where to build in the spring.] 
3 s 2 



500 



MASSACHUSETTS. 



[A fortified town, at least palisadoed, was thought 
necessary to defend them against the natives, and 
they could not agree upon the most convenient 
place for that purpose. 

They found, when they arrived, a few families 
scattered about in several parts of the bay. Mr. 
Maverick, who will often appear in the course of 
this history, lived upon Noddle s island, a grant 
or confirmation of which he afterwards obtained 
from the court. He had built a small fort, and 
had four cannon mounted there. At a point upon 
Shawmut or Trimontaine, since Boston, lived Mr. 
Blaxton, who had left England, being dissatisfied 
there, and not a thorough conformist ; but he was 
more dissatisfied with the nonconformity of the new 
comers. He told them, he came from England 
because he did not like the lords bishops, but he 
could not join with them because he did not like 
the lords brethren. He claimed the whole pen 
insula upon which Boston is built, because he was 
the first that slept upon it. He had a grant of a 
very handsome lot there at these?, part of the town, 
but he chose to quit all, and removed to the 5. at or 
near what is since called Providence, where he 
lived to old age. There were also several families 
at Mattapan, since called Dorchester, or rather 
Dorchester Neck : here Mr. Ludlow and Mr. Ros- 
siter pitched their abodes, with two ministers, Mr. 
Warham and Mr. Maverick. On the n. of Charles 
river (Charlestown) were the remains of those who 
had moved the last year from Salem ; here Mr. 
iNowell and some of kis friends made their pitch, 
but considered themselves and Boston, at first, as 
but one settlement and one church, with Mr. Wil 
son for their minister. When he went to England 
in the spring, Charlestown became a distinct church 
and town, and took Mr. James for their minister. 
Sir Richard Saltonstall chose a place some miles 
up Charles river, which has taken the name of 
Watertown ; his company took Mr. Phillips -for 
their minister. Mr. Pynchon was at the head of 
another company, who settled between Dorchester 
and Boston. Their town took the name of Rox- 
bury. They had Mr. Elliot for their minister. 
Medford and Mistick were then distinct places, 
though not so at present. At Medford, which we 
take to have been a small village at the lower part 
of Mistick river, now called Neck-of-Land, where 
a creek also ran into Charles river, it was intended 
a settlement should be made for Mr. Cradock and 
the people he was sending and had sent over. 
Here, by his agents, he built several vessels of 
burden. At these several places, together with 
Salem, the whole company were settled for the 
first winter. They had little time enough to pro- 

2 



vide their huts. As soon as December came, their 
out-door work was over. On the 6th of Decem 
ber, the governor and assistants met-j and agreed to 
fortify the neck between Boston and Roxbtiry, and 
orders were given tor preparing the materials ; but 
at another meeting, on the 21st, they laid that de 
sign aside, and agreed on a place, (first called 
Newtovvn, since Cambridge), about three miles 
above Charlestown, and most of them engaged to 
build houses there the next year. The weather 
held tolerable until the 2-lth of December, but the 
cold then came on with violence. Such a Christ 
mas eve they had never seen before. From that 
time to the 10th of February, their chief care was 
to keep themselves warm, and as comfortable in 
other respects as their scant provisions would per 
mit. The poorer sort were much exposed, lying 
in tents and miserable hovels, and many died of 
the scurvy and other distempers. They were so 
short of provisions, that many were obliged to live 
upon clams, mussels, and other shell-fish, with 
ground-nuts and acorns instead of bread. One, 
coming to the governor s house to complain of his 
sufferings, was prevented, being informed that, 
even there, the last batch was in the oven. Some 
instances are mentioned of great calmness arid re 
signation in this distress. A good man, who had 
asked his neighbour to a dish of clams, after dinner 
returned thanks to God who had given them to 
suck of the abundance of the seas, and of treasure 
hid in the sands. They had appointed the 22d of 
February for a fast, but on the 5tb, to their great 
joy, the ship Lyon, Captain Pierce, one of the last 
year s fleet, returned laden with provisions from 
England, which were distributed according to the 
necessities of the people. They turned their fast 
into a thanksgiving. 

In the spring of 1631, they pursued their design 
of a fortified town at Newtown. The governor 
set up the frame of a house ; the deputy governor 
finished his house and removed his family. About 
this time, Chicketawbut, the chief of the Indians 
near Boston, came to visit the governor, and made 
high professions of friendship. The apprehensions 
of danger lessened by degrees, the design of a 
fortified town went off in the same proportion, until 
it was wholly laid aside. The governor took down 
his frame and carried it to Boston. Mr. Dudley 
the deputy was offended, and persisted for some 
time in his first determination of residing at New- 
town, but at length removed to Roxbury. 

This scheme of a fortified town was well enough 
while they were uncertain what the temper of the 
natives would be. Their design was to make 
improvements, and to extend their settlements in] 



MASSACHUSETTS. 



501 



[the several parts of the country. Unless they were 
upon such terms with the Indians, that they could 
do this with safety, the colony could not long 
subsist. If (hey were upon such terms, fortified 
towns were unnecessary. 

The high price of provisions this year in Eng 
land impoverished the colony. Every bushel of 
.wheat meal cost, including the freight, J 45. ster 
ling ; every bushel of peas 10s. ; and Indian corn, 
imported from Virginia, sold at 10s. Some were 
discouraged and returned to England, viz. Sir 
Richard Saltonstall, Thomas Sharpe, &amp;c. and 
never came back ; but others, in hopes of better 
times, went over to fetch their families and return 
ed with them, viz. Mr. Wilson, Coddington, &amp;c. 
They went in the Lyon, which brought their 
supply. In the same ship, Sir Christopher 
Gardiner Mas sent home under confinement. He 
was a knight of the sepulchre, but concealed his 
true character, and came over last year under 
pretence of separating himself from the world, and 
living a life of retirement and devotion. He offered 
to join to several of the churches, but he was 
suspected to be an immoral man, and not received. 
He had a comely young woman, who travelled 
with him. He called her his cousin. For some 
miscarriages in the Massachusetts, he fled to the 
Indians. They carried him to Plymouth, having 
first used him pretty roughly. From thence he was 
sent to Boston. Hejoined afterwards with Gorges, 
Mason, and others, in complaints against the 
colony. 

Mr. Wilson left the church on the s. side of the 
river without a minister. At his parting he 
recommended them to the care of the governor, 
deputy governor, and other godly and able Chris 
tians, to carry on the worship of God, on the 
Lord s day, by prophesying until his return. 

So much of their attention was necessary in 
order to provide for their support, that little 
business was done by the assistants or by the 
general court. The removal of the charter made 
many new regulations necessary, which were settled 
by degrees. The first court of assistants was at 
Chariest own, August 23d, about two months after 
their arrival. A beadle, a corporation officer, 
was appointed. It was then ordered, that the 
governor and deputy for the time being should be 
justices of the peace ; four of the then assistants 
were also appointed justices. All justices whatso 
ever were to have the same power, for reformation 
of abuses and punishing offenders, which justices 
have in England, but no corporal punishment to be 
inflicted, except by an assistant. In high offences, 
the governor and assistants sat as a court, as well as iu 



civil matters. There was a triai by a jury this year 
for murder, and the person charged was acquitted. 
The first general court was held the 19th of October, 
not by a representative, but by every one that 
was free of the corporation, in person. None had 
been admitted freemen since they left England. 
The governor and assistants had a great influence 
over the court. It was ordered that for the future, 
the freemen should choose the assistants, and the 
assistants, from among themselves, choose ( he gover 
nor and deputy governor. The court of assistants 
were to have the power of making laws and ap 
pointing officers. This was a departure from 
their charter. One hundred and nine freemen 
were admitted at this court. Maverick, Blackstone, 
and many more who were not oi any of the churches, 
were of this number. This was all that was trans 
acted, that was any thing material, the first year. 
The next general court was the court of election 
for 1631. The scale was now turned, and the 
freemen resolved to choose both governor, deputy, 
and assistants, notwithstanding the former vote, 
and made an order, that, for the time to come, 
none should be admitted to the freedom of the body 
politic but such as were church members. 

This was a most extraordinary order or law, and 
yet it continued in force until the dissolution of 
the government, it being repealed in appear 
ance only, after the restoration of King Charles 
II. Had they been deprived of their civil privi 
leges in England by an act of parliament, unless 
they would join in communion with the churches 
there, it might very well have been the first in the 
roll of grievances. But such were the requisites 
to qualify for church membership here, that the 
grievance was abundantly greater. 

The scarcity of the former year excited the inha 
bitants to make the greater improvements, by tillage, 
as soon as the spring advanced, and it pleased God 
togive them such favourable seasons,that they had 
a very plentiful harvest; and Indian corn, which 
could not be purchased with money the year before, 
at the end of this year was made a tender in 
discharge of all debts, except money or beaver had 
been specially agreed for. Cattle were extremely 
dear, a great part of what had been shipped from 
England being dead, and a milk cow was valued 
at 25/. to 301. sterling. 

The same governor and deputy governor, and 
such of the assistants of 1630 as were living and in 
the colony, were re-elected for the year 1631. They 
continued to make the same choice for 1632, with 
the addition of Mr. John Humfrey, who had been 
deputy governor in England, but was prevented 
coming the first year, and John Winthrop, jun.] 



502 



MASSACHUSETTS. 



[the governor s eldest s6n, who, with his wife, 
mother, and some others of the family, arrived in 
October the year before. They were frequently 
alarmed this year by the Indians, which put them 
into confusion ; happy for them, that in this their 
feeble infant state they were only alarmed. A 
company of e. Indians, called Tarretines, about 
JlOO in number, assaulted the wigwams of the 
sagamore of Agawam. They came by water in 
30 canoes, slew seven Indians, and wounded two 
sagamores who lived near Boston, and carried 
away captives one of their wives with divers other 
Indians. The governor likewise received advice 
from the governor of Plymouth of a broil between 
some English of that colony and some of the 
Naraganset Indians, who set upon the English 
house at Sowam ; also of motions made by the 
Pequods, which caused the Dutch governor of 
Manhadoes to give notice to the English to be 
upon their guard. A shallop belonging to Dor 
chester having been missing all the winter, it 
appeared this summer, that the crew, consisting of 
five men, had been secretly murdered by the 
e. Indians. However, the sagamores near Bos 
ton made professions of friendship ; and on the 
5th of August this year, Miantinomo, one of the 
great sachems of the Naragansets, the most nume 
rous of all the Indians between Boston and Hud 
son s river, came down to Boston, whether out of 
fear or love they could not tell, to enter into a 
league of friendship with the colony. He and 
his followers were invited to attend the public 
worship, but three of them withdrew in sermon 
time, and to satify their hunger, broke into an 
English house to get victuals. The sagamore, 
who was a very high-spirited fellow, could hardly 
be persuaded to order them any corporal punish 
ment ; but he was so ashamed of his attendants, 
that he ordered them out of town, and followed 
them himself soon after. 

The French also occasioned some uneasy appre 
hensions. They had been driven from Accady 
by Sir Samuel Argall in 1613. The people of 
New Plymouth had set up a trading house at 
Penobscot about the year 1627. Intelligence 
was brought this year to the Massachuscts, that 
in 1630 or 1631 Sir William Alexander had sold 
the country of Nova Scotia to the French, and that 
the fort, with all the ammunition and stores, was 
delivered to them ; that Cardinal Richlieu had 
ordered some companies there, and that more were 
expected the next year with priests, Jesuits, &amp;c. 
This news alarmed the governor and council, and 
put them upon consultations for their defence. 
They determined to finish a fort which was begun 



at Boston, to build another at Nantasket, and to 
hasten the settlement of Agawam, (Ipswich), it 
being one of the best places both for pasture and 
tillage, lest an enemy should take possession and 
prevent them. Mr. Winthrop, the governor s son, 
was accordingly sent to begin a plantation there. 

It appears that their apprehensions of the French 
designs, to take possession of some part or other of 
the coast, were not ill founded ; for they sent a 
ship this year to Penobscot, as a pelude to what 
was to come after. Governor Bradford of Ply 
mouth gives this account of it. " This year the 
house at Penobscot is robbed by the French in this 
manner : while the master of the house, and part of 
the company with him, is come with one vessel to 
the westward to fetch a supply of goods brought 
over for us, a small French vessel, having a false 
Scot aboard, goes into the harbour, pretends they 
are newly come from sea, knows not where they 
are, that the vessel is very leaky, and desires they 
may haul her ashore, and stop her leaks, making 
many French compliments and congees : and see 
ing but three or four simple men who are servants, 
and by the Scotchman understanding the master 
and the rest of the company are gone from homej 
fall to commending the guns and muskets which 
lie on the racks by the wall-side, take them down 
to look on them, asking if they were charged, and 
when possessed of them, one presents a loaded 
piece against the servants, another a pistol ; they 
bid them not to stir but deliver the goods, and 
made them help in carrying them all aboard, to the 
value of 400 or 500 pounds sterling, prime cost, 
300 weight of beaver, the rest in trading goods, as 
coats, rugs, blankets, &amp;c. then set the servants at 
liberty, and go away with this taunting message, 
" Tell your master when he returns, that some of 
the isle of Rhee gentlemen have been here." 

It appears that the Massachusetts people took 
possession of the country at a very critical time. 
Richlieu, in all probability, would have planted 
his colony nearer the SUH, if he could have found 
any place vacant. De Monts and company had 
acquired a thorough knowledge of all the coast 
from cape Sables beyond cape Cod in 1CG4 ; in 
deed it does not appear that they then went round 
or to the bottom of Massachusetts bay. Had they 
once gained footing there, they would have pre 
vented the English. The Frenchified court of 
King Charles I. would, at the treaty of St. Ger- 
mains, have given up any claim to Massachusetts 
bay us readily as they did to Acadia ; for the 
French could make out no better title to Penobs 
cot, and the other parts of Acadia, than they could 
to Massachusetts. The little plantation at New] 



MASSACHUSETTS, 



503 



[Plymouth would have been no greater bar to the 
French in one place than in the other. The 
Dutch the next year would have quietly possessed 
themselves of Connecticut river, unless the French, 
instead of the English, had prevented them. 
Whether the people of either nation would have 
persevered is uncertain. If they had done it, the 
late contest for the dominion of N. America would 
have been between France and Holland, and the 
commerce of England would have borne a very 
different proportion to that of the rest of Europe 
from what it did. 

The new settlers were in perils also from their 
own countrymen. Sir Ferdinando Gorges, and 
Captain Mason, two of the council of Plymouth, 
who with a view to the advancement of their for 
tunes had expended large sums to little purpose 
in attempts to settle colonies in New England, be 
held the Massachusetts with an envious eye. They 
intended for themselves all that part of the colony 
which lies to the e. of Naumkeag. Gardiner and 
Morton, to revenge the affronts they had received, 
joined with them in a complaint to the king in 
council against the colony. At this time they 
failed of success, and an order was made in council, 
19th of January 1632, " declaring the fair ap 
pearances and great hopes which there then were, 
that the country would prove beneficial to the 
kingdom, as well as profitable to the particular 
persons concerned ; and that the adventurers might 
be assured, that if things should be carried on as 
was pretended when the patents were granted, and 
according as by the patent is appointed, his Ma 
jesty would not only maintain the liberties and 
privileges heretofore granted, but supply any thing 
further which might tend to the good government, 
prosperity, and comfort of the people there." 

In the year 1633, the people still continued the 
administration of government in the same hands. 
Fresh supplies of inhabitants had been brought 
from England, from time to time, in the course of 
the two former years, but there were many who 
were willing to see the success of the first adven 
turers before they embarked themselves. The re 
ports carried over were very encouraging, so that 
this year there was a very great addition made, 
ships arriving all summer, in some months twelve 
or fourteen in a month ; an exportation so great 
and of such sort of persons, that it produced the 
following order of the king in council, Feb. 21st, 
1633. 

" Whereas the board is given to understand of 
the frequent transportation of great numbers of 
his Majesty s subjects out of this kingdom, to the 
plantation of New England, among whom divers 



persons known to be ill affected, discontented not 
only with civil but ecclesiastical government here, 
are observed to resort thither, whereby such con 
fusion and distraction is already grown there, espe 
cially in point of religion, as, beside the ruin of 
the said plantation, cannot but highly tend to the 
scandal both of church and state here. And 
whereas it was informed in particular, that there 
are at this present divers ships in the river of 
Thames ready to set sail thither, freighted with 
passengers and provisions ; it is thought fit and 
ordered, that stay should be forthwith made of the 
said ships until further order from this board : And 
the several masters and freighters of the same 
should attend the board, on Wednesday next in 
the afternoon, with a list of the passengers and pro 
visions in feach ship: And that Mr. Cradock, a 
chief adventurer in that plantation, now present be 
fore the board, should be required to cause the 
letters patent for the said plantation to be brought 
to this board." (Hubbard.) 

Mr. Hubbard says, that this order was the effect 
of a new complaint preferred by Gardiner, Morton, 
and others, of their hardships and sufferings from 
the severity of the government, and that such of 
the company as were in England were called be 
fore the committee of council, and delivered an 
answer in writing, and that upon reading thereof, 
it pleased God so to work with the Lords of the 
council and afterwards wilh the king s Majesty, 
that when the whole matter was reported to him by 
Sir Thomas Jerrnayne (one of the council who had 
been present at the three days of hearing, and 
spake much in commendation of the governor, 
both to the Lords and after to his Majesty), the 
king said, he would have such severely punished 
as should abuse his governor and the plantation, 
and the defendants were dismissed, with a favour 
able order for their encouragement ; being assured, 
from some of the council, that his Majesty did not 
intend to impose the ceremonies of the church of 
England upon them, for that it was considered, it 
was for the sake of freedom from those things that 
people went over thither. It is certain, a stop was 
not put to the emigration. There came over, 
amongst many others in this year, 1633, Mr. 
Haynes of the civil order, Mr. Cotton, Mr. Hooker, 
and Mr. Stone, three of the most famous men of 
the religious order. Mr. Cotton is supposed to 
have been more instrumental in the settlement of 
their civil as well as ecclesiastical polity, than any 
other person. The church of Boston, by advice of 
the governor and council and of the elders in the 
colony, received him for their teacher; to which 
office he was ordained the 17th of October. Mr.] 



50* 



MASSACHUSETTS. 



[Thomas Leverett, an ancient member of Mr. Cot 
ton s church in England, was at the same time 
ordained a ruling elder. The circumstances and 
order of proceeding, in Mr. Cotton s ordination, 
were intended as a precedent, and the Congrega 
tional churches in New England have generally 
conformed thereto ever since. Mr. Hooker and 
Mr. Stone, with their friends, settled at Newtowa 
(Cambridge). 

In the year 1634, they thought proper to give 
their governor some respite, Mr. Dudley being 
chosen in his stead, and Roger Ludlow deputy go 
vernor. 

Mr. Haynes, who had lately come over, was 
chosen 1o the place of assistant. The governor 
and assistants kept the powers of government, 
both legislative and executive, very much in their 
hands the three first years. The people began to 
grow uneasy, and the number of freemen being 
greatly multiplied, an alteration of the constitution 
seems to have been agreed upon or fallen into by a 
general consent of the towns ; for at a general court 
for elections in 1G34, 24 of the principal inhabi 
tants appeared as the representatives of the body of 
freemen, and before they proceeded to the election 
of magistrates, the people asserted their right to a 
greater share in the government than had hitherto 
been allowed them, and resolved, " That none 
but the general court had power to make and esta 
blish laws, or to elect and appoint officers, as go 
vernor, deputy governor, assistants, treasurer, se 
cretary, captains, lieutenants, ensigns, or any of 
like moment, or to remove such upon misdemean 
our, or to set out the duties and powers of these 
officers : That none but the general court hath 
power to raise moneys and taxes, and to dispose of 
lands, viz. to give and confirm proprieties." After 
these resolutions, they proceeded to the election of 
magistrates. Then they further determined, 
" That there shall be four general courts held 
yearly, to be summoned by the governor for the 
time being, and not to be dissolved without the 
consent of the major part of the court : That it 
shall be lawful for the freemen of each plantation 
to choose two or throe before every general court, 
to confer of and prepare such business as by them 
shall be thought fit to consider of at the next court ; 
and that such persons as shall be hereafter so de 
puted by the freemen of the several plantations to 
deal in their behalf in the affairs of the common 
wealth, shall have the full power and voices of all 
the said freemen derived to them for the making 
and establishing of laws, granting of lands, &amp;c. 
and to deal in all other affairs of the common 
wealth, wherein the freemen have to do, the mat 



ter of election of magistrates and other officers only 
exccpted, wherein every freeman is to give his 
own voice." And to shew their resentment, they 
imposed a fine upon the court of assistants for 
going contrary to an order of the general court. 
(Massachusetts Records.) 

The freemen were so increased, that it was im 
practicable to debate and determine matters in a 
body ; it was besides unsafe, on account of the In 
dians, and prejudicial to their private affairs, to be 
so long absent from their families and business ; so 
that this representative body was a thing of neces 
sity, but no provision had been made for it iii their 
charter. 

Thus they settled the legislative body, which, 
except an alteration of the number of general courts, 
which were soon reduced to two only in a year, 
and other not very material circumstances, con 
tinued the same as long as the charter lasted. This 
we suppose was the second house of representatives 
in any of the colonies. There was, as has been ob 
served, no express provision for it in the charter ; 
thev/ supposed the natural rights of Englishmen, 
reserved to them, implied it. In Virginia, a house 
of burgesses met first in May 1620. The govern 
ment in every colony, like that of the colonies of 
old Rome, may be considered as the ejfigies parva 
of the mother state. 

There was great disturbance in the colony this 
year, occasioned by Roger Williams, minister of 
Salem. He had been three or four years at Ply 
mouth, and for some time was well esteemed, but 
at length advanced divers singular opinions, in. 
which he did not meet with a concurrence, where 
upon he desired a dismission to the church of Sa 
lem, which was granted him. That church had 
invited him, upon his first coming to New Eng 
land ; but the governor and council interposed 
with their advice, and prevented his settlement at 
that time. He had refused to join in communion 
with the church at Boston, because they would not 
make a public declaration of their repentance for 
holding communion with the church of England 
whilst they lived there. He was charged with 
divers exceptionable tenets, as " that it is not law 
ful for a godly man to have communion in family 
prayer, or in an oath, with such as they judge un- 
regenerate, and therefore he refused the oath of 
fidelity and taught others so to do; that it is not 
lawful for an unregenerate man to pray ; that the 
magistrate has nothing to do in matters of the first 
table :" another tenet is added, which ought not to 
have been ranked with the former, viz. " that to 
punish a man for any matters of his conscience is 
persecution." The magistrates sent a second time] 



MASSACHUSETTS. 



505 



[to the church of Salem to desire them to forbear 
calling him to office, but they refused to hearken 
to their advice, and proceeded to ordain him, Mr. 
Skelion, their former minister, dying a little before. 
Mr. Williams caused the church of Salem to send 
their letters of admonition to the church at Boston, 
and to several other churches, accusing the ma 
gistrates which were members of them, of divers 
heinous offences, would admit no church to be 
pure but the church of Salem ; but at length, be 
cause the members of that church would not se 
parate not only from all the churches in Old Eng 
land, but from all in New England also, he se 
parated from them ; and to make complete work 
of it, he separated from his own wife, and would 
neither ask a blessing nor give thanks at his meals 
if his wife was present, because she attended the 
public worship in the church of Salern. (Hub- 
bard.) But what gave just occasion to the civil 
power to interpose, was his influencing Mr. Endi- 
col, one of the magistrates and a member of his 
church, to cut the cross out of the king s colours, 
as being a relic of antichristian superstition. A 
writer of the history of those times questions whe 
ther his zeal would have carried him so far, as to 
refuse to receive the king s coin because of the 
cross upon it. Endeavours were used to reclaim 
him, but to no purpose, and at length he was ba 
nished the jurisdiction. He removed to the s. to 
look out for a new settlement among the Indians, 
and fixed upon a place called by them Moshaw- 
sick, but by him Providence. After all that has 
been said of the actions or tenets of this person 
while he was in the Massachusetts, it ought for 
ever to be remembered to his honour, that for 
forty years after, instead of shewing any revenge 
ful resentment against the colony from which he 
had been banished, he seems to have been con 
tinually employed in acts of kindness and benevo 
lence, giving them notice from time to time, not 
only of every motion of the Indians, over whom he 
had very great influence, but also of the unjust de 
signs of the English within the new colony, of 
which he himself had been the founder and go 
vernor, and continued the patron. 

Mr. Endicot was sentenced by the court, " for 
his rashness, uncharitableness, indiscretion, and 
exceeding the limits of his commission, to be sadly 
admonished, and also disabled for bearing any 
office in the commonwealth for the space of a year 
next ensuing." He protested against the proceed 
ing of the court, and an order passed for his com 
mitment, but upon his submission he was dis 
missed. 

Mr. Winthrop s conduct had been such, from 

VOL. II. 



his first associating with the company in England 
until his being dropped this year from his place of 
governor, that unless the ostracism of the ancient 
Greeks had been revived in this new common 
wealth, it was reasonable to expect that he should 
be out of all danger of so much as the least thought 
to his prejudice, and yet he had a little taste of 
what, in many other popular governments, their 
greatest benefactors have taken a large portion. 
After he was out of the chair, he was questioned 
in such a manner, as appears to have been dis 
agreeable to him, concerning his receipts and dis 
bursements for the public during his administra 
tion. Having discharged himself with great ho 
nour, he concludes his declaration and account in 
these words. 

" In all these things which I offer, 1 refer my 
self to the wisdom and justice of the court, with 
this protestation, that it repenteth me not of my 
cost or labour bestowed in the service of this com 
monwealth, but do heartily bless the Lord our 
God, that he hath pleased to honour me so far, as 
to call for any thing he hath bestowed upon me 
for the service of his church and people here, the 
prosperity whereof and his gracious acceptance 
shall be an abundant recompence to me. 

" I conclude with this one request (which injus 
tice may not be denied me) that as it stands upon 
record, that upon the discharge of my office I was 
called to account, so this my declaration may be 
recorded also, lest hereafter, when I shall be for 
gotten, some blemish may lie upon my posterity, 
when there shall be nothing to clear it. 

Sept. 4, 1634. JOHN WINTHROP." 

In the year 1635, there was a great addition 
made to the numbers of inhabitants ; among others 
Mr. Vane, afterwards Sir Henry Vane, was ad 
mitted to the freedom of the colony on the 3d of 
March ; and at the same time Mr. Harlakenden, a 
gentleman of good family and estate. There were 
many others, as Mr. Bellingham, Mr. Dummer, of 
the magistrates ; Mr. R. Mather, Mr. Norton, Air. 
Shepard, and Mr. Peters, of the ministers, who 
came over in this and the last year, determined to 
take up their abode ; and many other persons of 
figure and distinction were expected to come over, 
some of which are said to have been prevented by 
express order of the king, as Mr. Pym, Mr. Hamp- 
den, Sir Arthur Haslerigg, Oliver Cromwell, &amp;c. 
We know this is questioned by some authors, but 
it appears plainly by a letter from Lord Say and 
Seal to Mr. Vane, and a letter from Mr, Cotton to 
the same nobleman, as we take it, though his name 
is not mentioned, and an answer to certain de 
mands made by him, that his Lordship himself] 
3x 



506 



MASSACHUSETTS. 



[and Lord Brooke and others were not without 
thoughts of removing (o New England, and that 
several other persons of quality were in treaty 
about their removal also, but undetermined whe 
ther to join the Massachusetts or to settle a new 
colony. By the charter, the number of assistants 
might be 18, but hitherto they had chosen a less 
number, from six to nine, which left room, as any 
gentleman of distinction came over, to admit him 
to a share in the government without leaving out 
any of the former assistants. 

Jt appears by the demands just mentioned, that 
some of the nobility and principal commoners of 
that day had, what appears at this day to be very 
strange, apprehensions of the relation they should 
stand in to Great Britain, after their removal to 
America. Many of the proposals were such, as 
imply that they thought themselves at full liberty, 
without any charter from the crown, to establish 
such sort of government as they thought proper, 
and to form a new state as fully to all intents and 
purposes as if they had been in a state of nature, 
and were making their first entrance into civil so 
ciety. The importance of the colonies to the na 
tion was not fully understood and considered. 
Perhaps the party which then prevailed in Eng 
land, would have been content to have been rid of 
the heads of what was deemed a faction in the go 
vernment, and to have had no further connection 
with them. Be that as it may, this sentiment, in 
persons of luch figure and distinction, will in a 
great measure excuse the same mistake which will 
appear to have been made by our first settlers, in 
many instances in the course of our history. The 
answer made to the demands seems not to have 
been satisfactory, for these lords and gentlemen, soon 
after, again turned their thoughts to Connecticut, 
where they were expected to arrive every year, 
until after 1640. 

Mr. Haynes was chosen governor for this year, 
and Mr. Belli ngham deputy governor ; Mr. Dum- 
iner and Mr. Haugh were added to the assistants. 
The inhabitants of the plantation being so much 
increased, found it difficult to pitch upon con 
venient places for settlements. Mr. Hooker and 
Mr. Cotton were deservedly in high esteem ; some 
of the principal persons were strongly attached to 
the one of them, and some to the other. The great 
influence which Mr. Cotton had in the colony, in 
clined Mr. Hooker and his friends to remove to 
some place more remote from Boston than New- 
town. Besides, they alleged as a reason for their 
removal, that they were straitened for room, and 
thereupon viewed divers places on the sea-coast, 
but were not satisfied with them. Three or four 



persons had some time before travelled w. into the 
country an hundred miles upon discovery, until 
they struck "a great river, which afterwards they 
found to be Connecticut or the Fresh river, where 
there were many spots of intervale land, and land 
in other respects to be desired for settlement. The 
Dutch at the Manhados had some knowledge of 
this place, and had given intimations of it to the 
people of New Plymouth with whom they had 
commerce, but the Plymouth government kept their 
intelligence secret. A letter from Mr. Winslow of 
New Plymouth, Sept. 26, 1633, mentions their 
having been up the river. They forbade the 
Dutch making any settlements there, and set up a 
trading house themselves. 

The governor of the Massachusetts also this year, 
1635, sent a bark round the cape to the Dutch go 
vernor, to acquaint him that the king had granted 
the river and country of Connecticut to his own 
subjects, and desired him to forbear building any 
where thereabouts. This river Mr. Hooker and 
his friends pitched upon as the most likely place 
to accommodate them. The latter end of the last 
year (1634) they intended to remove, and applied 
to the court for leave. Of 21 members of the 
lower house, 15 were for their removal ; but of the 
magistrates, the governor and two assistants only 
were for it, the deputy-governor Mr. Winthrop 
and the rest of the assistants against it ; but still, 
as the lower house was so much more numerous 
than the upper, the major part of the whole court 
was for it. This division was the occasion of first 
starting the question about the negative voice. 
The deputies or representatives insisted that the 
voice of a major part of the assistants was not ne 
cessary. The assistants refused to give up their 
right, and the business was at a stand. The whole 
court agreed to keep a day of humiliation and 
prayer, to seek thedivine direction, in all the con 
gregations in the colony, and to meet agnin the 
next week after. At the opening of the court 
Mr. Cotton preached from Hag. ii. 4, " Vet now 
be strong, O Zerubbabel, saith the Lord, and be 
strong, O Joshua, the son of Josedcch the high 
priest, and be strong all ye people of the land, 
saith the Lord, and work, for 1 am with you, saith 
the Lord of hosts." His sermon was as pertinent 
to the occasion as his text, and prevailed upon the 
deputies to give up the point at that time. Here 
was a crisis, when the patricians, if we may so 
style them, were in danger of losing great part of 
their weight in the government. It may seem a 
matter of less consequence than it would have been, 
if the office of assistant had by charter been here 
ditary or even for life ; but the assistants, aided] 



MASSACHUSETTS. 



50? 



[by the elders, who had great influence with the 
people, were in a good measure secure of their 
places. It was by the same aid that they now 
carried the point against the plebeians. There was 
no occasion for prodigies or miracles to secure their 
instalment. A judicious discourse from a well 
chosen text was more rational, and had a more 
lasting effect. 

There were some circumstances very discou 
raging: particularly the neighbourhood of the 
Dutch on the one side, and some intelligence re 
ceived of the designs ofthePequod Indians on the 
other, and of their having killed Capt. Stone and 
his company as he was going up the river ; but 
they could not be satisfied until they had accom 
plished their intentions and obtained the leave of 
the court. 

They met with a new company which arrived 
this year, who purchased their estates and settled 
at Newtown in their stead, with Mr. Shepard for 
their minister. They did not take their depar 
ture until June the next year, and then about 100 
persons in the first company, some of whom had 
lived in splendour and delicacy in England, set 
out on foot to travel 120 or 130 miles with their 
wives and children, near a fortnight s journey, 
having no canopy but the heavens, and a wilder 
ness to go through without the least cultivation, 
in most places no path nor any marks to guide 
them, but depending upon the compass to steer 
by, many hideous swamps and very high moun 
tains to traverse, beside five or six rivers or dif 
ferent parts of the same winding river, (the Chic- 
kapi), not every where fordabie, and which they 
could not avoid to pass over. The greatest part 
of the lands they were going to were evidently 
without the jurisdiction of the Massachusetts ; ne 
vertheless they took a commission from the autho 
rity of that colony to govern in Connecticut. 
There are other instances which shew that they 
supposed they retained some authority over their 
inhabitants, even when out of the limits of the 
colony. 

The Plymouth people, notwithstanding the 
French piracy in 1032, kept possession of their 
house at Penobscot, and carried on trade with the 
Indians; but in 1C35, Rousilion, commander of a 
French fort at La Have upon the Nova Scotia 
shore, sent a French man of war to Penobscot, 
which took possession of the trading house and 
all the goods. The French gave their bills for the 
goods, and sent away all the men. The com 
mander wrote to the governor of Plymouth, that 
he had orders to displace all the English as far as 
Pomaquvd, but to those zc. he would shew all 



courtesy. The Plymouth government, who sup 
posed they had good right to the place, were not 
willing to put up with the injury quietly, a id hired 
a large ship of some force, the Hope of Ipswich, in 

England, Girling commander, to displace 

the French. Girling was to have 200/. if he ef 
fected it. A bark Avith 20 men was sent with 
him as a tender. But the French having notice 
of the design fortified the place, and Girling hav 
ing nearly spent his ammunition, sent the bark to 
the Massachusetts for aid. Two persons came 
from Plymouth also to treat about it, and the court 
agreed to assist their neighbours by a subscription 
among themselves ; but provision was so scarce 
that there could not sufficient be had suddenly to 
fit out an expedition of 100 men only ; so the mat 
ter was deferred to a further time, and Girling re 
turned, leaving the French in possession, which 
they continued until 1654. 

The situation the colony was in at this time must 
have given them a threatening prospect. They 
were utterly defenceless, whilst the French were 
on their borders on one side, the Dutch on the 
other, and the Indians in the midst, restrained 
only by want of union among themselves from ma 
nifesting their mutual ill-will to all the settlers. 

This year Mr. Winthrop, jun. returned from 
England, whither he had gone the year before, 
and brought a commission from the Lord Say and 
Seal, and Lord Brook and others, to be the go 
vernor of their plantation at Connecticut. A fort 
was built at the mouth of the river, known by the 
name of Saybrook fort. He brought also a num 
ber of men, with arms, ammunition, and stores, and 
2000/. in money, to bring forward a settlement. 
This commission interfered with the intended set 
tlements by the Massachusetts ; notwithstanding 
that, as a number of the inhabitants of VVatertown 
had possessed themselves of a fine piece of mea 
dow at VVeathersfield below Hartford, where Mr. 
Hooker and his company settled ; the agents for 
the lords being well disposed to promote the gene 
ral good, permitted these settlers quietly to enjoy 
their possessions. The fortress below struck terror 
into the Indians, and quieted the minds of the 
English. Plymouth was dissatisfied with being 
thus supplanted by the Massachusetts, (the Dor 
chester men, as we suppose, having pitched upoa 
the. spot where Plymouth had built a trading 
house, and, as they alleged, had purchased the 
lands of the Indians), and demanded 100/. or part 
of the land. There was great danger of a warm 
contention between the two colonies, but at length 
the Dorchester men made such offers of satisfac 
tion that Plymouth accepted them. The Dutch } 
3x2 



508 



MASSACHUSETTS. 



[also sent home to Holland for instructions, intend 
ing to maintain their claim to the river, or the place 
where they had possession; but upon a treaty af 
terwards with the commissioners of the united co 
lonies, they quitted all claim to all parts of the 
river, resigning it up to the English. 

Sir Ferdinando Gorges and Captain Mason 
having been at more expence, and taken more 
pains than any other members of the grand coun 
cil of Plymouth, and perceiving no prospect of 
any equivalent return, and fearing from the great 
clamour in the nation against monopolies that they 
should ere long be forced to resign up their grand 
charter, they entered this year upon a new pro 
ject, viz. to procure a general governor for the 
whole country of New England to be forthwith 
sent over ; and because the Massachusetts charter 
stood in their way they endeavoured a revocation 
of it, that so the whole from St. Croix to Maryland 
might be brought under the same form of govern 
ment ; we do not find they succeeded in their ob 
ject. 

In the year 1636, Mr. Vane was chosen go 
vernor, Mr. Winthrop deputy governor, and 
Mr. Harlakenden, who came in the same ship 
with Mr. Vane, was added to the assistants. The 
people of the colony very early discovered that 
they were not without disposition to novelty and 
change. It was not merely out of policy to en 
courage others that they took early notice of such 
as came over from year to year. Besides this mo 
tive, they were easily captivated with the appear 
ance only of wisdom and piety, professions of a 
regard to liberty and of a strong attachment to the 
public interest. Mr. Haynes, who seemed to 
stand most in the way of Mr. Winthrop, had left 
the colony and was settled at Connecticut, and 
Mr. Winthrop would have had a good prospect 
of recovering his former share of the people s fa 
vour, if Mr. Vane s grave solemn deportment, 
although he was not then above 24 or 25 years of 
age, had not engaged almost the whole colony in 
his favour. There was a great friendship between 
Mr. Cotton and him, which seems to Imve conti 
nued to the last. lie had great respect shewn him 
at first. He took more state upon him than any 
governor had ever done before. When he went 
either to court or to church, four Serjeants walked 
before him with their halberds. His administra 
tion, for several months, met with great applause. 
Towards the end of the year the people grew dis 
contented. He perceived it, and grew weary of 
the government. Receiving letters from London 
in December, urging his return home, he first com 
municated them to the council, and then called 



the general court together to ask their consent to 
his quitting the administration. He declared to 
them the necessity of his departure, and such of 
the council as had seen the letters affirmed that 
the reasons were very urgent, but not fit to be im 
parted to the whole court. The court took time 
until the morning to consider, when one of the 
assistants lamenting the loss of such a governor in 
a time of such danger, both from French and In 
dians, the governor burst into tears, and professed 
that howsoever the causes propounded for his de 
parture did concern the utter ruin of his outward 
estate, yet he would rather have hazarded all than 
gone from them at such a time, if something else 
had not pressed him more, viz. the inevitable 
danger of God s judgments, which he feared were 
coming upon them, for the differences and dissen 
sions which he saw amongst them, and the scan 
dalous imputation brought upon himself, as if he 
should be the cause of all, and therefore bethought 
it was best for him to give place for a time. The 
court did not think fit to consent to his going for 
such reasons. He found he had gone too far, and 
recalled himself, professing that the reasons which 
concerned his own estate were sufficient to satisfy 
him, and therefore desired he might have leave; 
the other passage slipped from him out of passion, 
not judgment. Whereupon the court agreed that 
it was necessary to give way to his departure, and 
ordered another meeting of the general court to 
make choice of a governor and deputy governor; 
and as it was in the midst of winter (15th Dec.) 
the freemen had liberty to send their votes in writ 
ing, if they did not come in person. Some of the 
church of Boston, loth to part with the governor, 
met together and agreed that it was not necessary, 
for the reasons alleged, that the governor should 
depart, and sent some of their number to signify 
as much to the court. The governor pretended to 
be overpowered, and expressed himself to be such 
an obedient son of the church, that notwithstand 
ing the licence of the court, yet, without the con 
sent of the church, he durst not go away. A great 
part of the people who were informed of this trans 
action declared their purpose still to continue him ; 
and it was thought advisable, when the day ap 
pointed for election came, to adjourn the court to 
May, the time of the annual choice. Mr. Vane 
has been charged with as dark dissimulation, a few 
years after, in affairs of vastly greater importance; 
particularly in the manner of giving his testimony 
in the case of the Earl of Straffbrd. 

There came over with Mr. Cotton, or about the 
same time, Mr. Hutchinson and his family, who 
had lived at Alford in the neighbourhood of Bos-] 



MASS A C Hi U SETTS. 



509 



[ton. Mr. Hutchinson had a good estate and was 
of good reputation. His wife, as Mr. Cotton 
says, " was well beloved, and all the faithful 
embraced her conference, and blessed God for her 
fruitful discourses." (Answer to Bailey.) After 
she came to New England, she was treated with 
respect, and much notice was taken of her by 
Mr. Cotton and other principal persons, and par 
ticularly by Mr. Vane, the governor. Her hus 
band served in the general court several elections 
as representative for Boston, until he was excused 
at the desire of the church. So much respect 
seems to have increased her natural vanity. Coun 
tenanced and encouraged by Mr. Vane and Mr. 
Cotton, she advanced doctrines and opinions which 
involved the colony in disputes and contentions ; 
and being improved, to civil as well as religious 
purposes, had like to have produced ruin both to 
church and state. The vigilance of some, of 
whom Mr. Winthrop was the chief, prevented 
and turned the ruin from the country upon herself 
and many of her family and particular friends. 
Mr. Wheelwright, a zealous minister, of character 
for learning and piety, Avas her brother-in-law, and 
firmly attached to her, and finally suffered with 
her. Besides the meetings for public worship on 
the Lord s day, the stated lecture every Thurs 
day in Boston, and other occasional lectures in 
other town^, there were frequent private meetings 
of the brethren of the churches for religious exer 
cises. Mrs. Hntchinson thought fit to set up a 
meeting of the sisters also, where she repeated the 
sermons preached the Lord s day before, adding 
her remarks and expositions. Her lectures made 
much noise, and 60 or 80 principal women at 
tended them. At first they were generally ap 
proved of. After some time, it appeared she 
had distinguished the ministers and members of 
churches through the country ; a small part of 
them under a covenant of grace, the rest under a 
covenant of works. The whole colony was soon 
divided into two parties ; and however distant one 
party was from the other in principle, they were 
still more so in affection. The two capital errors 
with which she was charged were these, " That 
the Holy Ghost dwells personally in a justi 
fied person ; and that nothing of sarictificntion can 
help to evidence to believers their justification." 
From these two a great number of others were said 
to flow, which were enumerated and condemned at 
a synod held the next year. The ministers of the 
several parts of the country, alarmed with these 
things, came to Boston while the general court was 
sitting, and some time before the governor, Mr. 
Vane, asked his dismission. They conferred with 



Mr. Cotton and Mr. Wheelwright upon these two 
points. The last they both disclaimed, so far as 
to acknowledge that sanctification did help to evi 
dence justification; the other they qualified at 
least by other words ; they held the indwelling of 
the person of the Holy Ghost, but not strictly a 
personal union, or as they express it, not a com 
municating of personal properties. The governor 
not only held with Mr. Cotton, but &amp;gt;vent further, 
or was more express, and maintained a personal 
union. Mr. Winthrop, the deputy governor, de 
nied both, and Mr. Wilson, the other minister of 
Boston, and many of the ministers in the country, 
joined with him. A conference or disputation, 
was determined on, which they agreed should be 
managed in writing, as most likely to tend to the 
peace of the church. When they could not find 
that the scriptures nor the primitive church, for 
the first 300 years, ever used the term v^Zito^ or 
person of the Holy Ghost, they generally thought it 
was best it should be forborne, as being of human 
invention. Upon the other question, Mr. Cotton, 
in a sermon the day the court met, had acknow 
ledged that evident sanctification is a ground of 
justification, and went on to say, that in cases of 
spiritual desertion true desire of sanctification 
was found to be sanctification, as divines usually 
held ; and further, if a man was laid so flat upon 
the ground, as that he could see no desires, but 
only as a bruised reed did wait at the foot of 
Christ, yet here was matter of comfort, for this 
was found to be true sanctification in the root and 
principle of it. Mr. Vane and he both denied 
that any of these, or any degree of sanctification, 
could be evident without a concurrent sight of 
justification. (Hubbard.) The town and country 
were distracted with these subtleties, and every 
man and woman who had brains enough to form 
some imperfect conceptions of them, inferred and 
maintained some other point, such as these, u a 
man is justified before he believes; faith is no 
cause of justification ; and if faith be before just ifi ca 
tion, it is only a passive faith, an empty vessel, &amp;c. 
and assurance is by immediate revelation only. * 
The fear of God and love of our neighbour seemed 
to be laid by and out of the question. All the 
church of Boston, except four or five, joined with 
Mr. Cotton. Mr. Wilson, the other minister, and 
most of the ministers in the country, opposed him. 
To increase the flame, Mr. Wheelwright 
preached a sermon (Jan. 19) in which, besides 
carrying antinomianism to the height, he made 
use of some expressions which were laid hold of 
by the court as tending to sedition ; for which he 
was sent for and examined whilst Mr. Vane wasj 



510 



MASSACHUSETTS. 



[in office, but a full inquiry and determination was 
suspended until a more convenient time. 

Whilst these contentions were thus increasing 1 
within, the Pequods, the most warjike ot" all the 
Indians were plotting destruction from without. 
After Stone and his company were murdered, they 
sent messengers to Boston to make peace, pretend 
ing that the murder was committed by a lew bad 
fellows who had fled to the Dutch. Their ambas 
sadors were courteously treated, and the terms of 
peace were agreed on. In confidence of their 
fidelity, John Oldham, of whom mention has been 
made before, went in a small bark to trade with 
the Indians at Block island. They murdered him, 
but spared two boys and two Naraganset Indians 
who were of his company. The murderers were 
discovered by the crew of a small vessel, one Gal 
lop master, from Connecticut, which happened 
to come upon them soon after the fact. Gallop 
had with him only one man and two boys, and no 
arms except two muskets and two pistols. Al 
though the deck was full of Indians who had guns, 
swords, &amp;c. ; yet, as they were then not much 
used to them, they made but little resistance, and 
when he boarded the vessel they jumped into the 
sea, and many of them were drowned. He found 
Olclham s body not cold, his brains beat out and 
bis limbs hacked off. Block island was under the 
Naraganset Indians, but they denied their having 
any concern in the murder. The murderers were 
sheltered and protected by the Pequods, who at 
the same time surprised divers English in Connec 
ticut river. These proceedings caused the Massa 
chusetts to send fourscore men by water, under 
Captain Endicot, who had instructions to offer 
peace to the Indians upon their delivering up the 
murderers ; if they refused to do it, then to attack 
them. A great number of them entered into some 
sort of parley by a messenger and interpreter, 
keeping at a great distance themselves; but, as 
soon as they knew the terms, they fled into the 
woods. Winter was approaching, and Mr. En 
dicot thought it advisable to return home in order 
to prepare for a more general attack the next sum 
mer. There were some severe reflections cast upon 
him for not pursuing the enemy at that time. 
The Pequods, in the winter, attempted an union 
with the Naragansets. There had been a fixed 
inveterate enmity between the two tribes, but on 
this occasion the Pequods were willing to smother 
it, their enmity against the English being the 
strongest of the two ; and artfully urged that the 
English were come to dispossess them of their 
country, and that all the Naragansets could hope 
for from their friendship, was the favour of being 



the last devoured ; whereas, if the Indians would 
unite, they might easily destroy the English, or 
force them to leave the country, without being 
exposed themselves to any hazard. They need 
not come to open battles : tiring their houses, kill 
ing their cattle, and lying in wait for them as they 
went about their ordinary business, would soon 
deprive them of all means of subsisting. But the 
Naragansets preferred the present pleasure of re 
venge upon their mortal enemies, to the future 
happiness of themselves and their posterity. They 
are said to have wavered at first, but at length 
Myantinomo, their chief sachem, with 20 atten 
dants went to Boston, where all the magistrates 
and ministers were called together to receive them, 
and a guard of 20 musketeers set to Roxbury to 
attend them. They proposed to join in war 
against the Pequods, and that neither English nor 
Indians should make peace with them, but utterly 
destroy them. The governor, for form-sake, took 
time until the next morning to give an answer, 
and then the following articles were agreed to. 

1. A firm and perpetual peace betwixt them 
and the English. 

2. Neither party to make peace Avith the Pe 
quods without the consent of the other. 

3. That the Naragansets should not harbour any 
Pequods. 

4. That they should put to death or deliver up 
any murderers of the English. 

5. That they should return fugitive servants. 

6. The English to give them notice when to go 
out against the Pequods, and the Naragansets to 
furnish guides. 

7. Free trade to be carried on between the 
parties. 

8. None of the Naragansets to come near the 
English plantation during the war with the Pe 
quods, without some Englishman or Indian known 
to the English. 

Cushamaquin, a sachem of the Massachusetts 
Indians, also became a party to the treaty. 

The Naragansets are said to have kept to this 
treaty until the Pequods were destroyed, and then 
they grew insolent and treacherous. 

Towards the end of the year, religious heats be 
came more violent, and the civil affairs more 
sensibly affected by them. The people of Boston, 
in general, were in favour of Mr. Vane the go 
vernor ; the rest of the towns, in general, for Mr. 
Winthrop the deputy governor. At a sessions of 
the court in March, it was moved that the court 
of elections for 1637 should not be held in Boston, 
but in Newtown (Cambridge). Nothing could 
be more mortifying to the governor, and as he] 



MASSACHUSETTS. 



511 



[could not hinder the vote by a negative, he refused 
to put the question. Mr. Winthrop the deputy 
governor, as he lived in Boston, excused him 
self, and the court required Mr. Endicot, one of 
the assistants, to do it. It was carried for the re 
moval. 

The more immediate occasion of the court s re 
sentment against Boston, was a petition signed by 
a great number of the principal inhabitants of that 
town, together with some belonging to other towns, 
judging and condemning the court for their pro 
ceedings against Mr. Wheelwright. At this ses 
sion, Mr. Vane the governor could not prevent a 
censure upon one Stephen Greensmith, for saying 
that all the ministers except Mr. Cotton, Mr. 
Wheelwright, and he thought Mr. Hooker, preach 
ed a covenant of works. He was required to 
make an acknowledgment to the satisfaction of 
the magistrates and ministers, and was fined 40/. 
&amp;c. (Mass. Records.) 

(Anno 1637.) At the opening the court of 
election for 1637, which was not done until one 
o clock, (May 17), a petition was again offered 
from many of the town of Boston, which the go 
vernor, Mr. Vane, would have had read, but Mr. 
Winthrop the deputy governor opposed it as be 
ing out of order ; this being the day, by charter, 
for elections, and the inhabitants all convened for 
that purpose, if other business was allowed to take 
up the time the elections would be prevented ; 
after the elections were over, the petition might be 
read. The governor and those of his party would 
not proceed unless the petition was read. The 
time being far spent, and many persons calling for 
election, the deputy governor called to the people 
to divide, and the greater number should carry 
it ; which was done, and the majority was for pro 
ceeding. Still the governor refused, until the de 
puty governor told him they would go on without 
him. This caused him to submit. Mr. Win 
throp was chosen governor, Mr. Dudley deputy 
governor, Mr. Saltonstall, son of Sir Richard, and 
Mr Stoughton, new assistants; and Mr. Vane and 
his friends of the same persuasion, Dummer, 
Haugh, and Coddington, left out of the magis 
tracy. There was great danger of a violent tu 
mult that day. The speeches on both sides were 
iierce, and they began to lay hands on one another, 
but the manifest majority on one side was a re 
straint to the other. Boston waited the event of 
this election of magistrates before they would 
choose their representatives for the other business 
of the general court, and the next morning they 
chose Mr. Vane, the late governor, Mr. Codding 
ton, and Mr. Ilaugh. This election of Boston 



was immediately determined by the court to be 
undue. The reason is not assigned in the record, 
but it is said this reason was given, that all the 
freemen were not notified. A warrant issued for a 
new choice, and Boston returned the same men 
again, and then they were not rejected. The 
Serjeants who used to attend Mr. Vane, laid down 
their halberts and went home as soon as the new 
governor was elected, and they refused to attend 
him to and from the meetings on the Lord s days, 
as had been usual. They pretended this extraor 
dinary respect was shewn to Mr. Vane as a person 
of quality. The court would have appointed 
others, but Mr. Winthrop took two of his own 
servants to attend him. Mr. Vane professed him 
self ready to serve the cause of God in the meanest 
capacity. He was, notwithstanding, much mor 
tified, and discovered his resentment. Although 
he had sat at church among the magistrates from 
his first arrival, yet he and those who had been 
left out with him, placed themselves with the 
deacons, and when he was invited by the governor 
to return to his place he refused it. 

An extraordinary act, made by the general court 
this session, very much heightened the discontent. 
Many persons of the favourite opinions in Boston 
were expected from England ; a penalty therefore 
was laid on all persons who should entertain in 
their houses any stranger who came with intent to 
reside, or should allow the use of any lot or habita 
tion above three weeks, without liberty from one 
of the standing council or two other assistants. 
The penalty on private persons was 40/. and 20/. 
besides for every month they continued in the 
offence ; and any town, which gave or sold a lot to 
such stranger, was subject to 100/. penalty, but 
if any inhabitant of such town should enter his 
dissent with a magistrate, he was to be excused his 
part of the fine. This was a very severe order, and 
was so disliked by the people of Boston, that upon 
the governor s return from court they all refused to 
go out to meet him or shew him any respect. Mr. 
Winthrop, however firm and resolute in the ex- 
ecirtion of his office and steady to his principles, 
yet in private life behaved with much moderation. 
He was obliging and condescending to all, and by 
this means, in a short time, recovered their affec 
tions, and was in greater esteem than ever. In 
deed, while Boston thus slighted him, the other 
towns increased their respect ; and in travelling, 
the same summer, to Ipswich, he was guarded 
from town to town with more ceremony than he 
desired. 

Mr. Vane, in company with Lord Leigh, son 
of the Earl of Marlborough, who carne to see the] 



512 



MASSACHUSETTS. 



[country, sailed for England the beginning of 
August, where he had a much larger field opened. 
The nation at that time was disposed to receive 
very favourably men of his genius and cast of 
mind. The share he had in the revolution there, 
and his unhappy fate upon the restoration of King 
Charles the Second, are too well known to need 
any notice here. He came into New England 
under peculiar advantages. His father was one 
of the privy council. He himself had the friend 
ship of the Lord Say and Seal, who was in the highest 
esteem in the colony. He made great professions 
of religion, and conformed to the peculiar scruples 
of that day. A long letter had been written to 
him while he was on ship-board, by one of the 
passengers in the same ship, applauding him for 
honouring God so far as to shorten his hair upon 
his arrival in England from France, and urging a 
complete reformation by bringing it to the primi 
tive length and form. It was with much difficulty 
he could obtain his father s consent to pass over, 
but his inclination was so strong, that at length 
he had leave of absence for three years. It is said, 
that the king being acquainted with Mr. Vane s 
disposition, commanded the father, who had no 
great affection for the religion of New England, to 
gratify him. However this may have been, it was be 
lieved in New England to be true, and with the 
other circumstances mentioned, strongly recom 
mended him. Part of his business was the settle 
ment of Connecticut, in conjunction with Mr. 
Winthrop the governor s son, as agents for Lord 
Say and Seal and Lord Brooke, &amp;c. The most 
valuable places for townships had been taken up 
before, by people from the Massachusetts, as we 
have already observed ; and the agents, not being 
willing to disturb them, contented themselves at 
present with the possession of the mouth of the 
river, and Mr. Vane was stopped by the general 
desire of the colony, in order to his being elected 
governor. The administration of a young and 
unexperienced, but obstinate and self-sufficient 
governor, could not but be disliked by the major 
part of the people ; and at the next election, they 
not only would not so much as choose him an 
assistant, but made an order that no man for the 
time to come should be qualified for the place of 
governor until he had been at least one whole year 
in the country. Some letters written at this time 
from New England shewed the bad opinion they 
had of him after they had made trial. 

The party in New England had now lost their 
head: Mrs. Hutchinson, notwithstanding, con 
tinued her lectures ; but the confusion occasioned 
in the colony by these religious disputes had been 



every day gaining ground, and were at last, only 
with great difficulty, suppressed. 

In this year Mr. "Wheelwright went to New 
Hampshire, and laid the foundation of the town 
and church of Exeter; and afterwards removed 
to Hampton, and from thence to Salisbury. He 
was restored in 1644, upon a slight acknowledg 
ment. He was in England in 1658, and in favour 
with Cromwell, as appears by a letter to the 
church at Hampton. He lived to be the oldest 
minister in the colony, which would have been 
taken notice of, if his persecutors had not remained 
in power. 

In June of the same year, two large ships arrived 
from England with passengers. Mr. Eaton and 
Mr. Hopkins, two London Merchants, Mr. Da 
venport, a minister of great character for learning 
and piety, and many others of good note and con 
dition, were of this company. Great pains were 
taken to persuade them to stay in the jurisdiction. 
The court offered them any place they would pitch 
upon. The town of Newbury offered to give up 
their settlement to them. Quinnipiack, and the 
country between that and the Dutch, was repre 
sented as a very fruitful place and well situated 
for trade and navigation. They flattered them 
selves, but upon what grounds does not appear, 
that there they should be out of the reach of a 
general governor, with which the country was 
from time to time threatened. These were the 
reasons publicly given for removing there. Be 
sides, the principal men of the new company 
would be at the head of the government there ; 
here it was natural to expect the old slanders would 
be considered as their superiors. They laid the 
foundation of a flourishing colony, of which Quin 
nipiack or New Haven was the chief town. They 
agreed among themselves upon a model of govern 
ment in church and state, very like to that of the 
Massachusetts, and continued a distinct colony 
and government until the year 1665, Avhen Con 
necticut and New Haven having three years before 
been incorporated by a charter from King Charles 
the Second, united under one governor. The 
people in the Massachusetts soon after reflected 
upon the favour of Providence, in not gratifying 
them with the continuance of this company among 
them. It appeared that the Dutch were design 
ing to take possession of this country, and they 
opposed the English in the settlement even of New 
Haven itself, threatening hostilities against them. 
Mr. Eaton, being a man of good abilities, was a 
fit person to resist them ; and finally, in the year 
1650, the other colonies uniting in the cause with 
New Haven, they were by treaty limited to Green-] 
2 



MASSACHUSETTS. 



513 



fwicl), said to be 10 or 12 miles on a straight line 
distant from Hudson s river. Indeed the suffering 
them to extend thus fur was mere favour and in 
dulgence, but there had been a good correspon 
dence always kept up between the English colo 
nies and these intruders. They had mutual trade 
and commerce, and although the Dutch at that 
day did not esteem godliness to be the greatest 
gain, yet their form of worship, their principles 
as to discipline and ceremonies, were more agree 
able to the New Englandcrs than those of the high 
party in England. New Haven was a barrier to 
the colony of Connecticut, and caused its increase. 
To which we may add, that the Massachusetts, 
by the removal of this company, were enabled to 
provide the better for the immediate accomoda- 
tion of the great number of passengers which un 
expectedly came over the next year. 

For in 1638, notwithstanding the clamour 
against the plantation was revived in England, and 
a design was on foot to revoke and annul the char 
ter, there arrived about 20 ships and 3000 passen 
gers. These ships were the more welcome to the 
colony, because they were afraid, that in conse 
quence of the complaints against them, a stop 
would be put to any more passengers coming from 
England. In 1635, a commission had been 
granted to several of the nobility arid great officers 
of the crown for the regulation of the colonies. 
The same governor, deputy governor, and assis 
tants were chosen for 1638, as had been for 1637. 
The settlements were extended this year beyond 
Merrimack river. Salisbury and Hampton had 
a great quantity of salt meadows. They were an 
inducement to people to sit down there, although 
the upland was a light sandy soil and not very 
inviting. Rowley and "Sudbury were both settled 
this year also. 

The inhabitants of Lynn being desirous of larger 
accommodations, many of them removed to Long 
island, near the w. end, Lord Stirling, by his 
agent there, having sold or quit-claimed to them 
a tract for a plantation ; but they were soon dis 
turbed by the Dutch, and some of them were im 
prisoned, under a pretence of an affront offered to 
the Prince of Orange s arms, which they had 
taken down from a tree where the Dutch had hung 
them up. Not being able to keep their ground, 
they removed to the e. end, and settled a church 
and town, (Southampton), and entered into a civil 
combination, intending to be independent of any 
of the colonies. Another distinct government was 
forming at the mouth of Connecticut river by the 
agent of Lord Say and Seal and Lord Brooke, who 
with other persons of distinction were still expected 

vor,. ii. 



in New England, and other companies who were in 
tending to remove, intended likewise to form into 
separate governments. But this humour did not 
last long. In a few years, all the colonies found 
an union or confederacy necessary for their de 
fence, not only against the Indians, but against 
the French and Dutch ; and there could be no 
encouragement for small bodies of men to sit down 
any where, independent or unconnected. All 
that had begun any settlements between the Mas 
sachusetts and the Dutch, (the Rhode islanders 
excepted, who were covered, except on the sea, 
by the other colonies), joined with Connecticut or 
New Haven, and alt to the e. whether in New 
Hampshire, province of Maine, or the country 
further c. applied to the Massachusetts that they 
might incorporate with them. 

The year 1638 was memorable for a very great 
earthquake throughout New England. The shock, 
by the printed accounts of it, and from manu 
script letters, appears to have been equal to that 
in 1727; the pewter in many places being thrown 
off the shelves, and the tops of chimneys in some 
places shook down, but the noise, though great, 
not so surprising as that of the last mentioned. 
The course of it was from w. to e. This was a re 
markable era. " So long after the earthquake," was 
as common an expression with the people of New 
England, for many years, as it seems to have 
been heretofore with the children of Israel. 

Harvard college takes its date from the year 
1638. Two years before, the general court gave 
400/. towards a public school at Newtown, but 
Mr. John Harvard, a worthy minister of Charles- 
town, dying this year, and having given a great 
part of his estate, between seven and eight hun 
dred pounds to the same use, the school took 
the name of Harvard college by an order of 
court. 

In 1639, the former governor and deputy go 
vernor were continued, and the same assistants, 
except Mr. Harlakenden, who died in the colony, 
and we suppose the last year. 

Straits and difficulties, at the beginning of the 
colony, had produced induslry and good hus 
bandry, and then they soon raised provisions 
enough for their own support, and an overplus for 
exportation. We hear but little of trade for the 
first seven years, except a small traffic with the 
natives by barter of toys, and the few utensils, 
tools, and clothing they at first thought necessary, 
in exchange for furs and skins. What the plant 
ers brought with them consisted, principally, of 
materials for their buildings, necessary tools for 
their husbandry, stock for their farms, and cloth.] 
3 u 



514 



MASSACHUSETTS. 



[ing for themselves and families ; and those who 
had more estate than was sufficient for these pur 
poses, were country gentlemen and unacquainted 
with commerce, as Winthrop, Dudley, Bclling- 
ham, Bradstreet, &amp;c. and never employed them 
selves in it. Mr. Winthrop built a small bark, 
called the Blessing-, which was employed to im 
port corn from the 5. Indians when the colony 
was in want, but she was soon cast away. Indeed, 
people in general turned their minds to provide 
comfortable lodgings, and to bring under improve 
ment so much land as would afford them necessary 
support, and this was enough to employ them. 
After a few years, by hard labour and hard fare, 
the land produced more than was consumed by 
the inhabitants ; the overplus was sent abroad to 
the West Indies, the Wine Islands, &amp;c. Returns 
were made in the produce of the respective coun 
tries and in bullion, the most of which, together 
with the furs procured from the natives, went to 
England to pay for the manufactures continually 
necessary from thence. As hands could be spared 
from husbandry and labour in providing their 
houses, they were taken off, and some employed in 
sawing boards, splitting staves, shingles, and 
hoops ; others in the fishery, and as many as were 
capable of it in building small vessels for the 
fishery and for coasting and foreign trade. Thus 
gradually and insensibly they seem to have fallen 
into that trade most natural to the country and 
adapted to their peculiar circumstances, without 
any premeditated scheme or projection for that 
purpose. The primary views, in their removal, 
were the enjoyment of civil and religious liberty. 
Merchants and others, for the sake of gain, when 
they saw a prospect of it afterwards, came over and 
incorporated with them, and caused a great in 
crease of commerce, and led the legislators to mea 
sures for the further improvement of it. For en 
couraging the fishery, an act was made, this year, 
to free all estates, employed in catching, making, 
or transporting fish, from all duties and public 
taxes ; and all persons were restrained, by penalty, 
from using any cod or bass fish for manuring the 
ground ; and all fishermen during the season for 
business, and all ship-builders, were by the same 
act excused from trainings. Sumptuary laws were 
made for restraining excess in apparel and other 
expenccs ; a spirit of industry and frugality pre 
vailed ; and those who lived in the next age speak 
of this as the aurea cetas^in which religion and vir 
tue flourished : but it was not long before many 
became discontented, and encouraged projects for 
their removal. 

la the year 1640, Mr. Dudley was governor and 



Mr. Bellingham deputy governor ; Mr. Winthrop, 
the former governor, one of the assistants ; the rest 
the same as the last year. The importation of 
settlers now ceased. The motive to transportation 
to America was over, by the change in the affairs 
of England. They who then professed to be able 
to give the best account, say, that in 298 ships, 
which were the whole number from the beginning 
of the colony, there arrived 21,200 passengers, 
men, women, and children, perhaps about 4000 
families. Since which, more persons have re 
moved out of New England to other parts of the 
world than have come from other parts to it ; and 
the number of families, in 1740, in the four go 
vernments, was supposed to be less rather than more 
than the natural increase of 4000. This sudden 
stop had a surprising effect upon the price of 
cattle. They had lost the greatest part of what 
they intended for the first supply, in the passage 
from Europe. As the inhabitants multiplied, the 
demand for the cattle increased, and the price of a 
milch cow had kept from 25/. to SO/, but fell at 
once this year to 51. or 61. A farmer, who could 
spare but one cow in a year out of his stock, used 
to clothe his family with the price of it at the ex- 
pence of the new-comers ; when this failed they 
were put to difficulties. Although they judged 
they had 12,000 neat cattle, yet they had but 
about 3000 sheep in the colony. 

The year 1641 afforded not so pleasing a pro 
spect. As soon as the country ceased to be ne 
cessary, as an asylum for oppressed people in 
England, some of those who had been the greatest 
benefactors there not only discouraged any further 
transportation, but endeavoured to induce such as 
had gone over to remove. Had the same changes 
happened in England six or eight years sooner, 
the continent of North America would in all pro 
bability have been at this day in a far less flourish 
ing state than it is. Some of the principal men 
wavered, but others were more resolute, and deter 
mined not to forsake their undertaking. 

Lord Say and Seal had turned his thoughts to a 
more s. settlement in the Bahama islands. He 
had engaged Mr. Humfries, one of the assistants of 
the Massachusetts colony, in the design, with a 
promise of being the governor of the new settle 
ment. A new plan of government was framed, 
wholly aristocratical, and the magistracy to be 
hereditary ; but exceptions being taken to this 
form by the people, it was altered and brought 
nearer to that of the Massachusetts. 

It is certain that a great part of the colony was 
at this time under great doubts as to their subsist 
ence. All could not be traders. Much labour] 



MASSACHUSETTS. 



515 



[was necessary to the clearing a new country for 
pasture or tillage; after three or four years im 
provement of a piece of ground, they found they 
had exhausted the goodness of the soil, and were 
obliged to go upon new improvements. They 
never used such manure as would keep it in heart. 
The common practice of manuring with fish, left 
the l;md in a worse state than it would have been 
in if they had used no manure at all, or than any- 
other manure, even lime, would have left it. This 
caused many of them to have an unfavourable 
opinion of the country, and to despair of obtaining 
a livelihood in it, and great numbers had deter 
mined to remove. Some were persuaded to alter 
their resolution, but others persisted. A church 
had been gathered at Providence, and news came, 
that Mr. Sherwood the pastor, with another minis 
ter, had been sent home prisoners by Carter the 
deputy governor, and that the magistrates were in 
clined to persecution. This is not incredible, 
even in the year 1641, when they could not have 
expected that these measures would be approved 
in England, for Virginia persisted in opposition to 
the parliament many years after. Whilst some in 
New England were discouraged by this advice, 
others were the more confirmed, looking upon it 
their duty to go over and strengthen their brethren. 
Mr. Humfries had met with great losses by fire the 
year before, and was detained in New England by 
his private affairs for this year ; but a company 
embarked with Captain William Pierce, who was 
of the first fleet which came over with the charter, 
and a very noted commander. Upon their arrival 
at Providence, they found the island in the posses 
sion of the Spaniards. They had shot in under 
the command of the fort before they discovered 
their danger ; and in coming about, Pierce was 
slain from the fort, but the vessel got clear and re 
turned to New England, and the designs of the 
rest, of course, were at an end. The lords, and 
others concerned in this attempt to settle the Ba 
hama islands, spent 60,000/. sterling, which was 
entirely lost by the island s being taken. 

The difficulties particular persons were under, 
and the difference of sentiment upon private affairs, 
had an influence upon the public affairs. The 
election this year, (1641), notwithstanding the 
great number of voters, was determined in favour 
of Mr. Bellingham for governor, Mr. Winthrop 
being his competitor, by a majority of six votes 
only. Mr. Endicot was chosen deputy governor. 
The court, this year, expecting great revolutions 
were at hand in England, sent over, as their agents, 
two of the ministers, Mr. Thomas Weld and Mr. 
Hugh Peters, and one of the representatives, Mr. 



William Hibbins, in order to establish the interest 
of the colony. Their particular instructions have 
not been preserved. 

This year also, the plantation at Springfield, 
upon Connecticut river, returned to the jurisdiction 
of the Massachusetts. In the year J636, as has 
been observed, the towns or settlement on Con 
necticut river began. A more particular account 
of the settlement of that colony will perhaps be 
expected. The inhabitants of the towns of Rox. 
bury, Dorchester, Cambridge, and Watertown, 
in the Massachusetts, laid the foundation of the 
colony of Connecticut. Mr. William Pynchon, 
being the principal person among those from Rox- 
bury, who had pitched upon a place higher up the 
river than the rest, called by the Indians Agawam, 
he changed the name to Springfield. His mansion- 
house was at a town of that name in England, near 
to Chelmsford in Essex. Those from Dorchester 
pitched upon a place below, called by the Indians 
Mattaneaug or Cushankamaug. Mr. Ludlow was 
the principal person who removed with them. 
Mr. Warham their minister and the whole church 
followed the next year. They called their settle 
ment Windsor. The Cambridge people, with Mr. 
Hooker and Mr. Stone their ministers, and Mr. 
Haynes, who the year before had been governor at 
their head, were seated next below, at a place called 
Suckiang, which they changed into Hartford, the 
place of Mr. Stone s nativity in England. A few 
miles below, there was another tract of intervale 
land, called by the Indians Pauquiang, which those 
of Hartford intended to have included in iheir 
settlement ; but a few of the Wartertown people 
were too quick for them. They gave it the name 
of Weathersfield. The commission, which they 
took from the Massachusetts, was of a pretty 
extraordinary nature. The preamble to it acknow 
ledges, that the lands, which they intended to take 
possession of, were without the commonwealth and 
body of the Massachusetts, and that certain noble 
personages in England, by virtue of a patent, 
challenged the jurisdiction there ; but their minds 
not being known as to a form of government, and 
there being a necessity that some authority should 
be established, they therefore appointed Roger 
Ludlow, Esq. &amp;c. with full power and authority to 
hear and determine, in a judicial way, all matters 
i difference between party and party, to inflict 
corporal punishment, imprisonment, and fines, 
and to make and decree such orders for the present 
as shall be necessary for the plantation, relative 
to trading, planting, building, military discipline 
and defensive war, if need require, and to convene 
the inhabitants in general court if it shall be thought] 

3 U t~ 



516 



MASSACHUSETTS. 



[meet. The commission to continue no longer than 
one year, and to be recalled if a form of govern 
ment could be agreed upon between the noble 
personages, the inhabitants, and the commonwealth 
of the Massachusetts, &amp;c. 

There would be no accounting for this stretch of 
power were it not for a principle at that time 
generally received, and which upon a question was 
determined some years after by the general court, 
some of the members dissenting, that the oath of 
fidelity to the commonwealth was binding even 
though the person should no longer reside within 
the limits. 

Notwithstanding this commission, they soon 
after entered into an agreinent or combination, by 
virtue of which they called themselves a body 
politic formed and established by mutual consent, 
and framed such laws and constitutions as they 
thought necessary. The most material point in 
which they differed from the Massachusetts, was 
the not making membership of their churches 
necessary to freedom in the civil government or to 
the holding any offices therein. Upon the petition 
of Mr. Pynchon and others to the court to receive 
them again, an order passed asserting the court s 
right, and a commission was granted to Mr. 
Pynchon to hold courts there, from whose judg 
ments an appeal lay to the court of assistants. 

The settlers at Piscataqua, about the same time, 
submitted themselves to the Massachusetts govern 
ment. The river of Newichewannock or Pisca 
taqua is said to have been first discovered by 
Capiain Smith, or some emploj ed by him, in 1614 
or 1615. De Monts, ten years before, had been at 
Kennebeck and Saco, and some leagues further 
westward along shore ; but struck over from some 
part of Welles, by the description he gives of the 
coast, to cape Ann, which he calls cape Louis, 
and from thence to cape Blanc, which must be 
cape Cod. In the year 1623, several gentlemen, 
merchants and others in the a\ of England, belong 
ing to Bristol, Exeter, Dorchester, Shrewsbury, 
Plymouth, &amp;c. having obtained patents from the 
council of Plymouth for several parts of New 
England, and being encouraged by the plantation 
of New Plymouth, and the reports of fishermen 
who had made voyages upon the coast, projected 
and attempted a fishery about Piscataqua, and sent 
over David Thompson, together with Edward Hil 
ton and William Hilton, who had been fishmongers 
in London, and some others, with all necessaries 
for their purpose. The Hiltons set up their stages 
some distance above the mouth of the river, at a 
place since called Dover. Some others of the 
company, about the same time, seized on a place 



below, at the mouth of the river called Little Har 
bour, where they built the first house. Sir Fer- 
dinando Gorges and Captain John Mason were of 
this company, and the place where this house 
was built, with three or four thousand acres of land 
for a manor or lordship, by consent of the rest 
of the undertakers, was assigned to Captain 
Mason, and the house took the name of AJason 
Hall. 

These settlements went on very slowly for seven 
years after; and in 1631, when Edward Colcott 
first came over, there were but three houses in all 
that side of the country adjoining to Piscataqua 
river. There had been some expence besides 
about saltworks. The affairs of the great council 
of Plymouth, from first to last, were carried on 
in a confused manner. There have been six or 
seven several grants of the lands between Merri- 
mack and Kennebeck. Whether any of them, 
besides those to Gorges and the Massachusetts, 
are at this day of any validity, I will not determine. 
In 1629, Gorges and Mason are said to have taken 
a patent together for all the lands between the 
two rivers ; and by mutual agreement, and by a 
distinct patent, all the lands from Piscataqua to 
Merrimack were assigned to Mason. Gorges seems 
to have laid no great stress upon his titles, for in 
1639, he obtained a patent under the great seal 
from King Charles the First. The Lords Say and 
Brooke, who were very general adventurers, they 
purchased the Bristol men s share, which was two 
thirds of the first company s interest. Some 
persons of Shrewsbury held the other third. Cap 
tain Wiggan was made the agent for the Shrews 
bury men. In the year 1630, Captain Neale, with 
three others, came over to Piscataqua to superin 
tend the affairs of Sir Ferdinando Gorges, Mason, 
and the rest, but principally to discover a new 
country, to which they gave the name of Laconia, 
and which in Gorges s history is very pompously 
described. Champlain, many years before this, 
had given his own name to lake Iroquois, and the 
English, it may be, were informed by the Indians 
something of the geography of the country, and 
of other lakes on the back of New England, and 
no doubt the rumour was carried over to England. 
Neale spent three years in searching out his new 
country, but could not find it, and so returned. 
Nothing else memorable is mentioned of Neale, 
except that he forbad Wiggan settling a point of 
land betwixt Dover and Exeter. Wiggan went on, 
and determined to defend his right by the sword. 
The other threatened as high, and from what 
might have happened, the disputed lands took 
the name of Bloody Point, which it retains to] 



MASSACHUSETTS. 



517 



[this day. The Lords Say and Brooke also made 
Wiggan their agent for the term of seven years; 
during which lime the interest was not greatly 
advanced, the whole being sold to him, at the 
expiration of the term, for GOO/. 

Soon after the year 1631, one Mr. Williams 
came over from England, sent also by Gorges and 
Mason to take care of their salt works. Mr. 
Chadburne, with several other planters and traders, 
came over with him. These began the settlement 
of Strawberry bunk (Portsmouth), and after Neale 
went away they are supposed either to have enter 
ed into an agreement and to have chosen Williams 
for their governor, who is said to have been a 
discreet sensible man and a gentleman, or else he 
was appointed by the company in England. 
There was a grant of a sum of money for building 
a parsonage house and a chapel, and for a glebe of 
60 acres of land to be annexed, made by the 
inhabitants of Strawberry bank to Thomas Walford 
and Henry Sherburn, church-wardens, and their 
successors, &amp;c. and this was signed by Francis 
Williams governor, Ambrose Gibbons assistant, 
and 18 inhabitants, dated May 25, 1640. Williams 
soon after removed to Barbadoes. The first who 
enterprised the settlement of Piscataqua had some 
religious as well as civil views, and a Puritan 
minister, Mr. Leveridge, a worthy man, came over 
with Captain Wiggan in 1633, but not being sup 
ported he removed to the southward, and was 
succeeded by Mr. Burdet, who has not left so good 
a character. Not contented with his sacred 
function, he invaded the civil government, and 
thrust out Captain Wiggan, and assumed the place 
of governor himself. 

In the mean time, the Lords and others concern 
ed had prevailed upon several persons of good 
estates, and who made profession of religion, to 
transplant themselves and families to Piscataqua, 
so as to be able to make inhabitants enough for a 
considerable township ; and having no charter, 
commission, or power of government from the 
crown, they were under necessity of entering into a 
combination or agreement among themselves. Thus 
we see three distinct colonies and independent 
governments formed upon Piscataqua river. 

During these transactions, the Massachusetts 
people were inquiring into the bounds of their 
patent. In 1639, they sent persons to find out the 
northernmost part of Merrimack river. A line to 
run e. from three miles n. of the head of the 
river, will take in the whole of JSevv Hampshire. 
They determined therefore that it came within 
then jurisdiction, and from that time they allowed 



plantations to be settled, particularly at Hampton, 
as readily as in any other part of the colony, and 
exercised jurisdiction over them ; but they left 
those upon the river to their liberty ; and it was 
their inability to preserve order among themselves 
which occasioned the application and submission 
which has already been mentioned. At their session 
in October the court passed the following order. 

" \Y hereas it appeareth that, by the extent of the 
line according to our patent, the river of Piscata 
qua is within the jurisdiction of the Massachu 
setts, and conference being had at several times 
with the said people and some deputed by the 
general court for the settling and establishing of 
order in the administration of justice there ; it is 
now ordered by the genera! court, hold^n at Boston 
this 9th day of the 8th month 1641, and with 
the consent of the inhabitants of the said river, as 
folioweth. Imprimis, That from henceforth the 
said people, inhabiting there, are and shall be 
accepted and reputed under the government of the 
Massachusetts, as the rest of the inhabitants within 
the said jurisdiction are. Also that they shall 
have the same order and way of administration of 
justice, and way of keeping courts, as is establish 
ed at Ipswich and Salcrn. Also they shall be 
exempted from all public charges, other than 
those that shall arise for or from among themselves, 
or from any action or course that may be taken to 
procure their own good or benefit. Also they 
shall enjoy all sucli^ lawful liberties of fishing, 
planting and selling timber, as formerly they have 
enjoyed in the same river. Mr. Simon Bradstreet, 
Mr. Israel Stoughton, Mr. Samuel Simonds, Mr. 
William Tyng, Mr. Francis Williams, and Mr. 
Edward Hilton, or any four of them, whereof Mr. 
Bradstreet or Mr. Stoughton to be one, these 
shall have the same power that the quarter courts 
at Salem and Ipswich have. Also the inhabitants 
there are allowed to send two deputies from the 
whole river to the court at Boston. Also Mr. 
Bradstreet, Mr. Stoughton, and the rest of the 
commissioners, shall have power at the court at 
Piscataqua to appoint two or three to join with 
Mr. Williams and Mr. Hilton to govern the people 
as the magistrates do here, till the next general 
court, or till the court take further order. It is 
further ordered, that until our commissioners shall 
arrive . at Piscataqua, those men who already 
have authority, by the late combination, to govern 
the people there, shall continue in the same 
authority and power, to be determined at the 
coming of the said commissioners, and not before." 
Although nothing is sakl of Strawberry bank in"] 



518 



MASSACHUSETTS. 



[the submission, yet all the settlements seem to have 
concurred, and Williams, the governor, was made 
one of the magistrates. 

The Massachusetts, by thus extending its wing 
over the inhabitants of New Hampshire, nourish 
ed and cherished them for near 40 years ; and to 
this must be attributed the growth and the present 
flourishing state of that colony. The principal 
inhabitants, when the benefit was recent, in 1680, 
made a public and grateful acknowledgment of it. 
Upon this construction of the charter, the whole 
province of Maine is taken into the Massachusetts 
as well as New Hampshire ; but no application 
being made by the people there, nothing was done 
concerning them. Mr. Wheelwright and others, 
who had been banished from the Massachusets, 
soon after removed to the province of Maine from 
New Hampshire. 

(Anno 1642.) Mr. Winthrop was elected 
governor in 1642, and Mr. Endicot deputy gover 
nor, and Mr. Thomas Flint added to the assistants, 
together with Mr. Pynchon, who, upon his remo 
val to Springfield, had been left out whilst the 
jurisdiction was doubtful. 

The college at Cambridge was this year put 
upon a more respectable footing than it had been. 
The governor, deputy governor and magistrates, 
and the ministers of the six next adjacent towns, 
with the president, were made a corporation for 
ordering and managing the affairs of the college, 
and nine young gentlemen, at a public commence 
ment this year, received the degree of bachelor 
of arts. The thesis, with a particular account of 
the whole proceeding, was published in England. 

There was a general design this year, among the 
Indians, against the English. Miantinomo, the 
sachem of the Naragansets, was supposed to be the 
author and chief promoter, and to have drawn 
many other sachems to join with him. The In 
dians be^an to make use of fire-arms, and had 
procured a great number, together with powder and 
shot, from English traders in the e. parts, as well 
as from the Dutch. A constant watch was ordered 
to be kept from sun-set to sun-rising, and a place 
of retreat to be provided, in each plantation, for 
the women and children and for the security of 
ammunition. Beacons were erected, and ordered 
to be fired upon an alarm, and all smiths were re 
quired to lay aside all other business, until, all the 
arms in the colony were put into good order ; for 
which payment was promised by the government. 
Mr. John Leveret arid Mr. Edward Hutchinson 
were sent to Miantinomo with articles of complaint, 
and to require him to come himself, or to send two 



of his chief counsellors, to the governor, in order to 
give satisfaction. Connecticut proposed to fall 
upon the Indians immediately, and offered, if the 
Massachusetts would send 120 men to Saybrook, 
to join a proportionable number. But the Massa 
chusetts court doubted whether they had sufficient 
proofs of the designs of the Indians to justify a 
war. However, the governor with the magistrates, 
before the court met, thought it necessary to dis 
arm the India. is within the colony, which they 
readily submitted to. Miantinomo came in person 
t&amp;lt;l the court, and demanded that his accusers should 
be brought face to face ; and if they failed in their 
proof, that they should suffer the same punish 
ment he would have deserved himself if be had 
been guilty, viz. death. His behaviour was grave, 
and he gave his answers with great deliberation 
and seeming ingenuity. He would never speak 
but in the presence of two of his counsellors, that 
they might be witnesses of every thing which 
passed. Two days were spent in treaty. He de 
nied all he was charged with, and pretended the 
reports to his disadvantage were raised by Uncas, 
sachem of the Mohegins, or some of his people. 
He was willing to renew his former engagements, 
that if any of the Indians, even the Nianticks, who 
he said were as his own flesh and blood, should do 
any wrong to the English, so as neither he nor they 
could satisfy without blood, he would deliver them 
up and leave them to mercy. The people of Con 
necticut put little confidence in him, and could 
hardly be kept from falling upon him, but were at 
last prevailed upon, by the Massachusetts, to desist 
for the present. The minds of men were filled 
with fear from these rumours of a general conspi 
racy, and every noise in the night was alarming. 
A poor man, in a swamp at Watertown, hearing 
the howling of a kennel of wolves, and expecting 
to be devoured by them, cried out for help, which 
occasioned a general alarm through all the towns 
near Boston. The Indians, being thus prevented 
from surprising the English, remained quiet. 

In the year 1642, letters came to Mr. Cotton of 
Boston, Mr. Hooker of Hartford, and Mr. Daven 
port of New Haven, signed by several of the no 
bility, divers members of the house of commons, 
and some ministers, to call them or some of them, 
if all could not come, to assist in the assembly of 
divines at Westminster. Such of the magistrates 
and ministers as were near Boston met together, 
and n ost of them were of opinion that it was a call 
of God, but Mr. Hooker did not like the business, 
and thought it was not a sufficient call to go 1000 
leagues to confer about matters of church govern- J 



MASSACHUSETTS. 



519 



[ment. Mr. Davenport thought otherwise, but his 
church, having but one minister, would not spare 
him. Mr. Cotton thought it a clear call, and 
would have undertaken the voyage if others 
would have gone with him. Soon after, other 
letters were received, which diverted them from 
any thoughts of proceeding. Mr. Hooker was 
about that time preparing for the press a vindica 
tion of Congregational churches, or rather framing 
a system or plan of church government, which he 
designed for the New England churches, let the 
determination at Westminster be what it would; 
Had the churches of New England appeared there 
by their representatives, or any of the principal 
divines appeared as members of the assembly, 
greater exception might have been taken to their 
building after a model of their own framing. Se 
veral persons who came from England in 1643, 
made a muster to set up prcsbyterian govern 
ment, under the authority of the assembly at West 
minster ; but a New England assembly, the gene 
ral court, soon put them to the rout. 

(Anno 1643.) The governor and deputy go 
vernor for the last year were re-elected in 1643. 
Samuel Symons and William Hibbins were added 
to the assistants. The colony had so increased, 
that it was divided this year into four counties or 
shires, Essex, Middlesex, Suffolk, and Norfolk. 

In this year the united colonies of New England, 
viz. Massachusetts, Plymouth, Connecticut, and 
New Haven, enter into a firm and perpetual 
league, offensive and defensive. This confederacy 
had been in agitation for several years. In 1638, 
articles were drawn up which were referred until 
1639. 

(Anno 1644.) About this time, much division 
and disturbance in the colony were occasioned by 
the French of Acadia and Nova Scotia, but were 
soon settled to the approbation of all parties. In 
this year Mr. Endicot was chosen governor, and 
Mr. Winthrop deputy governor. Mr. Pynchon, 
who, living very remote at Springfield, had been 
left out of the number of assistants, was again re 
stored. 

The Indians, this year, were at war among 
themselves. They were daily acquiring the use of 
fire-arms, and the commissioners, this year, passed 
an act, that no person within any of the united co 
lonies should, directly or indirectly, sell any kind 
of arms or ammunition to an Indian, under penalty 
of twenty for one ; nor any smith or other person 
mend any gun or other weapon for an Indian, 
under the like penalty. There was a proposal 
likewise made, among the commissioners, for an 
exclusive trade with the Indians, to be carried on 



by a company, to consist of subscribers from the 
several governments ; each government to have a 
distinct committee to receive subscriptions, take in 
stock, &amp;c. ; the whole to be under the regulation of 
the commissioners. This proposal was recom 
mended to the several general courts, but never 
agreed to. The Massachusetts was more consider 
able than all the other colonies together, and this 
alone was enough to have prevented them from 
approving of such a motion. 

The next year, 1645, a meeting extraordinary 
of the commissioners was held at Boston ; when it 
was thought necessary to send messengers to the 
sachems of Naraganset and Mohegin to require 
their appearance at Boston ; and a conference en 
sued, which ended in a treaty of conciliation. 

About this time there was another struggle for 
power between the assistants or magistrates and 
the deputies. The latter could not bear their 
votes should lose their effect by the non-concur 
rence of the former, who were so much fewer in 
number; but by the firmness of Mr. Winthrop, 
the assistants maintained their right at this time, 
and (March 25, J644) the deputies, not being able 
to prevail, moved that the two houses might sit 
apart, and from that time votes were sent in a par 
liamentary way from one house to the other, and 
the consent of both was necessary to an act of the 
court. Other differences also arose, but were ami 
cably adjusted in the next sessions. 

Mr. Dudley had the place of governor for 1645, 
and Mr. Winthrop deputy governor. Herbert 
Pelham, Esq. who arrived not long before, was 
added to the assistants in the room of Mr. Stough- 
ton, who we suppose died this year. Mr. Pelharn 
being a gentleman distinguished by his family, 
estate, and the qualities of his mind, was also, this 
first year of his arrival, chosen commissioner for 
the united colonies, Mr.Winthrop being the other. 

In 1646, Mr.Winthrop was chosen governor, 
and Mr. Dudley deputy governor ; Mr. Endicot 
and Mr. Pelham commissioners. Nothing worthy 
of recording took place in this year. 

In 1647 and 1648, the same governor and de 
puty governor were continued ; and the first of 
these years, Robert Bridges was added to the as 
sistants. The number of males, in each of the 
four colonies, being carried in to the commissioners 
in the yeajr 1647, in order to proportion the sum 
of 1043/. 10s. Id. expended ibr the general ser 
vice, it appeared that the Massachusetts part or 
proportion of the sum was 670/. 3*. 4J. ; Ply 
mouth s 128/. 13s Ad. ; Connecticut s 140/. 2s. 5d. ; 
and New Haven s 104/. 1 Is. 

(Anno 1649.) In the ^beginning of 1649,] 
2 




520 



MASSACHUSETTS. 



[(March), died Mr. Winthrop, the father of the 
; courttry, in the 63d year of his age. His death 
caused a general grief through the colony. He 
spent his estate and his bodily strength in the 
public service, although he was remarkable for his 
temperance, frugality, and economy. His vir 
tues were many, his errors few, and yet he could 
not escape calumny and detraction, which would 
sometimes make too great an impression upon him. 
Mr. Endicot succeeded him in the place of go 
vernor, and Mr. Dudley took the place of deputy 
governor. 

A dispute between the colonies of the Massa 
chusetts and Connecticut, which began several 
years before, was this year brought to an end ; and 
in the following year, 1650, a controversy which 
had long subsisted between the colony of New 
Haven and the Dutch at the Manhados, was set 
tled by the commissioners of the united colonies. 
The same governor and deputy governor were re- 
elected for the year 1650. A corporation in Eng 
land, constituted for propagating the gospel among 
the Indians, began this year their correspondence 
with the commissioners of the united colonies, who 
were employed as agents for the corporation, as 
long as the union of the colonies continued. One 
professed design of the colony charter was the gos- 
pelizing the^natives. 

Proposals had been made in the year 1648 to 
Monsieur D Aillebout, the governor of Canada, 
for a free commerce between the Massachusetts and 
that colony. The French professed to be greatly 
pleased, and a correspondence was kept up upon 
the subject until the year 1650, when the French 
governor sent an agent to Boston in order to settle, 
not merely trade, but a league or alliance, defen 
sive and offensive, between the government of Ca 
nada and the colonies of Massachusetts and Ply 
mouth ; but being informed that all matters of that 
nature were left to the commissioners of the united 
colonies, he returned to Canada, and the next 
year two gentlemen were sent with letters to the 
commissioners, praying in behalf of the French of 
Canada, and of the christianized Indians in Aca- 
dia, the aid of the English against the Indians of 
the Six Nations, but nothing essential was effected 
on this score. 

Mr. Endicot was chosen governor in the years 
1651, 1652, and 1653, Mr. Dudley deputy go 
vernor. 

The Massachusetts, who, as hath been observed, 
claimed the province of Maine as within the 
bounds of their charter, took the opportunity of 
the confusions existing there, in this year, and 
encouraged the disposition which prevailed in 



many of the inhabitants to submit to their juris 
diction, and in 1651 they appointed Mr. Brad- 
street, Major Dennison, and Captain Hawthorn, 
to treat with the gentlemen of that province about 
the surrender thereof, as in their best judgment 
and discretion should seem meet. The next year, 
1652, Mr. Bradstreet and others were sent com 
missioners to summon the inhabitants of Kittery to 
come in and own their subjection to the Massachu 
setts, as of right belonging to them. The inhabi 
tants accordingly assembled Nov. 16, and agreed 
to submit, and about 40 inhabitants subscribed an 
instrument of submission. The like was done at 
Acamentieus the22d of the same month, and soon 
after at Wells, Saco, and Cape Porpoise. To the 
inhabitants of all these plantations larger privileges 
were granted than to those of the other parts of the 
Massachusetts government, for they were all free 
men upon taking the oath, whereas every where 
else none could be made free unless he was a 
church member. The province was made a 
county, by the name of Yorkshire. The towns 
from that time sent their deputies to the general 
court at Boston. 

The trade of the province increasing, especially 
with the West Indies, where the bucaneers or pi 
rates at this time were numerous ; and part of the 
wealth which they took from the Spaniards, as well 
as what was produced by the trade, being brought 
to New England in bullion, it was thought neces 
sary for preventing fraud in money to erect a mint 
for coining shillings, sixpences, and threepences, 
with no other impression at first than N E on 
the one side, and XII. VI. or III. on the other; 
but in October 1651, the court ordered that all 
pieces of money should have a double ring with 
this inscription, MASSACHUSETTS, and a tree in the 
centre, on one side, and NEW ENGLAND, and the 
year of our Lord, on the other side. At the same 
sessions, a committee or council of trade was ap 
pointed, after the example, as expressed in the or 
der, of the parliament of Great Britain, who were 
to meet at Boston or Charlestown to receive pro 
posals for promoting trade, but nothing came 
from this attempt. 

In October 1651, hostilities began between the 
English and Dutch in Europe. tThe Dutch co 
lony at Manhados was in too feeble a state, openly 
to annoy the English colonies their neighbours, 
and therefore desired to preserve peace in America. 
The English colonies carried on an advantageous 
trade with the Dutch, and were for that reason will 
ing to continue in friendship, and a correspondence 
was kept up between the subjects of the two na 
tions. In an address from the general court to] 



MASSACHUSETTS. 



521 



[Cromwell, they consider themselves as at liberty 
to continue in peace with the Dutch, and suppose 
their own act to be necessary to bring them into 
a state of war, notwithstanding the two nations 
were at war in Europe. But in 1653, informa 
tion was given by the Indians from several quarters 
that the Dutch governor was privately soliciting 
them to a general confederacy, in order totally to 
extirpate the English. The massacre at Amboyna 
was then but a late affair. A general alarm was 
spread through the colonies. An extraordinary 
meeting of the commissioners was called at Bos 
ton, April 19, u to consider of several rumours 
and reports gathered from the Indians and others, 
that the Dutch had plotted with the Indians, and 
stirred them up to cut off the English." The 
result of this first meeting was, that although the 
evidence was so strong, as that some of the com 
missioners looked upon it to be full proof, yet they 
thought it most expedient the Dutch governor 
should have opportunity of making answer ; but 
before any message could be sent, letters were re 
ceived from him, denying all which the Indians 
or any others had charged him with, wondering 
the English would give credit to Indian testimo 
nies, and offering to come or send, or to make 
answer to any deputies which might be sent thither. 
It was thought proper to send agents to him; and 
after some conferences, a treaty of peace was 
signed on the 5th of April. 

(Anno 1654.) TJiis peace with the Dutch, to 
gether with " the hopeful establishment of go 
vernment in England," occasioned a public 
thanksgiving in the Massachusetts, Sept. 20 ; and 
an order, passed the last year, prohibiting trade 
with the Dutch, was repealed. 

Mr. Endicot was governor in 1655, and was 
annually chosen until 1660, and Mr. Bellingham 
deputy governor each year. During this period 
the trade of the colony was in a flourishing state, 
free admission being allowed to all nations, and 
the vessels of the colony trading to and from 
France, Holland, and other parts of Europe ; the 
importation of no commodities whatsoever being 
prohibited, or under any clog or restraint. Not 
withstanding the great variety of sectaries in Eng 
land, there had been no divisions of any conse 
quence in the Massachusetts; but from 1637 to 
1650, they enjoyed, in general, great quietness in 
their ecclesiastical affairs, discords in particular 
churches beiiiy healed and made up by a submis 
sion to the arbitrament of neighbouring churches, 
and sometimes the interposition of the civil power. 
The reputation, not only of the constitution of the 

VOL. II. 



churches, but a so of the New England clergy, 
had been for some time very great in England, 
and the opinions of Mr. Cotton, Hooker, Daven 
port, and others, are cited as authorities by many 
English divines. The persecution of the Episco 
palians by the prevailing powers in England, was 
evidently from revenge for the persecution they 
had suffered themselves, and from political consi 
derations and the prevalence of a pnrty, seeing 
all other opinions arid professions, however ab 
surd, were tolerated ; but in New England, it must 
be confessed, that bigotry and cruel zeal pre 
vailed, and to that degree that no opinions but 
their own could be tolerated. They were sincere, 
but mistaken in their principles ; and absurd as it 
is, it is too evident, they believed it to be for the 
glory of God to take away the lives of his crea 
tures for maintaining tenets contrary to what they 
professed themselves. This occasioned complaints 
against the colony to the parliament and to Crom 
well, but without success. 

Mr. Winslow, the agent for the colony in Eng 
land, being dead, Mr. Leveret, one of Crom 
well s commissioners in the expedition to Acadia, 
was appointed in his stead. Cromwell had been 
very desirous of drawing off the New Englandcrs 
to people Ireland after his successes there, and 
the inhabitants of New Haven had serious thoughts 
of removing, but did not carry their design into 
execution. Jamaica being conquered, Cromwell 
renewed his invitation to the colony of the Mas 
sachusetts to remove, and to go and people that 
island ; and it appears, by Mr. Leveret s letters 
and a letter from the general court to Cromwell, 
that he had it much at heart. Cromwell foresaw 
that the W. India planters would raise estates 
far superior to those of the inhabitants of the n. 
colonies; but all he could do was insufficient to 
induce the people of New England to quit a coun 
try where they could live tolerably, and were in 
dulged with all (he privileges they desired, and we 
have no account of many families having removed. 
A few accepted the invitation. Complaints were 
carried to Cromwell from Rhode island against 
the Massachusetts, by Clark, Holmes, and others ; 
but Mr. Leveret, who was a captain of horse under 
Cromwell during some part of the war, had much 
of his favour, and though he could not prevent 
the Rhode islanders from being favourably re 
ceived, for no sect could fail of an advocate in 
Cromwell s court, yet he prevented so much as an 
inquiry into the conduct of the Massachusetts. 
Nay, Cromwell applauded the colony for banish 
ing the evil seducers which had ri.scii up among] 
3 x 



522 



MASSACHUSETTS. 



[them, of which Mr. Wheelwright and Mrs. 
Hutch inson were the chief, and probably he had 
a view to them in particular. 

Cromwell seems to have been the first who had 
a true sense of the importance of the colonies to 
their mother country. The expedition to Hispa- 
niola was by him well intended, though by his ser 
vants badly executed, and his plan tor enlarging 
the national interest in America no doubt extended 
further than the conquest of that island. Let us 
take a view of the state of the colonies at that 
time. Barbadoes and the Caribees were at that 
time under the same government. These with 
Virginia, Maryland, and Bermudas, refused to 
acknowledge the parliament whilst the king lived, 
and it occasioned some trouble to reduce them 
after his death. They were all the colonies, ex 
cept New England, which were settled when Crom 
well took the government upon him. There were 
DO less than three different governors over Virgi 
nia during his short rule; Digby, Ben net, and 
Matthews. Barbadoes surrendered to Sir George 
Ayscough, upon condition that the government 
should be by governor, council, and assembly ; and 
Daniel Searl being appointed their governor, con 
tinued until the restoration. It was a rash thing 
to resist the supreme authority in England, and 
gave great offence. Until then all the colonies 
had been indulged in a free open trade to and from 
all parts of the world, unless the privileges granted 
to the East India company made an exception ; 
but Cromwell obtained an act or ordinance of the 
parliament, prohibiting the plantations from re 
ceiving or exporting any European commodities, 
except in English-built ships navigated by Eng 
lishmen, and all correspondence was forbidden 
with any nation or colony not subject to England, 
and no alien was allowed to set up a factory or 
carry on a trade in the plantations. Virginia made 
heavy complaints that they were not allowed to 
send off their produce to, nor to import necessa 
ries from, any foreign countries, whilst England 
alone, they said, could nottakeoff their produce, 
nor could they at that time be supplied from thence 
with all things necessary for them. But, how- 
.ever grievous this act might prove to the other co 
lonies, it is certain that those of New England, 
whether it was designed to extend there or not, 
guffered nothing by it. In a letter to Cromwell, 
in 1654, the Massachusetts seem to be under fears 
lest they should be deprived of the privileges 
which had been indulged to them by his prede 
cessors, and hope his highness will be no less pro 
pitious, and will not be displeased with them for 



asserting their just privileges, to the prejudice 
whereof some attempts had been made by the com 
manders of ships, especially by some ar.vied with 
commission, which through for fear of offending 
they had patiently endured, yet they thought it 
not safe to approve of such actings, &amp;c. If this 
letter had respect to any attempts to regulate the 
trade, they were attempts which were soon given 
over, and caused little or no interruption ; and they 
were not only indulged in their trade to all parts, 
but that extraordinary privilege of having their 
goods imported into England, free from all cus 
tom which other subjects were liable to pay, seems 
to have been continued until the restoration. No 
wonder if they were envied by the other colonies, 
and if the merchants in England were dissatisfied 
also with the continuance of the last-mentioned 
extraordinary favour. 

(Anno 1656 to 1660.) In the year 1656 began 
what has been generally, and not improperly, called 
the persecution of the Quakers. Two years be 
fore, an order had been made that every inhabitant 
who had in their custody any of the books of John 
Reeves and Lodowick Muggleton, " who pretend 
to be the two last witnesses and prophets of Jesus 
Christ," which books were said to be full of blas 
phemies, should bring or send them in to the next 
magistrate, within one month, on pain of 10/. for 
each book remaining in any person s hands after 
that time. No person appeared professing the 
opinions of the Quakers until July 1656, when 
Mary Fisher and Ann Austin arrived from Barba 
does. A few weeks after arrived in the ship 
Speedwell of London, Robert Lock master, nine 
more of these itinerants, whose names " after the 
flesh," the language they used to the officers sent 
to make inquiry, Avere William Brend, Thomas 
Thurston, Christopher Holder, John Copeland, 
Richard Smith, Mary Prince, Dorothy Waugh, 
Sarah Gibbons, and Mary Witherhead. On the 
8th of September they were brought before the 
court of assistants, and being examined, and each 
of them questioned how they could make it ap 
pear that God sent them, after a pause they an 
swered, that they had the same call which Abra 
ham had to go out of his country ; to other ques 
tions they gave rude and contemptuous answers, 
which is the reason assigned for committing them 
to prison. A great number of their books, which 
they had brought over with intent to scatter them 
about the country, were seized and reserved for the 
fire. Soon after this, as the governor was going 
from the public worship on the Lord s day to his 
own house, several gentlemen accompanying him ? ] 



MASSACHUSETTS. 



523 



[Mary Prince called to him from a window of the 
prison, railing at and reviling him, saying, woe 
unto thee, thou art an oppressor ; and denouncing 
the judgments of God upon him. Not content 
with this, she wrote a letter to the governor and ma 
gistrates, filled with opprobrious stuff . The go 
vernor sent for her twice from the prison to his 
house, and took much pains to persuade her to 
desist from such extravagancies. Two of the mi 
nisters were present, and with much moderation 
and tenderness endeavoured to convince her of 
her errors, to which she returned the grossest rail 
ings, reproach frig them as hirelings, deceivers of 
the peopie, Baal s priests, the seed of the serpent, 
of the brood of Ishmacl, and the like. 

The court passed sentence of banishment against 
them all, and required the master of the ship in 
which they came, to become bound with sureties to 
the value of 500/. to carry them all away, and caused 
them to be committed to prison until the ship 
should be ready to sail. At this time there was no 
special provision by law for the punishment of 
Quakers; they came within a colony law against 
heretics in general. At the next sessions of the 
general court, the 14th of October following, an 
act passed, laying a penalty of 100A upon the 
master of any vessel who should bring a known 
Quaker into any part of the colony, and requiring 
him to give security to carry him back again ; that 
the Quaker should be immediately sent to the house 
of correction and whipped twenty stripes, and af 
terwards, kept to hard labour until transportation. 
They also laid a penalty of five pounds for im 
porting, and the like for dispersing, Quakers books, 
and several penalties for defending their heretical 
opinions. And the next year, an additonal law 
was made, by which all persons were subjected to 
the penalty of forty shillings for every hour s 
entertainment given to any known Quaker, and any 
Quaker, after the first conviction, if a man was to 
lose one ear, and a second time the other ; a woman, 
each time to be severely whipped; and the third 
time, man or woman, to have their tongues bored 
through willi a red-hot iron ; and every Quaker, 
who should become such in the colony, was 
subjected to the like punishments. In May 1658, 
a penalty of ten shillings was laid on every person 
present at a Quakers meeting, and five pounds upon 
every one speaking at such meeting. Notwith 
standing all this severity, the number of Quakers, 
as might well have been expected, increasing 
rather than diminishing, in October following, a 
further law was made for punishing with death all 
Quakers who should return into the jurisdiction 
after banishment. That some provision was 



necessary against these people, so far as they 
were disturbers of civil peace and order, every 
one will allow ; but such sanguinary laws against 
particular doctrines or tenets in religion are not to 
be defended. The most that can be said for the 
people of Massachusetts is, that they tried gentler 
means at first, which they found utterly ineffectual) 
and that they followed the example of the autho 
rities in most other states, and in most ages of the 
world, who, with the like absurdity, have sup 
posed every person could and ought to think as 
they did, and with the like cruelty have punished 
such as appeared to differ from them. We may 
add, that it was with reluctance that these unna 
tural laws were carried into execution. 

That we may finish what relates to the Quakers, 
it must be further observed, that their friends in 
England solicited and at length obtained an order 
from the king, Sept. 9th, 1661, requiring that a 
stop should be put to all capital or corporal punish 
ment of those of his subjects called Quakers, and 
that such as were obnoxious should be sent to Eng 
land. Whatever opinion they might have of the 
force of orders from the crown controulingthe laws 
of the colony, they prudently complied with this 
instruction, and suspended the execution of the 
laws against Quakers, so far as respected corporal 
punishment, until further order. 

From 1656 to 1660, we find but very few facts 
relative to the public affairs of the colony worth 
transmitting to posterity. After the peace witli 
the Dutch in Europe, the trade between the Eng 
lish and Dutch colonies was revived, and Stuyve- 
sant, the Dutch governor in 1657, wrote to the com 
missioners of the English colonies, that the limits 
agreed and settled in 1650, both upon the main 
and upon Long island, were ratified and confirmed 
by the states general of the United Provinces, and 
desired that the confirmation of the Lord Protec 
tor being ready, time and place might be appointed 
for the exchange. The commissioners, in their 
answer, let him know that they had ever conformed 
to that settlement, although he had not; but they 
said nothing of the Protector s confirmation. It 
does not appear that ever they sought for it. To 
wards the end of this period the changes in Eng 
land were so frequent, that it was prudence in the 
colonies to take as little notice of them as might be, 
until there appeared a prospect of a lasting esta 
blishment. An express acknowledgement of 
Richard Cromwell was expected from the Massa 
chu^etts, but they declined it. An original letter 
from him to the governor, recommending the case 
of Mr. Si .wall, a minister, is all that appears upon 
the records relative to him.] 
3x2 



MASSACHUSETTS. 



[The rapid increase of (lie Massachusetts colony, 
together with the figure which many of the first 
settlers made in England before their removal, and 
the correspondence which they maintained with 
their friends of great distinction there, many years 
after, eclipsed the colony of New Plymouth, whose 
growth and progress would otherwise have been 
thought considerable. The s. part of the co 
lony in general, being of a light sandy soil, would 
have been incapable of supporting its inhabitants, 
were it not for the large bodies of salt meadow, the 
hay of which serves for fodder for their cattle in 
the winter, and the dung from it,bekig an excellent 
manure, produces good crops of grain, with little 
labour, in the summer, light land being easily 
tilled. The n. parts, bordering upon the Massa 
chusetts, afforded many good farms, particularly 
the town of Bridgewater, which has been famous 
for the quality of the land and for good husban 
dry. They were few at first, and but little ad 
ditions were made after the Massachusetts was 
planted, except from their natural increase ; and 
yet before the year 1643, besides the town of Ply 
mouth, they had settled Duxbury, Scituate, Taun- 
ton, Rehoboth, Sandwich, Barnstable, Yarmouth, 
and Eastham. Upon the death of Mr. Carver, 
their first governor, soon after their arrival, they 
chose in his stead Mr. Bradford, being a grave 
discreet man. They were so well satisfied with 
his administration, that they continued to choose 
him annually, until his death in 1657, except two 
years, when they chose Mr. Winslow, and one 
year Mr. Prince. 

Their ecclesiastical affairs were for divers years 
in discouraging circumstances. They had expec 
tations that Mr. Robinson their pastor, whom they 
had left with one half his church in Holland, would 
follow them, but his death, in 1624, put an end to 
their hopes. They were unsuccessful in their at 
tempts to settle a minister; the principles of one and 
the manners of another were exceptionable, and 
having several brethren among themselves well 
gifted, they chose to continue without a minister 
for some time, rather than to settle one who was not 
exemplary in his life, or who differed from them in 
points of doctrine or chinch government ; but in 
1643, they had a set of pious learned ministers ; 
one of whom, Mr. Chauncey, some years after, was 
chosen to the presidentship of the college in the 
Massachusetts, and removed to Cambridge. 

CHAP. II. 

Historical occurrences from the restoration of King 
Charles II. to the year 1686, when the charter 
was vacated. 
{Anno 1660.) Since the year 1640, the people 



had been without any apprehensions of danger to 
their religious or civil privileges. They prudently 
acknowledged subjection to the parliament, and 
afterwards to Cromwell, so far as was necessary to 
keep upon terms and avoid exception, and no far 
ther. It was not till the 30th of November in this 
year, that a ship arrived from Bristol, which 
brought advices of the proceedings of parliament, 
and that all matters were fully settled in England. 
They were also informed by letters from Mr. Le 
veret their agent, and others, that petitions and 
complaints were preferred against the colony to the 
king in council, and to the parliament, (a citation 
being posted upon the Exchange in London), by 
Mason, Gorges, and others. The governor and as 
sistants met forthwith ; called the general court to 
convene the 19th of December ; a very loyal ad 
dress to the king was presently agreed upon, and 
another to the two houses of parliament. A most 
gracious answer was given to the address by the 
king s letter dated Feb. 15, 1660, which was the 
first public act or order concerning them after the 
restoration, except a few lines the 23d of January 
before, from secretary Morice, to inclose an order 
for the apprehending two of the late king s judges. 
A day of public thanksgiving was appointed by 
authority, to aknowledge the favour of heaven, in 
inclining the king graciously to accept and answer 
the address made to him. They were notwith 
standing under no small degree of fear, lest the re 
volution of government in England should pro 
duce as great a change in the form of their govern 
ment, both in church and state. They were 
alarmed from all quarters. Reports were spread, 
that Virginia and the islands were forbid trading 
with them, that three frigates would soon be sent 
from England, and that a general governor over all 
the colonies was to come in one of them. 

The proclaiming the king having been deferred 
until August 1661, the governor, upon intelligence 
from England of what was doing there to the pre 
judice of the colony, did not think proper to delay 
it any longer, and called the general court together 
the 7th of August, when, alter a great variety of 
forms for a proclamation had been proposed, the 
following was agreed to. 

" Forasmuch as Charles II. is undoubted king 
of Great Britain, and all other his Majesty s terri 
tories and dominions thereunto belonging, and hath 
been some time since lawfully proclaimed and 
crowned accordingly : We therefore do, as in 
duty we are bound, own and acknowledge him to 
be our sovereign lord and king, and do therefore 
hereby proclaim and declare his s;icred Majesty 
Charles II. to be lawful king of Great Britain,] 
10 



MASSACHUSETTS, 



525 



[France, and Ireland, and all other the territories 
thereunto belonging. God save the king." 

An order passed the court the same day, mid 
was posted up in Boston, forbidding all disorderly 
behaviour on the occasion ; declaring that no per 
son might expect indulgence for the breach of any 
law, and " in a particular manner, that no man 
should presume to drink his Majesty s health," 
which the order says, " he hath in an especial 
manner forbid." An address to the king was 
likewise agreed to, and ordered to be sent to Eng 
land. 

The year 1662 was remarkable for a synod or 
general council of all the. churches, held at Boston 
in the month of September, by order of the general 
court. 

The two questions referred to their decision, and 
concerning which the country was much divided 
in sentiment, were these, 

1st, Who are the subjects of baptism ? 

2d, Whether, according to the word of God, 
there ought to be a consociation of churches, and 
\vhat should be the manner of it ? 

The result of this synod was printed by order 
of the general court, and is particularly mentioned 
by Dr. Mather, Mr. Neale, and other writers. 

John Touton, a French doctor and inhabitant 
of Rochelle in France, made application to the 
court, in behalf of himself and other protcstants 
expelled from their habitations, on account of their 
religion, that they might have liberty to inhabit 
here, which was readily granted to them. 

The inhabitants upon Connecticut river being 
increased to three townships, Springfield, North 
ampton, and 11 ad ley, at the sessions of the general 
court in May 1662, they were made a county by 
the name of Hampshire. 

(Anno J663.) A letter was sent signed by the 
governor, in the name of the general court, dated 
Oct. 20, 1663, to Dr. John Owen, desiring him 
to come over and to accept the call or invitation 
which the first church in Boston had given him, 
to become their teacher in the room of Mr. Norton ; 
but he could not be prevailed upon. 

(Anno 1664.) In 1664, the people of New Eng 
land were surprised with the appearance of a very 
large comet, which continued from the 17th of 
November until the 4th of February following. 
At first it appeared in the e. bearded, afterwards 
in tlie w. with a tail. They were not alone in 
their opinion, that comets were omens of great 
evils. So judicious a writer as Sleidan observes, 
that a comet was seen all the month of August 
preceding the October when Zuinglius was slain ; 



he adds, that the queen-mother of France died 
about the same time. One had appeared just be 
fore Mr. Cotton s death. The death of their aged 
governor, and the troubles the colony met with the 
next year, from the king s commissioners, tended 
to confirm the people in their opinion. 

(Anno 16b5.) The first prosecution, we find 
upon record, of any of the people called Anabap 
tists, was in the year 1665. Wiiliam Turner, 
Thomas Gold, Edward Drinker, Joh:i George, 
and Thomas Os oorne, were charged before the 
governor and other magistrates, with " gathering 
themselves into a pretended church state, in op 
position to the order of the churches in Christ in 
the colony, and intermeddling with those holy ap 
pointments of the Lord Jesus, which nre proper 
only to office trust." They confessed they had 
joined in a church society, that they had been re- 
baptized, and that one of them administered the 
Lord s supper. They were admonished, and 
threatened that if they continued to meet and 
practise contrary to the order of the gospel, the 
court would proceed against them according to 
their demerits. They persevered notwithstand 
ing, and were sentenced by the court to be dis 
franchised, if they were freemen ; and if they still 
continued their practice, to be committed to pri 
son, upon conviction before one magistrate, until 
the general court should take further order ; and 
some time after, they were imprisoned and ba 
nished. Nitimur in vetitutn was verified in this 
proceeding, as it usually is in the like cases. Se 
verity made converts, and then it was thought ad 
visable to cease from further prosecutions. 

In the year 1664, the line between the Massa 
chusetts and Plymouth was fully and amicably 
settled, and ran by a committee from each colony, 
their return being accepted by the general court of 
the Massachusetts, and ordered to be recorded 
and there is no doubt the general court of Plymouth 
colony accepted it likewise. 

From the restoration until the vacating the 
charter, the colony never stood well in England j 
the principal persons, both in church and state, 
were never without fearful expectations of being 
deprived of their privileges. The years 1664 and 
1665 afforded them greater occasion for fears than 
they had met with at any time before. In the 
spring of 1664, intelligence was brought that se 
veral men of war were coming from England, and 
several gentlemen of distinction aboard them. As 
soon as the general court met in May, they or 
dered the captain of the castle to give the speediest 
notice, upon sight of the ships, to the governor and] 



526 



MASSACHUSETTS. 



[deputy governor ; appointed a committee to repair 
on board to present the respects, of the court to the 
gentlemen, and to acquaint them that it was the 
desire of the authority of the place, that strict 
orders should be given to the under- officers and 
soldiers, in their coming ashore to refresh them 
selves, but at no time to exceed a convenient num 
ber, and those without arms, and to behave them 
selves orderly, and to give no offence to the people 
and laws of the place. This was no more than a 
prudent precaution, considering how strict the 
laws were against all immoralities, the sense the 
magistrates hud of their obligations to execute 
thorn upon all offenders without distinction, the 
certainty that the crews of men of war would of 
fend, and the danger of tumults, quarrels, and 
bloodshed, when they should be brought to punish 
ment. Preparation was likewise made for receiv 
ing and entertaining the gentlemen in the best 
manner. 

A day of fasting and prayer was appointed to 
be observed throughout the jurisdiction, to implore 
the mercy of God to them under their many dis 
tractions and troubles, according as they should 
stand in need. And apprehending it to be of great 
concernment, that the patent or charter should be 
kept safe and secret, they ordered the secretary to 
bring it into court and to deliver it, together with 
a duplicate, to four of (he court, who were directed 
to dispose of them, as might be most safe for the 
country. 

The ships arrived Saturday the 23d of July, with 
Colonel Richard Nichols and George Cartwright, 
Esq. ; who, together with Sir Robert Carr and 
Samuel Maverick, Esq. had received a commis 
sion from the king for reducing the Dutch at the 
Manhados, visiting the colonies in New England, 
hearing and determining all matters of complaint, 
and settling the peace and security of the country, 
any three or two of them to be a quorum, Colonel 
Nichols during his life being one. At their desire 
the governor ordered a meeting of the council on 
Tuesday the 26th. The commissioners laid their 
commission before the council, with the king s let 
ter of the 23d of April, and part of an instruction 
referring to the reducing the Manhados, and pro 
posed the raising such a number of men as the 
country could spare, to begin their march on the 
20th of August, promising that if in the mean time 
they could prevail by treaty or any nearer assist 
ance, they would stop the progress of raising or 
marching the men. 

The court resolved to raise a number not ex 
ceeding two hundred men, at the charge of the co 



lony, for his Majesty s service against the Dutch. 
The men were raised, but the place surrendering 
upon articles, no orders were given for them to 
march. 

The Dutch being reduced, Nichols remained at 
New York, the other commissioners returned to 
Boston the 15th of February, and departed the 
next day for Plymouth, to deliver the king s letter 
to that government. And having dispatched their 
business there, they went to the Naraganset coun 
try, and at Warwick held their court, made in 
quiry into the tides of lands there, and made divers 
determinations which had no long effect, and then 
came privately and separately to Boston the latter 
end of April, and so prevented, designedly as was 
supposed, that respect which was intended to have 
been shewn them at their arrival. Mr. Endicot 
the governor died the J5th of March 1665, and 
was succeeded in his office by Mr. Bellingham the 
deputy governor. 

(1666 to 1670.) This gentleman was afterwards 
duly elected, and continued to be annually chosen 
governor, and Mr. Willoughby deputy governor. 
Nova Scotia and the rest of Acadia, which had 
been rescued from the French by Cromwell, were 
restored by the treaty of Breda. The French 
made little progress in settling this country. The 
only inconvenience the Massachusetts complained 
of, until after the revolution, was the encourage 
ment given to the Indians to make their inroads 
upon the frontiers. Sir Thomas Temple, who with 
others had a grant of the country first from Crom 
well, and afterwards from King Charles, thought 
he had reason to complain, and the king s order 
was repeated to him, to give up his forts to the 
French, some pretence being made for not com 
plying with the first order. 

After 40 years, the greatest part of the first 
emigrants had finished their pilgrimage, and were 
arrived at the place of their everlasting abode. 
Some of them lamented their being born too 
soon to see New England in its most flourishing 
state. 

The people of New Hampshire had continued 
in a quirt and orderly state ever since the year 
1641. There was no person who had any pretence 
to the powers of government, Mason having only 
a grant of the soil from the council of Plymouth. 
Sir Ferdinando Gorges received a royal charter, 
granting the same royalties, privileges, and fran 
chises as are of right or ought to be enjoyed by 
the bishop of Durham, in the county palatine of 
Durham, with power to constitute a deputy go 
vernor, a chancelbr, a treasurer, a marshal, a] 



MASSACHUSETTS. 



527 



[judge of admiralty, officers of admiralty for order 
ing maritime affairs, master of ordnance, a secre 
tary, &amp;c. ; and by repeatedly nominating some 
such officers, and attempting to establish a form of 
government consisting of different persons from 
those appointed by the Massachusetts, there were 
always two different parties and interests kept alive 
in that province, but New Hampshire had been 
so long united to the Massachusetts that the peo 
ple of both colonies were of one heart and mind in 
civil and religious affairs. The town of Ports 
mouth shewed an instance of their great regard to the 
public interest, and in 1669 made a collection, as 
it is termed in the instrument presented to the ge 
neral court, more probably a subscription, of GO/, 
per annum, for the term of seven years, for the use 
of Harvard college, to be paid into the hands of 
the overseers, and they say they hoped to make 
it more. 

The colony, about this time, made a greater 
figure than it ever did at any other time. The re 
port made by the commissioners to the king had 
produced no further troubles from England. The 
plague, the fire of London, the discontents among 
the people of England, caused by their jealousies 
of a design to subvert the constitution there, may 
well enough be supposed to have been the cause 
of a respite in favour of the people here. The 
Massachusetts governed, without opposition, the 
province of JNew Hampshire and province of 
Maine, and were beginning settlements even fur 
ther e. The French were removed from their 
neighbourhood on the one side, and the Dutch 
and Swedes on the other. Their trade was as ex 
tensive as they could wish. No custom-house 
was established. The acts of parliament of the 
12th and 15th of King Charles the Second, for re 
gulating the plantation trade, were in force; but 
the governor, whose business it was to carry them 
into execution, was annually to be elected by the 
people, whose interest it was that they should not 
oc observed. Some of the magistrates and prin 
cipal merchants grew very rich, and a spirit of 
industry and economy prevailed through the co 
lony. But a change of affairs came on soon 
after. 

(1671 to 1673.) Mr. Rellingharn continued 
governor in 1671 and 1672. Mr. Leveret was 
chosen deputy governor both those years ; and in 
1673, he succeeded Mr. Bellingham in the place 
of governor, when Mr. Samuel Symonds was 
chosen deputy governor. 

In 1670, the Pokanoket or Philip s Indians were 
ngain suspected, by their frequent assembling toge- 
ther,by fixing up their guns 5 grinding their hatchets, 



and other preparations, and by insults offered to 
the English in different places, to be meditating 
a general war. The government of Plymouth, in 
March, sent messengers to them to inquire into 
the reason of this behaviour, and at the same time 
wrote to the Massachusetts, acquainting them 
therewith. The governor and magistrates, always 
averse to an open breach, immediately dispatched 
their own messengers to Taunton, to prevent a 
war if possible, which Plymouth had intimated 
that they should be obliged to begin, if they could 
not otherwise bring the Indians to reason. This 
object was however effected ; and amongst the 
articles of capitulation on the part of Philip, we 
find the two following, which, on account of their 
importance, as compared to the capitulations of 
the present day, we shall insert, 

" 2dly, (States Philip), I am willing, and do 
promise, to pay unto the government of Plymouth, 
1001. in such things as I have, but I would en 
treat the favour that I might have three years to 
pay it in, for as much as I cannot do it at pre 
sent. 

" Stlly, I do promise to send unto the governor, 
or whom he shall appoint, five wolves heads, if 
I can get them, or as many as I can procure un 
til they come to five wolves yearly." 

From 1671 to 1677, we meet with no transac 
tion of moment relating to the Indians, but it is 
affirmed that Philip was all this time using mea 
sures to engage the "Indians in all parts of New 
England to unite against the English. Things 
soon broke out into an open rupture, and continued 
with various success till 1676, when in the height 
of the distress of the war, and whilst the authority 
of the colony was contending with the natives for 
the possession of the soil, complaints were making 
in England, which struck at the powers of govern 
ment, and an inquiry was set on foot which was 
continued from time to time, until it finally issued 
in a quo warranto, and judgment thereupon against 
the charter. In the summer of 1676, Edward 
Randolph was sent to the Massachusetts with his 
Majesty s letter of March 10th, 1675-6, and 
copies of the petitions and complaints of Mason 
and Gorges. The king commanded that agents 
should be sent over, to appear before him in six 
months after the receipt of the letter, fully instruct 
ed and empowered to answer. The governor 
summoned a special court, to meet the 9th of 
August. The elders which were then in town 
were desired to attend, and to consider of this 
question proposed to them by the court, viz. 

" Whether the most expedient manner of 
making answer to the complaints of Mr. Gorges] 



528 



MASSACHUSETTS. 



[and Mr. Mason, about the extent of (lie patent 
line, be by sending agents or attorneys io answer 
the same, or to answer by writing only ?" 
They soon agreed upon the following answer. 
" It seems unto us the most expedient way 
of making answer unto the complaints of Mr. 
Gorges and Mr. Mason, about the extent of our 
patent line, to do it by appointment of agents, to 
appear and make answer for us, by way of infor 
mation at this time and in this case, provided they 
be, with utmost care and caution, qualified as to 
their instructions, by and according to which they 
may negociate that affair with safety unto the 
country, and with all duty and loyalty unto his 
Majesty, in the preservation of our patent liber 
ties." The reasons for their opinion were sub 
joined. The court determined according to this 
advice. William Stoughton and Peter Bulkeley 
were chosen for the purpose. Soon after their 
arrival in England, a hearing was had before the 
lords of the committee of the council, upon the 
principal points of their agency, the claims of 
Gorges and Mason, in both which they were un 
successful. The province of Maine was confirmed 
to Gorges and his heirs, both as to soil and go 
vernment. To put an end to all future disputes, 
as well as to gratify many of the inhabitants of 
that province, John Usher was employed by the 
Massachusetts to purchase the right and interest 
of Gorgcs s heirs, which he did for 12001. ster 
ling, and assigned it over to the governor and com 
pany. This, instead of conciliating matters, gave 
further offer.ce to the crown. \Vith respect to 
Mason s claim, it was determined, that the Mas 
sachusetts had a right to three miles n. of Merri- 
mack river, to follow the course of the river, so 
far as it extended, and that the expressions in the 
charter do not warrant the over-reaching those 
bounds by imaginary lines or bounds. 

: (1679 to 1686.) A commission was issued, in 
1679, by the crown, for the government of New 
Hampshire. The Massachusetts, thereupon, for 
bore any further exercise of jurisdiction. The 
to w of Salisbury, Arnesbury, and Haverhili, by 
their original grants from the Massachusetts co 
lony* extending more than three miles from Mer- 
rimack, the Massachusetts continued to exercise 
jurisdiction over the whole of those towns, al 
though, according to the determination , part of them 
lay without the patent, 

jVTr. Leveret continued, governor, by annual 
election, from his* being first chosen in l(&amp;gt;73, 
until his death, March Jfc th, 1678. The weighty 
affairs of the war and the agency, during his ad 
ministration, conducted with prudence and steadi 



ness, caused him to be greatly respected. He 
was succeeded by Simon Bradstreet, (May 1679), 
who was one of the first assistants, and had con 
tinued to be annually chosen an assistant 50 years 
together, being about 76 years of age when he 
first entered upon the office of governor. A few 
months before, upon the death of Mr. Symonds, 
Mr. Bradstreet succeeded him as deputy governor. 
Upon Mr. Bradstreet s being chosen governor, 
Thomas Dan forth came into the deputy governor s 
place, and they were continued in their respective 
places, from year to year, until the dissolution of 
the government. 

The complaint of Gorges and Mason, and the 
uncertainty of the event, restrained the general 
court from any attempt to hold possession of the 
country e. of Maine. Upon the exchange of 
Surinam for New York, that country, and the 
islands and countries contained in the former grant 
to the Duke of York, were granted anew, and 
Major Andros, governor under the Duke, creeled 
a fort, and established a custom-house at Pcma- 
quid, part of the territory between Kennebeck and 
St. Croix. Whilst the Dutch were in possession 
of New York, this territory had been neglected, 
and the inhabitr.nts being without any powers of 
government, the Massachusetts (in 1672) had sent 
their commissioners, who appointed and held 
courts, and established civil and military officers 
from Pemaquid to Gorges, the sea-coast being well 
inhabited, and the fishery in a flourishing state ; 
but upon the Duke s taking possession, by his go 
vernor, they laid aside their pretences to iurisdic- 
,. - 

tion. 

The province of Maine continued to be pro 
tected by the Massachusetts. After the purchase 
from Gorges, of his interest in the province of 
Maine, which had been made in 1679, the major 
part of the court were of opinion that it should be 
sold again to the best bidder, towards reimburs 
ing the ex pence of defending it, which they com 
puted at 8000/. and a committee was appointed 
for this purpose, but this vote was reconsidered. 
However, there was a necessity of a different ad 
ministration from what there had been formerly. 
Whilst the province was supposed to be included 
in the bounds of the Massachusetts charter, the 
towns were represented in the general courl, and it 
was to all intents and purposes considered ^as a 
county, but the determination of 1667 ha/i con 
fined the Massachusetts to three mites n\ or n.. e. 
of Merriiiuick river. The colony consuierbd 
itself, therefore, in the place of Gorges, invested 
with the powers granted to him by charier or pa 
tent. Accordingly tftey appointed their dejiiity] 



MASSACHUSETTS. 



529 



[governor Thomas Danforth, president of the pro 
vince of Maine, to govern under the Massachu 
setts, the lords proprietaries, and to be account 
able to them, and thither he repaired towards the 
end of 1679, together with Mr. Nowcll, &amp;c. and 
there appointed officers, held courts, and made 
provision for administering government in the 
form prescribed by the patent to Sir Ferclinando 
Gorges. 

Randolph kept a continual watch upon the 
colony, and went divers times to England with 
complaints, and returned with fresh orders and 
powers. In 1676, he brought over the complaint 
of Mason and Gorges. In 1678, he came over 
with power from the commissioners of the customs 
as an inspector, arid to make seizures and bring 
informations for breaches of the acts of trade, but 
he was generally, if not always, condemned in co^ts; 
and it appears by a representation he afterwards 
made to the commissioners, that he had been a 
great sufferer. lie brought with him also a com 
mission to divers persons, himself at the head of 
them, to administer an oath to the governor faith, 
fully to execute the oath required by Ihe act of 
trade. The governor, Mr. Leveret, did not take 
the oath in consequence of that commission. Ran 
dolph was in England again in 1679, and returned 
the latter part of the same year. 

In 1680, a letter had been received under the 
king s sign manual, charging the colony with ne 
glecting to send over other agents in the room of 
those who had obtained leave to return, and re 
quiring that they be sent in three months after the 
receipt of the letter, and that they come prepared 
to answer the claim which Mason had made to the 
lands between Naumkeag and Merrirnack. Im 
mediately upon the receipt of this letter, the court 
chose two agents, Mr. Stoughton and Mr. Nowell, 
and instructions were drawn up, but both of them 
peremptorily refused to engage in the affair ; Mr. 
Stoughton, notwithstanding the exceptions some 
had taken to his former conduct, being strongly 
urged to it. As for Mason s claim, it was looked 
upon as groundless and extravagant, and the court 
gave themselves but little concern about it, further 
than to observe, that if he had any pretence to the 
lands, his title would be fairly tried upon the spot, 
where by law, and according to the opinion of the 
attorney and solicitor-general in 1677, it ought to 
be tried. After this, Randolph brought to Boston 
the king s letter of October the 21st, 1681, com 
plaining " that the collector had not been able to 
execute his office to any effect, that attachments 
had been brought against him and his officers for 
doing their duty, that he had been obliged to de- 

VOL. tt. 



posit money before he could bring an action against 
offenders, that, appeals, in matters relating to the 
revenue, had been refused, and that they had sei/ed 
into their hands the moiety of forfeitures belonging 
to his Majesty by law." It was therefore required, 
" that fit persons be sent over, without delay, to 
answer these complaints, with powers to submit to 
such regulations of government as his Majesty 
should think fit, that restitution be made of all 
moneys levied from the officers, that they be en 
couraged in putting the acts of trade in execution, 
without charge, as in England, that an account be 
given of forfeitures received, and that appeals be 
allowed." The court denied the charge, and said 
in their answer, " that Mr. Randolph was ac 
knowledged collector, and his commission enrolled, 
that no suits had been countenanced against any 
officers, except where the subject had been un 
justly vexed, that they knew of no forfeitures, ex 
cept a fine upon a master of a ship for abusing the 
government, that they would encourage his offi 
cers, and require no deposit for the future ; but as 
to admitting appeals, they hoped it would be fur 
ther considered." However, the sending over 
agents could be no longer delayed. At a court 
called in February 1681, when his Majesty s letter 
by Randolph was read, they determined to come 
to the choice of agents. Mr. Stoughton and Mr. 
Dudley were chosen, the court being much di 
vided. Mr. Stoughton again utterly refused, and 
Mr. Richards was chosen in his stead. The de 
sign of taking away the charter became every day 
more and more evident. Agents empowered to 
submit to regulations of government were, in other 
words, agents empowered to surrendertheir charter. 
However, the general court would have been glad 
to put a more favourable construction upon it, it 
being inconsistent with his Majesty s repeated de 
clarations, and therefore they directed their agents 
not to do, or consent to any thing that should vio 
late or infringe the liberties and privileges granted 
by charter, or the government established thereby. 
A new matter of charge had been brought against 
them in England, viz. the coining money. This 
they excused, " it having began in the times of 
the late confusions, to prevent frauds in the pieces 
of eight current among them ; and if they had tres 
passed upon his Majesty s prerogative, it was 
through ignorance, and they humbly begged his 
pardon." The other points of exception were an 
swered as before mentioned. The agents sailed 
May 31st, 1682. A public fast was appointed to 
be observed June 22d, through the colony, to pray 
for the preservation of their chater and success to 
the agency. Randolph was in England not long] 
3 r 



530 



MASSACHUSETTS. 



[after them, ready to disclose every thing the agents 
desired to conceal. The governor had desired him 
to do nothing to the prejudice of. the colony. He 
promised, in his answer, that if they would make 
a full submission to his Majesty, he would en 
deavour to procure his Majesty s royal pardon, 
and the continuance of their privileges, so far as 
that they should have liberty of conscience and (lie 
free exercise of their religion, and that no money 
should be raised without the consent of the people: 
for other matters, their agents were most proper to 
solicit. The agents, in their first letters to the 
general court, acquainted them, " that his Majesty 
was greatly provoked by their so long neglecting 
to send agents, and they desired the court to con 
sider whether it was best to hazard all, rather than 
satisfy his Majesty as to the mode of submission to 
the laws for regulating trade, since they seriously 
intended to submit to the substance." They had 
not then been heard before the council, but soon 
after, upon presenting the court s address, they 
were commanded to shew their powers and all 
their instructions, not publicly, but to Sir Lionel 
Jenkins, secretary of state ; and it appearing, upon 
perusal, that they did not contain such powers as 
had been required, they were informed by Lord 
Radnor, that the council, nem. con. had agreed to 
report to his Majesty, that unless the agents 
speedily obtained such powers as might make them 
capable to satisfy in all points, a quo warranto 
should proceed. The agents represented the case 
of the colony as desperate, and left it to the court 
to determine, whether it was most advisable to 
submit to his Majesty s pleasure, or to suffer a quo 
warranto to issue ? Many cities had submitted. 
Bermudas in the plantations, and the city of Lon 
don, had refused, and qiiowarrnntos had gone out, 
the determination of which might enable the Mas 
sachusetts to judge what would be prudent for 
them to do. 

Upon receipt of these advices, it was made 
a question, not in the general court only, but 
amongst all the inhabitants, whether to surrender 
or not ? The opinions of many of the ministers, 
and their arguments in support of them, were 
given in writing, and, in general, it was thought 
better to die by the hands of others, than by their 
own. An address was agreed upon by the general 
court, another was prepared and sent through the 
colony to be signed by the several inhabitants, 
which the agents were to present or not, as they 
thought proper, and they were instructed to de 
liver up the deeds for the province of Maine, if re 
quired, and it would tend to preserve their charter, 
otherwise not; and they were to make no conces 



sions of any privileges conferred upon the colony 
by the charter. 

Cran field, governor of New Hampshire, being 
on a visit at Boston, sent advices to the agents wait 
ing upon Lord Hide, tendered him an acknow 
ledgment of 2000 guineas for his Majesty s pri 
vate service, and at the same time promised to 
represent the colony in a favourable iight. The 
court agreed to the proposal, and shewed him the 
loiter they wrote to the agents thereupon, but lie, 
infamously, represented the colony as rogues and 
rebels, and made his game of them for making such 
an offer, and the agents complained of their being 
ridiculed for the sham put upon the country. 
Upon the agents receiving this final resolution of 
the court, their business was at an end. It was 
immediately determined a quo warranto should go 
against the charter, and that Randolph should be 
the messenger of death. The agents arrived at 
Boston the 23d of October 1683, and the same 
week Randolph arrived with the quo warranto^ and 
a declaration from the king, that if the colony, be 
fore prosecution, would make full submission and 
entire resignation to his pleasure, he would regu 
late their charter for his service and their good, 
and with no further alterations than should be ne 
cessary for the support of his government there. 
Two hundred copies of the proceedings against the 
charter of London were sent at the same time, 
by advice of the privy-council, to be dispersed 
through the province. The governor and major 
part of the assistants, despairing of any success 
from a defence, passed the following vote: u The 
magistrates have voted, that an humble address be 
sent to his Majesty by this ship, declaring, that 
upon a serious consideration of his Majesty s gra 
cious intimations, in his former letters, and more 
particularly in his late declaration, that his plea 
sure and purpose is only to regulate our charter, 
in such a manner as shall be for his service and 
the good of this his colony, and without any other 
alteration than what is necessary for the support of 
his government here, we will not presume to con 
tend with his Majesty in a course of law, but 
humbly lay ourselves at his Majesty s feet, in a 
submission to his pleasure so declared ; and that 
we have resolved, by the next opportunity, to send 
our agents, empowered to receive his Majesty s 
commands accordingly. And, for saving a de 
fault for non-appearance upon the return of the 
writ of quo warranlo, that some meet person or 
persons be appointed and empowered, by letter of 
attorney, to appear and make defence, until our 
agents may make their appearance and submission, 
as above. The magistrates have passed this with][ 



MASSACHUSETTS. 



531 



[reference to the consent of their brethren the de 
puties hereto. 
" \5th Nov. 1683. EDW. RAWSON, Sec." 

This lay in the house, under consideration, a 
fortnight, and was then passed upon as follows: 

" November 30, 1683. The deputies consent 
not, but adhere to their former bills. 

" WM. TOUREY, Cler." 

Had this been made an act of the general court, 
it is doubtful whether the consequent adminis 
tration of government would have been less arbi 
trary than it was upon the judgment against the 
charter ; but upon the revolution they might have 
resumed their charter, as Rhode island and Con 
necticut did their respective charters, there having 
been no judgment against them. 

A letter of attorney was sent to Mr. Humphrys, 
to appear and answer for the province. Addresses 
were sent, one aftor another, but to no purpose. 
In September, a scire facias was received by Mr. 
Dudley, and communicated to the governor, who 
called a special court. The time for their appear 
ance at Westminster was past before it was receiv 
ed in Boston. 

Affairs continued in this colony in a very disturb 
ed, unsettled state, when the death of King Charles 
occurred in 1684. Mr. Blaithwait immediately wrote 
to the governor, (though he said he did riot write as 
to a government, the charter being vacated), and 
recommended the proclaiming King James without 
delay. This was done, with great ceremony, in 
the high street in Boston, April 20th. 

There were all the symptoms, notwithstanding, 
of an expiring constitution. Several of the towns 
neglected to send their deputies in the year 1684, 
and, indeed, there seems to hare been as much 
indifference in the legislature about public affairs 
in 1645. 

The election for 1686 was the 12th of May. 
Mr. Dudley being left out, Mr. Stoughton, from 
complaisance to him, refused to serve. 

The 15th, the Rose frigate arrived from Eng 
land, with a commission to Mr. Dudley, as presi 
dent, and divers others, gentlemen of the council, 
to take upon them the administration. Upon 
the accession of King James, this sovereign paid 
a distinguishing honour to this colony by transmit 
ting to it a letter under his sign manual, acquainting 
them with his accession to the throne, the great 
tilings the parliament had done, the defeat of 
Argyle, and the landing of Momnouth, and the 
care taken to prevent his success, all to prevent 
any false and malicious rumours that might be 
spread among his Majesty s subjects at thatdistance. 
An address was sent to the king, upon his accession, 
taking notice of the assurances they had received 



from his royal brother, and pray ing that his Majcsl? 
would fulfil them. This was the last effort. Con 
necticut kept more silent, inactive, and reserved, 
submitting when compelled to it, and reasurnmin^ 
their rights as soon as .they had opportunity for it. 

To avoid any interruption in relating the several 
steps taken for vacating the charter, we have pass 
ed over some events, the remenbrance of which 
should be preserved. 

The Indians, at the e. continued their hostilities, 
after those at the a&amp;gt;. were subdued and dispersed. 
In August 1676, they surprised the house of Mr. 
Hammond, an ancient trader at Kennebeck, and 
from thence crossed over to Arowsick island, where 
there was a large house, with, what was there 
esteemed, a strong fort, built round it, belonging 
to Major Clark and Captain Lake, two merchants 
of Boston, who owned the island and great part of 
the mainland near to it. The Indians hid them 
selves in the night under the walls of the fort. 
When the centinel left his station at day-light^ 
some of the Indians followed him in at the fort 
gate, whilst the rest ran to the port holes, and shot 
down every person they saw. Captain Lake, 
finding the Indians had possessed themselves of the 
fort, escaped with Captain Davis and two others, 
at a back-door, to the water-side, intending to pass 
to another island near to Arowsick. Captain Lake 
was killed just as he landed. His bones were, after 
some time, found and brought to Boston. Davis 
was wounded, but made his escape, as did the 
other two. At these two houses, fifty-three Eng 
lish were killed and taken. The news of this 
stroke broke up all the plantations at and near 
Kennebeck, the inhabitants transporting themselves 
to Piscataqua and Boston, or some other place of 
security. This brought the Indians further to. 
to Casco, Spurwinck, Black point, Wells, and 
cape Nidduek, within the bounds of York, at 
all which places they did more or less mischief. 
Mugg, a noted Indian, well known to the English, 
was at the head of the enemy. The prisoners, by 
his means, were treated with more humanity and 
courtesy than had been known, and he sent one 
or two of them to Piscataqua, in order to ransom 
their friends ; but the goods sent for their ransom 
were seized by other Indians. Mugg himself came 
to Piscataqua, and afterwards to Boston, where, iu 
behalf of Madockawando and Cheberrina, sachems 
of Penobscot, he entered into treaty with the 
governor and council, November J3th, 1676 . 
This was the first treaty with any of t lie Tarratcens, 
or e. Indians. " They promised to cease all 
acts of hostility, to return the captives, to do 
their utmost to repair the damage sustained by the 
English, to buy uo powder or ammunition of any ] 
3 Y 2 



M A S S A C 1 1 U S E T T S. 



[other than persons deputed by thegovernor,provid- 
ed ihpy. could have a supply in that way, and to 
account all other e. Indians in the number of their 
enemies, who did not assent to the same covenant 
and agreement." No mention is made of any 
subjection to the government of the colony, or to 
the king of England, but they are considered as 
a free independent people. The treaty is at large 
in Mr. Hubbard s history of the war. The Indians 
continued, notwithstanding, to do mischief on the 
e. frontier in 1677, when Major Andres, by virtue 
of his commission from the Duke of York, having 
placed forces at Pemaquid, the Indians made 
overtures of peace and friendship, and as a proof of 
their sincerity, brought in l/&amp;gt; English captives, 
and they continued for some time quiet. An attack 
was made upon the a&amp;gt;. frontiers by 40 or 50 Indians, 
said to be River Indians, but whether Connecticut 
or Hudson s river is not mentioned. This was the 
I9th of September 1677. They surprised many 
of Hatfield, as they were raising a house and 
unarmed, and killed and carried away about twenty, 
and the next day took three or four more from 
Deerfield. 

By the advice of the governor of New York, 
commissioners were sent, about this time, from the 
Massachusetts and Connecticut, to the Maquas, to 
secure their friendship to the English interest in 
general, and to engage them against the Tarrateens, 
or e. Indians, who bad been their ancient enemies. 
This was the first treaty between the Mohawks, or 
Five Nations, and the Massachusetts colony. 

CHAP. III. 
Prom the. dissolution of the charter in 1686, 

imtil the arrival of the province charter in 

1691. 

(Anno 1686.) Mr. Dudley s short adminis 
tration was not very grievous. The house of 
deputies, indeed, was entirely laid aside ; but the 
people, the time being short, felt little or no effect 
from the change. 

Mr. Dudley, having made Randolph trumpeter 
of his attachment to the prerogative and answered 
his ends, soon alter grew cool towards him. 
Randolph, in return, vilified Dudley, in a great 
number of letters he wrote to London about a 
month after his arrival; which letters, or the 
copies, are preserved. Mr. vStoughton was Mr. 
Dudley s chief confident. He was not suspected, 
by the body of the people, of being unfriendly, or 
of want of strong attachment to the religious 
principles arid to the ecclesiastical constitution of 
the country, and his. compliance, in taking a share 
in the administration, was charitably supposed to 
bej at least in partj for the sake of keeping out 



oppressors and tyrants. Mr. Dudley professed as 
great an attachment to the interest of the colony as 
Mr. Stoughton, and was very desirous of retain 
ing their favour. A letter, the day he demanded 
the government, to Mr. Mather, then the minister 
of the greatest influence in the colony, is a proof of 
it. The people were not so charitable as to believe 
him sincere. However, there was no molestation 
to the churches of the colony, but they continued 
both worship and discipline as before. The affairs 
of the towns were likewise managed in the same 
manner as formerly. 

Their courts of justice were continued upon the 
former plan, Mr. Stoughton being at the head of 
them. Trials were by juries as usual. Even in 
the court of admiralty, the trials were by juries; 
but, as the jurors were returned by the marshal, 
very different verdicts were given from what 
would have been given un.dc&amp;gt; the former admins- 
tration. The president, as ordinary, took all 
matters of wills and administrations into his own 
hand. In general, the former laws and established 
customs, so far as related to judicial proceedings, 
seem to have been their rule, although the govern 
ment which framed them was dissolved. Mr. 
Dudley considered himself as appointed to pre 
serve the affairs of the colony from confusion until 
a governor arrived, and a rule of administration 
should be more fully settled. 

Connecticut, Plymouth, and Rhode island con 
tinued their former administration. Mr. Dudley 
had some dispute with Plymouth governor concern 
ing the admiralty jurisdiction, which he claimed 
as vice-admiral of New England ; but it remained 
undetermined. 

December 19, 1686, Sir Edmund Andros arriv 
ed at Nantasket, in the Kingfisher, a 50-gtm ship, 
with commission from King James for the govern 
ment of New England. He was less dreaded than 
Kirk, but he was known to be of an arbitrary 
disposition. He kept a correspondence with the 
colony whilst he was governor of New York. 
His letters, then, discovered much of the dictator; 
but the depressed state of the colony prevented a 
proper return. He landed at Boston the 20th, and 
his commission was published the same day.)* 1 i 

The beginning of his administration gave great 
encouragement. He made high professions of 
regard to the public good and the welfare of the 
people, both of merchants and planters, directed 
the judges to administer justice according to the 
custom of the place, ordered the former establish 
ed rules to be observed, as to rates and taxes, and 
that all the colony laws not inconsistent with his 
commission should be in. -farcer, ij/j.-ii? 
(Anno 1687.) The major part of his council] 



MASSACHUSETTS. 



533 



[were men, who, although they had been of the 
moderate parly, yet wished the public interest, 
and would have been glad to have continued under 
the old form of government. With a good share 
of resolution they might have been serviceable so 
long as they were permitted to hold their places in 
council ; but their behaviour under the old charter 
discovered they had little firmness in their consti 
tutions. Perhaps, if they had been less pliable, 
they would have soon been displaced, and others 
more inclined to oppression appointed in their stead. 
Sir Edmund had no affection for them. Soon after 
his arrival there appears, by some loose minutes, to 
have been a pretty full meeting of the council. 
Many of them returned home, and a few only who 
lived at or near Boston attended constantly, and 
some of those complained, that the governor had 
always three or four of his creatures to say yes to 
every thing he proposed, after which no opposition 
was allowed. Nero concealed his tyrannical dispo 
sition more years than Sir Edmund and his creatures 
did months. It was not long before the case of 
some who apprehended themselves oppressed carne 
under consideration : one of the council told them, 
that they must not think the privileges of English 
men would follow them to the end of the world. 
This gave an alarm through the government, and 
it was never forgotten. 

One of the first acts of power, after the change 
of government, was the restraint of the press. 
Randolph was the licenser. There was not so 
much room to complain of this proceeding as if 
the press had been at liberty before. It only 
changed its keeper, having been long under restraint 
during the former administration. A restraint 
upon marriages wns more grievous. None were 
allowed to marry except they entered into bonds 
TV ith sureties to the governor, to be forfeited in 
case there should afterwards appear to have been 
any lawful impediment. Magistrates still conti 
nued to join people in matrimony. Other provision 
could not immediately be made. There was but 
one Episcopal minister in the country ; his name 
was Rate I i fie : Sir Edmund considered the Congre 
gational ministers as mere laymen. 

There had been very few instances of even 
occasional assemblies for religious worship accord 
ing to the rites and ceremonies of the church of 
England for more than 50 years. When the com 
missioners for King Charles were at Boston in 
1665, they had a chaplain with them ; but there 
was no house for public worship. Most of the 
inhabitants who were upon the stage in 1686, had 
never seen a church of England assembly. About 
that time, a small number of persons formed 



themselves into a society , Hvhich had ihercnsrd, if 
we may give credit to Randolph, in 1GSG, to 
near 400 person s . -The ngAts^ "ni Etiglnrtd, ;tnd 
the general court, in their ansi veMo thr: romphin s 
against them in 1677, had declared that no persons 
should be hindered from performing divine service 
according to the church of England. This was 
enough to prevent any open discouragement, even 
whilst the charter government continued. When 
the governor and many of the council were mem 
bers of the church of England, it might well be 
expected, that they would countenance and en 
courage the establishment and growth of that 
church. They did not stop there. The people 
were menaced, that their meeting-houses should 
be taken from them, and that public worship in 
the Congregational way should not be tolerated. 
Randolph had the insolence to reprove and threaten 
the governor of Plymouth for exacting taxes from 
the Quakers for the support of the ministry in that 
colony before the authority was superseded ; but 
it was not long before the people were freed from 
their fears of persecution, by- King James s 
proclamation for a general toleration. The design 
was seen by some, but the greater part swallowed 
the bait. Several churches hud agreed to set apart 
days of thanksgiving for his Majestsy s gracious 
declaration for liberty of conscience. The gover 
nor forbade them, though the reason is not mention 
ed. It must be supposed to have been this, that 
he looked upon it to be the royal prerogative to 
appoint such days. He told them they should 
meet at their peril, and that he would send soldiers 
to guard their meeting-houses. Many congre 
gations agreed to address the king. Some 
persons, who supposed popery to be at the bottom, 
strongly opposed the addresses: the late deputy 
governor Danforth was at the head of them. 

Swearing by the book, which had never been 
practised, was now introduced, and such as scru 
pled it were fined and imprisoned. 

The fees to all officers, under the charter, had 
been very low. They are generally so where they 
are established by the people. Under the new 
administration, they were exorbitant. Fifty shillings 
was the common fee for probate of a will. The 
governor was the supreme ordinary, and acted by 
himself, except a few months whilst he was at 
New York and in the e. country, when Mr. Dud 
ley was his deputy. It was a great burden upon 
widows and children who lived remote, to be 
obliged to come to Boston for every part of business 
relative to the settlements of estates. The fees of 
all other officers were complained of as oppressive. 
The harpies themselves quarrelled about their share] 



M ASSACHUSETTS. 



of the prey. Randolph , who from his commission 
of secretary, expected all the clerkships in the 
country, complains that West, who seems at first 
to have been a deputy only, ran away with a thou 
sand a year of his dues. 

But the greatest profit arose from patents for 
lands. The charter being vacated, the people 
were told that their titles to their estates were of no 
value. The expression in vogue was, u that the 
calf died in the cow s belly." Besides, the gene 
ral court had not made their grants under the seal 
of the colony. This was represented as a notable 
defect, which possession and improvement could 
not heal. However, it. was made public, that all 
who would acknowledge the insufficiency of their 
title derived from the former government, by peti 
tioning for new patents, should be quieted upon 
reasonable terms. The fees for the patents varied 
according to circumstances, both of persons and 
estates. In the complaint to King James it is al- 
ledged, that the fees of some amounted to 50/. 
Prudence was used. Men s titles were not ques 
tioned all at once. Had this been the case, accord 
ing to the computation then made, all the personal 
estates in the colony would not have paid the 
charge of the new patents. Some that had been 
most attached to the old administration were 
among the first who were threatened. We find a 
petition of Samuel Sewall, who had been a magis 
trate, (afterwards chief justice), for confirmation of 
his title to a valuable island in Boston harbour 
(llog island.) In a letter to a friend, a short 
time after, he laments his compliance. There are 
many hundred petitions of the same kind upon the 
files. Some favourites looked with an envious eye 
upon some of the best estates, especially where the 
property was in a town or company. A petition 
of Captain Hutchinson and others laboured, al 
though their title was originally derived from the 
Indian saclx&amp;gt;ms and proprietors, and the lands 
had been long possessed and improved. One of 
the best islands in New England, in Plymouth 
harbour, called Clark s Island, from the name of 
the person who first landed there, had been appro 
priated for the benefit of the poor of the town. 
This wns granted to Nathaniel ( lark, who had 
been secretary of that colony, and was afterwards 
of Sir Edmund s council, and one of his greatest 
tools. Randolph petitioned for half an acre of 
land, to be taken out of the common in Boston, for 
a house lot. The answer given to it does not ap- 
pear. In the latter part of the administration, pe 
titions multiplied greatly, and property became 
everyday more and more precarious. This was 
not the only invasion of their property. The go 



vernor, with four or five of his council, laid what 
taxes they thought proper. This the people com 
plained of as their greatest grievance. They 
thought themselves entitled to the liberties and im 
munities of free and natural-born English subjects, 
and that consequently no moneys ought to be raised 
from them but by their representatives. They had 
no hopes of a restitution of their charter privileges 
in general ; but they hoped that, even under so 
arbitrary a prince, they should be allowed a house 
of representatives. This was among the first things 
they applied for. King James assured their agent, 
he would take as much care of New as of Old 
England, and, no doubt, he intended to bring his 
subjects in both under the same regulation. The 
charges of government, over and above the fees of 
the several officers, were not excessive. Under the 
charter, the salaries were below the dignity of the 
offices, the highest allowance to the governor not 
exceeding 100/. per annum. What salary Sir 
Edmund received does not appear. The second 
year of his administration, the public charge was 
greatly increased by a war with the Indians. There 
was a general submission to the taxes, and the as 
sessments were proportioned upon the inhabitants 
of the towns by officers chosen by themselves, it 
is probable this was the reason of continuing to the 
towns some of their privileges. Every town was 
suffered to meet once a year to choose their officers ; 
but all meetings at other times, or for other pur 
poses, were strictly forbidden. An entire new model 
of government was intended, but there was not time 
to perfect it. There are minutes of a great num 
ber of bills, passed the council and approved by 
the governor, but the bills themselves are lost. 
The old laws of the colony seern to have con 
tinued the rule for the administration of justice, 
except where they were superseded by any new 
edicts. Mr. Dudley and Mr. Stoughton were two 
of the judges of the superior court, and neither of 
them disposed to go to the extremes which some 
others of the council wished for. The law pro 
ceedings were more formal than they had been. 

The moneys applied for the propagation of the 
gospel among the Indians, amounted to 600/. or 
700/. sterling per annum, which continued to be 
intrusted with some of the old magistrates and mi 
nisters. Mr. Boyle, who had been long governor 
of the corporation in England, was a very mode 
rate churchman, and most of the members were 
dissenters, or favourers of the cause. The arch 
bishop of Canterbury promised Randolph that a 
commission should be directed to some persons to 
audit and report the accounts of that money. The 
legality of such a commission, it being contrary to] 



M A S S A C H U S E T T S. 



[the charter of (lie corporal ion, might have been 
questioned, perhaps with as good reason as the le 
gality of the royal order, which his grace and the 
six bishops soon after very justly refused to obey. 
One would think, that merely a difference of place 
should not make the same measure towards Eng 
lish subjects appear reasonable in the one case, 
and arbitrary and oppressive in the other. The 
archbishop either altered his sentiments, or was di 
verted by greater affairs from pursuing his design. 

(Anno 1688.) The Indians upon the frontiers, 
in the summer of 1688, renewed their hostilities. 
A garrison had been kept at Pemaquid, but it was 
no security to the scattered settlements upon the 
frontiers. The governor, from a prejudice against 
the late administration, by whom, without sufficient 
grounds for it, he supposed the Indians had been 
treated with too great severity, if not injustice, re 
solved to try mild measures, and endeavour to win 
them by good words and small courtesies. Cas- 
tine, a Frenchman, who lived among the Indians 
at Penobscot, made profession of friendship to the 
English ; but was suspected to be a false friend, 
and to stir up the Indians against them. His 
trading-house was plundered this year, whilst he 
was absent from it, which he rightly charged upon 
tiie English. The Indians informs J some of their 
captives that Castine furnished every Indian who 
engaged against the English with a pound of 
powder, two pounds of lead, and a quantity of 
tobacco. Some cattle, belonging to the inhabi 
tants of N. Yarmouth, having been killed by the 

Indians, a justice of peace, Blackmail, seized 

a party of J 8 or 20 Indians at or near Saco. Re 
prisals were made the 5th of September, and one 
Henry Smith and his family taken at New Dart 
mouth ; and the next day Edward Taylor and his 
family were taken from the same place, and all car 
ried to Taconnett, up Kenriebeck river, where they 
found nine captives taken from the lower parts of 
the river. The Indians killed divers of these cap 
tives in their frolics, as appears by Smith s exa 
mination, who made his escape from them. Sir 
Edmund was then at New York. Upon his re 
turn to Boston, he ordered the Indians, which 
Blackmail had seized, to be released. The In 
dians returned several English captives in ex 
change. The 20th of October, he published a pro 
clamation, commanding the Indians to set at liberty 
his Majesty s subjects lately taken by them, and 
that such Indians, as had been actually concerned 
in the murder of any of his Majesy s subjects, 
should surrender themselves by the llth of No 
vember, to answer for their crimes, or otherwise be 



pursued and proceeded against with the utmost se 
verity ; and all that were innocent were allowed 
to live near the English towns if they desired it ? 
and all persons were to take notice and conform 
themselves accordingly. The Indians treated the 
proclamation with contempt. The English, being 
laid under restraint, were more unsafe than if war 
had been publicly declared. 

The people in general, as has been observed, 
were patient under the new government. There 
are a few instances of prosecution for contempt of, 
or opposition to, the authority. One John Gold, 
of Topsfield, was tried and convicted, by verdict 
of a jury, of treasonable words, what they were 
is not mentioned, and fined 50/. &amp;c. Mr. Apple- 
ton, of Ipswich, who had been an assistant, and 
Mr. Wise, the minister of that town, were im 
prisoned. Mr. Wise, after the revolution, brought 
an action against Mr. Dudley, chief judge, for 
denying him the benefit of the habeas coipus 
act. Mr. Mather, one of the ministers of Boston, 
had been a very active person in dissuading from 
the surrender of the charter, and published reasons 
against it. Randolph frequently mentions him, in 
his letters, as a factious person. He behaved with 
so much prudence as to give no room to lake hold of 
any part of his conduct. A forged letter was 
therefore forwarded, in his name, by way of IJur- 
badoes, directed to a person in Amsterdam, but in 
tercepted and shewn by Randolph to Sir Lionel 
Jenkins, who was reflected upon in the letter. 
There were many passages in favour of Ferguson, 
Lord Shattsbury, Oatcs, &amp;C. all which must have 
made the writer obnoxious to the king and his mi 
nisters, and raised a prejudice against the country. 
Sir Lionel either suspected the forgery, or treated 
the thing with contempt, asking whether it was 
that star-gazer wrote it, -so that Randolph missed 
his aim. Mr. Mather, two or three years after, 
being informed of the danger he had been in, ex 
culpated himself in a letter to a friend, and 
charged the forgery upon Randolph or his brother. 
This letter coming to Randolph s knowledge, he 
brought an action of defamation against Mr. Ma 
ther, and laid his damage at 500/. The jury gave 
the defendant costs. But Randolph, we know not 
how, was bringing a new action for the same defa 
mation. Mr. Mather s friends advising him of it, 
he kept concealed to avoid the service of the writ. 
About this time some of the principal men of the 
colony flattered themselves that they might obtain 
a partial relief by a representation of their grie 
vances to the king, and Mr. Mather was thought 
a proper person to be their agent or messenger,] 

4: 



MASSACHUSETTS. 



[and he embarked in the night hi disguise. The 
service of Randolph s writ would have prevented 
his voyage. 

There seems to have been but little room to hope 
for success. King James was making daily ad 
vances towards despotism in England. It was 
not likely that he should consent to any degree of 
liberty in the colonies. Sir Edmund knew too well 
the disposition of his master to give himself any 
concern about the complaints preferred against 
him. There were two persons in .London at that 
time who had been assistants under the charter, 
Samuel Nowel and Elisha Htitchinson. They 
joined with Mr. Mather in a remonstrance to the 
king. One of the new council, Richard \Vhar- 
ton, sensible of the distresses of the country, con 
curred with the others also, as appears by his let 
ters, but all was to no purpose. At first indeed a 
report was agreed upon by the committee for fo 
reign plantations, in which an assembly was men 
tioned, but Lord Snnderland struck out that clause 
with his own hand before the report was presented. 
The inhabitants of Cambridge made a particular 
application, and Mr. Ilinkley, the late governor 
of Plymouth, petitioned in behalf of that colony. 
No solicitations, however, in England, had theleast 
influence upon measures in New England. 

Writs of intrusion were brought against some 
of the principal persons in the colony who re 
fused to petition for patents. Col. Shrimpton hired 
Deer island of the town of Boston ; the rent was 
appropriated to the support of a school. An ac 
tion was commenced for recovering possession. 
Besides the realoppressions from this arbitrary ad 
ministration, many groundless jealousies were 
raised, which increased the terror of the people. 
Castine, it was intimated, was robbed with the 
privity of the authority, in order to incense the 
French and Indians. Upon the first insurrection 
of the Indians, the inhabitants began to fortify and 
garrison their houses. Sir Edmund ordered them 
to desist. An Indian who came in to Sudbury af 
firmed to the people there, that the Indians under 
stood, from the governor, that the French and 
Irish would take possession of Boston in the spring. 
A Penicook Indian affirmed that the Maquas or 
Mohawks had sent a messenger to inform the Pe 
nicook tribe, that Sir Edmund had hired them to 
fight against the English. These idle stories were 
spread about the country. The Mohawks, it is 
true, made peace with the French under the in 
fluence of Sir Edmund. The close connection be 
tween the courts of England and France at this 
time well accounts for it. 



The Indians neglected to comply with the go 
vernor s order to deliver up the murderers. They 
continued their hostilities ; he thereupon raised 
a small army of 700 or 800 men, and in the be 
ginning of November, marched at the head of 
them, through frost and snow, into the e. country. 
This measure was universally condemned ; the men 
were exposed to extreme hardships, without any 
prospect of service, the Indians taking can? to 
keep out of their reach. Some of his enemies 
charged him with a design to starve or freeze the 
men ; but other persons, who were more candid, 
acknowledged that he readily took to himself his 
full share of the hardships of the campaign, and 
that he was a kind and good general to the men 
under his command. Notwithstanding his care 
many died with hardships, more, it was thought, 
than the whole number of Indians at that time in 
hostility. Not one Indian was killed. They all fled 
into their more remote dens, where they remained 
the whole winter. Besides the fort at Pemaquid, 
Sir Edmund builfc-a fort at Pejypscot falls, and 
another at Sheepscote, and placed garrisons in 
them; and, upon his return to Boston, left the 
command of the country with Anthony Brock- 
holt, one of his council and favourites. 

In the summer of 1688, the governor received 
a new commission, which was published, with 
great parade, from the balcony of the town-house ; 
and soon after he received the joyful news of the 
birth of a prince, and ordered a general thanks 
giving through his government. The suspicions 
concerning this birth were transmitted with the 
news, and very easily received by the people in 
general. 

(Anno 1689.) During the winter of 88, there was 
no account received in New England of the land 
ing of the Prince of Orange. Something transpired 
by way of Virginia, as the spring opened. The 
rumour brought the governor from Pemaquid to 
Boston. Soon after his arrival, viz. April I6th, 
he writes to Brock holt : " There is a general 
buz/.ing among the people, great with expectation 
of their old charter, or they know not what ; hope, 
that all magistrates and officers will be careful not 
to be wanting in their duty, and particularly trust, 
that the soldiers be in good order, and diligent to 
avoid surprise, and see they have provisions fitting 
duly served out, and if occasion, more than the 
ordinary allowance," &amp;c. A few days before, 
one Mr. Winslow came from Virginia, and brought 
a printed copy of the Prince of Orange s declara 
tion. Upon his arrival he was imprisoned by- 
Justice Foxcrott and others, " for bringing a] 



MASSACHUSETTS. 



537 



[traitorous and treasonable libel into the country," 
as the mittimus expressed it. \Vinslow offered 
20001. bail, but it could not be accepted. A pro 
clamation was issued, charging all officers and 
people to be in readiness to hinder the landing of 
any forces which the Prince of Orange might send 
into those parts of the world. The old magistrates 
and heads of the people silently wished, and se 
cretly prayed, for success to the glorious under 
taking, and determined quietly to wait the event. 
The body of the people were more impatient : 
the flame which had been long smothered in their 
breasts burst forth with violence, and on Thurs- 
day the 18th of April, the governor and such of 
the council as had been most active, and other ob 
noxious persons, about fifty in the whole, were 
seized and confined, and the old magistrates were 
reinstated. This was certainly a rash, precipitate 
proceeding: little or no inconvenience could 
Lave arisen from a few days delay. The re 
volution in England could not, at any time, 
have been effected without risk to all persons 
there who moved in it ; their lives depended on the 
success of the attempt; but the fate of New Eng 
land depended upon that of Old. If the prince 
suceeeded, they might have assumed the govern 
ment without any hazard ; if he failed, had they 
remained quiet, they would have been in no worse 
state than before ; but the consequence of an insur 
rection would have been death to the principal 
actors, and a still harder slavery than before to all 
the rest of the inhabitants. 

However exceptionable the first rising of the 
people might be, it is certain, as we before ob 
served, they did not want for advocates and pro 
tectors in the newly raised magistracy ; though, to 
give due credit to this body, we confess it is diffi 
cult to conceive in what other way the people could 
hare been quieted, otherwise than through the in 
fluence they exerted upon the occasion. Had the 
people been left to themselves, the consequences 
must have been terrible. Some, however, who 
had been the most firm in support of the charter, 
began to be afraid of being called to account for 
the concern they had taken in the business. 

A long declaration was read from the balcony or 

gallery of the town-house. This is printed at 

large in Neale and other writers. There would 

be room to doubt whether this declaration was not 

a work of time, asd prepared beforehand, if it did 

i; pot appear, by the style and language, to have 

been the performance of one of the ministers of the 

r {townof Boston, who had a remarkable talent for 

I v $*y quwfk and sudden composures ; besides, it 

was hot printed until several days after, and per- 

VOL. II. 



haps was corrected and enlarged. Indeed it fully 
appears from many private letters, still preserved, 
one of the best sorts of evidence of the truth of 
historical facts of this nature, that none oflhe ma 
gistrates were privy to the first rising of the people, 
and in the people themselves it seems to have 
been sudden, and without any previously concerted 
plan. 

The next day, April 19th, an order was signed 
by many respectable persons, and also by William 
Johnson of Woburn, and James Russell of Charles- 
town, directed to John Pipon, commander of the 
castle, and accompanied with an order from the 
late governor, to deliver the fort and stores to Cap- 
tain Fairweather, which was complied with. The 
20th, the tumult being abated, the new council be 
gan to consider what form of government they 
should establish, in the room of that which was 
dissolved. They first invited divers other persons 
to join with them, who were required to sign an 
approbation of the advice given to Sir Edmund, 
and being thus strengthened, they took the title of 
" A council for the safety of the people, and con 
servation of the peace." 

This council continued to pass orders from time 
to time, for the regulation of the inhabitants; but 
the authority was weak, and there was a necessity 
of a further settlement : they were careful to avoid 
reassuming their charter. Besides the exceptions 
that might be taken whilst the decree against it 
stood in full force, there were many who were de- 
sirous of a settlement from England, sensible of the 
defects in the charter ; and when the governor and 
assembly afterwards addressed for the restitution 
of it, thej desired such further privileges ns were 
necessary. They had, no doubt, received advice 
of the convention -called by the Prince of Orange, 
and in imitation of it, on the second of May, they 
recommended to the several towns in the colony to 
meet and depute persons, not exceeding two for 
each town, except Boston four, to form an assem 
bly to sit the ninth of the same month. Sixty^x 
persons met, and presented a declaration to the 
president and former magistrates in particuliV, 
taking no notice of such as had associated with 
them; but upon receiving an answer in writing, 
they desired the whole council to continue in their 
station until the 23d instant, at which limeifc was 
agreed there should be a meeting of the represen 
tatives of all , the towns in the colony at Boston, 
who were to be specially instructed by their towns. 
Letters had been sent to Plymouth and to Con 
necticut, to acquaint the principal gentlemen there 
witli what had been done at Boston. Both those 
colonies were content the governor should be Con-] 



533 



MASSACHUSETTS. 



[fined at Boston, and both reassumed their old form 
of government. Nothing passed relative to New 
Hampshire or Rhode island. As soon as the news 
reached New York, Nicholson the lieutenant go 
vernor dispatched a messenger to Boston, express 
ing a hope that the new council would use all (heir 
influence to bring back things to their former foot 
ing : the answer was, as might be expected, such 
as to shew them pretty clearly that such views had 
no chance of being realized. 

The representatives of 54 towns met at Boston 
on the 22d of May. They soon discovered a de 
sire to reassnme the charter. The major part of 
the council were against it. Two days were spent 
in disputes. The people without doors were also 
much divided in sentiments. On the 24th, the 
governor and magistrates chosen in 1686 signed a 
paper, declaring their acceptance of the care and 
government of the people, according to the rules 
of the charter, for the conservation of the peace 
and safety of the people, until by direction from 
England there be an orderly settlement of govern 
ment, provided an addition should be made of fit 
persons to assist them, as was desired, and that 
what had been before done be allowed, and the 
stewards be reimbursed. This they did for the 
satisfaction of the people, and from the present ne 
cessity, but they did not intend, nor would be 
understood to intend, an assumption of the charter 
government. Their declaration was accepted by 
the representatives, notwithstanding its being qua 
lified in the conclusion of it. The next day, Mr. 
Winthrop, and most of the other gentlemen who 
had acted as members of the council, and who had 
a strong party in favour of their continuing so to 
act, generously quitted all claim to it, in con 
fidence, as they express it, that the people will be 
inviolably preserved in their obedience to the di 
rections expected from England, and that the per 
sons of all the gentlemen confined should be well 
treated ; and promised to endeavour to pacify the 
people who were dissatisfied on their account, and 
t to promote the public tranquilliiy as far as should 
be in their power. 

The 26th (being Sunday) a ship arrived from 
England, with advice of the proclaiming King 
William and Queen Mary. This was the most 
joyful news ever received in New England. The 
fears of the people of any very bad consequences 
from their late actions were now over. Onthe29th, 
the proclamation was published in Boston with 
greater ceremony than had been known, the go 
vernor and council, civil and military officers, 
merchants of the town, and principal gentlemen of 
the town and country being on horseback, the 



regiment of the town, and many companies of 
horse and foot from the country, appearing in 
arms ; a grand entertainment was prepared in the 
town-house, and wine was served out to the 
soldiers. 

The 5th of June, the representatives of the se 
veral towns, upon a new choice, assembled at Bos 
ton. The council immediately proposed to them 
to exhibit articles against the gentlemen seized by 
the people, or else to consent to their enlargement, 
upon security given ; but this was not agreed to. 
The next day the representatives urged to the 
council, to take upon them the part they ought to 
bear in the government, according to the charter, 
until orders should be received from England, and 
declared " they could not proceed to act in any 
thing of public concerns until this was conceded." 
An acceptance was voted, this declaration being 
given as the reason of the vote. By these steps the 
change was made from the unlimited power of Sir 
Edmund and four of his council, to the old govern 
ment, which had continued above fifty years ; but 
the weight and authority did not return with the 
form. They were scrupulous of their power 
themselves, and made an apology, in an address to 
the crown, for causing certain pirates to be exe 
cuted. They found it very difficult to raise men, 
and continue them in service, for the defence of the 
province. Several contemptuous pamphlets against 
them were published with impunity. Thirty 
years before, the authors of the like would have 
been guilty of a capital offence; and although the 
fir4 advices received afterwards from England, 
gave them some grounds to expect a re-establish 
ment of government in the old form, yet these ad 
vices were soon succeeded by others which caused 
them to despair of it. Mr. Mather, the agent in 
England, waited the event of the Prince of 
Orange s expedition. Soon after the withdraw of 
King James, Mr. Mather was introduced to the 
Prince of Orange by Lord Wharton, when, after 
humbly congratulating his Majesty s accession, 
Mr. Mather implored his Majesty s favour to New 
England. The king promised all the favour in 
his power ; but hinted what had been irregular in 
their former government ; whereupon Mr. Mather 
undertook that, upon the first word, they should 
reform any irregularities they should be advised 
of, and Lord Wharton offered to be their guaran 
tee. The king then said, that he would give orders 
that Sir Edmund Andros should be removed, and 
called to account for his mal-administration, and 
that the king and queen should be proclaimed by 
the former magistrates. Mr. Mather was a faith 
ful agent, and was unwearied in securing friends] 



MASSACHUSETTS. 



539 



[for bis country. Besides several of the nobility 
and principal commoners, he had engaged the 
whole body of the dissenting ministers, whose 
weight, at that time, was far from inconsiderable. 

The family of Ashurst had always been friendly 
to New England. The first addresses after the resto 
ration were sent to Mr. Ashurst, Mr. Leveret, and 
Mr. Richard Hutch inson, to be deli veredtothe king. 
Sir Henry Ashurst, a member of parliament, was 
more particularly engaged at this time by Mr. Ma 
ther, who desired that he might be empowered by 
the colony to appear as their agent. Mr. Hamb- 
den, another member, also shewed great friend 
ship. The house of commons voted the taking 
away the charters of the plantations to be a griev 
ance, and a bill passed the house for restoring 
charters, and the New England charters were ex 
pressly mentioned ; but whilst the bill lay in the 
house of lords, the parliament, sooner than ex 
pected, was prorogued, the king going to Ireland. 
The king, from the beginning, discovered a design 
to reserve the appointment of the governor to him 
self. It was in vain, after losing this chance in 
parliament, to try for the restoration of the old 
charter. A now charter, with as many of the old 
privileges as could be obtained, was all that could 
be hoped for. In the mean time, application was 
made for express power and authority to be granted 
to the colony to exercise government according to 
the old charter, until a new could be settled. 
This was obtained. Letters arrived in England, 
shortly after the king s order to the old magis 
trates, from Sir Edmund Andros, Mr. Dudley, 
&amp;c. complaining of their usage. Nicholson and 
Usher came to London also with their complaints, 
and the Indians falling upon Piscataqua about the 
same time, it was imputed to the revolution in the 
Massachusetts, and the friends of New England 
were afraid the powers would be recalled, and a 
governor sent over without delay. 

The letters did not arrive in New England until 
very late in the year, but came very opportunely 
to calm the commotions, which had very much in 
creased there. Sir Edmund, his servant having 
i.nticed the centinel to drink, and then to sutler 
him to be upon guard in his stead, escaped from 
the castle, and went to Rhode island, where Major 
Sanford stopped him, and sent him b:ick to the 
castle again. The first opportunity alter the ar 
rival ot the king s order, he with Mr. Dudley and 
several others embarked for England. T! ge 
neral court thought it advisable to send over two 
of their members to join with Sir Henry Ash hurst 
and Mr. Mather in maintaining their charges 
against their oppressors, as well as in soliciting 



the restoration of the charter, with such additional 
privileges as should be thought proper, viz. 
Elisha Cooke and Thomas Oakes, both of them 
assistants. Mr. Cooke was a gentleman of good 
understanding, and had been well educated, had 
always adhered stiffly to the old charter, and when 
all the rest of the assistants declined reassuming it, 
he alone was in favour it. Mr. Oakes was a man of 
no less consequence, but attached to the same side, 
having been some time a representative of the 
town of Boston, and not of the assistants when they 
refused to reassume. They were instructed, among 
other things, to solicit in parliament or elsewhere 
the confirmation of their ancient charter, and all 
its rights and privileges, civil and sacred, and if 
there should be opportunity, to endeavour the ob 
taining such farther privileges as might be of be 
nefit to the colony. The agents disagreed, and 
by this means certain articles intended against Sir 
Edmund were never signed by them. He ob 
tained some time after the government of Virginia, 
where he died. Mr. Dudley was appointed chief 
justice of New York, and the latter end of the 
year 1690, was at Boston in his way to his post. 
Nicholson endeavoured for the government of New 
York, but had not interest to carry it, and was ap 
pointed lieutenant-governor of Virginia, under 
Lord Howard of Effingharn. 

The war with the Indians, which began before 
the revolution of government, continued all the 
year after. Madockawando, sachem of the Pe- 
nobscots, who came into Pemaquid, was sent to 
Boston, where he arrived just about the time the 
governor was confined. The authority treated 
him kindly and sent him home, and at the same 
time wrote to St. Castine, and desired him to use 
his influence over the Indians, and offered him 
safe conduct if he inclined to come to Boston. 
Madockawando had promised his interest for re 
demption of the captives which hud been taken, 
and for putting an end to the war ; but both he 
and Castine deceived the government. Madocka 
wando proved a mo&amp;t virulent enemy. 

The Indians of Penicook, upon Merrirnack 
river, in the spring of the year 1689, professing 
great friendship to Major Waldron ofQuochecho, 
were civilly treated by him, and one of their chiefs 
was lodged in his garrison. The Indian, in the 
night, opened the gate lo a great number of S tco 
and Penicook Indians, who lay hovering round 
it. They killed the major and 22 others, and 
carried away 29 captives, and plundered and 
burnt the neighbouring houses. The aulnority 
at Boston were equally anxious for the protection 
and delence of the people, as if they had bv-en] 
3z 2 



540 



MASSACHUSETTS. 



[within the colony, and sent out forces for their 
relief. Intelligence arrived soon after, of mischief 
done in several parts of the county of York, or 
province of Maine, and on the 22d of August, the 
fort at Pemaquid, the command of which (being 
garrisoned by 14 men only) was given to one 
Weenies, an officer Sir Edmund had left there, 
was besieged by the Indians. It was so situated 
as to be overlooked from a rock near to it. From 
thence the Indians galled the garrison to such de 
gree, that the next day they capitulated upon 
terms, which were kept with Indian faith, some 
of the men being butchered and the others carried 
captive. There were no hopes of security by sea 
or land, the French from Quebec instigating the 
Indians, and joining parties with them, and the 
French from Acadia, by their small privateers, 
infesting the coasts, and taking many vessels. In 
the winter, therefore, the general court were medi 
tating an attempt both upon Port Royal and Que 
bec. Sir William Phips came to New England 
in the summer of 1689. He was thought the fit 
test person for the command of the forces. Eight 
small vessels, with 700 or. 800 men, was thought a 
sufficient force for Port Royal. 

(Anno 1690.) The fleet sailed the 28th of 
April, and returned the 30th of May. The fort 
at Port Royal being in no capacity to stand a siege, 
surrendered with little or no resistance. Sir Wil 
liam took possession (as appears by his journal) 
of the whole sea-coast from Port Royal to Penob- 
scot and the New England settlements. The 
plunder was thought equal to the whole expence. 
But this was conjecture. The acquisition was so 
easy that the court were confirmed in the prosecu 
tion of their design upon Canada. Besides, the 
ravages begun upon the frontiers by French and 
Indians, as soon as the spring opened, made it 
appear more necessary than ever. Casco fort, 
with above 100 persons, was besieged and taken, 
whilst the forces were gone to Port Royal. There 
was a still further inducement, they hoped to re 
commend themselves to the king s favour, and to 
obtain the establishment of their government. A 
small vessel had been sent to England express, the 
beginning of April, with a representation of the 
exposed state of the colony, and the necessity of 
the reduction of Canada, and praying for a supply 
of arms and ammunition, and a number of the 
king s frigates to attack the French by sea, whilst 
the colony forces should march by land and per 
form their parts. Now their hands were too full in 
England to give any attention to this proposal ; 
but the Massachusetts determined to proceed, and 
Connecticut and New York engaged to furnish a 



body of men. Two thousand were expected to 
march by lake Champlain and attack Montreal, 
at the same time that the forces by sea should be be 
fore Quebec. It was late in the season to under 
take this great affair, but they tarried longer than 
otherwise they would have done, in ex pectation of the 
stores they had sent for to England. None arriving, 
the 9th of August the fleet sailed from Nantasket. 
There were between 30 and 40 vessels, great and 
small, the largest of 44 guns and 200 men, perhaps 
not of superior strength to a sixth -rate man of war, 
the whole number of men about 2000. They did 
not arrive before Quebec until the 5th of October. 
Great dependence was had upon a division of the 
French force, but it happened most unfortunately, 
that the forces designed against Montreal had re 
treated, and the news of it had reached Montreal 
before the fleet arrived at Quebec, so that Count 
Frontenac, the French general, was able to employ 
the whole strength of Canada against this little 
army. This. must have struck a damp upon the 
spirits of the English forces, and they could have 
but little hopes of succeeding. Le Hontan, a 
French writer, says, " the general was at Mont 
real when he heard the news of the fleet s being in 
the river, and that, if the English had made their 
descent before his arrival at Quebec, or two days 
after, they would have carried the place without 
striking a blow, there not being 200 French in the 
city, which lay open and exposed on all hands, 
but that they lost three days in consulting before 
they came to a resolution. * Success is wisdom 
with mankind in general : from the ill success of 
this undertaking, both English and French writers 
have treated it with ridicule and peculiar con 
tempt. The next morning after the fleet arrived, 
Sir William sent a summons ashore. If it was 
too pompous, the answer was too insolent. The 
English were called heretics and traitors, and told 
that if it had not been for the revolution, New 
England and Canada would have been all one. 
The French say the major who carried the sum 
mons was threatened with a gibbet, and had like to 
have swooned. No notice is taken of this in the 
English journals ; and it is not likely to be true. An 
attempt was made to land the next day, (the 7th), 
but the violence of the wind prevented. The 8th 
they landed all the effective men, amounting to 
between 1200 and 1300. They were fired upon 
from the woods by French and Indians, and 
marched in disorder, and did not attempt to cross 
Charles river, which lay between them and the 
town. Night overtook them. Upon examining 
a deserter, he gave them such an account of the 
strength of the French, as discouraged them from! 



MASSACHUSETfS. 



541 



[advancing any farther. The ships were drawn 
up (he next evening before the town : they did 
little damage to the enemy, but were much shatter 
ed by the cannon from their batteries. The forces 
continued ashore until the 1 1th, rather upon the 
defensive, when they embarked with precipitation. 
A council of war was called the next day, and 
proposals were made for another attempt, after a 
few days refreshment for the men ; but tempes 
tuous weather came on, which drove some of the 
vessels from their anchors and scattered the whole 
fleet, and they made the best of their way back to 
Boston, where Sir William arrived the 19th of 
November. Some of the fleet were blown off to 
the West indies, one was lost upon Anticosta, 
and two or three were wrecked or never heard of. 
It appears by manuscript letters, that about 200 
men were lost by the enemy and sickness. The 
small-pox, which prevailed in Boston before they 
sailed, had got into the army : many died of the 
camp disease after their return, and spread the 
infection among the inhabitants of Boston. This 
was a humbling stroke to New England. The 
return of the New York and Connecticut forces 
was the most visible cause of the disappointment. 
Walley, who had the command of the land forces, 
gave in a journal of his proceedings to the general 
court. His conduct was censured by particular 
persons, but there was no public inquiry. 

The government was utterly unprepared for the 
return of the forces. They seem to have presumed 
not only upon success, but upon the enemy s trea 
sure to bear the charge of the expedition. The 
soldiers were upon the point of mutiny for want of 
their wages. It was utterly impracticable to raise, 
in a few days, such a sum of money as would be 
necessary. An act was passed for levy ing the sum, 
but the men could not stay until it should be 
brought into the treasury. The extreme difficulty 
to which the government was thus reduced, was 
the occasion of the first bills of credit ever issued 
in the colonies, as a substitute in the place of 
money. The debt was paid by paper notes from 
two shillings to ten pounds denomination, which 
notes were to be received for payment of the tax 
which was to be levied, and all other payments in 
the treasury. This was a new experiment. They 
had better credit than King James s leather money 
in Ireland, about the same time; but the notes 
would not command money, nor any commodities 
at money price. Sir William Phips, it is said, 
exchanged a large sum, at par, in order to give 
them credit. The soldiers in general were great 
sufferers, and could get no more than 12 or 14 
shillings in the pound. As the time of payment 
2 



of the tax approached, the credit of the notes was 
raised, and the government allowing five per cent, 
to those who paid their taxes in notes, they be 
came better than money. This was gain to the 
possessor, but it did not restore to the poor soldier 
what he had lost by the discount. Sir William 
Phips, after a few weeks tarry in Boston, embark 
ed for England, to solicit an expedition from 
thence against Canada, the government at the 
same time sending their humble address to their 
Majesties, shewing the necessity of it. 

Whilst the forces were gone to Canada, and the 
event uncertain, the Indians pretended to be dis 
posed to peace. Major Pike and Major Hutchin- 
son, two of the assistants, were appointed to treat 
with them at Wells, but nothing was done. On 
the 29th of November, six of the chiefs, viz. 
Edgeremet, Toqualriiot, Watombamet, Naictum- 
buit, Walombee, and John Hawkins, brought in 
10 captives; and in behalf of the Penicook, Win- 
napissiaukee, Ossapy, Pigwacket, Arnascoggin, 
Pejepscot, Kennebeck Indians, and all adjacent 
places, within the territories of those sagamores, 
agreed upon a truce until the 1st of May ensuing, 
upon which day they were to meet at the house of 
Lieutenant Storer, in Wells, arid to bring in all 
the English captives, arid to settle articles for a 
firm and lasting peace. This agreement was made 
at Sagadahoc, with Captain John Alden, appoint 
ed by the governor and council for that purpose. 
In consequence of this truce the land enjoyed rest 
for the winter. 

(Anno 1691.) At the day appointed, Mr. 
Danforth, the deputy governor, and several 
others, with a proper guard, repaired to Wells, 
but no Indians appeared. Captain Converse went 
out, and meeting with some of them, they came 
in, bringing two captives with them, and pro 
mised in 20 days to bring in all the rest. The 
deputy governor returned disappointed, and a 
fresh supply of 35 men were sent to Storer s house, 
where they were scarcely arrived when, on June 
9th, an attack was made upon the garrison by 
200 Indians, with Moxus, a noted sachem, at 
their head ; but the fortunate arrival of these re 
cruits prevented the enemy from succeeding. 
Divers were killed at Berwick, Exeter, and cape 
Nidduck. A small army was sent into the e. 
country by sea, which landed at Maquot, and 
marched to Pcjepscot, but met with none of the 
enemy. As the English were re-embarking, they 
were attacked by a great body of Indians. Their 
vessels were aground. English and Indians kept 
firing all night. The Indians were, by this army, 
diverted from going over to the isles of Shoals,] 



MASSACHUSETTS. 



[which they intended to have done. The frontiers 
were unmolested after this, until the 28th of Sep 
tember, when seven people were killed and taken 
at Berwick, and the next day, between 20 and 30 
at Sandy-beach ; and in October, a family was 
destroyed at Rowley, and another at Haverhill. 
On the 25th of January, the town of York was 
destroyed. Most of the houses were unguarded. 
A gun, fired by the Indians, caused many of the 
inhabitants to run to their doors. They found 
themselves surrounded with Indians ; about 50 of 
the English were killed upon the spot, and near 100 
made captives. The minister, Shubael Dummer, 
who was in great esteem, was shot dead as he was 
mounting his horse at his door, and his wife and 
family made prisoners. They set fire to the 
houses, four fortified houses only holding out 
against them, viz. Alcock s, Prebles s, Harman s, 
and Norton s. A party of men were sent from 
Portsmouth, but too late to give relief. 

Whilst the colony was thus distressed within 
themselves, their enemies in England took the 
advantage of their distresses, and used them as an 
argument against the restitution of the charter, 
imputing all to the bad administration of govern 
ment. The difference between their agents also 
increased. Mr. Wiswall, a minister of Plymouth 
colony, a gentleman of piety and learning, was in 
Bosto"n when Mr. Cooke and Oakes were about to 
embark, and he was desired to go with them. He 
had no credentials. He joined in politics with Mr. 
Cooke, rather than with Mr. Mather. The peo 
ple of Plymouth were extremely desirous of con 
tinuing a separate government, but if that could 
not be obtained, they chose to be annexed to the 
Massachusetts rather than New York. When 
Mr. Slaughter was appointed governor of New 
York, Plymouth was put into his commission, 
but by the industry and discreet application of 
Mr. Mather, t!;e commission was altered. An 
order after this was issued to the lords chief jus 
tices Holt and Pollexfcn, and the attorney and 
solicitor-general, to draw up a new charter for the 
Massachusetts, and Plymouth was included in it. 
"When Mr. Wiswall understood this, he opposed 
it, in hopes of obtaining a separate grant. This 
offended the solicitor-general, and he struck out 
Plymouth, and it was again intended they should 
be annexed to New York. When tin s news 
reached the colony of Plymouth, many people 
were alarmed, yet their general court persisted in 
desiring Sir Henry Ashurst, their agent, to apply 
for a separate charter, without signifying that 
they chose to be joined to the Massachusetts 
rather than to New York ; nor could they raise 



any money, the people about Bristol, Dartmouth, 
&amp;c. pretending that there were no hopes of any 
charier for them, nor the Massachusetts neither. 
The sentiments of many of the best men in the 
colony were known to Mr. Mather, otherwise, it 
is not improbable, Plymouth would finally have 
been included in New York commission, although 
near 300 miles distant. 

When Mr. Mather found it impossible to ob 
tain the restitution of the old charter, his next 
care was to preserve as many of the privileges con 
tained in it as he could. Sir Henry Ashurst join 
ed with him in all his measures. Mr. Cooke was 
for the old charter, or none at all. Mr. Oakes, 
the other agent, joined with Mr. Cooke. it was 
doubiful whether they had authority, by their in 
structions, to solicit for any other. In the first 
draught of a new charter, the governor only was 
reserved to the king, the deputy governor and 
council, and other officers, were to be chosen by 
the people, and the governor had no negative in 
any case. This draught was made by the attor 
ney-general, according to what he took to be the 
king s mind, as expressed in council. It was 
presented at the council-board the 8th of June 
1691, when it was objected, that, " by such a 
charter as this, the king s governor would be made 
a governor of clouts ;" and an order passed for 
preparing the heads of another draught. When 
they were prepared, a copy was given to Mr. 
Mather, with an order from their lordships, that, 
" if the agents were not satisfied therewith, they 
should bring in their objections to the attorney- 
general." Mr. Mather was so dissatisfied, that he 
declared he would sooner part with his life than 
consent to them. He was told " the consent of the 
agents was not desired; the agents of New Eng 
land were not plenipotentiaries from a sovereign 
state; if they declared they would not submit to 
the king s pleasure, his Majesty would settle the 
country, and they might take what would follow." 
Sir Henry Ashurst, with Mr. Mather, drew up 
notwithstanding their objections against the mi 
nutes, insisting upon the king s promise, and that 
charters might as well be refused to be restored to 
any of the corporations in England, where they 
had been taken away, as to New England. The 
objections were presented to the attorney-general 
and laid before the council, and a copy sent to 
the king in Flanders, but all had no effect. The 
king approved of the minutes, and disliked the 
objections made to them, and the charter was 
drawn up by Mr. Blaithwait according to them. 
The only question with the agents was, whether 
to submit to this new settlement, or to signify to] 



MASSACHUSETTS. 



543 



[the ministers of state that they had rather have no 
ch irterat all. Mr. Cooke continued firm to his 
first principles, and as he would never take any 
one step towards obtaining the charter, so he utter 
ly refused to accept of it when granted, and he en 
deavoured to prevent the colony from accepting it 
also. Mr. VViswall s principles and conduct were 
the same with Mr. Cooke s, and he endeavoured 
to prejudice the colony of Plymouth against the 
charter. The nomination of the officers reserved 
to the crown was left, for the first time, to the 
agents, or rather to Mr. Mather, who was con 
sidered as inslar omnium. 

Sir William Phips was the person recommended 
for governor. He had been chosen by the colony 
an assistant the year before, and was acceptable to 
the people in general. Mr. Stoui&amp;gt;-hton had been 
appointed deputy president by King James, and 
although he had not recovered his interest so far, 
with the people, as to obtain a vote for an assistant, 
yet he stood well with many persons of influence, 
particularly with Mr. Mather the son, who wrote 
to his father in favour of him. Mr. Addington 
the secretary was at that time secretary to the 
colony. The emoluments of that office were small, 
compared with the duty, and so he was in less 
danger of a competitor. The 28 counsellors were 
persons of the best characters in the several parts 
of the colonies, of which, by the charter, they were 
to be inhabitants or propri&amp;lt; tors. Several who 
had been of the assistants chosen by the people, 
were left out of the number, Mr. Cooke in parti 
cular, also Thomas Danforth, William Browne, 
William Johnson, John Smith, Thomas Oakes, 
and Jeremiah Swayne. All these, except Mr. 
Browne, who was supposed to have been too com 
pliant with Sir Edmund, were rigidly attached to 
the old charter, and Mr. Mather, no doubt, ex 
pected they would appear in opposition to the ac 
ceptance of the new ; for however extraordinary it 
may appear, the people of the country were far 
from being unanimous in submitting to it, expect 
ing that if it should be refused, they might main 
tain their right to their old privileges. They 
thought it would be a singular hard case, that the 
effects of the late despotism must be felt by them 
alone of all their Majesties subjects ; all other 
charters, whether there had been judgments against 
them, or whether there had been a surrender only, 
being by one means or other restored. But, it was 
said, there was this difference between the case of 
the Massachusetts and most of the other charters. 
In general, there was no room for legal exception 
to the powers exercised by the corporations, but 



the Massachusetts charter not being intended, 
when it was granted, for such government as is ne 
cessary to be exercised in a colony remote from its 
mother country, a reversion of the former judg 
ment would have been of no service ; and Sir 
(&amp;gt;eorge Trcby declared to Mr. Mather, Sir John 
Somers and the two lords chief justices being 
present and assenting to it, that " if the judgment 
against the charter should be reversed, and the go 
vernment should exercise those powers which, be 
fore the quo warranto^ they had done, a new writ 
would issue out against them in Westminster-hall, 
and there would be a judgment against them, 
and such an one, as that there would be no room 
for a writ of error." By the old charter, it was 
said, they had power to imprison or inflict punish 
ment in criminal cases, according to the course of 
corporations in England, but that unless capital 
cases be expressly mentioned, the power would 
not reach them ; that no power was given to erect 
judicatories or courts for probate of wills, or with 
admiralty jurisdiction, nor any power to constitute 
a house of deputies or representatives, nor to im 
pose taxes on the inhabitants, nor to incorporate 
towns, colleges, schools, &amp;c. which powers and 
privileges had been notwithstanding usurped. 
Whether many of the corporations in England 
had not deviated as much from their original con 
stitution, and whether particular persons are not 
punishable for usurpations, and not the corpora 
tion itself extinguished or dissolved, as was urged 
in the case of the city of London, it is not neces 
sary to determine. 

(Anno 1692.) Sir William Phips arrived at 
Boston, with the charter, the 14th of May 1692. 
He issued writs for a general assembly, which met 
the 8th of June following. 

Although a party was formed which opposed a 
submission to the charter, yet a majority of the 
court wisely and thankfully accepted it, and ap 
pointed a day of solemn thanksgiving for " grant 
ing a safe arrival to his excellency the governor 
and the Rev. Mr. Increase Mather, who have 
industriously endeavoured the service of this peo 
ple, and have brought over with them a settlement 
of government, in which their Majesties have 
graciously given us (the colony) distinguishing 
marks of their royal favour and goodness." 

CHAP. IV. 
From the charter in 1691, until the arrival of 

Governor Dudley in 1702. 
THE first planters of the Massachusetts colony 
removed to America, expecting there to enjoy] 



544 



MASSACHUSETTS. 



[civil and religious liberty in a greater degree than 
their fellow-subjects at that time enjoyed it in Eng- 
. land. The country to which they removed was 
claimed by the crown of England, by right of 
discovery. The property of a very large tract, in 
which Massachusetts bay is contained, had been 
granted to a certain corporation called the Council 
of Plymouth in Devon. This council made a 
grant of Massachusetts bay to Sir Henry Roswell 
and others, who intended to send out planters and 
servants, to be under the direction of the proprie 
tors in England. An incorporation was thought 
necessary, and a charter was obtained from King 
Charles, which some manuscripts say cost the com 
pany 2000/. sterling. The principal undertakers 
were Puritans ; planters and ministers of the same 
persuasion, together with servants, cattle, and all 
necessaries for beginning a colony, were sent over ; 
the expence of which was very great. Subscriptions 
were slowly paid, and a cloud arose very early 
upon the affairs of the colony; but it was soon dis 
pelled by a proposal from Johnson, Winthrop, 
and several other Puritans of good families and 
estates, to remove to America ; provided they 
might carry the charter with them, and manage 
the affairs of the colony without any dependence 
upon such of the company as should remain in 
England. This, by some, was thought irregular; 
but after consultation it was agreed to. The re 
moval of so many persons of character induced a 
great number of others, of the same opinions, who 
were not of the company, to remove with or fol 
low after them, and put themselves under their 
protection and government. They complained of 
the then reigning prince, that he deprived his 
subjects of their just rights, and had no regard to 
the great charter of the kingdom. What depen 
dence then could rationally be placed upon a 
special charter to a small part of his subjects in 
America ? They were soon convinced that it was 
an insufficient security. A circumstantial account 
of an attempt to vacate it the second year after 
their removal, we have in a letter to the governor 



from Emanuel Downing, 



father of Sir George 



Downing. 

In 1638, a formal demand was made of the 
surrender of their charter, which was refused, and 
other proceedings followed, which would have 
issued in a final decisive judgment carried into 
execution, and probably have proved fatal to the 
plantation, if the change of affairs in England had 
not prevented. Upon this change the colony be 
came a favourite : the principal men were the in 
timate friends of the leading members of parlia 



ment, Pym, Hambden, &amp;c. who had been en 
gaged with them, and from time to time were ex 
pected to join them. Whilst Cromwell ruled, he 
shewed them all the indulgence they desired. 

From 1640 to 1660, they approached very near 
to an independent commonwealth ; and during 
this period, completed a system of laws and go 
vernment, the plan of which they had before laid 
and began to execute. In this they departed from 
their charter ; and instead of making the laws of 
England the groundwork of their code, they pre 
ferred the laws of Moses; and, notwithstanding 
the charter knew no representative body, they es 
tablished one ; and, although it gave them no 
power to judge and determine capital offences, 
they gave this power to the judicatories thejr 
erected. This last provision became necessary, 
from their distance from the judicatories in Eng 
land ; but we know not how to excuse the persecu 
tion of all who could not conform to their religious 
establishment, when their charter granted tolera 
tion to all Christians, except Papists. 

For the first 30 years, although the governor 
and assistants were annually chosen by the bodjr 
of the people, yet they confined themselves to the 
principal gentlemen of family, estate, understand 
ing, and integrity; but as one said, who lived at 
the time when King Charles commanded them to 
fill up their numbers in government, which they 
had neglected, the new persons empowered were 
Dii minor urn gentium ; and one of their divines 
told them in public, they were in danger of being 
undone by creeping statesmen. 

Upon the restoration, not only Episcopalians, 
but Baptists, Quakers, Gortonists, &amp;c. preferred 
complaints against the colon}- ; and although, by 
the interest of the Earl of Manchester and Lord 
Say, their old friends, and of secretary Morrice, 
all Puritans, King Charles confirmed their charter, 
yet he required a toleration in religion and an 
alteration in civil matters, neither of which were 
fully complied with. The heirs of Ferdinando 
Gorges and of John Mason also complained that, 
by a liberal construction, the Massachusetts had 
extended their bounds to comprehend the pro 
vinces of Maine and New Hampshire. Commis 
sioners were sent over in 16(i5, to settle the bounds 
of the colonies and to make inquiry into their state 
in general. The Massachusetts denied their au 
thority, and pronounced the commission a viola 
tion of their charter. 

Notwithstanding the acts of parliament for re 
gulating and restraining the plantation trade, a 
constant trade was carried on with foreign coun-] 



MASSACHUSETTS. 



5*5 



[tries for contraband and enumerated commodities. 
This gave great offence. There was no custom 
house. The governor was the naval officer, witli 
whom or his deputy all vessels entered and cleared. 
The governor, being annually elected by the peo 
ple, was the more easily disposed to comply with 
popular opinions. It seems to have been a ge 
neral opinion that acts of parliament had no other 
force than what they derived from acts made by 
the general court to establish or confirm them. 
This could not consist with the charter: by this 
they could make no laws repugnant to the laws of 
England. Had the corporation continued within 
the realm, as was intended, the company and 
every member must undoubtedly have been sub 
ject to the law of the land. Upon complaint made 
by Edward Randolph, who first came over in 1676, 
and by the repeated orders from the crown to con 
form to the acts of trade, they passed an act or 
law of the colony, declaring that those acts should 
be executed there. For several years they were 
threatened with the loss of their charter. Ran 
dolph was unwearied in soliciting against them. 
By repeated addresses and agencies, they endea 
voured to exculpate themselves, but to no pur 
pose. In 1684, by a judgment or decree in 
chancery, their charter was declared forfeited, and 
their liberties were seized into the king s hands ; 
and whatever opinion some had formed, that their 
subjection depended upon mutual compact be 
tween the crown and the colony, they were forced 
to submit to superior power, and to such form of 
government as King Charles the Second and his 
successor King James thought fit to establish. 
Upon the first advice of the landing of the Prince 
of Orange, they reassumcd their charter, and 
earnestly solicited a re-establishment of it, with 
some necessary additional powers; but the king 
could not be prevailed upon to consent to it. A 
new charter was obtained ; from the arrival of 
which, this second part of their history is to be 
carried on. 

But before we proceed, it will be proper to ob 
serve the difference between the new and the old 
charter, with respect to the territory and to the 
powers of government. The new province con 
tained the whole of the old colony, without any 
deduction or reserve ; and to this were added the 
old colony of New Plymouth, the province of 
Maine, the province of Nova Scotia, and all the 
country between the province of Maine and Nova 
Scotia, as far n. as the river St. Lawrence, also 
Elizabeth islands, and the islands of Nantucket and 
Martha s Vineyard. A vast exposed frontier must 
bring heavy burdens upon a government. In the 

TOL. II. 



course of sixty years, the province of Massachu 
setts bay hath been at greater expence, and hath 
lost more of its inhabitants, than all the other colo 
nies upon the n. continent taken together. 

The two colonies of Massachusetts bay and New 
Plymouth were tolerably well peopled ; but the 
province of Maine had never been stocked with 
inhabitants; and just before the new incorpora 
tion, had been depopulated by the wars with 
French and Indians. The whole province of 
Nova Scotia was destitute of British inhabitants ; 
and although there were several thousand French, 
who had been lately conquered, yet they were a 
burden, and there could be no dependence placed 
upon their fidelity. From the time of the con 
quest of Nova Scotia, the Massachusetts colony 
had considered the inhabitants as part of the co 
lony, and had given commissions and instructions 
to persons for the exercise of government there. 
All the lands between the province of Maine and 
Nova Scotia were uninhabited, except at and near 
Pemaquid, where there are a few scattering Eng 
lish ; and upon the principal rivers, the Penobscot, 
Machias, and Norridgawock Indians had their 
wigwams. The bounds of this vast territory were 
understood to be the river St. Lawrence on the n. 
the colonies of Rhode Island and Connecticut on 
the s. the Atlantic on the e. and the S. sea on the 
w. ; but within these limits lay the provinces of 
New Hampshire and New York. In the contro 
versies with several of the other governments, it 
has been urged against the Massachusetts, that 
their w. boundary could be extended no farther 
than where the line met with Rhode Island or 
Connecticut. The words in the charier are, 
" from the Atlantic towards the S.sea, or w. as far 
as the colonies of Rhode Island, Connecticut, and 
the Naraganset country." The Massachusetts co 
lony was the n. boundary of Rhode Island and 
Connecticut; it, was impossible therefore the ne\t 
province, which contained the whole of the old co 
lony, should, generally, be bounded w. upon either 
of those colonies ; and it would be a strange con 
struction, to suppose a corner of Rhode Island co 
lony, which is but a few miles from the Atlantic, 
to be the utmost limits the province was to extend 
w. ; for it could then contain but a very small 
part of the old colony of Massachusetts, whereas 
the whole is expressly included. The only sense 
the words can bear, undoubtedly is this, viz. that 
the province shall extend as far towards the S.sea, 
or w. as Rhode Island or Connecticut do extend. 
Naraganset country, although it lies between 
Rhode Island and Connecticut, is mentioned after 
Connecticut, because it was then claimed by that] 
4. A 



MASSACHUSETTS. 



[colony, as within the bounds of their charter ; and 
the Massachusetts agents fa voured that claim, and 
considered it as an appendage to Connecticut. 

The governor, under the old charter, although 
he carried great porte, yet his share in the adminis 
tration was little more than that of any one of the 
assistants. He had the power of calling the ge 
neral court upon urgent occasions, so had the de 
puty governor, or major part of the assistants, if 
the governor did not think fit to do it ; but he 
could not adjourn, prorogue, or dissolve the court ; 
the vote of the major part of the whole court was 
necessary. He voted with the assistants, and if 
there was an equal vote, his vote was twice counted 
to make a casting vote. He gave commissions to 
civil and military officers, but this was merely a 
ministerial act, in which nothing was left to his 
discretion, all officers being elected by the general 
court. Under the new charter, there must be an 
annual meeting of the general court, on the last 
Wednesday in May; but the governor calls an as 
sembly at any other times he thinks proper, and ad 
journs, prorogues, and dissolves it at pleasure. He 
has no vote in the legislature, and does not, or re 
gularly should not, interest himself in matters in 
debate, in council, or in the house ; but no act of 
government is valid without his consent. He has 
the appointment of all military officers solely, and 
of all officers belonging to the courts of justice, 
with the consent of the council ; other civil officers 
are elected by the two houses, and he has his nega 
tive ; no money can issue out of the treasury but 
by his warrant, with the advice and consent of the 
council. 

The assistants or counsellors, under the old 
charter, were annually elected by the votes of all 
the. freemen of the colony ; they were not only, 
with the governor, one of the two branches of le 
gislature, but the supreme executive court in all 
civil and criminal causes, except in such cases 
where, by the laws, an appeal was allowed to the 
general court. The new charter provides, that 
upon the last Wednesday in May annually, 28 
counsellors shall, by the general court or assembly, 
be newly chosen. At the first election, it was 
made a question, whether by the general court or 
assembly, was intended the house of representa 
tives only, or the whole three branches ? and it is 
handed down to us by tradition, that after some 
time spent in messages and replies, the council of 
the former year gave up the point, and sent Major 
Whalley, one of their number, to acquaint the 
house with it ; but when he came to the door, he 
heard the speaker putting the question to the 
house, and finding they had conceded to the coun 



cil, he returned without delivering his message; 
and a committee coming soon after from the house 
to bring up the vote, the council, by this accident, 
retained a privilege which they have been in the 
exercise of ever since ; and no doubt, it is in a 
great measure owing to this, thntany great change 
in the council has been rarely effected, even when 
there have been very warm altercations between 
the two houses the preceding year. Jt is very 
difficult to form a second branch of legislature, 
analogous to the second branch in the Uritish con 
stitution. The colonies are not ripe for hereditary 
honours, otherwise there seems no more room for 
exception to them there than in Ireland. In the 
charter governments of Connecticut and Rhode 
Island, this branch is more dependent upon the 
people in general, than the house of representa 
tives ; the first being elected by the freemen in ge 
neral, the last by the freemen of their several 
towns ; and there have been instances in those co 
lonies, where the representatives have had virtue 
enough to withstand popular prejudices, when the 
council have not. In the royal governments, as 
they are called, the council can scarely be con 
sidered as a distinct branch ; frequently they re 
ceive their appointment from the recommendation 
of the governor ; they are always liable to be sus 
pended by him, and if it be without sufficient 
cause, the remoteness of the colonies from the place 
where redress is to be obtained, and the expenceof 
soliciting it, are very often sufficient to discourage 
from applying for it. In the Massachusetts, this 
branch is dependent both upon the governor and 
people, and we have seen, at different times, the 
influence of the one or the other over this branch, 
according to the degree of spirit arid resolution 
which has respectively prevailed. We have seen 
instances also of counsellors, who have had forti 
tude enough to resist an undue influence from 
either, and who from year to year have had violent 
opposition to their election. We -have seen so 
many good men members, that we may not give the 
epithet to this branch which is sometimes used for 
the small boroughs in England. Hut we have 
often seen, that the most likely way to secure a 
seat for many years is to be of no importance, and 
therefore it must be pronounced defective. Neither 
in the Massachusetts, nor in the royal governments, 
do we meet with that glorious independence, 
which makes the house of lords the bulwark of 
the British constitution, and which has sometimes 
saved the liberties of the people from threatened en 
croachments, and at other times put a stop to ad 
vances making upon the royal prerogative. 

The representatives, under the old charter, were] 



MASSACHUSETTS. 



Delected by freemen only ; under the new, every 
treeholder of 40 shillings sterling a year is a voter, 
and so is every other inhabitant who has forty 
pound sterling personal estate. The speaker of 
the house was at first elected, and took his place 
without any notice to the governor ; and for many 
years after the present charter, there was only the 
formality of notice, until disputes upon oilier points 
with the governor, caused him to insist upon his 
right of negativing the speaker, which the house 
was obliged, after a long struggle, to submit to. 

We find nothing in the new charter, of an ec 
clesiastical constitution. Liberty of conscience is 
granted to all, except Papists. The agent sup 
posed, that the power given to the general court 
to make laws, was sufficient for supporting and 
encouraging such modes of worship and such form 
of church government as should be most agreeable 
to the inhabitants in general. At the first session 
of the general court, an act passed, establishing all 
the local laws of the Massachusetts province, until 
other provision should be made. By this law, the 
platform of church discipline, among the other 
laws, was established, but the law was disapproved 
in England. At the next session, by another law, 
it was enacted, " that the respective churches in 
the several towns within this province shall, at all 
times hereafter, use, exercise, and enjoy all their 
privileges and freedoms, respecting divine wor 
ship, church order and discipline, and shall be en 
couraged in the peaceable and regular profession 
and practice thereof." An attempt was soon made 
to continue the practice of an appeal to the general 
court in controversies upon ecclesiastial matters. 
A great part of the church and inhabitants of 
Salem village petitioned the general court to ap 
point an ecclesiastical council to settle a contro 
versy with Mr. Paris the minister, but the court 
refused. There have been instances of the general 
court s interposing, so far as to recommend an ec 
clesiastical council ; and sometimes committees 
have been appointed by the court, for the sake of 
preserving or restoring peace, professing rather to 
advise than enjoin measures, but exceptions have 
been generally taken to such votes or orders of 
court, as irregular, and not consisting with the 
dignity of the supreme legislative authority of the 
province. Synods were occasionally called under 
the old charter. Some steps were taken for calling 
a synod about thirty years after the new charter 
arrived, but a royal instruction prevented any fur 
ther progress. 

If the first commissions from the crown to the 
governor of any colony, and the form of govern 
ment prescribed by such commissions, are a pre 



cedent to be followed in all succeeding commis 
sions, and a system of laws once approved by the 
crown cannot be repealed, (all which is contended 
for by the inhabitants of the royal governments), 
the charter to the Massachusetts was not so great 
a boon as their forefathers generally imagined, the 
material difference in the constitutions being in 
the second branch only of the legislature ; but it 
is certain, that at the time of granting the charter, 
it was deemed a much greater security to the peo 
ple for the enjoyment ot the privileges granted by 
it, than they could have had merely from a royal 
temporary commission to a governor. 

The distress of the people, at the time of the 
arrival of the charter, is represented to have been 
peculiarly great. The sea-coast was infested with 
privateers, so that few vessels could escape them ; 
the inland frontiers f.-and w. were continually har- 
rassed by French and Indian enemies ; a late ex 
pedition against Canada had exposed the province 
to the resentment of France, the effects of which 
were from time to time expected ; the same expe 
dition brought so heavy a debt upon the govern 
ment, that it required all the skill of the adminis 
tration to support the public credit, and to procure 
farther. supplies for carrying on the war ; a strong 
party in the government had opposed every other 
measure, except the adhering to the old charter, 
and was now dissatisfied with the acceptance of 
the new ; but the greatest misfortune was, an ap 
prehension that the devil was let loose among 
them, that many had entered into a league with 
him, and others were afflicted, tormented, and the 
subjects of diabolical rage and fury. The minds 
of people in general were seized with gloom and 
horror. The greater part were credulous and be 
lieved all they heard, and expected by and by their 
own turn ; the few who believed the whole to be 
an imposture or delusion, were afraid to discover 
their sentiments, lest some who pretended to be 
bewitched should accuse theni) and in such case 
there was no room to hope for favour. 

Sir William Phips arrived at Boston with the 
charter, Saturday the 1 4th of May, towards even 
ing. On Monday he was conducted from his 
house to the town-house by the regiment of Bos 
ton, the military companies of Charlestown, the 
magistrates, ministers, and principal gentlemen of 
Boston ami the adjacent towns. The charter was 
first published, then the governor s commission ; 
and thereupon the venerable, old charter governor, 
Bradstreet, resigned the chair ; we dare to say, not 
without a deep sigh from many of the spectators. 
After publishing the lieutenant-governor s commis 
sion, and administering the oaths, the governor] 
4 A 2 



MASSACHUSETTS. 



[was conducted "with the same panicle to the place 
appointed for a public dinner, and from thence to 
his house again. By the first ships, letters from 
the governor and council were sent to the arch 
bishop of Canterbury, the Earl of Nottingham, 
and the Countess of Sunderland, Hugh Boscawen, 
John Hambden, and Francis Charlton, Esqrs, 
thankfully acknowledging the favour Mr. Mather 
the agent had received from them, and the affection 
which they had discovered to the interest of their 
Majesty s subjects in the province. At the first 
general council for the appointment of sheriffs, 
justices, and other civil officers, the governor either 
misconceived, or was prevailed upon to give up, 
the powers which belonged to him by charter, the 
council nominating or choosing the officers, and the 
governor giving his consent. This practice would 
have lessened the weight and influence of the go 
vernor. It was not suffered long to continue. 
After the vacating the colony laws under the old 
charter, by the publication of the new charter, 
there was room to question what was the rule of 
law in civil and criminal matters, and how far the 
common law, and what statutes, took place? The 
council appointed by the charter were to continue 
until May 1693, and so no special provision was 
made for a general assembly in May 1692, but 
writs issued immediately upon the governor s ar 
rival, and the court met the 8th of June, and an 
act passed, declaring that all the laws of the co 
lony of Massachusetts bay and the colony of New 
Plymouth, not being repugnant to the laws of Eng 
land nor inconsistent with the charter, should be in 
force in the respective colonies to the 10th of No 
vember 1692, except where other provision should 
be made by act of assembly ; and all justices of the 
peace (assistants, like aldermen of London, were 
ex-oflScio justices under the old charter) had the 
same powers given to them, in the execution of 
laws, which magistrates used to have. The con 
fusion the country was in, from the supposed 
witchcrafts, seems to have occasioned an adjourn 
ment of the general court, on the 2d of July, 
to the second Wednesday in October, very little 
public business having been done during the 
session. 

The great noise which the New England witch 
crafts made throughout the English dominions, 
proceeded more from the general panic with which 
all sorts of persons were seized, and an expectation 
that the contagion would spread to all parts of the 
country, than from the number of persons who were 
executed, more having bren put to death in a 
single county in England, in a short space of time, 
than have suffered in all New England from the 



first settlement until the present time. Fifteen 
years had passed before we find any mention of 
witchcraft among the English colonists. The In 
dians were supposed to be worshippers of the 
devil, and their poworos to be wizards. The first 
suspicion of witchcraft among the English was 
about the year 1645 ; at Springfield, upon Connec 
ticut river, several persons were supposed to be 
under an evil hand, and among the rest two of the 
minister s children. Great pains were taken to 
prove the facts upon several persons charged with 
the crime, but cither the nature of the evidence 
was not satisfactory, or the fraud was suspected, 
and so no person was convicted until the year 
1650, when a poor wretch, Mary Oliver, probably 
weary of her life from the general reputation of 
being a witch, after long examination was brought 
to confession of her guilt, but we do not find that 
she was executed. Whilst this inquiry was mak 
ing, Margaret Jones was executed at Charlestown ; 
and Mr. Hale mentions a woman at Dorchester, 
and another at Cambridge about the same time, 
who all at their death asserted their innocence. 
Soon after, Hugh Parsons was tried at Springfield 
and escaped death. In 1655, Mrs. Hibbins, the 
assistant s widow, was hanged at Boston. In 
1662, at Hartford in Connecticut, (about 30 miles 
from Springfield, upon the same river), one Ann 
Cole, a young woman who lived next door to a 
Dutch family, and no doubt had learned some 
thing of the language, was supposed to be possess 
ed with daemons, who sometimes spake Dutch and 
sometimes English, and sometimes a language 
which nobody understood, and who held a con 
ference with one another. Several ministers, who 
were present, took down the conference in writing, 
and the names of several persons, mentioned in the 
course of the conference, as actors or bearing parts 
in it; particularly a woman, then in prison upon 
suspicion of witchcraft, oneGreensmith, who upon 
examination confessed and appeared to be sur 
prised at the discovery. She owned that she and 
the othqrs named had been familiar with a daemon, 
who had carnal knowledge of her, and although 
she had not made a formal covenant, yet she had 
promised to be ready at his call, and was to have 
had a high frolic at Christmas, when the agree 
ment was to have been signed. Upon this con 
fession she was executed, and two more of the 
company were condemned at the same time. In 
1669, Susanna Martin, of Salisbury, was bound 
over to the court, upon suspicion of witchcraft, 
but escaped at that time. 

In 1671, Elizabeth Knap, a sort of ventriloqui, 
alarmed the people of Groton in much the same] 



MASSACHUSETTS. 



549 



[manner as Ann Cole had done those of Hartford ; 
but her daemon was not so cunning, for instead of 
confining himself io old women, lie railed at the 
good minister of the town, and other persons of 
good character, and the people could not then be 
prevailed on to believe him, but believed the girl, 
when she confessed she had been deluded, and that 
the devil had tormented her in the shape of good 
persons ; and so she escaped the punishment due 
to her fraud and imposture. 

In 1673, Eunice Cole of Hampton was tried, 
and the jury found her not legally guilty, but that 
there were strong grounds to suspect her of fami 
liarity with the devil. 

In 1679, William Morse s house, at Newbury, 
was troubled with the throwing of bricks, stones, 
&amp;c. and a boy of the family was supposed to be 
bewitched, who accused one of the neighbours; 
and in 1682, the house of George Walton, a Qua 
ker, at Portsmouth, and another house at Salmon 
falls, (both in New Hampshire), were attacked after 
the same manner. 

In 1683, the da2mons removed to Connecticut 
river again, where one Desborough s house Avas 
molested by an invisible hand, and a fire kindled, 
nobody knew how, which burnt up great part of 
his estate ; and in 1684, Philip Smith, a judge of 
the court, a military officer, and a representative of 
the town of Had ley, upon the same river, (an hy- 
pocondriac person), fancied himself under an evil 
hand, and suspected a woman, one of his neigh 
bours, and languished and pined away, and was 
generally supposed to be bewitched to death. 
While he lay ill, a number of brisk lads tried an 
experiment upon the old woman. Having dragged 
her out of her house, they hung her up until she 
was near dead, let her down, rolled her some time 
in the snow, and at last buried her in it and there 
left her, but it happened that she survived, and the 
melancholy man died. 

Notwithstanding these frequent instances of sup 
posed witchcrafts, none had suffered for near 
thirty years in the Massachusetts colony. The 
execution of the assistant or counsellor s widoxv, in 
J655, was disapproved of by many principal per 
sons, and it is not unlikely that her death saved 
the lives of many other inferior persons. But in 
1685, a very circumstantial account of all or most 
of the cases we have mentioned was published, and 
many arguments were brought to convince the 
country that they were no delusions nor impos 
tures, but the effects of a familiarity between the 
devil and such as he found fit for his instruments ; 
and in 1687 or 1688, began a more alarming in 
stance than any which had preceded it. Four of 



the children of John Goodwin, a grave man and a 
good liver, at the n. of Boston, were generally be 
lieved to be bewitched. We have heard that per 
sons, who were of the neighbourhood, spoke of the 
great consternation it occasioned. The children 
were all remarkable for ingenuity of temper, had 
been religiously educated, and were thought to be 
without guile. The eldest was a girl of thirteen or 
fourteen years. She had charged a laundress with 
taking away some of the family linen. The mo 
ther of the laundress was one of the wild Irish, of 
bad character, and gave the girl harsh language; 
soon after which she fell into fits, which were said 
to have something diabolical in them. One of her 
sisters and two brothers followed her example, and, 
it is said, were tormented in the same part of their 
bodies at the same time, although kept in separate 
.apartments, and ignorant of one another s com 
plaints. One or two things were said to be very 
remarkable; all their complaints were in the day 
time, and they slept comfortably all night; they 
were struck dead at the sight of the Assembly s Ca 
techism, Cotton s Milk for Babes, and some other 
good books, but could read in Oxford Jests, Popish 
and Quaker books, and the Common Prayer, with 
out any difficulfy. Is it possible the mind of man 
should be capable of such strong prejudices as that 
a suspicion of fraud should not immediately arise ? 
But attachments to modes and forms in religion, 
had such force, that some of these circumstances 
seem rather to have confirmed the credit of the 
children. Sometimes they would be deaf, then 
dumb, then blind ; and sometimes all these dis 
orders together would come upon them. Their 
tongues would be drawn down their throats, then 
pulled out upon their chins. Their jaws, necks, 
shoulders, elbows, and all their joints, would ap 
pear to be dislocated, and they would make most 
piteous outcries of burnings, of being cut with 
knives, beat, &amp;c. and the marks of wounds were 
afterwards to be seen. The ministers of Boston and 
Charlestown kept a day of fasting and prayer at 
the troubled house; after which, the youngest 
child made no more complaints. The others per 
severed, and the magistrates then interposed, and 
the old woman was apprehended, but upon exami 
nation would neither confess nor deny, and ap 
peared to be disordered in her senses. Upon the 
report of physicians that she was compos mentis, 
she was executed, declaring at her death the chil 
dren should not be relieved. The eldest after this 
was taken into a minister s family, where at first 
she behaved orderly, but after some time suddenly 
fell into her fits. The account of her affliction is 
in print ; some things are mentioned as extraordi-] 



550 



M A S S A C II U S E T T S. 



[nary, which tumblers arc every day taught to per 
form ; others seem more than natural, but it was a 
time of great credulity. The children returned to 
their ordinary behaviour, lived to adult age, made 
profession of religion, and the affliction they had 
been under they publicly declared to be one mo 
tive to it. A printed account of those transactions 
was published with a preface by Mr. Baxter, who 
says, u the evidence is so convincing, that he 
must be a very obdurate sadducee who will 
not believe." It obtained credit sufficient, to 
gether with other preparatives, to dispose the 
whole country to be easily imposed upon by the 
more extensive and more tragical scene, which 
was presently after acted at Salem and other parts 
of the county of Essex. Not many years before, 
Glanvil published his witch stories in England ; 
Perkins and other nonconformists were earlier ; 
but the great authority was that of Sir Mathew 
Hale, revered in New England, not only for his 
knowledge in the law, but for his gravity and piety. 
The trial of the witches in Suffolk was published 
in 1684. All these books were in New England, 
and the conformity between the behaviour of 
Goodwin s children and most of the supposed 
bewitched at Salem, and the behaviour of those in 
England, is so exact, as to leave no room to doubt 
the stories had been read by the New England per 
sons themselves, or had been told to them by others 
who had read them. Indeed, this conformity, 
instead of giving suspicion, was urged in confir 
mation of the truth of both ; the Old England 
daemons and the New being so much alike. The 
court justified themselves from books of law, and 
the authorities of Keble, Ualton, and other lawyers, 
then of the first character, who lay down ru^es of 
conviction as absurd and dangerous as any which 
were practised in New England. The trial of 
Richard Hathcway. the impostor, before Lord 
Chief Justice Holt, was ten or twelve years after. 
This was a great discouragement to prosecutions 
in England for witchcraft, but an effectual stop 
was not put to them, until the act of parliament 
in the reign of his late Majesty. Even this has 
not wholly cured the common people, and we 
hear of old women ducked and cruelly murdered 
within these last twenty years. Reproach, then, 
for hanging witches, although it lias been often 
cast upon the people of New England, by those 
of Old, yet it must have been done with an ill 
grace. The people of New England were of a 
grave cast, and had long been disposed to give 
a serious solemn construction even to common 
events in providence; but in Old England, the 
of Charles the Second was as remarkable for 



gaiety as any whatsoever, and for scepticism and 
infidely, as any which preceded t. 

Sir William Phips, the &amp;lt;rovernor, upon his 
arrival, fell in with the opinion prevailing. Mr. 
Stoughton, the lieutenant-governor, upon whose 
judgment great stress was laid, had taken up this 
notion, that although the devil might appear in the 
shape of a guilty person, yet lie would never be 
permitted to assume the shape of an innocent 
person. This opinion, at first, was generally 
received. Some of the most religious women who 
were accused, when they saw the appearance of 
distress and torture in their accusers, and heard 
their solemn declarations, that they saw the shapes 
or spectres of the accused afflicting them, persuaded 
themselves they were witches, and that the devil, 
some how or other, although they could not 
remember how or when, had taken possession of 
their evil hearts, and obtained some sort of assent to 
his afflicting in their shapes; and thereupon they 
thought they might be justified in confessing them 
selves guilty. 

About this time, 1692, it was proposed that the 
members of the general court should, during the 
recess, consider of such laws as were necessary to 
be established ; for the act reviving the colony laws 
was to continue in force no longer than until 
November 1692. 

This was a work of great importance, and 
required the wisest heads, and ought to have been 
committed to select persons upon a preconcerted 
plan, the whole of which each person should have 
kept in view ; for want thereof the people of the 
province have been sufferers ever since; the con 
struction of many laws has been doubtful arul 
varying, it being impossible to reconcile the several 
parts to any general principle of law whatsoever. 
Besides, being passed one from another, as they 
happened to be brought in, and sent to England for 
allowance, some were disapproved ; others, which 
depended upon or had some connection with those 
which were disapproved, were allowed ; whereas, 
if one complete code or system had been prepared 
and sent to England^ such alterations would have 
been proposed, as might finally have issued in a 
veil-digested consistent body -of laws ; and a tem 
porary provision might have been made, until this 
perpetual rule should be settled. Seven years had 
passed, and four different acts had been sent one 
after another to England, for establishing courts of 
justice, before the royal approbation could be 
obtained. It was the practice of the administration 
then, and it seems at that time to have been well 
enough received in the province, to point out, 
either in the order disallowing laws, or to the agent], 



MASSACHUSETTS. 



551 



presented them, the particular exceptions, 
and to propose such alterations as might render them 
acceptable, except in such cases where the law in 
all its parts was disapproved. 

The legislature consisting of many of the same 
persons who had composed the legislature under 
the old charter, we find the same spirit in most 
of the laws which were first passed as had been in 
the colony laws. The first act was a sort of magna 
charta, asserting and setting forth their general 
privileges, and this clause was among the rest, 
" No aid, tax, tallage, assessment, custom, loan, 
benevolence, or imposition whatsoever, shall be 
laid, assessed, imposed, or levied on any of their 
Majesties subjects or their estates, on any pretence 
whatsoever, but by the act and consent of the 
governor, council, and representatives of the 
people assembled in general court." The other 
parts of the act were copied from magna charla. 
This was soon disallowed. So was an act for 
punishing capital offenders ; amongst whom are 
ranked idolaters, blasphemers, and incestuous per 
sons ; and what the benignity of the common law 
makes manslaughter, was by this act expressly 
declared to be wilful murder. This law was fram 
ed from the judicial laws of Moses. Divers other 
acts, which discovered the same spirit, met with 
the same fate. The danger they had been in from 
Sir Edmund Andres s calling their titles in ques 
tion, we imagine, must have occasioned an act for 
quieting possessions ; declaring that three years 
quiet possessor! should give a title, with the usual 
savings of infants, &amp;c. This, probably, was 
thought too short a term, and therefore disallowed ; 
as was also an act for the equal distribution of 
insolvents estates. The rule of law for paying 
debts according to their nature and degree was 
thought preferable ; but the people having never 
been used to this, it would have been very incon 
venient, and upon further trial, tlie act, or one to 
the same purpose, was allowed. It is indeed 
difficult to assign a sufficient reason, why not only 
one set of creditors of a deceased insolvent shall be 
paid their full debts to the exclusion of all others ; 
but even an executor or administrator shall have 
it in his power to pay himself, to the exclusion of 
others whose debts were of the same nature. 

Other acts, which were passed, were approved, 
viz. one for prevention of frauds and perjuries, 
conformable to the statute of Charles II. others for 
punishing criminal offences, in many parts miti 
gating the penalties at common law ; for the obser 
vation of the Lord s day ; solemnizing marriages 
by a minister or a justice of peace ; settlement and 
support of ministers and schoolmasters; regulat 



ing towns and counties; requiring the oaths 
appointed instead of the oaths of allegiance and 
supremacy, as also the oaths of officers ; establish 
ing fees ; ascertaining the number and regulating 
the house of representatives, and divers other acts 
of immediate necessity and general utility, which 
have been in force ever since ; but none of more 
universal influence than the act for settlement of the 
estates of persons dying intestate. Jn a new 
country the length of time an estate has been in a 
family cannot be urged for the further continuance 
of it; where improvements are continually mak 
ing, the personal estate is continually changing 
into real, which increases the natural injustice of 
one child s taking the real estate of the parent, to 
the exclusion of the other children ; it was therefore 
thought reasonable, that the real as well as persoanl 
estate of a parent should be equally distributed 
among his or her children, saving to the eldest son, 
either from the rule in the law of Moses, or a 
supposed just claim from primogeniture, a double 
share. The act therefore, in general, was planned 
upon the statute of distributions, but gave two 
shares to the eldest son, and undoubtedly, in the 
distribution among the children of an intestate, 
respected real estates in like manner with personal ; 
the widow had her thirds in the real for life only. 

It is evident that the principal point in view 
was to make real estates partible among the children 
of an intestate, and that they never considered the 
full operation of the clause in the statute, and 
which is also brought into the act, providing, that 
where there are no children, the whole estate shall 
go to the next of kin to the intestate. 

The new government, as we have observed, 
found themselves in a state of war. The authority 
of the colony had appointed Elisha Hutchinson, 
who was one of the assistants arid chief officer of 
the regiment of Boston, to be commander of the 
forces. He was at Portsmouth, in JVew Hamp 
shire, when the charter arrived, and had disposed 
his men upon the e. frontiers, so as to cover 
the few inhabitants which remained there after the 
destruction of York. Captain Convers, with 15 
men, was posted in a garrison house at Welis, 
called Storer s garrison; and about as many more 
were on board two sloops, which went from Boston 
with provisons. About the JOth of June, the 
inhabitants Avere alarmed, by their cattle running 
home from the woods in a fright, and some wound 
ed. This notice caused the several families to 
betake themselves immediately to this one house, 
where they were scarce lodged, when an army of 
French and Indians, of three or four hundred, sur 
rounded the house. A French officer, Labrocree,} 



552 



MASSACHUSETTS. 



[was commander, and Madockewando, Moxus, 
Egeremet, and oilier noted Indian chiefs, were 
under him. They first attempted the garrison 
lionse ; but having no cannon, they were repulsed 
and went to the sloops. The river, where they lay, 
is not above J8 or 20 feet broad, but the banks 
shelve away, so that they could not leap aboard. 
They set the sloops on fire several times, with fire 
arrows, but the fire was as often extinguished, and, 
after a variety of contrivances to shelter themselves 
from the English shot, they gave over and return 
ed to the garrison, where they had no better suc 
cess. The women not only tended the men with 
ammunition and other necessaries, but many of 
them took their muskets and fired upon the enemy. 
Very good terms were offered the garrison, if they 
would surrender, but no regard was paid to them ; 
an army of French and Indians were not to be trust 
ed. Being driven again from the garrison, they 
made a second attempt upon the sloops by a fire 
raft, which fortunately drove ashore and broke, 
without any damage to the vessels. Having spent 
eight and forty hours in this way, they withdrew, 
with the loss of Labrocrec, their commander, and 
some few of the men. In their retreat, they wreak 
ed their malice in torturing a poor Englishman, 
John Diamond, who was taking prisoner in pass 
ing from the sloops to the fort, and in killing all 
the cattle they could find. 

Sir William Phips was charged by his instruc 
tions to build a strong fort at Pemaquid. This he 
performed the first summer, going down in person. 
The country in general disliked it. They have 
been reproached for grudging at so small an 
expence for their own safety ; but this was not 
the principal cause of their aversion to a fort here. 
It answered no other purpose than to keep posses 
sion of that particular harbour, and was not conve 
nient for a post for any marching parties, who from 
time to time were sent out for discovery of the 
enemy, nor for the settlers of the frontiers to retreat 
to. The ministry seemed to have had a view in it, 
which the people of the province little considered, 
viz. preventing the French from claiming Acadia 
as a derelict country , and perhaps taking possession 
of it as such. However, the fort was built, and a 
very respectable one ; and a garrison maintained 
there at the charge of the province. The French 
immediately formed a design, or prosecuted what 
was before designed, to possess themselves of the 
place. Two ships of war, le Poli and 1 Envieux, 
under Iberville, were to attempt the place by sea, 
whilst Villebone, with a body of Indians, did the 
same by land. The ships came late in the fall, 
and finding an English vessel at anchor under the 



guns of the fort, and having no pilots, nor any 
body acquainted with the coast, they thought it 
prudent to retreat. The Indians had assembled in 
great numbers, and were very much dissatisfied, 
depending upon driving away their troublesome 
neighbours the English. The French at Quebec 
supposed these extraordinary preparations, which 
frustrated their attempt, were caused by the 
intelligence which two deserters, who had been 
spirited away by Mr. Nelson, gave to the authority 
in the Massachusets, but this was a mistake. 

Whilst the governor was at Pemaquid, building 
the fort, he sent Major Church, the celebrated 
commander in Philip s war, with part of the forces 
to Penobscot, and upon his return he ordered him 
to Kennebeck. Church took three or four prisoners 
and some plunder at Penobscot, and discovered 
a great number of Indians ; but for want of whale- 
boats could not pursue them. At Kennebeck he 
burned a fort which the Indians had at Tacon- 
nick, and destroyed their corn, but neither killed 
nor took prisoners any of the enemy. 

We meet -with nothing else memorable this year 
relative to the frontiers. The Indians had not 
been very active ; they were sensible of their ill 
treatment from the French, who had often 
abandoned them, and it was the influence of the 
priests, and the attachment of the Indians to the 
Roman Catholic religion, which prevented their 
forsaking the French interest and adhering to the 
English ; besides, the English had several of 
their principal people prisoners at Boston, of whose 
redemption they were very desirous, and had no 
hopes of accomplishing it, except by a treaty of 
peace. 

{Anno 1693.) The appointment of counsellors, 
in the charter, was in consequence of the nomina 
tion made by Mr. Mather, the agent. Perhaps he 
was well enough pleased, in the time of it, with 
having it in his power to distinguish his friends, 
some of whom he afterwards thought ungrateful 
to him ; and those who had formerly been in, and 
now thought themselves injured, as soon as they 
were restored, shewed their resentment; and he 
used to say he had been more unkindly treated, 
from time to time, by the council than any other 
men in the province. The election, in May 1693, 
was the first opportunity the country had of shewing 
their own sense of Mr. Mather s nomination. 
William Stonghton, Thomas Danforth, John 
Pynchon, Elisha Cooke, Isaac Addington, Wil 
liam Browne, Nathaniel Thomas, John Saffin, 
Francis Ilooke, and Charles Frost, were elected 
counsellors, (the six first named had been asistants, 
but were left out of the charter), and Simon Brad-] 



M A S S A C H U S E T T S. 



553 



[street, Samuel Applet on, John Joyliffe, Adam 
Winthrop, Richard Middlecot, Joseph Lynde, 
Samuel Hay man, Stephen Mason, Thomas Hinck- 
ley, and Job Alcot, were left out of the council. 
Stoughton, the lieutenant governor, had acted 
as a counsellor all the year 1692, although there 
were 28 without him ; the deputy governor used 
to be considered as an assistant under the old 
charter ; but it was now thought proper to choose 
him one of the 28. They were not sureof always 
having a lieutenant governor so agreeable to the 
people as he was. The governor refused his con 
sent to Mr. Cooke, He had opposed, when he 
was in England, the appointment of the governor. 
He was, however, in real esteem with the people, 
and the negative was impolitic. 

Repeated applications had been mad-e for a 
naval force to be sent from England, sufficient, in 
conjunction with laud forces to be raised in New 
England and New York, for the reduction of 
Canada, but without success; other affairs of the 
war not permitting this, though deemed important, 
to be engaged in. In 1692, it was resolved there 
should be an expedition the next year. A fleet 
was to be employed in the winter, in reducing 
Martinico, and, having performed that service, was 
to go to Boston, there to take on board a body of 
land forces under Sir William Phips, and so 
proceed to Quebec. Had Quebec been the only 
object, and reasonable notice given to the colonies, 
there was reason to expect success. By the fleet s 
going to the West Indies, the whole design was 
blasted. If sickness had not weakened them, the 
force would still have been insufficient for the 
reduction of Martinico ; but the mortality was 
so great, that before Sir Francis Wheeler, the 
commander in chief, came to Boston with the fleet, 
June llth, he had buried 1300 out of 2100 
sailors, and 1800 of 2400 soldiers. It may well 
be .supposed the admiral had done with the thoughts 
of the Canada expedition. The land army, 
perhaps, might have been recruited, but a supply 
of seamen could not be obtained. Besides, not 
the least preparations had been made, he brought 
the news himself of his proposed attempt. The 
letters dated in February, the vessel being by 
some means or other delayed or beat off the coast, 
did not arrive until July. In an affair of such 
importance, and in a time of war, notice might 
well have been expected by many different con 
veyances. Sir Francis settled, with the govern 
ment, a plan for another year; viz. 2000 land 
forces to be sent from England, and 2000 more to 
be raised in the colonies, the ships and forces from 
England to beat Canso by the first of June, where 

VOL. II. 



the forces from the colonies were to be ready for 
them ; the whole forces to go up the river, there 
to divide, and attack Montreal and Quebec at the 
same time. Considering the stale Canada was then 
in, this seems to have been no injudicious plan. 
A rendezvous at Boston would have been known 
at Quebec, by persons from the frontiers, before 
a fleet could have gone up the river. With Canso 
(Cape Breton not being then settled) the French in 
Canada had less communication : The whole force 
going up the river was not loss judicious. Former 
and latter attempts have shewn, how uncertain the 
mutual aid would have been, of an army up the 
river and another marching within land. 

The distemper which had been in the fleet 
spread in Boston, and was more maglignnnt than 
ever the small pox had b en, or any other epide 
mical sickness which had been in the country 
before ; and many families left the town and resid 
ed in the country, until the infection ceased. 

The molestations upon the frontiers, this year, 
were not very great. Preparations were ma&amp;lt;le for 
carrying on the war. Captain Convers, who had 
behaved well, was appointed, with a major s com 
mission, to the command of the forces e. With 
a small army of 400 or 500 men, he marched 
to Tacouick, on Kennebeck, but met with none of 
the enemy, except one party, which he surprised, 
not far from Wells. On his return, he made some 
stay at Saco river; and about two leagues up the 
river, on the w. side, near the falls, a very 
proper station, he built a stone fort, an irregular 
pentagon with a tower. This was in the heart of 
the Indians hunting ground at that time, and was 
thought to have accelerated a treaty of peace. An 
apprehension prevailed among them at the same 
time, that the Iroquois, instigated by the English, 
would fall upon them. 

Thurry, a French missionary at Penobscot, 
spared no pains to prevent it, but they were 
ineffectual. The Indians sued for peace, and the 
English were glad of a respite from war. Pema- 
quid being appointed for the place of treaty, on 
the llth of August the articles were signed, and 
hostages delivered by the Indians, as a security for 
their fidelity. This security could not be obtained 
from them in later treaties. It was ineffectual at 
this time. 

Charlevoix has not truly represented this trans 
action. He may have been misinformed by the 
Indians, who have always kept from the French, 
as far as they could, the submissions made to the 
English. He says, Sir William Phips had engag 
ed a few of the. Abenakis to a sort of an accom 
modation, and that two of their chiefs, in the] 
4 B 



554 



MASSACHUSETTS. 



[month of May, h?ul promised that they would 
conclude upon articles of peace, and gave two 
hostages for the performance of their promise, and 
that Phips came in person to Pemaquid to have 
finished the affair, if De Villieu, a French officer, 
had not, by his diligence, prevented; for being 
seconded by the priest Thurry, he found out the 
secret of recovering Madockewando, who had 
declared in favour of the English, and prevailed 
upon him to raise 250 men, and make a descent 
upon Piscataqua river 36 miles from Boston. 
Charlevoix has brought the treaty, made in 1693, 
into 1694, and by calling it only a proposal for 
a treaty, has given a gloss to the whole affair, and 
extenuated the perfidy of the Indians in their 
hostilities soon after, and the guilt of the priest in 
exciting them. 

Upon the w. frontiers, in the summer of this 
year, the Indians, led on by the French, made 
what the latter call la petite guerre upon the new 
settlements, but forces Constantly kept up, prevent 
ed any remarkable destruction. 

Whilst the government had their hands and 
hearts full, in providing for their own defence, 
they were called upon to provide their quota of 
men for the defence of New York. Mr. Soughton, 
in Sir William s absence e. excused the province 
from concerning itself therewith, in a letter to 
Lord Nottingham, October 20, J693. 

(Anno 1694.) Sir William Phips s rule was 
short. His conduct, when captain of a ship of 
war, is represented very much to his advantage; 
but further talents were necessary for the good 
government of a province. He was of a bene 
volent, friendly disposition ; at the same time quick 
and passionate. A close attachment to his friends 
engaged him in a dispute with the collector of the 
customs ; and provocation, both from the collector 
and a captain of a man of war, caused him to 
break out into some indecent sallies of passion and 
rage, and to treat both of them in such a manner 
as was dishonourable to him. Mr. Brenton, a 
young gentleman of a principal family in Rhode 
Island government, had been appointed collector 
tor the port of Boston. This was before the estab 
lishment of custom-houses in the plantations by 
act of parliament. The people thought it enough 
to enter and clear at the naval office, and questioned 
the authority of the collector. The governor being 
the naval officer, and acting by his deputy, did 
not discountenance this opinion of the people. A 
vessel arrived from the Bahama islands, with a 
load of fustic, for vrhich no bond had been given. 
Colonel Foster,, a merchant of Boston, a member 
of the council, and fast friend to the governor. 



bought the fustic, at such price that he was loth 
to give up the bargain. The collector seized the 
vessel and goods ; and upon Foster s representation 
to the governor, he interposed. There was at 
that time no court of admiralty. By the charter, 
the king reserved admiralty jurisdiction, but no 
court had been constituted. It was supposed the 
governor imagined, that, by virtue of his com 
mission for vice-admiral, he had a right to sit as 
judge, ar.-l that he condemned several prizes, and, 
among the rest, the Si. Joseph, brought in by a 
privateer of the Leeward islands, which the 
captain would have carried thither for condem 
nation, but was not pfrmitted. Be this as it 
may, it is certain that Sir William took a more 
summary way of deciding this rase, and sent an 
order to the collector to forbear meddling with the 
good* ; arid, upon his refusal to observe orders, 
the governor went-to the wharf, and after warm 
words on both sides, laid hands upon the collector, 
but with what degree of violence was controverted 
by them. The governor prevailed, and the vessel 
and goods were taken out of the hands of the 
collector. 

There had been a misunderstanding also between 
the governor and Captain Short of the Nonesuch 
frigate. In their passage from England, a prize 
was taken ; and Short complained that the governor 
had deprived him of part, of his share or legal 
interest in her. Whether there were grounds for 
it, does not now appear. The captains of men of 
war, stationed in the colonies, were in those days 
required to follow such instructions as the gover 
nors gave them, relative to their cruizes and the 
protection of the trade of the colonies, and the 
governor, by his commission, had power, in case 
of any great crmie committed by any of the 
captains of men of war, to suspend them, and the 
nextofficer was to succeed. The governor required 
Captain Short to order part of the men belonging 
to the Nonesuch upon some service, which we do 
dot find mentioned, probably to man some cruizer, 
there being many pickeroons about the e. 
coast, but he refused to do it. This was ill taken 
by the governor; and meeting Captain Short 
in the street, warm words passed, and at length 
the governor made use of his cane and broke 
Short s head. Not contented vith this, he com 
mitted him to prison. The right of a governor, 
to commit by His own warrant, had not then been 
questioned. From the prison he removed him to 
the castle, and from thence on board a merchant 
vessel bound to London, to be delivered to the 
order of one of their Majesties principal secretaries 
of state; giving the master a warrant or authority] 



MASSACHUSETTS. 



555 



[so to do. The vessel, by some accident, put into 
Portsmouth in New Uampshire. Sir William, 
who seems to have been made sensible of some 
irregularity in these proceedings, went to Ports 
mouth, required the master of the merchantman 
to return him the warrant, which he tore to pieces, 
and then ordered the cabin of the ship to be opened, 
secured Short s chest, and examined the contents. 
Short was prevented going home in this vessel, and 
went to New York, to take passage from thence 
for England; but Sir F. Wheeler arrived soon 
after at Boston, sent for him and carried him home 
with him. The next officer succeeded in the 
command of the ship, until a new captain arrived 
from England. Short was restored to the com 
mand of as good a ship. Brent on s complaint 
was made to the lords of the treasury about the 
same time, and referred to the board of trade, and 
both came before the king, who was solicited 
Immediately to displace the governor. This the 
king refused to do, without hearing what he had 
to say in his defence ; and he was ordered to leave 
his government and make answer in England. 
The governor s friends in New England excused 
him by the great provocation he received, both 
from the captain of the man of war and the col 
lector. This would serve better to excuse a private 
person, than the governor of a province. The 
prejudices were great against him in England. 
Mr. Dudley, who was upon the spot and desired 
to succeed him, heightened them. There was a 
strong party against him also within the province. 
By negativing Mr. Cooke, he had made many of 
those who had opposed all measures, except the 
restoration of the old charter, to be his enemies. 
Dudley had been trying to reconcile himself to 
his countrymen ever since the revolution. He had 
great family interest. Stoughton, the lieutenant- 
governor, retained his friendship, and secretly 
corresponded with him, and was very cold in Sir 
William s interest. They who had been in favour 
of the charter were for him. They were the most 
numerous, but not most active and zealous. The 
private letters sent to England, were generally 
against him. He had a hard task to keep a majo 
rity of the general court in his favour. An 
address was proposed and carried in the house of 
representatives, humbly praying his Majesty, that 
the governor might not be removed ; but of 50 
members present, 24 voted against it. The non 
resident act was not then in force ; and it appear 
ed, that most of the inhabitants of Boston, who 
represented towns in the country, were against the 
address. The party in favour of the address, to 
prevent further trouble if there should be further 



occasion for any thing to be done in favour of the 
governor, brought into a bill, which was then 
before the house, a clause restraining towns from 
choosing any person to represent them in the general 
court, other than freeholders and residents within 
such towns. This provision is generally looked 
upon as a privilege, and a point gained by the 
people; but it certainly was occasioned by what 
is commonly called the prerogative party in 
government, and however salutary, was designed 
as an abridgment of liberty. Sir William left 
Boston the 17th of November. 

An injudicious use of power produced what 
were judged by the crown necessary regulations, 
sooner than perhaps they would otherwise have 
been made, viz. the establishment of a judge of 
admiralty, powers to the officers of the customs, 
and the oath to the governors by the 7th and 8th 
of William ; and the remembrance of this, together 
with other acts of plantation governors, might 
also cause the power over the ships of war to be 
taken from them, although it was suffered to 
continue some years after this time. 

The government falling into Mr. Stoughton s 
hands upon Sir William s leaving the province, 
seems to have been administered by him to good 
acceptance in England, and to the general satis 
faction of the people of the province. The rule of 
a lieutenant-governor it is expected will be short, 
it is scarce worth while to form parties against him 
within the government ; and if tlwre should be any 
misrule which requires check or censure from 
England, it is of less consequence, his authority 
being so soon to be superseded. This is not the 
only reason why the administration of Mr. Stough 
ton and one of his successors, Mr. Drummer, have 
been generally well spoken of: they had each of 
them spent sometime in England, and betlerknew 
what conduct would be approved of there ; they were 
well acquainted with the tempers of their own coun 
trymen ; each ofthem, very prudently, rather aimed 
at an easy quiet administration, than at uny thing- 
great and striking; considering themselves as at 
helm, to keep the ship in its steady course ; they 
seldom relied wholly upon their own judgments, 
acting in Ihe most common affairs by advice of 
council, which served as a justification of any 
measures which might be unpopular, or in which 
there might be any mistake, and yet took not auay 
the credit of such as proved to be well judged, and 
were generally applauded. At the first election, 
Mr. Cooke being chosen of the council, although 
he had ever been of the party opposite to tlie 
lieutenant-governor, yet he approved of the 
choke.] 

4 B 2 



M A SS-AOH U SETTS. 



&amp;lt;- [The treaty last, year at Pemaquid bad pro 
duced pear a twelvemonth s quiet .to the frontiers : 
the French did not intend it should last so long : 
they kept the Indians from restoring the prisoners 
according to their engagements. The hostages 
were no security whilst the Indians had a much 
greater number of the English in their power. 
New hostilities therefore were every day expected. 
At length, the 18th of July, they fell with fury 
upon a village at Oyster river, in New Hamp 
shire province, killed and carried away 94, some 
accounts say about 100 men, women, and children. 
This was a heavy blow. The l ( ]nglisn represent the 
enemy as a very great army. Charlevoix says there 
were 250 of Penobscot and St. John s Indians, 
besides some of father Bigot s mission, and only 
one Frenchman. He adds, that 230 English perish 
ed. His account of thenumberot the enemy is most 
to be depended upon ; and the best account of the 
loss is as we have stated above. Madockewando, 
a Penobscot, who was the head of the party, went 
with the body of his countrymen to Quebec, and 
presented the scalps to Frontenac, the governor of 
Canada. We hear nothing of prisoners. Toxus, 
the Norridgewock chief, with about 40 of that 
tribe, marched along towards Merrimack river. 
In their way, after an unsuccessful attempt upon 
the house of one Blackford, they murdered Mrs. 
Cutt, the widow of President Cwtt, and three of her 
people, at her farm-house. Having crossed Merri 
mack, on the 27th of July, they fell upon Groton, 
about 40 miles from Boston. They were repulsed 
at Lakin s garrison house, but tell upon other 
houses, where the people were off their guard, and 
killed and carried away from the vicinity about 40 
persons, Toxus s two nephews were killed by his 
side, and he had a dozen bullets through his blan 
ket, according to Charlevoix, who adds, that he 
carried the fort or garrison, and then went to make 
a spoil at the gates of Boston ; in both which 
facts the French account is erroneous. 

lu August, some stragglers killed 10 or 11 per 
sons at Spruce creek and other parts of Kittery, 
and knocked in the head, scalped, and left for 
dead, a little girl named Downing, about seven 
years old, who was found alive next morning, and 
lived many years afterwards ; and September the 
4th, Joseph Pike, a deputy sheriff, and another 
person with him, were shot down between Alms- 
bury and Ha verb ill. 

After all these outrages, Bomazeen, a noted Nor 
ridgewock chief, one who had signed the treaty 
at Pemaquid, and yet was afterwards a principal 
actor in the carnage upon, the English, came 
straight to Pemaquid with a flag of truce, pre 



tending he came from Canada with several more 
who were in company with him, and that he was 
sorry for what had happened. The commanding 
officer at the fort considered them as rebels, and 
sent them to Boston, after a promise or encourage 
ment given them of safety. The French called 
this English treachery. The government of the 
Massachusetts supposed, that for their perfidy 
they were to be treated as land pirates and mur 
derers. Je it so, yet the public faith given to 
them is not to be violated. This is one of those 
actions which have caused the English to be charg 
ed with injuring the Indians and provoking them 
to all the cruelties which have been committed, as 
a just return. We do not undertake to justify it; 
but think, that instead of imprisoning Bomazeen 
and the rest for several months at Boston, they 
ought to have been set at liberty, whether we con 
sider the affair in a moral or political view. We 
know of no other action of this sort which can be 
justly charged upon the government. We shall 
be obliged to relate more unjustifiable actions of 
some particular inhabitants. 

Sir William Phips, upon his arrival in London, 
was sued by Dudley and Brenton, in actions of 
20,0007. damage. Sir Henry Ashurst bailed him. 
What were the grounds of Dudley s action does 
not appear. Sir William urged in his defence 
against Breton, that there was no custom-house 
established in the plantations by act of parliament, 
and that Brenton had no authority to compel mas 
ters to enter and clear with him ; the naval officer, 
then known and established by act of parliament, 
being the only proper officer for that purpose. 

Captain Short exhibited no articles in form. 
Sir William s friends in New England supposed 
his affairs in England would have been all accom 
modated, and that he would have returned in a 
short time to his government, if death had not 
prevented. He laid his arrest so much to heart, 
that it was supposed to have brought upon him or 
increased the sickness of which he died the 18th of 
February, 1694-5. 

After Mr. Mather and the other agents, who 
solicited the settlement of the government, left 
England, Sir Henry Ashurst alone appeared as 
agent. In 1693, Constantino Phips (afterwards 
lord chancellor of Ireland) was joined with Ashurst, 
and both instructed by the general court. They 
were both of them friendly to Sir William. 

Mr. Dudley had been making friends with a 
view to supplant the governor while he was living; 
and upon his death solicited for the government 
with fresh vigour and application. Without los 
ing his old friends, he successfully applied himselfj 



MASSACHUSETTS. 



[to bring over some who had been his violent ene 
mies. He recovered the favour of many of the 
ministers in New England, and recommended 
himself, by a grave serious deportment, to the dis 
senters in England ; whilst at the same time, by 
his good sen e and polite behaviour, he acquired 
the notice and esteem of many considerable per 
sons at court. His income was very moderate ; 
and yet, with economy, he made a decent ap 
pearance in England, and gave several of his chil 
dren education there, whilst the rest of his family 
was supported by him in New England. A va 
cant government had divers candidates, but it looks 
as if he would have carried it from the rest, if it 
had riot been for the opposition made by the two 
agents for the province, Ashurst and Phips, who 
were obliged to urge against him the share he bore 
in the trial and condemnation of Leisler at New 
York ; and, for the sake of laying open that affair 
to the prejudice of Dudley, they both of them 
promoted a bill in the house of commons, of which 
Ashurst was a member, for reversing Leisler s at 
tainder. Mr. Dudley could stand it no longer, 
and withdrew his solicitation* for that time ; and 
soon after, by the interest of Lord Cutts, obtained 
the place of lieutenant-governor of the isle of 
Wight, of which his lordship was then governor. 
From thnt time Lord Bellamont was looked upon 
as the governor of Massachusetts bay, although 
he was not actually appointed until the next 
year. 

The acts of trade had been very little regarded 
in any of the colonies. Bucanicrs or pirates, who 
in times of peace made their depredations upon 
Spanish ships arid settlements in America, were 
very numerous. They brought their plunder 
chiefly to New York, and some to other colonies. 
With a view to put a stop to these mischiefs, the 
Earl of Bellamont was pitched upon as the most 
proper person for the government of New York, 
and probably to make the appointment worth 
accepting, as well as to render the other pur 
poses more effectual, Massachusetts bay and New 
Hampshire were put under the same person. 

(Anno 1695.) The year 1695 passed away 
with less molestation from the enemy, than any 
year since 1688. In the spring, they killed one 
of the soldiers belonging to Saco fort, and carried 
another away captive. A mortal sickness pre 
vailed among the Indians, and the French found 
it impracticable to send them out in parties upon 
our frontiers. Their attachment one to another 
equals that of more civilized nations. Besides 
the hostages they had given in 1693, the Indians 
seized at Pemaquid were in the prison at Boston : 



Bomazeeri, in particular, they greatly valued, and 
they were ready to submit to almost any terms to 
obtain his relief. The French represent the English 
as treating the hostages and prisoners with cruelty ; 
but there was no other cruelty than a confinement 
in a prison in Boston, which it must be acknow 
ledged \\as a very bad one. The English were 
not less desirous of peace than the Indians:, if they 
could have had any security for the continuance 
of it. One of the hostages, Sheepscote John, un 
dertook to go from Boston as a mediator, and by 
his influence, 50 canoes of Indians came within about 
a league of the fort at Pemaquid, the 20th of May, 
and sent in eight captives ; acknowledged their 
fault in violating the last treaty, and proposed the 
release of captives on both sides, and the establish 
ment of a durable peace. A truce of SO days was 
agreed upon ; and commissioners were to come 
from Boston to settle the terms of the peace. The 
commissioners, Colonel Phillips, Lieutenant-colo 
nel Hawthorn, and Major Convers, soon after met 
delegates from the Indians at Pemaquid, but re 
fused to enter upon any treaty with them until all 
the English in their hands should be delivered up. 
Bomazeen, their great warrior, and some others, 
were left in prison at Boston. The Indians looked 
upon themselves not well used; sensible that 
when they had parted with all their prisoners, 
they should have no way of obtaining the release 
of their own people, except by a new set of cap 
tives. They therefore refused to treat any further, 
and left the place abruptly. The government, 
we imagine, expected that, by retaining some of 
the Indians as hostages, some restraint would be 
laid upon the rest, from exercising cruelty to 
wards English prisoners, seeing it would have ft 
in its power to retaliate it upon their own people ; 
and chose rather to risk the continuance of the war 
than part with this security. 

Charlevoix, who supposes the Lieutenant-cro- 
vernor Stoughton to have been there in person, 
says, " the Abenaquis insisted upon the release of 
their brethren, who were detained in violation of 
the flag of truce and the laws of nations, and 
Stoughton only returned bloody reproaches for 
their late hostilities, and terrible threats if they 
did not deliver up the authors of them. The 
Indians were as stout as he -was. At length, both 
sides began to soften. Stoughton was not willing 
to drive to extremity a people who had formerly 
known how to make themselves a terror. They 
were desirous, at any rate, of recovering their re 
lations out of the hands of the English ; being 
fully determined, that when they had accofnplish- 
ed their ends, they would revenge the blood of] 



558 



MASSACHUSETTS. 



[such of them as had been murdered; but per 
ceiving that, whilst (hey were in treaty, the Eng 
lish were preparing to surround them, they ran to 
their arms." This, no doubt, was the account 
they gave to their priest, when they returned 
home. 

Immediate notice was given to the frontiers to be 
upon their guard, but this did not prevent spoils 
upon divers places. In July, Major Hammond 
of Kittery was taken prisoner and carried to Ca 
nada, but being above the ordinary rank of the 
Indian captives, he was very kindly used by 
Count Frontenac, the governor ; and soon return 
ed in a vessel which went from Boston for exchange 
of prisoners. In August, they killed and took 15 

at Billerica, and plundered the house of 

Rogers, and soon after surprised and killed the 
serjeant of Saco fort. In September, they killed 
four, and wounded six, belonging to Pemaquid 
fort. In October, they came upon the house of 
John Brown of Newbury, and carried away nine 
persons ; but being pursued and overtaken in the 
night by a party under Captain Greenleaf, they 
first tomahawked all their prisoners, which effec 
tually prevented them from joining the pursuers, 
and then took to their heels and escaped. Some of 
these unhappy prisoners lived several months, and 
some more than a year ; but all finally died of 
their wounds, except a lad who happened to be 
wounded in the shoulder, and not in the head, as 
the rest were. 

The winter of 1695 proved a time of rest to the 
frontiers. Their only fears in winter were from 
an army or large body of the enemy, sufficient to 
resist any force which could be collected before 
they had done their mischief, and had time for a 
retreat. Small parlies would be in hazard, when 
they could be tracked upon the snow. 

(Anno 1696.) The spring of 1696 opened as 
usual. In May, a poor fellow, who had been a 
captive before, and made his escape, was killed at 
Cocheco. In June, three women, sisters, going 
with their husbands from York to Wells ; one of 
them, wife of Thomas Cole, with her husband, 
were shot down, the others escaped. In the same 
month, several houses were burnt by the enemy 
within the limits of Portsmouth ; 12 or 14 ol the 
inhabitants were slain, and four taken prisoners. 
One woman was supposed to be left dead, and her 
scalp was carried to Canada, as the evidence of 
it ; but those who went out to bury the dead, 
finding her alive, carried her home, and she re 
covered. The Indians generally are content 
with a piece not larger than the palm of the hand, 
from the top of the crown ; and if it was not for 



the blows of the tomahawk, many might have 
survived the operation of the knife. Some who 
have lost the skin, from the whole crown, have re- 
covered and lived many years. 

In July, they attacked Cocheco again, a planta 
tion which often suffered; killed three of the in 
habitants as they were going home from public 
worship, wounded three more, and carried other 
three away prisoners to Penobscot. 

We have tnken no notice of Nova Scotia, al 
though included in the bounds of the Massachu 
setts charter; the inhabitants in general, for seve 
ral years, having been under the power and com 
mand of the authority sent from France : but this 
year the affairs of that, and of the other parts of 
the government, are more interwoven. 

After the conquest of that province by the 
Massachusetts colony in 1690, the French in Eu 
rope gave themselves but little concern about the 
recovery of it, and the English as little about its 
preservation or security. The Massachusetts were 
unable to bear the charge of a sufficient military 
force to keep the inhabitants in subjection : they 
gave commissions to judges, justices, and other 
officers, and required oaths of fidelity ; and, in 

1691, gave power and authority to Mr. Nelson, 
who was bound there from Boston upon a trading 
voyage, to be commander in chief in Acadia; 
but when he came near the river St. John s, he 
was taken by Monsieur Villebon, who having a 
commission from the French king, had been into 
Port Royal and ordered the English flag to be 
struck and the French flag to be hoisted there, 
but intended to make St. John s the place of his 
residence, and took possession of it, where he car 
ried on great trade with the Indians, supplying 
them with warlike stores, provisions, &amp;c. without 
which they could not have carried on the war. In 

1692, sbon after Sir William Phips s arrival, an 
attempt was made by the province, with a small 
naval force, to remove Villebon; but it proved 
unsuccessful. In 1695, Captain Earns, in his 
Majesty s ship Sorlings, was sent from Boston to 
intercept the stores with which Villebon, every 
spring, had been furnished from France ; but the 
French ship happened to be of greater force than 
usual, and after an engagement at the mouth of 
the river, Earns was glad to retreat. It seems that 
until now, the Massachusetts looked upon themselves 
as in somesort of possession, and that they considered 
that as yet there had not been an entire revolt of the 
Avhole province : the general court, however, from a 
sense of their inability to protect it, now petitioned 
the crown that the province mijjht be freed from any 
further expence in the defence of Port Royal or] 

2 



MASSACHUSETTS. 



559 



[St. John s, and that garrisons might be kept in 
both these places at the charge of the nation. 
This perhaps might be deemed a refusal to exer 
cise jurisdiction over that part of the province, 
and a renunciation of their right ; and accord 
ingly, after the treaty of Utrecht, when possession 
was returned to the crown, it was settled a distinct 
province; otherwise jus postliminii might have 
taken place, as well with respect to the rights of 
a body corporate, as those of particular per 
sons. 

The disappointment, last year, which the Sor- 
lings, a single ship met with, occasioned the force 
to be doubled this year, to effect the like purpose. 
Captain Paxton, in the Newport, came to New 
England in company with the Sorlings, and both 
ships were ordered, together with a yacht or ten 
der in the province service, to lay oft the river St. 
John s, to wait the arrival of the store-ship. It 
happened, unfortunately, that the French at Que 
bec were at the same time fitting out two men of 
war, with the addition of two companies of sol 
diers and 50 Michmack Indians, in order to re 
duce the New England fort at Pernaquid. These 
ships were of superior force to the English ships, 
and Iberville, an experienced officer, commanded. 
When they had put into a port upon their pas 
sage, Villebon, from St. John s, informed them 
of the situation and circumstances of the small 
English fleet. They went immediately in quest 
of them, and came upon them when they were 
not expected. The Newport, after the loss of one 
of her topmasts, surrendered. A fog arose, which 
gave the Sorlings and the tender an opportunity 
for their escape, and they returned to Boston, 
with the news of this second disappointment. The 
French commander, being strengthened with the 
Newport, went into St. John s and there refitted. 
From thence he proceeded to Penobscot, where 
the Baron St. Castine was waiting for him, with 
200 Indians. The whole force arrived before the 
fort at Pemaquid the 14th of July. Captain 
March, who was a good officer, had resigned the 
command of the fort a few months before, and was 
succeeded by a very different man, Captain Chubb. 
Iberville, upon his arrival, sent a summons to 
surrender. Chubb returned a vain foolish answer, 
** that if the sea was covered with French vessels, 
and the land with Indians, yet he would not give 
up the fort." The Indians thereupon began 
their fire, and return was made by the musketry 
and with a few cannon from the fort. This brought 
the first day to a close. la the night, Iberville 
landed his cannon and mortars ; and the next day, 
before three in the afternoon, had raised his bat 



teries and thrown five bombs into the fort, to the 
great terror of Chubb and the garrison. Castine, 
about this time, found some way of conveying a 
letter into the fort, and let them know that, if they 
delayed surrendering until an assault was made, 
they would have to do with savages, and must 
expect no quarter, for he had seen the king s order 
to Iberville to give none. This did the business, 
the chamade was beat immediately, and the fort 
was surrendered, upon the terms offered by the 
French, that the garrison should be sent to Boston 
and exchanged for the like number of French and 
Indian prisoners; only, a special security or en 
gagement was insisted upon from the French com 
mander, that their persons should be protected 
against the rage of the Indians. 

Chubb s conduct was universally censured, and 
at first he was put under an arrest, but came off 
without any oth^r punishment than being laid 
aside. The fort had i5 cannon mounted, and 90 
able men to manage them, and no want of ammu 
nition or stores. The French suppose, that if 
there had been a brave defence, the event would 
have been doubtful ; at least, that the fort could 
riot have been carried without a great loss of men ; 
and attribute the surrender to the cowardice of the 
garrison, who compelled the commander to act 
contrary to his own inclination. This makes the 
acquisition to appear of more importance. 

After all, there is room to doubt whether a better 
garrison could have withstood that force, until re 
lief might have been afforded from Boston. The 
French were provided with cannon and mortars, 
were numerous enough to resist any sallies from the 
garrison, without interrupting the siege ; there 
were no casemates nor other shelter for the men, 
and the magazine itself was bomb proof in one part 
of it only, which was under a rock. 

The reason of the garrison s requiring an extra 
ordinary caution against the rage of the Indians, 
was this ; they were conscious of their own cruelty 
and barbarity, arid feared revenge; and a security 
from it might probably hasten the surrender, lest it 
should afterwards not be in their power to obtain it. 
In the month of February before, Egeremet, a chief 
of the Machias Indians; Toxus, chief of the Nor- 
ridgcwocks; Abenquid, a sagamore of the same 
tribe; and several other Indians, came to the fort, 
to treat upon exchange of prisoners. Chubb, with 
some of his garrison, fell upon the Indians in the 
midst of the treaty, when they thought themselves 
most secure, murdered Egeremet and Abenquid 
with two others. Toxus, and some others, escaped, 
and some remained prisoners; one Indian was 
found in the fort, in irons, when the French took") 



560 



MASSACHUSETTS. 



[possession of it. Such was the fury of Castine s 
Indians, that there was no way of securing the 
garrison but by removing them to an island, under 
a constant guard of French troops, until provision 
was made for transporting them to Boston. Some 
writers palliate and seem inclined to justify this 
action of Chubb. Surely the cruelty shewn by 
the Indians to the English must have biassed and 
blinded them. Private letters, which passed at 
this time, between some of the best men in the pro 
vince, condemned it as an horrid piece of villany. 

The French remained at Pemaquid until the 
18th of July, demolishing the fort; their plunder 
was small ; and (hen went to Penobscot, where they 
tarried until the 3d of September. 

When the news of the loss of the man of war 
and of the fort came to Boston, it was expected the 
enemy would proceed w. as far as Portsmouth. 
Five hundred men were raised without delay, and 
marched thither, to be ready for the defence of 
New Hampshire. Two men of war, the Arundel 
and Orford, arriving at the same time at Boston, a 
detachment from the militia was sent on board 
them, to serve as marines ; and these ships, to 
gether with the Sorlings, and a merchant ship of 
20 guns, and a fire-ship taken up by the province, 
were sent in quest of the enemy, and came in sight 
of them just as they sailed from Penobscot. The 
French, who were well acquainted with the coast, 
kept their ships close in shore. Whether the 
English were afraid of the coast, or were too far 
astern, or did not make sail enough, does not ap 
pear ; it is certain they did not come up with them 
the first day, and the next day being foggy they 
reached St. John s river, and the English vessels 
returned to Boston. The French account takes no 
notice of the fog, makes the five English vessels 
seven, and says, they steered for St. John s river, 
while the French fleet went to Cape Breton, and 
from thence to Newfoundland. The French wri 
ters supposed two expeditions to have been but 
one, and imagined a number of small vessels, under 
Colonel Church, were the same which pursued 
Iberville. As the Orford was returning, she met 
with a French shallop belonging to St. John s, 
with 9.3 soldiers under Villeau, their captain, and 
brought them prisoners to Boston. Charlevoix 
seems to mistake Villcbon for Villeau, and, finding 
htm soon after at St. John s, defending his fort, 
he takes it for granted he must have been released, 
as having a passport and not liable to be retained. 

When Mr. Stoughton found the enemy was 
gone back to the e. he ordered Colonel Church, 
who had the command of the 500 men at Ports 
mouth, to embark them on board brigantines and 



other small vessels, and to range along the e. shore. 
Church saw none of the enemy, except now and 
then an Indian canoe, until he came to Penobscot, 
where he did not arrive until after the French fleet 
had sailed, and the coast clear. Not being willing 
to return without doing some service, he resolved 
to know the condition of the province of Nova 
Scotia, and sailed directly up to Chignccto or 
Beaubassin. Upon the discovery of the English 
forces, most of the French inhabitants left their 
houses and fled into the woods. The English 
pursued, and soon met Bourgeois, (Church calls 
him Bridgman), a principal inhabitant, coming to 
ask quarter for himself and family ; which was 
readily granted. Upon his exumination, it ap 
peared that there were i rid iaus mixed with the French 
in the woods, and orders were thereupon given to 
renew the pursuit, and to offer quarter to all the 
French, but to give none to the Indians. Bour 
geois was ordered also to give notice to all his 
countrymen, who would come in, that they should 
be well received. Many of the inhabitants came 
in, and it was proposed to them to join with the 
English in pursuing the Indians, and upon their 
complying their houses should be spared, what of 
their goods had been taken should be restored, and 
the rest of their substance preserved. This was a 
hard condition, and, in effect, obliging them to 
quit their country, for otherwise, as soon as the 
English had left them without sufficient protec 
tion, the incensed Indians would have falle i upon 
them without mercy. They therefore refused to 
comply, and their houses were thereupon burnt, 
and their cattle, sheep, &amp;c. destroyed, and their 
goods became plunder for the army. 

Charlevoix says, that Bourgeois produced a 
writing, by which Sir William Phips had given 
assurances of protection to the inhabitants of Chig- 
necto, whilst they remained faithful subjects of 
King William ; and that Church gave orders, that 
nothing in their houses, &amp;c. should be touched ; 
but whilst he was entertained by Bourgeois, toge 
ther with the principal officers, the rest of the army 
dispersed themselves among the other houses, and 
behaved as if they had been in a conquered coun 
try. This may be true. Men raised from the 
militia of any country, until they are used to disci 
pline, are seldom exemplary for due subordination. 
Charlevoix adds, that many of the inhabitants, not 
trusting to the promises of the general, refused to 
come iii, and that it was well they did ; for, soon 
after, lie broke through all bounds, and left only 
the church and a few houses and barns standing ; 
and having discovered, posted up in the church, 
an order of Frontenac, the governor of Canada,] 



MASSACHUSETTS. 



561 



[for the regulation of trade, he threatened to treat 
them as rebels, set fire to the church, and the 
houses which he had before spared, and which were 
now all reduced to ashes ; and having done this, 
he presented a writing, which he told them was an 
acknowledgment of their having renewed their sub 
jection to King William, and would be a security 
to them in case any English should again land 
among them. 

The condition of these Acadians was truly de 
plorable. Their natural attachment was to the 
French. They were bigoted to the Roman Ca 
tholic religion, but they laboured under great dis 
advantages of education. Commerce, small in 
deed, led them to some connection with the Eng 
lish. For a whole century together, they were 
once in a few years changing their masters; and 
no sooner had owned themselves the subjects of one 
crown, but they were left to fall again under the 
power of the other. It was hardly reasonable, 
where protection was refused or neglected, to 
charge them with being traitors and rebels. When 
under English government, although allowed the 
exercise of their religion, yet their priests, always 
suspected of drawing them over to the French, 
were hated and often molested by the English. 
Their civil liberty was much the same under either 
government. They had certain persons, annually 
chosen, whom they called deputies, and sometimes 
select men, which they borrowed from the English 
colonies of New England, but they had no other 
authority than to bring and carry messages from 
and to their governors ; and upon any general dis 
turbance or affair of general concern, the whole 
village or district was summoned to appear. Thus 
they were always depressed and without spirit. 
No people are more confined to their own country 
than they were, few or none of them upon any oc 
casion ever passing so far as New England. Their 
fate at last was hard and pitiable. 

But to return to our story. Church left Chig- 
necto the 20th of September, and stood with his 
transports for the river St. John s, and landed his 
men, not without some opposition, upon the e. side. 
, He took several prisoners; interrupted the build 
ing of a new fort at the mouth of the river, and 
destroyed the materials they had prepared for it ; 
brought away 12 of their cannon, and what plunder 
he met with. Being informed there was not depth 
of water in the river for his vessels, he made no at 
tempt to go up to V^illebon s fort, but departed for 
Boston ; intending to (ouch at all the harbours and 
rivers upon the c. coast in his way. 

Mr. Sfoughton, having much at heart the re 
moval of Villebon from St. John s, ordered the 

VOL. ii. 



Arundel, Captain Kiggins, who returned to Boston 
the beginning of September ; the province galley, 
Captain Southack, and a transport sloop, Captain 
Alden, to go out and meet Church with his forces, 
and attempt to drive Villebon from his fort. A 
reinforcement for the land forces was sent in the 
transport, and the command of the whole given to 
Colonel Hawthorn, of Salem, one of the council. 
This was an impolitic measure, unless any mis 
conduct in Church made it necessary that he 
should be superseded; and it is evident, by his 
own account, that he was not a little mortifi&amp;lt; d ; 
and although he submitted, it was with reluctance, 
and every thing went on heavily. The men also, 
having their faces towards home, were loth to turn 
back, but were obliged to it : being met by the 
ships not far from the river. Villebon had timely 
notice of the return and reinforcement, and made 
the best preparations he could for his defence. 
Four of the small vessels went up the river, and 
landed their men near the fort, October the 7th. 
They raised a battery for two field-pieces, and be 
gan to fire with them and with their musketry the 
same day; and the French made return. When 
night came on, which proved very cold, the Eng 
lish lighted their fires to keep them from perishing. 
This made them a mark for the French cannon, 
which disturbed them to that degree, that they 
were obliged to put out their fires, a;id to be ex 
posed all night to the inclemency of the weather. 
They were soon discouraged, for the next night 
they reimbarked ; and having joined those at the 
mouth of the river, made the best of their way to 
Boston. No notice was taken of any loss on either 
side, except the burning a few of the enemy s 
houses ; nor is any sufficient reason given for re 
linquishing the design so suddenly. It is proba 
ble that the forces were not provided with tents nor 
clothing sufficient to defend them from the cold, 
which they had reason to expect to increase every 
day, and it is certain the old colonel, Church, 
was offended at being superseded in command. 

Whilst the forces which used to be employed 
for the defence of the frontiers, were upon other 
service, the inhabitants kept close confined to their 
garrisons, and were hindered from their labour; 
the Indians being upon the watch in every quarter, 
and now and (hen seizing or shooting down a 
man who ventured to step out of his door. Be 
sides those mentioned, in (he beginning of summer, 
Major Frost and his wife were killed at Berwick, 
as they were returning from meeting; and two 
men who went (o carry the news to the garrison at 
Wells, were ambushed and slain. In October, 
four soldiers were killed, belonging to the fort atj 
4c 



562 



MASSACHUSETTS. 



fSaco. A late author says, u a dreadful desolation 
was threatened, and more for want of management 
than power ;" but this is not so judicious as some 
others of this author s reflections. The settlement 
of a new country could never be effected, if the 
inhabitants should confine themselves to cities or 
walled towns. A frontier there must be, and no 
thing less than making every house a fort, and 
furnishing every traveller with a strong guard, 
could have been an effectual security against an 
enemy, as greedy after their prey as a wolf, and to 
whom the woods were equally natural and fa 
miliar. 

An expedition against Canada had been solicited 
every year since 1692. This year there was a 
more than ordinary "dependence upon it. The 
bad success of the war in Europe put an end to 
this dependence. Intimations were given, divers 
ways, of a French armament from Europe by 
sea, and land forces from Canada, to make a de 
scent upon the English colonies. Application had 
been made to the French king, by the governor of 
Canada, in the latter part of 1695, for 10 or 12 
men of war, to be sent the next spring from several 
ports inTrance, to encounter an English squadron, 
which it was expected would have been at sea 
about that time; and, having conquered the Eng 
lish ships, then to go and take Boston, which was 
represented to be a place of great trade; and, if 
they could gain possession of it, they would gain, 
by that means, the sole possession of the fishery. 
Nothing more was intended by the French court 
than the possession of Newfoundland, and the re 
moval of the English trorn Acadia. Both these 
were effected, for after Iberville had taken the fort 
at Pemaquid, he went with his ships to Newfound 
land, and possessed himself of St. John s and the 
other harbours there, and made a very successful 
expedition. This was not only a much easier ac 
quisition than Boston would have been, to a stron 
ger squadron than Iberville s; although it was not 
then one fourth part so well fortified as it is at this 
time ; but by gaining all the ports in Newfound 
land, the whole colony was gained ; whereas the 
gaining of Boston would not have enabled them to 
have possessed even the rest of that province, nor, 
without a very great land army, could they have 
held the possession of Boston alone one winter, 
against so great a number of inhabitants as were 
then in the province. 

(Anno 1697.) The last year of the war proved 
more alarming to the province than any of the pre 
ceding years. An invasion was every day ex 
pected, for several weeks together ; and news was 
brought to Boston, that a formidable French fleet 



had been seen upon the coast, it was indeed a 
very critical time, perhaps equal to that when the 
Duke D Anville was with a squadron at Chibuc- 
tou. The force, under the Duke, was superior, 
but the province, at that time, was in proportion 
stronger and better able to repel it. France ex 
pected that a very strong squadron would be sent 
from England to recover the ports in Newfound 
land, which Iberville had taken the last year. 
Great preparations were therefore made to defeat 
such squadron, and, after that, or in case it should 
not proceed, then to lay waste the English colo 
nies. Frontenac the governor of Canada, upon 
whom great dependence had always deservedly 
been placed, had orders to raise 1500 men, pre 
pared to march upon short warning ; but, at this 
time, the service for which they were intended was 
not communicated. He made provision accord 
ingly, and they would have been all ready upon 
eight days notice. The remembrance of this dan 
ger is lost in New England. Charlevoix s account 
deserves to be recorded. " The intended expedi 
tion against Boston was very well concerted, and 
would riot have failed, as all which preceded it had 
done, if it had been vigorously pursued. The 
king had intrusted the command with the Marquis 
of Nesmond, an oftieer of great reputation, an ! had 
appointed for the service 10 men of war, a galliot, 
and two frigates. Boston was not the only object. 
He had orders to be ready to leave Brest, with part 
of the squadron, by the 25th of April, at farthest, in 
order to join the other part, which lay at Rochelle, 
under Commodore De Magnon ; and with all pos 
sible dispatch, to proceed to Pliicentia bay in New 
foundland, that he might be beforehand of the 
English, who, it was said, were determined to re 
cover all they had lost the year before in that 
island, and to clear it entirely of the French. If 
he found Placentia besieged by the English, he 
had orders to attack them ; if they should be gone 
before he arrived, he was to follow them and give 
them battle whether they had succeeded or not. 
After their defeat, he was to sail for Pe nobs cot : 
dispatching, at the same time, a packet-boat to 
Quebec, to inform Count Frontenac of his route, 
that so that general might meet him at Penobscot 
with 1500 men, which he was to have in readiness. 
As soon as the junction was made, and the troops 
embarked, the fleet without loss of time was to go 
to Boston, and, that town being taken, it was then 
to rangf the coast to Piscataqua ; destroying the 
settlements as far into the country as they could, 
and so effectually as that it might take the English 
a long time to re-establish themselves. If there 
should be time left for further acquisitions^ the] 



MASSACHUSETTS. 



563 



[fleet was to go to New York ; and having reduced 
that city, the French American troops were to 
march through that colony to Canada, laying the 
country waste as they went along. The king had 
this expedition so much at heart, that he had given 
permission to De Nesmond to strengthen his fleet 
with the addition of certain ships, destined for an 
other expedition in Hudson s bay,, if he should 
happen to meet them at Placentia and think them 
necessary." 

We shall next see, from the same author, how 
this enterprise happened to fail of success. 

u As the French court had not received the 
news of the siege of Naxoat (St. John s River) when 
the instructions were prepared, but it happened to 
be brought a short time after ; upon De Nesmond s 
anchoring in Rochelle road, he found orders had 
been sent from court to meet him there, requiring 
him to give the Chevalier De Villebon all that aid 
both of men and stores which should be necessary 
to maintain him in, or restore him to his post. 
When De Nesmond came to Placentia, he found 
there a letter waiting for him from the Count de 
Pontchartrain, giving him intelligence of 18 Eng 
lish ships, laden with salt and ready to sail from 
Lisbon, under convoy of a man of war; which 
ships were to be employed in the cod fishery at 
Newfoundland ; and he was required to do every 
thing in his power to prevent their escaping him. 
The Count added further, that if he should be so 
fortunate as to beat the English fleet, which Avas 
expected to be or have been at Newfoundland, 
then it was the king s pleasure that he should 
range the e. coast of Newfoundland, and take or 
burn all the English shipping he could meet with. 
But De Nesmond departed too late, to carry so 
many and so great designs into execution. Be 
sides, meeting with contrary winds, he had above 
two months passage, not arriving at Placentia until 
the 24th of July. There he heard no news of the 
English fleet. He held a grand council of war, in 
order to determine whether immediately to proceed 
to Boston or not. All the voices were in the nega 
tive, and for these reasons ; there was no assurance 
that it could be a prudent measure, whilst they 
were wholly ignorant of the situation and circum 
stances of the enemy ; moreover, let there be ever 
so great dispatch in giving notice to Count Fron- 
tenac, the Canada forces could not be at Penobscot 
before the I Oth of September ; and by that time 
the fleet would not have above 50 days provisions 
left, and would be in no capacity of undertaking 
any thing." 

It was known in New England, that a formidable 
French fleet was at no great distance, and the ap 



proach of it was every day expected. There were 
no great hopes of an English fleet to encounter it. 
The inhabitants were in great consternation. The 
lieutenant-governor of the Massachusetts made the 
best preparations he could. The militia, for seve 
ral weeks, were held in readiness to march to the 
sea-ports. The castle at Boston was then but an 
inconsiderable fortress. Such additions were made 
as the time would admit of; and, when the danger 
was over, many persons expressed themselves, in 
the accounts they gave of it to their friends, as if 
they had no doubt that the ships would have been 
stopped from coming up to the town. It was ex 
pected that a great body of French and Indians 
from Canada would faU upon the e. frontiers, 
when the French fleet was upon the sea-coast; 500 
men were therefore raised, and sent un.ler Major 
March, for the defence of that part of the pro 
vince. 

This scheme of the French, in all probability, 
saved the lives of many of the inhabitants of Mas 
sachusetts. The greatest part of the summer, the 
strength of Canada, which would have been em 
ployed for annoyance, was kept in a state of 
inaction, waiting for orders to move; and until 
September the state was quiet, both e. and w. A 
parly of the enemy then fell upon Lancaster, and 
killed 20 or 30 persons, Mr. Whiting, the minister 
of the town, being one of them. 

(Anno 1698.) The next year they began early, 
and in February surprised Andover, about 25 
miles from Boston, where they killed seven of the 
inhabitants and took others prisoners, and burned 
many houses. Among the slain was Chubb, the 
captain of Pemaquid fort, who lived here with 
his family, in a place thought to be not exposed. 
His death afforded as much joy to the Indians as 
the destruction of a whole town, because they had 
taken their beloved vengeance of him for his per 
fidy and barbarity to their countrymen. It is not 
probable that they had any knowledge of the 
place of his abode, but they fell upon him by 
mere accident. Ilapin, the English historian, 
would have pronounced such an event the imme 
diate judgment of heaven ; Voltaire, that in this 
place of supposed safety the man could not avoid 
his destiny. Among the prisoners was Col. Brad- 
street (who absconded in 1692 to save himself 
from a prosecution for witchcraft) and all his fa 
mily. Fortunately for them, the Indians appre 
hended they were pursued by a superior force, 
and fled, leaving their prisoners to escape. Their 
terror must have been ijreat, seeing there was not 
time to knock the prisoners in the head, according 
to the usual practice when pursued. The enemy,] 
4 c 2 



MASSACHUSETTS. 



[upon their return home, made some spoil upon the 
town of Haverhill. In March, another party 
came upon the same town, burned nine houses, 
and killed and took prisoners in the whole about 
40 persons. There was a woman (Hannah Dtm- 
stan) a heroine, made prisoner at this time, whose 
story, although repeatedly published, we cannot 
well omit. She had lain in but a week when the 
Indians attacked the house. Her husband, with 
seven of his children, made their escape ; but the 
wife, the nurse, and the young infant were seized. 
The Indians soon beat out the infant s brains 
against a tree. The two women they made to 
travel with them 12 miles the first night, and to 
continue travelling from day to day towards an 
Indian town, the settlement of which, as the In 
dians said, had been begun a little while before, 
about 250 miles from Haverhill. When they had 
travelled 150 miles, the Indians told the women 
there was one ceremony which could not be dis 
pensed with upon their arrival ; they must be 
stripped and run the gauntlet through the village. 
This discipline has been sometimes so cruelly ad 
ministered that the poor captives have sunk under 
it. The women had been assigned as servants to 
an Indian family, consisting of two men, three 
women, and seven children, besides an English 
boy, who had been prisoner a year and a half. 
The terror of the Indian gauntlet seems to have in 
spired Dunstan wfth resolution, and she prevailed 
upon the nurse and the English boy to join with 
her in the destruction of the Indian family. The 
Indians kept no watch. The boy had been with 
them so long as to be considered as one of their own 
children. From women, ordinarily, attempts of 
this sort are not to be expected. In the morning, 
a little before day, Dunstan arose, and finding the 
whole company in a sound sleep, calls upon her 
confederates to join with her, and with the Indian 
hatchets they silenced such as they began with, 
and yet took care not to make so much noise as to 
awaken the rest ; and in this manner they dis- 
pntched the whole family, except a favourite boy, 
whom they designedly left, and an old woman 
they supposed they had killed, but who jumped up, 
and with the boy made their escape. They took 
off the scalps from ten to bring home with them. 
Their danger was great from the enemy and from 
famine, in travelling home above 100 miles, through 
thick woods and across mountains and rivers ; but 
they arrived safe with their trophies. They re 
ceived a reward of 50/. from the general court, 
and many presents from their neighbours ; and 
Col. Nicholson sent them a valuable present 
tVoin Maryland, the fame of so uncommon an 



action having soon spread through the conti 
nent. 

The Lieutenant-governor Stoughton had held 
the reins four years, and had kept free from con 
troversy with the other branches of the legislature. 
The defence of the province, by sea and land, was 
enough to employ the attention of the public. 
Internal disputes and controversies in states are, 
ordinarily, most effectually avoided or suspended 
by imminent external dangers. Besides, Mr. 
Stoughton now stood so well in the esteem of the 
people, that they chose him, at every election, one 
of the council ; although, at the same time, he 
was commander in chief. Before the year expired 
a new governor might arrive, in which case he 
would take his place as a counsellor. Sheriffs, in 
England, are named or remain in commission for 
the peace during their shrievalty, although the 
exercise of their authority, as justices, is sus 
pended for such time. 

The Earl of Bellamont embarked on board one 
of his Majesty s ships early in the fall. The mer 
chant vessels, which sailed at the same time for 
Boston, all arrived safe with short passages ; but 
the man of war was blown off to Barbadoes, and 
there wintered, not arriving at New York until 
some time in May. Immediately upon the advice 
of his lordship s arrival, a committee was sent 
with congratulations from the Massachusetts ; and, 
during his residence at New York, he was fre 
quently consulted, and all matters of importance 
were communicated to him, and his advice or 
directions were generally followed ; but the admi 
nistration of all acts of government were in the 
name of the lieutenant-governor, as commander in 
chief. The party disputes which ran high at N T ew 
York, and detained his lordship there about a 
year, do not come within our design. In general, we 
may observe, that he countenanced the Leislerians. 
This, together with the interest which had been 
made for Mr. Dudley in England, in opposition 
to his lordship, seems to have prejudiced him in 
favour of all Dudley s enemies in New England. 
Whilst he was at New York he kept a constant 
correspondence with Mr. Cooke, one of the coun 
cil for the Massachusetts, who was a principal 
man of that party, and seems to have placed more 
confidence in him than in Mr. Stoughton, who 
ever remained, in his heart, attached to the Dud 
ley party. 

The peace of Ryswick was proclaimed in Bos 
ton December the 10th, 1697. The war with the 
Indians did not immediately cease. The begin 
ning of the next year they shewed themselves at 
Kittery, where they killed an old man ; and at] 



MASSACHUSETTS. 



565 



(lie same time they carried away three persons from 
York. In July, they appeared upon (hew. frontier, 
and took three or tour prisoners at Hatfield ; but 
the French no longer daring to afford them assist 
ance, they spent the rest of (he year in contriving a 
peace. Upon intimations given by the Indians to 
any of the torts or out-posls that they are disposed 
to peace, the English are very ready to embrace 
the offer. The principal object is the recovery of 
the captives, which at (he end of the war have 
generally been numerous. In October, Major 
Convcrsand Captain Aldon were sent to Penobscot 
to settle preliminaries ; one of which was to be the 
release of all prisoners, but no more could be ob 
tained on this head than a promise to return all 
such as desired it ; the Indians refused to compel 
any who inclined to remain with them. In the 
winter, John Phillips, Esq. of the council, with 
Major Convers and Cyprian Southack, com 
mander of the province galley, went with full 
powers to conclude a treaty. The Indians are not 
very nice in acknowledging their perfidy in such 
terms as (he English prepare for them, and make 
such submissions and promises of future fidelity 
as are desired. The treaty was in the same terms 
with that in 1693. Several captives were restored, 
and others were promised in the spring; but many 
remained, males and females, who mingled with 
Indians and contributed to a succession of savages 
to exercise cruelties upon the English frontiers 
in future wars, and perhaps upon some of their 
own relations. 

The leaving bounds to be settled between the 
English and French upon the continent by com 
missaries, and the ambiguous terms made use of in 
treaties(perhaps artfully introduced by the French) 
have been the causes of new disputes between the 
two crowns ; and, in one instance at least, have 
very soon brought on a new war. The peace of 
Ryswick was scarcely proclaimed in New Eng 
land, when the inhabitants were made sensible of 
the designs of the French to make themselves sole 
proprietors of the fishery, and to restrain the Eng 
lish from the possession of any part of the country 
contained in the Massachusetts charter to the e. of 
Kennebcck. It was understood by the English 
cour(, that, by the treaty of Ryswick, all the 
country w. of St. Croix was to remain to the Eng 
lish, as being within the bounds of the province 
of Massachusetts bay. The French court, imme 
diately after the treaty, asserted an exclusive right 
to the fishery upon the sea-coasts and to all the 
inland country. A French man of war, bound 
from France to Port Royal, met one of our fishing 
vessels oft cape Sables, sent for the skipper to 



come on board, and caused to be translated and 
read to him in English an order of the French 
king for seizing all English vessels found fishing 
on the coasts, and told him to give notice of this 
order to all other vessels. Viilebori, governor of 
St. John s River, writes soon after to Mr. Stough- 
ton, that he had orders from the French king, his 
master, to take possession of and defend the whole 
country as far as Kennebeck. 

The Norridgewock Indians this year also built 
a church, at their chief settlement upon Kenne 
bcck river, which was complained of by the Mas 
sachusetts government as a French encroachment; 
but we know not for what reason, except (heir hav 
ing a Frenchman for their priest can be thought 
one. 

Representations were made to (he ministry, and 
the right of the English to the e. country, as .far 
as St. Croix, was insisted upon. The lords of 
trade write thus to the Earl of Bellamont: u As 
to the boundaries, we have always insisted and 
shall insist upon the English right as far as the 
river St. Croix ; but in the mean while, in relation 
to (he encroachments of the French and their 
building a church on Kennebeck river, that seems 
to us a very proper occasion for your lordship s 
urging the general assembly of the Massachusetts 
bay to rebuild the fort at Pemaquid, which they 
ought to have done long ago, and thereby they 
might have prevented this and many other incon- 
veniencies." 

The French persisted in their molestations of the 
English fishermen, and there seems to have been 
no great concern about it in the English ministry ; 
other greater affairs, in difference between the two 
crowns, engaged the attention and brought on a 
new war; and it was well they did, for it looks 
very probable that this dispute about the fishery 
would not have made a breach, but if peace had 
continued the French would have excluded the 
English, and this valuable branch once lost might 
never have been recovered. 

King James, always under the influence of 
France, had relinquished his right (o Acadia or 
Nova Scotia; and although his governor (Andros) 
for the short time the king remained afterwards 
upon the throne, retained the possession of Pema 
quid, and challenged a right to St. Croix ; and 
although the friendship between the two moriarchs 
might prevent any severity upon the English fish 
ermen, yet the French insisted upon their right 
both to the country and coasts. The war, upon 
the revolution, suspended the dispute about title. 
At the treaty of Ryswick, England was not dis 
posed to urge any points which would retard the] 



MASSACHUSETTS. 



[peace ;.and the French immediately after renewed 
the same claim they had made under King James. 
(Anno 1699.) f.ord Bellamont arrived at Bos 
ton from New York, May 26, 1699. A nobleman 
at the head of the government was a new thing ; 
all ranks of people exerted themselves to shew him 
respect, a id the appearance was so pompous, that 
his lordship thought it gave him good reason to 
expect a very honourable support from a province 
so well stocked with inhabitants, and in a state of 
so much affluence. He took every method to in 
gratiate himself with the people. He was conde 
scending, affable, and courteous upon all occa 
sions. He professed to be of the most moderate 
principles in religion and government ; although a 
churchman, yet far from high church, and he at 
tended the weekly lecture at Hoston with great re 
verence, and professed great regard and esteem for 
the preachers. He avoided all unnecessary con 
tests with private persons, or with either branch 
of the legislature. His inclination led him to Mr. 
Dudley s enemies, but he did not neglect those 
who -were friendly and attached to him. There 
was perfect harmony in the general court whilst he 
presided. There was something singular and un 
parliamentary in his form of proceeding in coun 
cil ; for he considered himself as at the head of 
the board in their legislative as well as executive 
capacity. He concerned himself in all their de 
bates, proposed all business, and frequently re 
commended to them to resolve into a committee 
upon bills or clauses in bills, and then, as the en 
tries stand, he left the chair, and the committee 
(being ready to report) reassumed ; nor did he 
think it proper they should act as a house of par 
liament in his absence; but when detained at 
home, by messages from time to time, directed 
their going into a committee and preparing busi 
ness against such time as he should be able to at 
tend. This was fruidins: them in all their debates 
and resolves, as far as his influence would extend, 
which was not a little way ; and yet afterwards, 
as a separate branch, he had his negative upon all 
their proceedings which were not according to his 
mind. This irregularity docs not seem to be the 
mere effect of his lordship s authority and influ 
ence over the council. The constitution under 
the new charter was not settled. They came off by 
degrees from their practice under the old charter. 
The governor, created by the people, used then 
to vote with the assistants: and although he had 
no negative, yet he had a casting voice. Lord 
Ijellamont finding this to have been the practice, 
and considering how much it increased his share 
in all acts of government, might be disposed to 



retain it. Experience taught, what was not at 
first conceived, the great difference between the 
privilege of proposing or originating, and that of 
rejecting. In some succeeding administrations it 
has given cause of exception and complaint when 
the governor has interested himself in the debates 
of the council, to influence their determinations 
and abridge them of their freedom, to which they 
are equally entitled with the other branches of the 
legislature. He was the first governor who imi 
tated the lord lieutenant of Ireland in formal 
speeches, as the king s representative, to the two 
houses of parliament ; copies of which were deli 
vered to the speaker and afterwards printed. Ex 
tracts from one or two shew they were calculated 
ad captandum. The unfavourable sentiments of 
the inhabitants in general of the reign of the 
Stuarts were well known to him ; no subject could 
be more engaging than a censure upon that family. 
He concludes his first speech, which is a very 
long one, in this manner. &amp;lt;f I should be wanting 
to you and myself too if 1 did not put you in 
mind of the indispensable duty and respect we owe 
the king for being the glorious instrument of our 
deliverance from the odious fetters and chains of 
popery and tyranny; which has almost over 
whelmed our consciences and subverted all our 
civil rights. There is something that is godlike 
in what the king hath done for us. The works of 
redemption and preservation come next to that of 
creation. I would not be misunderstood, so as to 
be thought to rob God of the glory of that stupen 
dous act of his providence, in bringing to pass 
the late happy and wonderful revolution in Eng 
land. His blessed work it was, without doubt, 
and he was pleased to make King William imme 
diately the author and instrument of it. Ever 
since the year 1602, England has had a succession 
of kings, who have been aliens in this respect, 
that they have not fought our battles nor been in 
our interests, but have been, in an unnatural man 
ner, plotting and contriving to undermine and sub 
vert our religion, laws, and liberties, till God was 
pleased, by his infinite power and mercy and good 
ness, to give us a true English king in the person 
of his present majesty, who has, upon all occa 
sions, hazarded his royal person in the fronts of 
our battles and where there was most danger ; he 
has restored to our nation the almost lost character 
of bravery and valour; and, what is most valuable 
of all, his Majesty is entirely in the interest of his 
people. It is therefore our duty and interest to 
pray to God, in the most fervent manner, that he 
would bless our great King William with a long 
and prosperous reign over us, to which, I am per-] 



MASSACHUSETTS. 



567 



[suaded, yon that are present and all good people 
Mill heartily say amen." 

His la^ speech and expressions, strong enough, 
upon the same strain. " The parting with Ca 
nada to the French, and the e. country called Aca- 
dia or Nova Scotia, with the noble fishery on that 
coast, \vere most execrable treacheries to England, 
and intended, without doubt, to serve the ends of 
popery. It is too \vcll known what interest that 
king favoured, who parted with Nova Scotia, and 
of what religion he died." 

By avoiding offence to particular persons, and 
by a general conformity to the cast or prevailing 
disposition of the people, his lordship obtained a 
larger sum as a salary and gratuity, not only than 
any of his predecessors, but also than any who 
succeeded b m, when the inhabitants were more 
numerous and more opulent, and money, compared 
with the necessaries of life, had become less va 
luable ; for he remained but 14 months in the 
province, and ihegrantsmade by the general court 
amounted 2500 /. lawful money, or 1875 /. sterling, 

His time was much taken up in securing the pi 
rates and their effects, which, we have observed, 
was a great inducement with the king to send him 
to America. Before his arrival in Boston, several 
suspected persons had been seized. After 30 or 
40 years indulgence, there succeeded a general 
abhorrence of bucaneering ; and the bucaneers, 
or freebooters, were hunted from one colony to 
another. A large sum of money was seized in the 
possession of one Smith, part of it foreign coins 
and the impressions unintelligible ; and he was 
brought upon trial, but the evidence produced 
being insufficient to satisfy the jury, he was ac 
quitted. 

About the same time, one Bradish was appre 
hended. He had been boatswain s mate of a ship 
fitted out by merchants and tradesmen of London 
to India, in the interloping trade. The crew 
turned pirates; and having left the master ashore 
at Polonais, gave the command to Bradish. They 
came to America, and lodged large sums of mo 
ney and goods with persons Uj on Long island and 
other places within and near to the government of 
New York, and then dispersed ; some to Connec 
ticut, others to Massachusetts bay, where Bradish 
was taken and others of his crew, and sent to Eng 
land. The vigilance used in pursuing and appre 
hending them, appears from the account Mr. 
Stoughton transmitted to the secretary of state. 
But Kidd was his lordship s chief object. 
His own reputation and that of several of his 
friends depended upon his seizure, being the only 
effectual way of removing the jealousies and un 



just surmises, not only against several of the mi 
nistry, but even against the king himself. In 
order to suppress the piracies committed by Eng 
lish subjects in India, &amp;c. it was thought jvoperto 
fit out a ship lor that special purpose. Lord Rum- 
ney, Somers, and others, became adventurers, 
to the amount of COOO/. sterling, and a grant was 
made to them of all captures, saving one-tenth 
only reserved to the king. Lord Bellamont seems 
to have had the principal direction. Upon in 
quiry for a proper commander, Mr. Livingstone, 
a principal inhabitant of .New York, being then 
in London, recommended Kidd, who had sailed 
out of New York, and having a family there, no 
question was made of his attachment to it, and 
there was no suspicion of his ever turning pirate 
himself. From London he went first to New 
Y r ork, where he broke through the instructions he 
had received, shipping his men upon new terms; 
and when he arrived in India, not only connived 
at and suffered to continue a known pirate vessel, 
but committed divers alarming acts of piracy him 
self, tothe endangeringthe amity subsisting between 
the East India company and the princes in that part 
of the world. The least said by the enemies of the 
administration, was that, from a greedy desire of 
gain, an ill-judged measure had been engaged in, 
which would be attended with very mischievous 
consequences, and the malice of some insinuated a 
criminal intention in the undertaking. 

Where Kidd would seek an asylum was uncer 
tain. Strangely infatuated, he came from Mada 
gascar to Boston, and made a bold open appear 
ance there, July the 1st this year, and some of 
his crew with him. On the 3d, he was sent for 
by the governor and examined before the council. 
What account he could give of himself does not 
now appear, but he was not immediately com 
mitted, and only ordered to draw up a narrative of 
his proceedings ; which neglecting to do in the 
time assigned him, on the 6th he was appre 
hended and committed to prison. Being a very 
resolute fellow, when the officer arrested him in 
his lodgings he attempted to draw his sword, but 
a young gentleman who accompanied the officer 
laying hold of his arm prevented him, and he sub 
mitted. Several of his men were secured at the 
same time, and advice having been sent to Eng 
land, it was thought an affair of so much import 
ance, that a man of war was sent to carry them 
there, where Kidd, Bradish, and divers others, 
were condemned and executed. The party writers 
in England pretended, that after Kidd s arrival he 
had assurance from some anti-courtiers, who ex 
amined him in prison, that his life should be spared] 



MASSACHUSETTS. 



[inie.WQulclapcu.se bis employers., but that he was 
not bad enough to comply with such a proposal. 
Lord Bellamont held two sessions of the general 
court this year; the first, the anniversary for the 
election of counsellors, the latter the 31st of 
March following, occasioned by a general rumour 
through the colonies, that the Indians (from all 
quarters, not only those upon the frontiers, but 
those who were scattered through the towns in the 
several colonies) had united and agreed, at an ap 
pointed time, to fall upon the English in order to 
a total extirpation. The Indians were no less 
alarmed with a report that the king had withdrawn 
his protection from them, and ordered his subjects 
to unite in their destruction. These reports were 
supposed to have been raised by evil-minded per 
sons among the English or Dutch ; but it is 
more probable the Indians of the Six Nations, to 
obtain the presents which accompanied all treaties 
between the English and them, were the con 
trivers and managers of the whole affair. Such 
was the consternation in the Massachusetts that 
several acts passed the general court for levying 
soldiers ; for punishing mutiny and desertion ; for 
holding all the militia in readiness to march ; and 
for enabling the governor to march them out of 
the province, which, by charter, he was restrained 
from without an act of assembly. As it happened, 
there was no occasion for carrying these laws into 
execution : the general terror subsiding soon after. 
(Anno 1700.) Soon after the session of the gene 
ral court in May 1700, Lord Bellamont took his leave 
of the Massachusetts and went to New York, where 
he died the 5th of March following. Mr. Stoughton 
look the chair again with reluctance. His ad 
vanced age and declining state of health made 
him fond of ease and retirement. 

(Anno 1701.) As soon as the news of the go 
vernor s death reached England, Mr. Dudley re 
newed his solicitations, with fresh vigour, for a 
post which he never lost sight of. By the interest 
of Lord Cutts, and the condescenson of Lord 
Wey mouth, whose son-in-law was a competitor, 
he was chosen member for Nevvtown, in Southamp 
ton county, in King William s last parliament. 
This, with the place of lieut. -governor of the 
isle of Wight, was to be preferred to all he could 
expect in New England if it had not been his na 
tive country ; but he had a passion for laying his 
bones there, which equalled that of the ancient 
Athenians, and which he could not help men 
tioning to every New England man who paid him a 
visit ; as many frequently would do, from Ports 
mouth, where "they were often detained for convoy. 
When Sir Richard Onflow and Mr. Harley 



were competitors for the speaker s place, his incli 
nation led him to the latter, from whom he had 
received favours ; but his favourite object, which 
he was then pursuing, obliged him to comply with 
the court ^nd vote for the former. He made use 
of the dissenting interest in England to obtain his 
commission and to recommend him to his country 
men upon his arrival. There was another diffi 
culty still remaining, the king was not willing to 
appoint a governor who he knew had been very 
obnoxious to the people. A petition was there 
fore procured from such persons belonging to the 
Massachusetts bay as were then in London, and 
from the principal New England merchants, pray 
ing that Mr. Dudley might be appointed gover 
nor. He had also the address to reconcile himself 
to Mr. Mather the younger, and to obtain from 
him a letter favouring his ca&amp;lt;ise, which he made 
known to the king, and which removed his ob 
jections; and although Lord Cornbury, a near 
relation of the late queen and the Princess Ann, 
being appointed for New York, expected Massa 
chusetts also, yet Mr. Dudley prevailed; and his 
commission passed the seals. The king s death, 
a few months after, caused him the trouble of tak 
ing out a new commission from the queen, but he 
had the unusual favour shewn him of remitting 
most, if not all the fees. 

Whilst these things were transacting in Eng 
land, the lieutenant-governor, Mr. Stoughton, 
died in May this year, at his house in Dorches 
ter. The administration for the first time devolved 
upon the council. Some manuscript minutes and 
letters which 1 have seen, about the time and after 
the settlement of the charter, take it for granted, 
that upon the death or absence of the governor and 
lieutenant-governor, the senior counsellor would 
preside, and an instruction from thecrown has been 
given for that purpose; but the expression in the 
charter, if it will admit of this construction, does 
not favour it. We must not wonder, therefore, 
that 27 counsellors did not readily give up their 
share in the administration to him that happened 
to be the eldest. It is a defect in the constitution, 
for although, for certain purposes, seven counsel 
lors make a quorum, yet in all acts, as command 
ers in chief, it has been judged necessary, that 15 
(or a majority of the whole number) should give 
their consent. This must be extremely inconve 
nient, especially in time of war, when dispatch often, 
arm secrecy sometimes, are of great importance. 

(Anno 1702.) Mr. Stoughton s father was 

esteemed by the people; was commander in chief 

of the forces of the colony in the first war against 

the Pequod Indians, and after that many years a "| 

g 



MASSACHUSETTS 



[magistrate ; and of a considernble eslate for those 
times. This circumstance caused his own natural 
endowments, which were cultivated and improved 
by the best education the country afforded, to be 
more observed and valued. Me was, in early life, 
a candidate for the ministry; but the people 
judged him proper to take his father s place as a 
magistrate ; then employed him a* their agent in 
England ; and urged him a second time to engage 
in the same service. It is no blemish in his cha 
racter that he had many opposers. Every man 
who makes it more his aim to serve than to please 
the peopl.. , may expect it. From the observa 
tions he made in his agency he was convinced it 
was to no purpose to oppose the demands of King 
Charles; and from tue example of the corpora 
tions in England, he was for surrendering the 
charter rather than to suffer a judgment or decree 
against it. In such case a more favourable admi 
nistration might be expected to succeed it, and in 
better times there would be a greater chance for re- 
assuming it. Tic consented to act as one of the 
council under Sir Edmund Andros, in hopes, by 
that means, to render the new form of government 
more easy. By this step he lost the favour of the 
people, and yet did not obtain the confidence of 
the governor, who would willingly have been rid 
of him, seldom consulted him, and by the in 
fluence he had over the majority of the council, 
generally carried the votes against his mind. He 
joined upon, the revolution with the old magis 
trates, who made no scruple of receiving him, in 
reassuming the government ; but upon the elec 
tion afterwards made by the people he did not ob 
tain a vote. At the desire of the council and re 
presentatives he drew up a narrative of the pro 
ceedings of Sir Edmund and his accomplices, 
signed by him and several others of the council; 
in which they modestly take exception to many 
things in the administration, and exculpate them 
selves from any share in them. He was nine years 
lieutenant-governor, and six of them commander 
in chief; had experienced the two extremes of po 
pular and absolute government ; and not only 
himself approved of a mean between both, but was 
better qualified to recommend it, by a discreet ad 
ministration, to the people of the province. He 
died a bachelor. Instead of children, he saw, be 
fore his death, a college reared at his expence, 
which took the name of Stoughton Hall. He had 
good reason to think it would transmit a grateful 
remembrance of his name to succeeding ages. 

Sir Henry Ashurst and Constantino Phips had 
continued agents for the province, in England, for 

VOL. II, 



ten years together. Divers attempts had been 
made, by Mr. Mather s friends, to send him again 
to England in the service of the province; and, 
after Mr. Stoughton s death, the two houses came to 
a resolution to choose some person in the province, 
and send him to England as their agent ; and a 
great interest was made that Mr. Mather might 
be the man ; but it happened that Mr. Cooke, who 
had not forgot their former difference when joint 
agents, stood as well with the assembly at this time 
as he had ever done, and had influence enough to 
prevent Mr. Mather from succeeding. The 
choice fell upon Waitstill Winthrop, grandson to 
the first governor of the Massachusetts, and son 
to the first governor of Connecticut, and who, 
either out of respect to his family, or for some 
other reason which does not now appear, was con 
sidered as president of the council, although 
there were many who by priority of appointment, 
the rule general observed, should have preceded 
him. 

The French claim to the country e. of the river 
Kennebeck and (o an exclusive fishery upon the 
sea-coast were the reasons publicly assigned for the 
choice of an agent at this time, and an address to 
the king had passed the council and assembly, and 
Mr. Winthrop s instructions were prepared. These 
proceedings of the French were really alarming. 
The professed reasons, however, were not the true 
reasons. Mr. Dudley s solicitations for thegoven- 
ment were known, and, although -his interest in the 
province was increasing, yet a majority of the 
general court had a very ill opinion of him. Mr. 
Winthrop was a good sort of a man, and although 
he was of a genius rather inferior to either of his 
ancestors, yet he was popular, and the party 
against Mr. Dudley wished to have him governor. 
They flattered themselves that his being acceptable 
to the country would, together with his family and 
his estate, both which were of the first rate, be 
sufficient to recommend him, but they were mis 
taken. Winthrop was a plain honest man. Dudley 
had been many years well acquainted with the cus 
toms and manners of a court, and would have 
been more than a match for him. Just as he was 
about to embark, news came that Mr. Dudley was 
appointed governor, and Thomas Povey lieutenant- 
governor. The reason of Mr. Winthrop s ap 
pointment to the agency immediately appeared. 
The vote for his instructions was reconsidered, and 
his voyage laid aside, it was thought proper, 
however, that the address to the king should be 
forwarded. This was sent to Mr. Phips. A second 
address accompanied it, occasioned by advice of] 
4 D 



570 



MASSACHUSETTS. 



[a bill being brought into the house of lords for 
dissolving charter governments. It is not probable 
that the Massachusetts charter was the special 
occasion of this bill. It differs so little from the 
commissions in the royal governments, as they are 
called, as not to be worth notice. About this time, 
or a little before, the spirit against the king had 
caused the reassumption of many grants which he 
had made of private estates. If there was a 
special prejudice against colony charters, it is 
probable the charter to Pennsylvania was the 
most exceptionable. Thepropi ietor was obnoxious, 
had absconded a few years before upon a suspicion 
of treasonable practices, and was still under a cloud. 
The Massachusetts instructed their agents as follows. 
" As to the bill said to be lying before the house 
of lords, lor the dissolving charter governments in 
the plantations, we entreat you to be very watchful 
in that matter, and use utmost diligence, by all 
convenient means, to prevent our being compre 
hended in or concluded by the same. Our cir 
cumstances are different from those of other 
plantations under charter government, our first 
settlement being wholly at our own cost and 
charge, and by our present settlement we are 
already reduced to a more immediate depend 
ence on the crown, his Majesty having reserv 
ed to himself the nomination of our governor, 
lieutenant-governor, and secretary, and a negative 
on our laws." In their address to the king they 
thus express themselves. " And forasmuch as we 
are given to understand that, through the sugges 
tions of some persons not well affected to charter 
governments, a bill has been preferred in the house 
of lords for vacating charter and proprietary 
governments within your Majesty s plantations, 
we in all submission crave leave humbly to pray 
your Majesty s grace and favour towards your good 
subjects within this your province, that no such 
suggestions may make an impression in your royal 
breast to deprive us of those privileges which we 
enjoy under your Majesty s most gracious grant, 
and that we may not be included in any such act 
to our prejudice, without having opportunity 
given us of being heard and speaking for our 
selves." The bill was dropped in the house of 
lords, and, a war with France being every day 
expected, the longest sword was to determine the 
points complained of in the first address. 

The sending these addresses to Phips was 
grievous to Ashurst. Ah hough he had not very 
shining talents, yet being a member of parliament, 
having a great family interest, and being an honest 
man, and conscientious in the discharge of his 



trust, he had been very serviceable to the province. 
He had, however, the fate of most agents. As soon 
as the party against him found they were strong 
enough they left him out of the agency, and he 
made frequent complaints that they had slighted 
his services, and neglected giving him an adequate 
reward. All the agents who had been employed 
before him, except. Mr. Winslow, were unsuccess 
ful, and several, probably for that reason, thought 
unfaithful. The first who were employed were 
Weld, Peters, and Hibbins, in 1640. They borrow 
ed money for the service of the colony, and proper 
care not being taken by the government for the 
payment, these agents for several years after were 
contending about the proportion in which they 
should pay it themselves. Winslow, who went 
over in 1646, soon found more profitable employ 
ment, but his allowance was so scant from the 
colony that the corporation for propogating the 
gospel among the Indians allowed him 130/. 
sterling for promoting that design, but wrote to the 
government that it ought to be restored. Brad- 
street and Norton were sent in 1660. Norton laid 
the reproaches he met with so much to heart as to 
affect his health and shorten his life. In 1677, 
Stoughton and Bulkley were employed, and soon 
after their return it was said by those who charged 
Bulkley with too great compliance with court 
measures, that his sun set in a cloud. He died of 
melancholy. Stoughton was reproached, and 
although ho had a majority of the court in his 
favour, he could not be prevailed on to risk his repu 
tation a second time. Dudley and Richards were 
the next, in 1682. The former managed the whole 
business and bore the whole blame, but, being of a 
very different temper from some of his predecessors, 
instead of laying to heart the slight of his country 
men, he was politic enough to improve frowns at 
home to procure favours from abroad. Mather, 
Cooke, and Oakes were employed to solicit the 
restoration of the first charter. In this they 
failed. Mather, without the consent of his brethren, 
accepted the present charter, and although, at first, 
a majority of the court acknowledged his merit, 
the opposite party soon after prevailed, and he 
failed of his expected reward, and complained all 
his life of the ingratitude of his countrymen, after 
having spent notonly his time, but part of his estate, 
in public service. We would draw a veil over our 
transactions relative to agents, if our obligations to 
truth would permit us. Errors and failings, as 
well as laudable deeds, in past ages, may be render 
ed useful, by exciting posterity to avoid the one, 
and to imitate the other.] 



MASSACHUSETTS. 



571 



[CHAP. V. 

From the arrival of Governor Dudley in 1702, to 
the arrival of Governor &amp;gt;///e in 1716. 

{Anno 1702.) Mr. Dudley was received with 
ceremony and marks of respect, even by those 
who had been his greatest opposers in the reign 
of King James. W inthrop, Cooke, Hutchinson, 
Foster, Addington, Russell, Phillips, Browne, 
Sargent, and others, who had been of the council 
which committed him to prison, where he lay 20 
weeks, were of the council when he arrived. 
Upon such political changes, a general amnesty is 
oftentimes advisable and necessary. 

The affront and insult shewn by Lewis XIV. 
not only to the prince upon the throne, but to the 
English nation, in proclaiming another person 
king, had rendered a war with France inevitable, 
before the governor left England. The news of its 
being proclaimed arrived in a few weeks after him. 
Not h ing less could be expected than a war with 
the Indians also. Ever since the peace in 1698, 
the governor of Canada, by his emissaries, had 
been continually exciting them to hostilities ; and 
justified himself upon this principle, that the 
Indians having cast themselves upon the French, 
long since, as their protectors, and being pro 
prietors of the e. country, where the English had 
usurped a jurisdiction, which, as far w. as Ken- 
nebeck, rightfully belonged to the French, the 
English therefore were to be considered as intru 
ders and invaders upon the jurisdiction of the 
French, and upon the property of the Indians. 

The governor, the first summer, visited all the 
e. frontiers as far as Pemaquid ; taking such 
gentlemen of the general court with him as he 
thought proper ; met the delegates from the 
Indian tribes, and confirmed the former treaties 
which had been made. He had recommended, in 
his first speech to the assembly, the rebuilding the 
fort at Pemaquid ; and the gentlemen who accom 
panied him e. reported in favour of it, and their 
report was accepted by the council ; but the house 
continued of the same mind they had formerly 
been, urging that all the money they could raise 
would be wanted for other services more necessary 
than that, and refused to comply with the gover 
nor s proposal. His heart was set upon it; the 
ministry continued their prejudice in favour of this 
particular spot, and it is not improbable that he 
had given encouragement he should be able to 
carry a point which his predecessors could not, 
and therefore was the more mortified at the 
failure. 

The Indians, upon the Massachusetts frontiers, 



continued quiet this year, but the Nova Scotia 
Indians seized three of the fishing vessels belong 
ing to this province, upon a report that war was 
declared. The council attempted to recover them, 
and by the interposition of Biuillon, governor of 
Nova Scotia, two, if not the third, were restored. 

At the first election Mr. Dudley treated the house 
more cavalierly than Sir William Phips or Lord 
Bellamont had ever done. After the list of coun 
sellors elect had been presented, " a message was 
sent from his excellency, to desire Mr. speaker and 
the house forthwith to attend him in the council 
chamber; and Mr. speaker and the house being 
come up, his excellency observed to them, that 
in their list of elections presented to him, he 
took notice that there were several gentlemen left 
out that were of the council last year, who were 
of good ability, for estate and otherwise, to serve 
her Majesty and well disposed thereto, and that 
some others, who were new elected, were not so 
well qualified ; some of them being of little or 
mean estate ; and withal signified, that he should 
expunge five of the names in their list, viz. Elisha 
Cooke and Peter Sargent, Esqs. Mr. Thomas Oakes, 
Mr. John Saflin, and Mr. John Bradford, and 
dismissed the house, who returned to their cham 
ber." Cooke had been of the council nine or ten 
years, had been assistant before the revolution, 
married a daughter of Governor Leveret, and was 
allied to the best families in the province, had a 
better estate than the governor himself, but then he 
had been agent in England, and discovered greater 
zeal for prosecuting the complaints against An- 
dros, Dudley, &amp;c. than any of his fellow agents. 
Sargent had married the relict of Sir William 
Phips. Oakes had been one of the agents in 
England also, and under the direction of Cooke. 
Saflin was a principal inhabitant of Bristol, (the 
father of Thomas Saflin in Stepney church-yard, 
whose memory the author of the Spectator has 
immortalized), and Bradford was grandson of the 
first worthy governor of Plymouth. 

(Anno 1703.) There had been but one instance 
of the governor s refusal of a counsellor since the 
charter. The right of refusal could not be disput 
ed. Had the power been frequently exercised, 
less exception would have been taken to this 
instance ; but the long disuse of it caused the 
reassumptiori of it, upon so many persons at once, 
to be more disagreeable. Oakes was of the house, 
and, notwithstanding the negative as a counsellor, 
remained there ; and, if he could have been of any 
consequence, this would have added to his weight. 

Lord Cornbury, governor of New York, some] 
4 D 2 



MASSACHUSETTS. 



[time in the month of May, advised Mr. Dudley of 
an army of French and Indians, intending to make 
a descent upon Deerfield, in the Massachusetts 
province. The intelligence was brought to Albany 
by some of the praying or christianized Mohawks, 
who had been to visit their friends at Cagnawaga 
in Canada, who formerly had belonged to the 
same village, about 40 miles from Albany. This 
design was not immediately carried into execution. 

Whilst every one was fearing hostilities from the 
Indians, several Englishmen, pretend ing friendship 
to Castine, son of the Baron de St. Castine by an 
Indian woman, who now lived at Penobscot, 
plundered his house, &amp;c. and made great spoil. 
Upon his complaint to the government, he was 
assured the action should not go without due punish 
ment, and that restitution should be made. About 
the same time, the Indians did mischief to some 
of the people of Kennebeck : which action was 
first, we cannot ascertain. Perhaps neither of them 
was from resentment or revenge for the other. 

Before the end of the year, the blow threatened 
in the beginning of it was struck upon Deerfield. 
This was the most remote settlement upon Connec 
ticut river, except a few families at Squ;ikheag or 
Northficld adjoining to it. Deerfield, being easiest 
of access of any place upon the river, had often 
suffered by small parties. In 1697, an attempt 
was made upon it, but failed of success through 
the vigilance and bravery of the inhabitants with 
Mr. Williams their minister at their head. Colonel 
Schuyler of Albany had obtained information of 
the designs of the enemy upon it this year, and 
gave notice seasonable enough to put the people 
upon their guard. It was afterwards thought re 
markable, that the minister had it strongly im 
pressed upon his mind, that (he town would be de 
stroyed. It would not have been very strange if 
this impression had never been off his mind. lie 
warned his people of it in his sermons, but too 
many made light of the intelligence, and of the im 
pressions which naturally followed. The govern 
ment, upon his application, ordered 20 soldiers as 
a guard. The party, which had been fitted out at 
Canada, consisted of about 300 French arid In 
dians, under Hertel dc Rouville, who had four 
brothers with him; their father had been a noted 
partisan, but was now unable to take so long a 
march. They came upon the town the night 
after the 28th of February. In the fore part of 
the night, and until about two hours before day, 
the watch kept the streets ; and then unfortunately 
went all to sleep. The enemy, who had been ho 
vering about them, and kept continually recon 



noitring, perceived all to be quiet, and first sur 
prised the fort or principal garrison house. The 
snow was so high in drifts, that they had no diffi 
culty in jumping over the walls. Another party 
broke into the house of Mr. Williams the minister, 
who, rising from his bed, discovered near 20 en 
tering. He expected immediate death, but had 
the firmness of mind to take down a pistol, which 
he always kept loaded upon his tester, and to pre 
sent it to the breast of the first Indian who came up 
to him. The pistol, fortunately for Mr. Williams, 
snapped only and missed fire. Had he killed the 
Indian, his own life no doubt would have been 
taken in revenge. Being, in effect, disarmed, 
he was seized and pinioned, and kept standing 
in his shirt only, in that cold season, the space of 
an hour. In the mean time his house was plun 
dered, and two of his children and a Negro wo 
man murdered. His wife and five other children 
were suffered to put on their clothes, and then he 
himself was allowed to dress and prepare for a Ions: 

r r e 

march. 

Other parties fell upon other houses in the town, 
and slew about forty persons, and made about 100 
more prisoners. About an hour after sun-rise, the 
enemy had finished their work and took their de 
parture, leaving all the houses, outhouses, &amp;c. in 
flames. Mrs. Williams had scarcely recovered 
from her lying-in, and was in a weak state. The 
enemy made all the haste they could, lest a superior 
force should overtake them. The second day, she 
let her husband know she was unable to travel any 
farther as fast as they did. He knew the conse 
quence, and would gladly have remained with her 
and assisted her; but they had different masters 
and leave could not be obtained, and he was car 
ried from her, and soon after heard that her master 
had sunk his hatchet into her brains. One cannot 
easily conceive of greater distress, than what an 
affectionate husband must then have felt. About 
20 more of the prisoners, in their travel towards 
Canada, gave out and were killed also. They 
were 25 days between Deerfield and Chambli, de 
pending upon hunting for their support as they 
travelled. Vaudreuil, the French governor of 
Canada, treated these prisoners with humanity ; 
and although the Indians have been encouraged, 
by premiums upon prisoners and scalps, to lay 
waste the English frontiers, yet the caplives, 
who have been carried to Canada, have often re 
ceived very kind usage from the French in 
habitants. 

The unfortunate provinces of Massachusetts bay 
and New Hampshire, were the only people upon ] 



MASSACHUSETTS. 



573 



[the continent against whom the French and In 
dians, during a ten years war, exerted their 
strength. Connecticut and Rhode island were 
covered by the Massachusetts. New York took 
care of themselves, and of the colonies s. of them, 
by a neutrality which the Iroquois or Six Nations 
(influenced by those Who had the direction of In 
dian affairs) engaged to observe between the Eng 
lish and French. This was, in effect, a neutrality 
between the French and the English governments 
to the s. of New England. Nothing could be 
more acceptable to the Canadians. The New 
England governments felt the terrible consequences. 
Charlevoix gives this account of it. " Teganis- 
sorens arrived a little while after at Montreal, and 
in the conference which he had with the com 
mander in chief, he appeared at first to be out of 
humour, which boded ill to the business he came 
upon. The Europeans, says he, are an out of the 
way people ; after they have made peace, one 
with another, they go to war again for mere no 
thing at all. This is not our practice ; after we 
have once signed to a treaty, there must be some 
very strong reasons to induce us to break it. He 
went on and declared, that his nation should not 
engage in a war which they did not approve of, 
neither on one side nor the other. Mons. de 
Vaudreuil let Teganissorens know, that he desired 
nothing further ; and that the Iroquois might have 
no pretence to break so advantageous a neutrality, 
he determined to send out no parties towards New 
York." Again upon another occasion, " At all 
events, the Six Nations, and especially the Tsonon- 
heans were resolved strictly to observe the neutra 
lity which they had sworn, and of which they had 
begun to feel the benefit ; but you may see that 
they were much set upon including the English, 
that they might be considered as mediators between 
them and us. Mr. Vaudreuil, who had very early 
seen through their design, had acquainted the 
court with it, and received for answer, that if he 
was able to carry on the war to advantage without 
putting the crown to any extraordinary expence, 
he should reject the proposals of the Iroquois ; 
otherwise, he might settle a neutrality for America 
upon the best terms he could, but that it was not 
for his Majesty s honour that his governor and 
lieutenant-general should be the first mover of it. 
The minister added, that lie thought it would be 
most proper for the missionaries to let the Indians 
know, that the French did not desire to disturb 
the peace of the country ; that although they 
were very well able to carry on a vigorous war, 
yet they preferred the quiet of Canada to all the 
advantages they might reap from the superiority 



of their arms ; and if the Six Nations, convinced 
that this was our disposition, .should cause the 
English to ask a neutrality for their colonies, M. 
Vaudreuil might consider of it ; but that he should 
not come to a conclusion without orders from the 
king." 

1 am sensible Charlevoix says, that t( the Bos- 
toneers would have obtained the same thing from 
the Abenaquis or e. Indians." It is certain 
that the Massachusetts government would have 
been content (provided the e. Indians had con 
tinued a peace with the English) that they should 
not be obliged to go to war against the French ; 
but the Massachusetts, in all their treaties with the 
e. Indians, made peace for the other governments 
as well as for themselves ; and hostilities against 
Connecticut or New York would have been 
deemed a breach of the peace, as well as those 
against the Massachusetts ; whereas the Ne\r 
Yorkers, or rather the Albanians, suffered the 
Canada Indians to go through their province and 
fall upon any of our frontiers, without looking 
upon it to be a breach of the neutrality, and car 
ried on great trade both with French and Indians 
at the same time ; and sometimes the plunder made 
in the county of Hampshire became merchandise 
in Albany. Some of the best people detested such 
proceedings, particularly Colonel John Schuyler 
of A Ibany ; who, by means of the Indians of the 
Six Nations in the English interest, informed him 
self of the intended expeditions of the French and 
French Indians, and gave frequent notice to the 
people upon our frontiers to be upon their guard ; 
but most of the inroads made upon us he had it not 
in his power to discover. 

That the French might improve this plan to 
greater advantage, they drew oft -about this time 
a great number of the Abenaquis families from 
Penobscot, Norridgewock, Saco, Pigwacket, &amp;c. 
and settled them at Becancour and St. Francois, in 
Canada, where they were known to the English 
by the name of St. Francois Indians. Here they 
were under the constant direction of the governor 
of Canada, and were sent out, from time to time, 
with parties of the Six Nations in the French in- 
terest, and French Canadians, to massacre the 
men, women, and children upon the e. and w. 
frontiers. Charlevoix says, " they were intended 
as a barrier against the inroads of the Six Nations, 
in case of a future war between them and the 
French." 

The Massachusetts, thus harrassed and per 
plexed, thought it necessary to remain no longer 
on the defensive only ; and in the fall, sent out 

3 or 400 men to a noted settlement of the In-1 
o 



574 



MASSACHUSETTS. 



[dians at Pigwacket, and another party to 
the ponds, Ossapy, &amp;c. upon the back of the e. 
frontier ; but neither party met with the enemy. 
Soon after, Colonel March, going out with another 
party, killed arid took about a dozen of the enemy. 
This measure not answering expectation; to en 
courage small parties of the English to go out arid 
hunt the Indians, the general court promised a 
bounty or reward, no less than 40/. for every In 
dian scalp. Captain Tyng went out in the winter 
and brought in five. 

(Anno 1704.) In the spring, another project 
was tried. About 100 Indians were obtained 
from Connecticut and posted at Berwick, in the 
county of York ; but these Indians were not only 
strangers to the woods, and wholly ignorant of the 
frontiers of Canada, but by long living in a de 
pressed state among the English, were dispirited, 
enervated, and unfit for this service, and nothing 
remarkable was effected. Had not the Six Nations 
been restrained, parties of them, harrassing the 
French settlements, would have induced the 
French, for their own preservation, to have suf 
fered the frontiers of New England, as well as 
New York, to have remained unmolested. 

All these attempts failing, a still more expensive 
undertaking was agreed on. It was supposed 
that an army, to sweep the coast and country from 
Piscataqua river to Nova Scotia, would strike ter 
ror into the Indians and bring them to reason. 
Colonel Church, noted for his exploits in former 
wars, especially in Philip s war, was pitched upon 
to command in this expedition, and had orders to 
enlist as many as he could, both of English and 
Indians, who had been in service before. This is 
called by Charlevoix an expedition against Port 
Royal ; but Ch;irch was instruced not to make any 
attempt against the fort there, and to ravage the 
country only. Mr. Dudley had intimations of the 
queen s intention to send ships the next year for 
the reduction of that fortress. 

Church had 550 soldiers under him, in 14 small 
transports, and was provided with 36 whaleboals, 
and convoyed by the Jersey man of war of 48, the 
Gosport of 32, and the province snow of 14 guns. 
He stopped first at Montinicus, and sent two of his 
boats to Green island, where he took four or five 
French and Indians, who served him for pilots up 
Penobscot river, and to the Indian settlements 
there. In this river he killed and took captive 
divers of the enemy ; among the captives were 
Castine s daughter and her children, her husband 
and father being gone to France, where Castrne 
had an estate, upon which he lived after he left 
America, The transports lay at Mount Desert. 



Church having taken from them a fresh supply of 
provisions, went in the boats up the w. Passima- 
quady. In the harbour he found only a French 
woman and her children upon an island, and ano 
ther family upon the main, near to it. He then 
went up the river, where he took prisoners, Gour- 
don, a French officer, and his family, who lived in 
a small cottage. Church seeing some of his men 
hovering over another hut, he called to them to 
know what they were doing ; and upon their re 
ply, that there were people in the house who 
would not come out, he hastily bid his men knock 
them in the head ; which order they immediately 
observed. He was much blamed for this, after his 
return, and excused himself but indifferently. He 
feared the enemy might fall upon his men, who he 
saw were off their guard, which put him in a pas 
sion. He went as high up the river as the Falls, 
taking or destroying all in his way ; missed Char- 
tiers, another French officer who lived or was 
posted there. The transports took in the forces at 
the harbour or mouth of the river and carried them 
to Mcnis ; the men of war standing for Portlioyal. 
At Menis he met with some opposition, the enemy 
firing from the banks as he rowed up the river to 
the town ; but he lost none of his men. They 
found plenty, not only of fresh provisions but good 
liquor in the town, which occasioned such dis 
orders among the men, especially the Indians, that 
it was necessary to stave all the casks which had 
any wine or spirits in them, and it was done ac 
cordingly. Here the lieutenant of Church s own 
company, Barker, (Charlevoix calls him the 
lieutenant-general), and one man more, were shot 
down, which were all that were lost in the expedi 
tion. After plundering the inhabitants of all their 
goods, they set the town on fire, and then embarked 
on board the transports. The inhabitants of a vil 
lage upon another branch of the river supposed 
the English to be gone, and that they should 
escape ; but Church went back with his boats, and 
going up this branch, came unexpectedly upon 
the village, and took what prisoners he had a mind 
to, and among the rest two gentlemen, Avho had 
been sent by the governor of Port Royal to bring 
two companies of soldiers for the defence of the 
place against the men of war which appeared in 
the gut. Church gave the gentlemen leave to re 
turn, for the sake of sending a message by them to 
the governor, to desire him to acquaint the gover 
nor of Canada, that if he did not prevent his 
French and Indians from committing such bar 
barities upon poor helpless women and children, 
as the people of Deerfield had suffered the last 
year, he would return with 1000 Indians,- and] 



M ASS ACHUS ETT-S. 



575 



[let them loose upon the frontiers of Canada to 
commit the like barbarities there. This the 
French governor must know to be a gasconade. 

The forces after this went up what is called the 
e. river and destroyed the settlements there, and 
then returned to the transports, and joined the men 
of war at Port Itoyal ; where it was agreed, both 
by sea and land officers, that no attempt should be 
made. The men of war returned to Mount Desert 
harbour, and Church, with his transports, went up 
to Chignecto. The inhabitants all fled, taking 
with them as much of their substance as they could 
carry away ; the rest they left to the mercy of the 
English, who laid all waste. From Chignecto 
they went to Mount Desert ; the men of war being 
gone to Boston, the transports followed ; and 
stopping at Casco bay, Church found orders lodged 
there from the governor, to go up Kennebeck river 
as far as Norridgewock fort ; but having intelli 
gence that it was deserted, and his men having 
undergone much fatigue, he thought it best to re 
turn home. 

This expedition Mr. Dudley supposes, in his 
speech to the assembly, struck great terror into 
the Indians, and drove them from our frontiers ; 
but it appears from Church s journal, that the poor 
Acadians, who had been so often ravaged before, 
were the principal sufferers now, and that the In 
dians were little or nothing annoyed. 

An exploit* of Caleb Lyman of Northampton 
deserves to be recorded. Hearing of a small 
party of Indians at Cohass, far up Connecticut 
river, he went out with only five friend Indians, 
and after nine or ten days travel, came upon the 
enemy Indians in the night, killed seven out of 
nine, and the other two escaped, but wounded. 

This may be placed among the favourable 
years; but the frontiers were not without annoy 
ance. In April, an Indian scout killed Edward 
Taylor at Lamprey river, and carried his wife and 
child to Canada ; Major Hilton with 20 men pur 
suing without overtaking them. They lay in 
wait to take Major Waldron at Cochccho, but 
missed him, carrying off one of his servants 
in his stead. July 31, about 400 French and 
Indians fell upon Loncaster, and assaulted six 
garrison houses at the same time, which made a 
brave defence. They burned many other dwell 
ing houses and the meeting house. An alarm was 
soon spread, and 300 men were in the town before 
niffht, who engaged the enemy with some loss on 
both sides. The" beginning of August, a party of 
the enemy lying in wait, fired upon a small scout 
going from Northampton to West field, killed one 
rnan^and took t\vo prisoners; but some more 



forces being behind, they came up, retook the two 
men and killed two of the Indians. Soon after, 
they killed Lieutenant Wyler and several others 
at Groton, and at a plantation called Nusheway. 

Almsbury, Haverhill, and York, in the Massa 
chusetts, and Exeter, Dover, and Oyster River, in 
New Hampshire, suffered more or less, this sum 
mer, by the enemy. 

The licentious practice, indulged among the sea 
men, of making depredat ions upon foreign nations 
in the East and West Indies, was not wholly sup 
pressed. John Quelch (who had been master of 
the brigantine Charles, and had committed many 
piratical acts upon the coast of India) came with 
several of his crew and landed, some in one part of 
New England, some in another. Quelch and six 
more were condemned at Boston and executed. 
Some were admitted to be witnesses for the king, 
some reprieved, and some pardoned. Tiie gover 
nor, upon this occasion, found old prejudices 
against him reviving. Reports were spread, of 
large sums of money falling into the hands of the 
governor and of his son, the queen s advocate, 
which however groundless easily obtained credit. 

Mr. Dudley s principles in government were 
too high for the Massachusetts people. He found 
it very difficult to maintain what appeared to him 
to be the just prerogative of the crown, and at the 
same time to recover and preserve the esteem of 
the country. The government had been so popu 
lar under the old charter, that the exercise of the 
powers reserved to the crown by the new charter 
was submitted to with reluctance. Sir William 
Phips was under the influence of some of his coun 
cil and some of the ministers of note, and suffered 
remains of customs under the old form, hardly 
consistent with the new. Mr. atoughton expect 
ing every day to be superseded, avoided all occa 
sions of controversy. Lord Bellamont, indeed, in 
some instances, assumed more than he had right to. 
His quality and the high esteem at first con 
ceived of him, prevented any controversies during 
his very short administration. Mr. Dudley set 
out with resolution to maintain his authority. 
The people were more jealous of him than they 
would have been of any oilier person. His nega 
tiving five of the council, the first election, was 
an unpopular stroke. The next yc;ir (1704) the 
two houses chose again two of the negatived -per 
sons, Mr. Cooke and Mr. Sargent, and the go 
vernor again refused to approve of them. They 
were such favourites of the house, that the speaker, 
the house being present, addressed his excellency, 
and prayed him to reconsider his negative, and to 
approve of the choice. This was out of chaf actor,] 



576 



MASSACHUSETTS. 



[and the house dishonoured themselves and had the 
mortification of being denied. This year neither 
of the persons were chosen of the council, but one 
of them, Mr. Oakes, being chosen speaker of the 
house, upon the governor s being acquainted there 
with, he signified to the house (hat he disapproved 
of their choice, and directed them to proceed to 
the choice of another, which they refused to do. 
it had been always the practice for the governor 
to give directions to the two houses to proceed to 
the choice of counsellors ; but the dispute about 
the speaker prevented it at this time, the council 
inserted themselves, and the question being put, 
whether it was in the governor s power, by virtue 
of the charter, to refuse the election of a speaker 
and direct the choice of another, they determined 
it was not, and immediately joined ihe house in 
electing counsellors. The next day the governor 
declared, that he looked upon it to be her Ma 
jesty s prerogative to allow or disallow the choice 
of a speaker, but he would not delay the assembly 
by disputes, when the affairs of the war were so 
pressing, saving to her Majesty her just rights at 
all times. 

The governor had it in special command to re 
commend three things to the assembly ; the re 
building the fort at Pemaquid ; the contributing 
to a fort at Piscataqua ; and the establishing ho 
nourable salaries for the governor, lieutenant-go 
vernor, and judges of the courts. He had been 
pressing these things from his first arrival, but 
could obtain neither of them; and as to salaries, 
they not only refused fixing a salary, but allowed 
him only 500/. per annum, viz. 300 of it in the 
gpring and 200 in the fall. To the lieutenant-go 
vernor they gave 200A annually, as lieutenant-go- 
Yernor and captain of the castle ; and although it 
was more than any lieutenant-governor has received 
since, yet he found it insufficient to support him, 
and this year, by the way of Lisbon, went back to 
England and never returned to the province. A 
message from the house this year to the governor, 
though not very elegant, shews the sense they had 
of these matters : 

u May it please your excellency, 

" In answer to those parts of your excellency s 
speech, at the beginning of the session, referring to 
her Majesty s directions for the building a fort at 
Pemaquid, contributing to the charge of a fort at 
Piscataqua, and settling of salaries, we crave leave 
to offer, 

" Imprimis, as to the building a fort at Pema 
quid, we are humbly of opinion, that her Majesty 
hath received misrepresentations concerning the 
necessity and usefulness of a fort there; wherefore, 



this house, in their humble address to her Majesty, 
dated the 27th of March 1703, and since twice 
repeated, did among other things lay before her 
Majesty our reasons why we could not comply with 
her expectations in that affair, as, 

" First, the little benefit said fort was to us, rot 
being, as \ve could discern, any bridle to the enemy 
or barrier to our frontiers, being out of the usual 
road of the Indians, and 100 miles distant from any 
English plantation ; and seemed only to make an 
anchorage for a few fishing boats that accidentally 
put in there; but the expence thereon was very 
great, not less than 20,000/. 

" Secondly, the charge of the said fort will be 
such that we c;mnot see how the province can pos 
sibly sustain it, having already laid out several 
large sums of money in raising new fortifications at 
Castle island, &amp;c. which vvas set forth in the ad 
dress and memorial accompanying the same ; but 
we understand we have been so unhappy, as that 
the said address and memorial did not reach her 
Majesty s hands, because proceeding from this 
house alone, although the addressing her Majesty 
is a privilege ever allowed to the meanest of her 
subjects. We did therefore, at our session in Fe 
bruary last, join the council in making our humble 
address to her Majesty upon the affair aforesaid, 
which we hope hath some time since arrived to 
her Majesty s favourable acceptance. 

" The second article is the contributing to the 
charge of Piscataqua fort. The fort in that pro 
vince has been built several years past, when it 
was not desired or thought necessary that this pro 
vince should assist them therein. The late reforms 
and reparations made of the same, as we have been 
informed, stands that whole province about the 
sum of 500/. which doth not amount to the quota 
of several particular towns within this province, 
towards the charge of the war one year ; and all 
the navigation and trade of this province, coming 
down Piscataqua river, have been charged with a 
considerable duty towards the support of that fort ; 
and this province hath always afforded such guards 
as were needful for their haling of masts, timber, 
&amp;c. for her Majesty s service, whilst the principal 
benefit and advantage of the trade hath accrued to 
that province. And they have never contributed 
any thing to the charge of our forces, forts, and 
garrisons, or guard by sea, that are as great a 
safety and defence to them as to ourselves ; but the 
public charge of that government has been much 
less proportionably than the charge of this; which 
being considered, we hope no assistance will be 
expected from us towards the charge of the said 
fort.] 



MASSACHUSETTS. 



577 



\_" Thirdly, as to the settling fixed salaries, the 
circumstances of this province, as to our ability to 
support the government, are at times so different, 
that we fear the settling of fixed salaries will be of 
no service to her Majesty s interest, but may prove 
prejudicial to her Majesty s good subjects here: 
and as it is the native privilege and right of Eng 
lish subjects, by consent of parliament, from time 
to time, to raise and dispose of such sums of 
money, as the present exigency of affairs calls for ; 
which privilege we her Majesty s loyal and duti 
ful subjects have hitherto lived in the enjoyment 
of, so we hope and pray always to enjoy the same 
under our most gracious sovereign and her suc 
cessors." 

The governor then proposed the several matters 
to the council. 

1st, Whether they advised to the building a fort 
at Pemaquid. 

2d, Whether they advised to a contribution to 
wards the charge of Piscataqua fort. 

3d, Whether they advised to the settling a fixed 
salary for the governor and lieutenant-governor for 
the time being. 

And they gave a negative answer to each 
question. 

It was a great disappointment to be able to 
carry neither of these points, which the ministry 
were very much set upon, and which it is not im 
probable they were encouraged might be obtained. 
Had they been matters less unpopular, yet the go 
vernor s weight, at this time, would have been 
scarce sufficient to have carried them through. 
The prejudices against him were great. The 
people in general looked upon him as an enemj , 
even to the privileges of the new charter. Sir 
Henry Ashurst procured an original letter, wrote 
by the governor s son, Paul, who was then at 
torney-general, to Mr. Floyd, and sent it to New 
England, in which were these expressions, " the 
government and college are disposed of here in 
chimney corners and private meetings, as confi 
dently as can be ; this country will never be worth 
living in for lawyers and gentlemen, till the charter 
is taken away. My father and I sometimes talk 
of the queen s establishing a court of chancery in 
this country. I have wrote about it to Mr. Blath- 
wait." Copies were dispersed about the province, 
and the letter was soon after printed. Mr. Dudley 
had no rest the first seven years ; besides the op 
position he met with in his administration, en 
deavours were using, soon after his arrival, to sup 
plant him, and his enemies prevailed upon Sir 
Charles Hobby (who had been knighted as some 
said for fortitude and resolution at the time of the 

VOL. II. 



earthquake in Jamaica, others for the further con 
sideration of 800/. sterling) to go to England and 
solicit for the government. He was recommended 
to Sir II. Ashurst, whoat first gave encouragement 
of success. Hobby was a gay man, a free liver, 
and of very different behaviour from what one 
would have expected should have recommended 
him to the clergy of New England ; and yet, such 
is the force of party prejudice, that it prevails 
over religion itself, and some of the most pious 
ministers strongly urged, in their letters, that he 
might be appointed their governor instead of Dud 
ley ; for which Ashurst himself, after his ac 
quaintance with Hobby, reproves and censures 
them. 

The governor, this year, sent Mr. Livingston, 
William Dudley, the governor s son, and two or 
three other gentlemen, to Canada, for the exchange 
of prisoners; who brought back with them Mr. 
Williams the minister, and many of the inhabi 
tants of Deerfield, with other captives. Vaudreuil, 
the French governor, sent a commissioner to Bos 
ton, with proposals of neutrality, which were 
communicated to the general court, who did not 
think proper to take any steps towards effecting 
it. They wished and hoped, instead of a neutrality, 
for the reduction of Canada ; whereas the employ 
ment given to the French strength in Europe 
might well cause Vaudreuil to fear the want of 
protection, and dispose him to secure himself by a 
neutrality. Dudley, however, kept the matter in 
suspense with Vaudreuil for some time, and to the 
policy of his negociation it was owing, that the 
people upon the frontiers enjoyed remarkable 
tranquillity, and he values himself upon it in his 
speech to the general court. Charlevoix says, 
" it was evident Mr. Dudley had no intention to 
agree, that he was a long time in treaty, and at 
length declared that he could come to no agree 
ment without the consent of the other English co 
lonies ; and .thereupon Vaudreuil caused hostili 
ties to be renewed against &amp;lt;he people of New Eng 
land. He adds, that the Canadians weremnch 
dissatisfied with their governor, for suffering Mr. 
Dudley s son to remain some time at Quebec, under 
pretence of finishing the treaty, and for permitting 
a New England brigantine to go yp and down the 
river." 

(Anno 1706.) Another negociation, the next 
year, had a less desirable effect. William Rowse 
was sent in a small vessel to Nova Scotia, as a 
flag of truce. He tarried there a long time, and 
brought back only 17 prisoners. Being sent a 
second time, he brought no more than seven. M uch 
greater numbers were expected, considering the] 



5;S 



MASSACHUSETTS. 



[time spent in procuring them. Upon his last re 
turn, it was charged upon him, that instead of em 
ploying his time in redeeming captives, he had 
been trading with the enemy, and supplying them 
with ammunition and other stores of war. Rowse, 
upon examination, was committed to prison. 
Samuel Vetch, afterwards Colonel Vetch and go 
vernor of Nora Scotia : John Borland, a merchant 
of note in Boston, and Roger Lawson, were all ap 
prehended and examined, and bound to answer at 
the superior court. There was a general clamour 
through the province ; and it was whispered 
about, that the governor was as deeply concerned 
as any ot the rest, and such reports against a go 
vernor as easily obtain credit, with many, without 
ground as with. The house of representatives 
tofffc the first opportunity of satisfying themselves. 
It was suggested there, that the superior court had 
no cognizance of the offence ; and that admitting 
Nova Scotia to be part of the province, yet it was 
not within the bounds of any county, and there 
was no authority, but the general court, that could 
punish it. (The carrying the goods from Boston, 
and the conspiracy there, were not considered.) 
Beside*, no persons could be supposed to have the 
public interest so much at heart, and none so like 
to search to the bottom. They thereupon resolved, 
that the superior court bad not jurisdiction, and 
that a parliamentary inquiry was necessary ; and, 
in imitation of the house or commons, they framed 
articles of accusation and impeachment against the 
several persons apprehended, for traitorously sup 
plying the queen s enemies, &amp;c. These were signed 
br the speaker, and sent by a committee to the 
council, (June 25), praying, :; that such proceed 
ings, examinations, trial*, and judgments, may be 
ftad and used upon, and relating to the said per 
sons, as is agreeable to law and justice." It was 
expected that the council should proceed, as the 
house of lords do upon an impeachment. No 
wonder the council did not immediately proceed. 
In trying a capital offence it behoved them to be 
well satisfied of their jurisdiction. No notice is 
taken of the affair, in the council books, for above 
a fortnight. The governor sat every day in coun 
cil, and he still continued the practice of directing, 
every day, upon what business the council should 
proceed. It having been reported, that the house, 
in tbeir examination of the prisoners, inquired how 
far the governor was concerned r on the 9th of 
July they passed a vote, vindicating themselves 
from an aspersion cast upon them, as having, in 
the examination of the prisoners, made it the first 
question, whether the governor was not concerned 
with them in, {he unlawful trade ; wickedly insi 



nuating, that the house had suspicion thereof, 
which they declared to be utterly raise ; and they 
thanked his excellency for his utmost readi 
ness and forwardness, upon all occasions, in de 
tecting and discouraffinff all such illegal trade 
and traders. For this the governor gave them 
thanks. 

Before the 13th of July, the house were either 
convinced that the form of proceeding was irregu 
lar, or else that they could not support the charge 
of high treason, and ordered a bill to be brought 
in for inflicting pains and penalties ; some moved 
for a bill of attainder, but the court being near 
rising, a message was sent to the governor, desiring 
that the prisoners charged might be kept in close 
custody until the next session, in order to further 
proceeding against them. 

At the next session, a few weeks after, the per 
sons charged, with two or three other accomplices 
of less note, were brought upon trial before the 
whole court ; the governor s son, Panl Dudley, 
the queen s attorney, supporting the charge. The 
prisoners wee heard by council in their defence. 
The court pronounced them all to be guilty, and 
then proceeded to determine their punishment. 
A committee of the two houses reported a fine of 
1000/. on Mr. Borland and three months imprison 
ment ; 3507. on Roger Law son and three months im 
prisonment : 400 . on Samuel Vetch and one year s 
imprisonment : 1000/. on \Villhro Rowse. one year s 
imprisonment, and incapacity of sustaining any of 
fice of public trust ; IOO/. on John Phillips, jun. 
and one year s imprisonment ; and IOO/. on Ebe- 
nezer Coffin. The house accepted this report, 
with an addition to Rowse s punishment, that he 
sit an hour upon the gallows with a rope about 
his neck ; but the board disagreed to and reduced 
all the fines except Rowse s, and disagreed to the 
infamous part of his punishment. After a confer 
ence between the two houses, they settled the pe- 
nahies as follows, viz. on Vetch a fine of 900^. ; 
Borland I IOO/. ; Larson 3001 ; Rowse ISOO/. 
and incapacity ; Phillips IOO/. ; and Coffin 60/. : 
all to stand committed until the fines and costs of 
prosecution were paid: and six separate acts 
passed the whole court for these purposes. By a 
clause in the charter, the general court is em 
powered to impose fines, imprisonments, and other 
punishments, and in consequence of this clause the 
proceeding was thought to be regular; but the 
queen did not think so, and these acts were disal 
lowed. The governor was under a disadvantage, 
any obstruction to the two houses would have been 
improved as an evidence of the truth of the re 
ports of his being par ticeps criminis ; bis compli-] 



MASSACHUSETTS 



579 



[ance did not satisfy the people. An ill impression 
against persons in authority is not easily effaced. 
Several persons, some in Boston, the most in Lon 
don, signed a petition, full of invectives against 
the governor, which was presented to the queen. 
Upon information of this petition, the council and 
house of representatives passed votes, declaring 
their sense of the injury done the governor by the 
persons signing this petition or address. Mr. Hiff- 
ginson, who was at the head of the petitioners, was 
originally of New England, and educated at Har 
vard college ; afterwards he travelled to the East 
Indies, and upon bis return became a merchant in 
London, was a member of the corporation for 
propagating the gospel among the Indians of New 
England, &amp;c. and had so good interest, that some 
persons of note, by their letters, signified that thev 
thought the two houses impolitic in the severity of 
their expressions, which, from being their friend, 
might at least cause him to become cool and indif 
ferent. 

Besides this petition, a pamphlet from New 
England appeared about the same time in Lon 
don, charging the governor with treasonable cor 
respondence, and it was expected that his ene 
mies would prevail. Mr. Povey wrote to him 
from London, that he must prepare to receive the 
news of being superseded ; but he was so fortu 
nate, as either to convince the queen and her mi 
nisters of his innocence, or by some other means to 
lay the storm which had been raised against him. 
The charge of supply ing the enemy with ammunition 
is incredible. Those persons who were convicted, 
had he been an accomplice, would have discovered 
him. He left them to suffer such punishment as 
the court thought proper to inflict. There was no 
certainty that the acts would be repealed, and, 
after they were repealed, some remained long in 
prison ; Rowse lay there IS months, unable to find 
security. The whole that appeared upon the trial, 
was an invoice of 100,000 of nails, which, at 
the request of the governor of Port Royal, Mr. 
Dudley allowed to be shipped. This was founda 
tion enough, though in no degree criminal, to 
give rise to all the calumny. It is not improbable, 
from the remonstrance of Mr. Sewall, who was a 
person of great integrity, that connivance might be 
shewn of some supplies of merchandise, and that 
this indulgence might be abused to the supply of 
powder, shot, &amp;c. contrary to the governor s mind. 
It was the ffeneral opinion that, without these snp- 
plies, the French could not have proceeded in their 
expedition against Newfoundland, where the har 
bours this year were much spoiled, and great loss 
and damage was sustained, not bj the Europeans 



only, but by the New Englanders, who had then 
large commerce there. 

That we might finish what relates to this prose 
cution, which was a subject of conversation for 
many years after, we have been led a year or two 
forward. We meet with no remarkable devasta 
tions by the enemy in 1705, but in April 1706 
they renewed their inroads, and murdered eizbt or 
10 people in one house at Ovster river. There 
was a garrison house near, where the women of 
the neighbourhood had retreated, their husbands 
being abroad at their labour, or absent upon other 
occasions. This house being attacked, the women 
put on their husbands hats and jackets, and let 
their hair loose to make the appearance of men ; 
and firing briskly from the flankarts, saved the 
house and caused the enemy to retreat. 

Col. Schuyler gave intelligence of 270 men hav 
ing marched from the frontiers of Canada, which 
was an alarm to all the frontiers of New England ; 
for it was uncertain upon which part they would 
fall. They made their first appearance upon Mer- 
rimack river, about D unstable, surprised and 
burned a garrison bouse there, in which 20 soldiers 
were posted, and did other mischief. Five of 
their Indians, probably from the same party, ven 
tured down as far as Reading, about 15 or 18 
miles from Boston, surprised a poor woman, who 
had eight children with her in a lone cottage, kill 
ed the woman and three of the children, and car 
ried away the rest : but the distant inhabitants 
were alarmed time enough to overtake them in 
their retreat, and recovered three of the children. 
Chelmsford, Sudbury, Groton, Exeter, Dover, 
and other plantations, had more or less of their 
people killed or taken ; some of the latter the/ 
murdered before they could reach Canada, other* 
very narrowly escaping. A poor woman, Re 
becca Taylor, after the misery of a Ion? travel to 
St. Lawrence river, near to Montreal, having- of 
fended her Indian master, he took off his bell and 
fastened one end of it round her neck, and threw 
the other over the limb of a tree, but the weight of 
her body broke the limb. He was making a sec-cud 
attempt, when the noted Bomazeen came by and 
rescued her. In their march, their hunting- foiling, 
they were kindling a fire to roast a child of one 
Hannah Parsons, when a strange dog falling ia 
their way supplied the child s place. A Groton 
soldier, Samuel Butterfield, defended himself 
bravely and killed one of iheir chiefs. This oc 
casioned a dispute about (he kind of punishment, 
some being for burning alive, others for whipping 
to death. It was left io the dead man s widow to 
determine it. She told them, that if kiLing thej 
4 E 2 



580 



MASSACHUSETTS. 



[prisoner would bring her husband to life she cared 
not what kind of death he suffered, bat, if not, 
she desired to have him for a slave, and her re 
quest was granted. 

It appears, by the French accounts, that the 
Indians themselves were tired of the war, and with 
great difficulty were prevailed upon to continue 
it. To encourage them, a noted chief, dreaded by 
the English upon the frontiers from the report of 
his cruelties, Nescambouit, was about this time 
sent by M. Vaudreuil to France, to receive his 
reward from the king himself. Upon his appear 
ance at court, beheld out his arm and bragged, 
that with that arm he had slain 150 of his Majes 
ty s enemies. The king was so much pleased, 
that, as was then reported, he knighted him, and 
settled a pension of eight livres per day for life. 

Charlevoix attributes the distress of the New 
Englanders to their refusal of a neutrality. " The 
Abenakis continued to lay New England desolate ; 
Mr. Dudley either being unwilling or afraid to ac 
cept the neutrality which had been proposed for 
that province. He was much affected with the 
cries of the inhabitants, who were no longer able 
to improve their lands, which were continually 
ravaged by the Indians, and he thought the only 
way to put an end to this distress was to extirpate 
the French from Acadia." 

(Anno 1707.) Dudley depended upon the 
French being extirpated from Canada, as well as 
Acadia, otherwise he would have been glad of a 
neutrality, if he could have had the queen s leave 
to agree to it. It was known that an armament 
was intended this year from England against the 
French, either in Canada or Acadia, or both. 
Troops were actually destined for this service, and 
general Macartney was to have commanded ; but 
the battle of Almanza, in Spain, made such an al 
teration in affairs, that the troops could not be 
spared, and the expedition was laid aside. The 
Massachusetts would have been ready with the 
forces expected from them ; and it was determined, 
early in the spring, that such a number of men 
should be raised, as might be sufficient for the re 
duction of Acadia, although no assistance came 
from England. At least the other parts of Nova 
Scotia might be ravaged ; but for Port Royal, it 
was doubted whether it could be subdued : how 
ever, the fortress there was " to be insulted, if by 
a council of war upon the place it should be found 
practicable." 

One thousand men, it was resolved, should be 
raised in the Massachusetts, and proposals were 
made to New Hampshire, Connecticut, and Rhode 
island to join. Counecticut declined. The other 



two governments assisted, and Mr. Dudley, in his 
speech to the assembly, acknowledges that he had 
received a very honourable assistance from Rhode 
island, and a proper force from New Hampshire. 
The naval force was barely sufficient for convoy, 
there being only the Deptford man of war, Cap 
tain Stukeley, and the province galley, Captain 
Southack. The command of the land forces was 
given to Colonel March, who had behaved well st 
Casco fort, and upon some other occasions ; but 
had never been tried in any service where other 
talents, besides mere natural bravery, were neces 
sary. The fleet sailed from Boston the 13th of 
May, and arrived the 26th at Port Royal. March 
immediately landed, with 700 men, on the harbour 
side; Colonel Appleton, with 300 men, landing 
on the other side. The next day, as March with 
his men were advancing towards the fort, they dis 
covered about 200 of the enemy, with Subercas, 
the governor, at their head, near the top of a hill. 
A short skirmish ensued, and Subercas had his 
horse killed under him ; but the numbers being 
very unequal, the French soon retreated, leaving 
two of their number killed, and having wounded 
three of the English. On the 29th, Appleton and 
his 300 men were attacked by a body of Indians, 
joined by about 60 Canadians, who had arrived 
just before to man a privateer which lay in the 
harbour. They killed two of the English, and 
then retreated. All the inhabitants forsook their 
houses and retired to the fort, which was well gar 
risoned. They made a continual fire with cannon 
and mortars upon the English camp ; but wanted 
skilful engineers ; very few of their shells falling 
so as to be any annoyance. The Indians, upon 
every quarter skulking about, shot down every 
man who ventured without the camp. It is evi 
dent that our forces were very diffident of success 
from their first landing; and the army would in a 
great measure have saved their reputation, if, in 
conformity to the vote of the court for engaging 
in the expedition, they had, at a council of war, 
determined not to attack the fort, and proceeded 
to ravage the country. Some intelligence which 
they had received of the disposition of great part 
of the garrison to revolt, seems to have encou 
raged them, more than any hopes they had of be 
ing able to reduce the place by a regular siege or 
sudden attack. The 13th of May, at a council 
of war, it was agreed, " that the enemy s well dis 
ciplined garrison, in a strong fort, was more than 
a match for our raw undisciplined army." They 
opened their trenches, notwithstanding, and in 
three or four days they had made some breaches, 
and determined upon a general assault ; but, ad-} 



M A S S A C H U S E T T S. 



581 



[vancing towards the fort, and finding no deserters 
come over, they altered their minds, and the 6th or 
7th of June the whole army were reimbarked. 
Colonel Redknap, the engineer, and Colonel Ap- 
pleton, went to Boston for further orders ; the rest 
of the army to Casco bay. A great clamour was 
raised at Boston against March and Wainwright, 
and letters were sent them from thence, some ano 
nymous, vilifying them as cowards and deserving 
the gallows. They charged Appldon with being 
the (irst for decamping, but own it would have 
been to no good purpose to have remained ; as 
there was no prospect of carrying the fort. Cap 
tain Stukely, of the Dcptford, gave an account of 
the strength of the place, and added, that he 
hoped the fighting men at Boston, who had wrote 
so many scurrilous, vilifying letters, without 
names, would be satisfied, that regular, well forti 
fied, and well defended forts, are not to be fnken 
by raw men ; and he was very certain, that 1500 of 
the best of them would corne back again as the 
army had done. 

Mr. Dudley, notwithstanding the diffidence ex 
pressed, thought of nothing short of the reduction 
of Port Royal from the beginning; and after so 
great expence in raising such an armed force, and 
so little diminution of it, he was loth to give over 
the design, and sent immediate orders for the forces 
to remain where they were, whilst he considered of 
further measures. March was beloved by the sol 
diers ; besides, his courage was not suspected, 
although his capacity for a general was called in 
question. It was not, therefore, thought proper to 
recal him; to appoint a general officer over him 
would be as exceptionable. An expedient was 
pitched upon, suggested perhaps by the practice 
of the Dutch. Three gentlemen of the council 
were to be sent to the army, with as full powers to 
superintend and direct the proceedings as the go 
vernor himself would have had if present in per 
son. Colonel Hutchinson, Colonel Townsend, and 
Mr. Leverett, were pitched upon for this purpose. 
They embarked the middle of July in Captain 
Gerrish, with about 100 recruits and several de 
serters, \vho had left the army at Casco. Upon 
their arrival they found parties formed among of 
ficers and men, no subordination, a coldness in 
the officers, and an aversion in the privates to a 
return to the ground they had left. But, it seems, 
the governor had made a point of it, that, at all 
events, the army should go back. 

There was found a round robin among Colonel 
Hutchinson s papers, signed by a gre;it number, 
peremptorily refusing to go to Port Royal; but 
the ringleaders being discovered and secured, whilst 



their sentence was under consideration the rest 
humbled themselves and submitted, and the ihips 
of war and transports sailed. They stopped at 
Passirnaqnadi about the 7th of August. March s 
spirits were broke and his healili affected, so that 
when the disposition was making for landing the 
army he declared himself incapable of acting, and 
the command was given to Wainwright, the next 
officer. The 10th of August they crossed over to 
Port Royal, where they landed, but on the oppo 
site side to the fort, and in every respect in a 
much worse condition than before. The nights 
were growing cold, the men sickening, and the 
army, in general, incapable of sustaining the fa 
tigues of a siege. Wainwright s letter to the com 
missioners, August 14th, shews the state they 
were in. " Our not recovering the intended 
ground on the opposite side is a mighty advantage 
to the enemy, in that they have opportunity, and 
are improving it, for casting up trenches in the 
very place where we designed to land and draw 
up our small forces. Yesterday the French, 
about eight of the clock forenoon, on the fort 
point, with a small party of St. John s Indians, 
began to fire on our river guards, and so conti 
nued until about three afternoon. Then appeared 
about 100 Indians and French upon the same 
ground, who kept continually firing at us until 
dark. Several were shot through their clothes, 
and one Indian through the thigh. About four 
in the afternoon I suflered a number of men, about 
40 or 50, to go down to the bank of the river to 
cut thatch to cover their tents. All returned well, 
except nine of Captain Dirnmock s men, who were 
led away by one Mansfield, a mad fellow, to the 
next plantation to get cabbages in a garden, with 
out the leave and against the will ot his officer. 
They were no sooner at their plunder, but they 
were surrounded by at least 100 French and In 
dians, who in a few minutes killed every one of 
them, their bodies being mangled in a frightful man 
ner. Our people buried them, and fired twice 
upon the enemy; on which they were seen to run 
towards our out-guards next the woods, which 
we immediately strengthened. Indeed, the French 
have reduced us to the same state to which we re- 
duced them at our last being at Port Royal j sur 
rounded with enemies, and judging it unsafe to 
proceed on any service without a company of at 
least 100 men. I shall now give you a short ac 
count of the state of our people, truly, as deli 
vered me by Dr. Ellis. There is a considerable 
number of them visited with violent fluxes, and 
although we have things proper to give them, yet 
dare not do it ; others taken with mighty swellings] 



582 



MASSACHUSETTS. 



[in their throats ; others filled with terror at the 
consideration of a fatal event of the expedition, 
concluding that, in a short time, there will not be 
well enough to carry off the sick. 

." I am distressed to know which way to keep 
the Indians steady to the service. They protest 
they will draw off, whatever becomes of them. It 
is truly astonishing to behold the miserable pos 
ture and temper that most of the army are in, be 
sides the smallness of our number, to be attacked 
by the enemy, which we expect exery moment. 

" I am much disordered in my health by a 
great cold. I shall not use it as an argument to be 
drawn of myself, but, as you are masters of the 
affair, lay before you the true state of the army, 
which indeed is very deplorable. 1 should much 
rejoice lo see some of you here, that you might be 
proper judges of it. 

" If we had the transports with us it would be 
impossible, without a miracle, to recover the 
ground on the other side, and I believe the French 
have additional strength every day ; in fine, most 
of the forces are in a distressed state, some in body 
and some in mind, and the longer they are kept 
here on the cold ground, the longer it will grow 
upon them, and, 1 fear, the further we proceed the 
worse the event. God help us." 

Captain Stukeley had given encouragement, 
that he would lead on 100 of his own men ; 
but the bad state of affairs caused him to change 
his mind, and he had drawn them off before the 
date of this letter. 

The army continued ashore until the 20th, when 
they re-imbarked. The enemy then attacked 
them. The Massachusetts accounts say, that they 
killed and wounded many of the enemy, and finally 
put them to flight. The French say, that both 
retreated by turns. Each seem to have been glad 
to be rid of the other. About 16 were killed in 
the whole expedition, and as many wounded. The 
French, finding so few dead bodies, supposed 
the others were thrown into the sea. 

When the forces returned, Mr. Dudley put the 
best face upon their ill success. In his speech to the 
assembly he says, " though we have not obtained 
all that we desired against the enemy, yet we are to 
acknowledge the favour of God in preserving our 
forces in the expedition, and prospering them so 
far as the destruction of the French settlements 
and estates, in and about Port Royal, to a great 
value ; which must needs distress the enemy to a 
very great degree." 

A court martial was judged necessary, and order 
ed, but never met. The act of the province, for 
constituting courts martial, made so many officers 



requisite, that it was found impracticable to hold 
one. This must be owing to the great number of 
persons charged, the remainder being insufficient 
to try them. 

Whilst the forces were employed against the 
French, the Indians kept harassing the frontiers. 
Oyster River, Exeter, Kingston, and Dover in New 
Hampshire government, and Berwick, York, 
Wells, Winter Harbour, Casco, and even the 
inland town of Marlborough, in the Massachuselts, 
sustained loss. The winter following passed without 
molestation. 

(Anno 1708.) Early in the spring, Mr. Little- 
field, the lieutenant of Wells, travelling to York, 
was taken and carried to Canada. For several 
months after, the enemy seemed to have forsaken 
the frontiers. It afterwards appeared, that they 
were collecting their forces in Canada for some 
important stroke. 

Schuyler had such influence over, the French 
Mohawks, who kept a constant trade with Albany, 
that they inclined to a more general peace with the 
English than merely those of New York. The 
French discovered their indifference, and, to keep 
them engaged, a grand council was called at Mont 
real the beginning of this year, and an expedition 
was agreed upon, in which were to be employed 
the principal Indians of every tribe in Canada, the 
Abenakis Indians, and 100 select French Cana 
dians, and a number of volunteers, several of whom 
were officers in the French troops. They were to 
make in the whole 400 men. 

De Chaillons and Hertel de Rouville (he who 
sacked Deerfielcl) commanded the French, and La 
Perriere the Indians. To give the less alarm to 
the English, the French party, with the Algonquin 
and St. Francois and Huron Indians, marched by 
the way of the river St. Francois ; La Perriere 
and the French Mohawks went by lake Champlain. 
They were to rendezvous at lake Nikisipique, and 
there the Norridgewock, Penobscot, and other 
e. Indians were to join them. They all began 
their march the 16th July, but the Hurons gave 
out and returned before they arrived at St. 
Fran9ois river. One of them had killed his com 
panion by accident, which they thought an ill 
omen, and that the expedition would prove unfor 
tunate. The Mohawks also pretended, that some 
of their number were taken sick of an infectious 
distemper, which would be communicated to the 
rest, and they returned. Vaudreuil, when he 
heard tnese accounts, sent orders to his French 
officers, that, although the Algonquin and St. 
Francois Indians should leave them also, yet they 
should go on and fall upon some of the scattered] 
2 



MASSACHUSETTS. 



583 



[settlements. When the Indians were tired of 
murdering poor helpless women and children, 
Vaudreuil employed his French officers to do it. 
Those Indians, however, did not leave them, and, 
being about 200 in all, they marched between 
400 and 500 miles through the woods to Nikipisi- 
que, where they found none of the e. Indians. 
This was a happy disappointment for the English. 
Had the whole proposed number rendezvoused 
there, Newbury, or perhaps Portsmouth, might 
have been surprised and destroyed ; but, the 
army being thus reduced, Haverhill, a small but 
compact village was pitched upon. Intelligence 
had been carried to Boston, that an army of 800 
men was intended for some part of the frontiers, 
but it was uncertain which. Guards were sent to 
Haverhill, as well as other places ; but they were 
posted in the most exposed parts of the town, and 
the enemy avoided them, or passed undiscovered, 
and on the 29th of August, about break of day, 
surprised the body of the town, adjoining to 
Merrimack river, where were 20 or 30 houses 
together, several of which they burned, and 
attempted to burn the meeting-house, but failed. 
The rest of the houses they ransacked and plunder 
ed. Mr. Rolfe the minister, Wainwright the 
captain of (he town, and 30 or 40 more, the French 
say about iOO, were killed, and many taken pri 
soners. Mr. Rolfe s maid jumped out of bed, 
upon the alarm, and ran with his two daughters 
of six or eighl years old into the cellar, and cover 
ed them with two l;trge tubs, which the Indians 
neglected to turnover, and they were both preserved. 
Three very good officers were at that time in the 
town, Major Turner, Captain Price, and Captain 
Gardner, all of Salem, but most of their men were 
posted at a distance, and before any sufficient 
number could be collected, the mischief was done. 
The enemy, however, was pursued, overtaken, and 
attacked just as they were entering the woods. 
The French reported, when they got back, that 
they faced about, and that our people, being 
astonished, were all killed or taken, except 10 or 
12, who escaped. The truth is, that there was a 
brush, whicli lasted about an hour, and that the 
enemy then took to the woods, except nine who 
were left dead, among whom was Rouville s bro 
ther, and another officer. Many of the prisoners 
were also recovered . The governor in his speech 
to the assembly says, " we might have done more 
against them if we had followed their tracks." 

The return of the French Mohawks might be 
owing to Schuyler s negociations with them, which, 
it may be said, he would have had no opportunity 
for, if it had not been for the neutrality between 



them and Albany; but, on the other hand, not 
only those Indians, at other times, but even the 
Penobscots and Norridgewocks, were enabled by 
this neutrality to make their inroads upon us. The 
governor of Port Royal, in a letter to the Count 
dePontchartrain, says, "thatthe Michmacks were 
quite naked, and the Kennebeckans and Penobscots 
would have been so too, if they had not carried 
on a trade with the Indians of Hudson s river, 
or rather by their means with the English, who 
allowed a crown a pound for beaver, and sold 
their goods very reasonably." Charlevoix justly 
remarks upon it, " thus our own enemies relieved 
our most faithful allies, when thay were in necessity, 
and whilst they were every day hazarding their 
lives in our service." The Massachusetts general 
court also, this year, in an address to the queen, 
say, " A letter from M. Vaudreuil, governor of 
Canada, to the late governor of Port Royal, was 
some time since happily intercepted, and came to 
our governor s hands; wherein he writes thus, 
namely, that he endeavours to keep all quiet on 
the side of Orange or Albany, having command 
from the king his master not to have any quarrel 
with your Majesty s subjects on that side, or with 
the Mohawks, which he hath strictly observed. 
And they are in a profound peace, having met 
with little or no loss on the land side, either in men 
or estates, this war." 

The enemy were satisfied with their success at 
Haverhill for this season, and, except now and 
then a straggling Indian, none of them appeared 
again upon the frontiers this summer. 

The party against the governor still pursued 
their schemes in England for his removal . Ashurst 
engaged a committee of the kirk of Scotland, who 
came up to London to settle some affairs with the 
queen s council, to use their interest, that Dudley 
might be removed and a new governor appointed ; 
and he was very sanguine that this would do the 
business, and that Hobby would be appointed, 
though not such a person as he could wish ; but 
the earth, he says, must help the woman : which 
too often means no more than we must do evil that 
good may come of it. In the province the 
governor s interest was strengthening. Some of 
the old senators, who had been disaffected to him, 
were left out of the council. Oakes, whom he had 
negatived as speaker, and one other member for 
Boston, lost their election, .and John Clark and 
Thomas Hutchinson, two young gentlemen of 
the town, who were under no prejudice against 
him, came into the house in their stead; and 
although this year Mr. Cooke was again chosen one 
of the council, it was the last effort. The governor] 



584 



MASSACHUSETTS. 



[persisted in negativing him, and at the same time 
negatived Nathaniel Paine of Bristol : but he had 
so accustomed them to negatives, that they gave 
less offence than they would have done after long 
disuse. 

The principal subject of the assembly s address, 
which we have just before mentioned, to the queen, 
was the reduction of Canada and Acadia by an 
armament from England, to be assisted by forces 
raised in the colonies. Vetch, who the last year 
was charged as a traitor, this year appeared before 
the queen and her ministers, soliciting in behalf of 
the colonies ; being able to give a full information 
of the condition of the French in America. 

(Anno 1709.) Early in the spring, Mr. Dudley 
\vas advised, by letters from the Earl of Sunder- 
land, that the queen had determined upon an 
expedition, and Vetch, made a colonel, came over 
with instructions to make the necessary prepa 
rations. The plan was extensive. The French 
were to be subdued, not only in Canada and Acadia, 
but in Newfoundland also. A squadron of ships 
were to be at Boston by the middle of May. Five 
regiments of regular troops were to be sent from 
England, to be joined by 1200 men, to be raised 
in Massachusetts and Rhode island, and the govern 
ments were to provide transports, flat-bottomed 
boats, pilots, and three months provisions for their 
own troops. With this force Quebec was to be 
attacked ; at the same time 1500 men, proposed 
to be raised in the governments s. of Rhode island, 
which were to march by the way of the lake, were 
to attack Montreal. The men assigned to the 
Massachusetts to raise, were ready by the 20th of 
May ; and Vetch gave a certificate under his hand, 
that all the governments concerned had cheerfully 
and punctually complied with the orders given, 
except Pennsylvania. It was left to Lord Lovelace, 
governor of New York, to appoint the general 
officer for the 1500 men, but, by his death, the 
power devolved upon Mr. Ingoldsby, the lieutenant- 
governor ; and N icholson , who had been lieutenant- 
governor of New York under Andros, and after 
wards lieutenant-governor of Virginia and Mary 
land, being then in America, was pitched upon 
as a proper person, and marched with the forces 
under his command as far as Wood creek, there 
to wait until the arrival of the fleet at Boston, 
that the attack on both places might be made at 
one time. The transports and troops lay waiting 
at Boston from May to September, every day 
expecting the fleet. No intelligence coming from 
England, Vetch, being sensible it was too late to 
go to Canada, proposed a meeting, at New Lon 
don, of the governors of the several colonies, to 



consider in what other way the forces raised should 
be employed against the enemy, that the expeac- 
might not be wholly lost ; but Nicholson nnexe 
pectcdly returned with his men from Wood creek, 
and he and Vetch and Colonel Moody met some 
of the governors at Rhode island. Two or three 
days before the congress, (October the llth), a ship 
arrived at Boston from England, with advices that 
the forces intended for America were ordered to 
Portugal, and with directions to consult whether 
the forces raised in America might not be employed 
against Port Royal ; the ships of war, of which there 
were several then at Boston, to be aiding and assist 
ing. There was no great honour or profit to be 
expected by the captains of the men of war, if 
the expedition should succeed, nothing more being 
required of them than to serve as convoy to the 
transports, and cover to the forces at their landing ; 
therefore two of the frigates, whose station was 
New York, sailed immediately from Boston, 
without taking leave of any body, and the com 
manders of the rest, Mathews, afterwards Admiral 
Matbews, who was then commander of the station 
ship at Boston, only exccpted, peremptorily refus 
ed. As soon as this was known to the two houses, 
the court being sitting, they desired the governor 
to discharge the transports and disband the men, 
it not being safe to proceed without convoy. This 
was a heavy charge upon the province without 
any good effect. It was indeed late in the year 
for the attempt against Port Royal, but then the 
prospect of surprising the enemy was so much the 
greater ; and if it had happened otherwise, and the 
forces had returned without subduing the place, 
it would have caused but little increase of the 
expence. 

Whilst Nicholson lay at Wood creek, the gover 
nor of Canada, who had intelligence of all his mo 
tions, sent out an army of 1500 French and Indians, 
who left Montreal the 28th July, N. S. and the 
three first days advanced 40 leagues towards the 
English camp ; but upon a report that they were 
5000 strong, and upon the march to meet the 
French, and there being discoid at the same time 
among the French officers, it was thought best to 
return to their advanced posts, and wait to receive 
the English there. Had they proceeded, they 
were equal to the English, better acquainted with 
the country, would have come unexpected, and 
the vent would at least have been doubtful for 
us. 

Charlovoix gives an instance of the treachery 
of the Indians of the Six Nations, and of their 
intention to destroy the whole English army. 
Speaking of father Mareuil, who had been a] 



MASSACHUSETTS. 



585 



[prisoner at Albany, he says, " this missionary 
having been exchanged for a nephew of the 
principal officer at Albany, we learned from him 
all the circumstances of that affair, and to what 
New Fiance owed her deliverance from the greatest 
danger to which she had been at any time exposed 
from that quarter." Then having mentioned a grand 
council of the Indians, held at Onondago, where all 
their general meetings upon important matters were 
held, he goes on, " the Onondago, one of the old 
men of that nation, who was the speaker, asked 
whether it was out of their minds that they were 
situated between two potent people, either of which 
were capable of totally extirpating them, and that 
it would be the interest of either to do it, as soon 
as they should have no further occasion for them. 
It behoved them therefore to be very careful, that 
they did not lose their importance, which they 
would do, unless each of these people were prevent 
ed from destroying the other. This harangue made 
great impression upon the assembly, and it was 
resolved, upon this occasion, to continue the 
political conduct which they had hitherto observed. 
Accordingly, the Iriquois, when they had joined 
the English army, and found, as they imagined, 
that it would be strong enough to take Montreal, 
employed their whole attention in contriving the 
destruction of it ; and this was the way they Avent 
to work. The army being encamped upon the 
banks of a small river, the Indians, who spent 
most of their time in hunting, threw the skins of 
all the creatures which they flead into the river, 
a little above the camp, which soon corrupted the 
water. The English never suspected this treachery, 
and continued to drink the water; but it caused 
such a mortality among them, that Father de 
Mareuil, and the two officers who went to fetch 
him from Albany to Canada, judged, by the 
graves, that there must have been at least 1000 
buried there." 

Nicholson certainly decamped sooner than was 
expected, which caused some dissatisfaction. The 
army was in a bad state. A letter dated New 
York, November 4th, 1709, says, that many of 
the soldiers who were at the lake died as if they 
had been poisoned. *- 

Although the French were in constant expecta 
tion of being attacked themselves, yet it did not 
take them oh 1 from employing some of their strength 
this summer against the New England frontiers. 
In April, a man was taken prisoner" at Deerfield. 
In May, several men were surprised and taken, as 
they were passing to a saw-mill in Exeter ; and in 
June, one of the Rouvilles, with 180 French and 
Indians, made another attempt upon Deerfield, to 

YOL. II. 



destroy or carry away prisoners the poor people, 
Avho but a little while before had returned from 
their captivity ; but the enemy was discovered at 
a distance and beat off, the inhabitants bravely de 
fending themselves. The town of Brookfield, in 
the w. and Wells, in the e. soon after lost some 
of their people by small parties of Indians. 

(Anno 17 JO.) Nicholson went to England in 
the fall, to solicit a force against Canada the next 
year, and an expedition seems to have been again 
resolved upon. Advice was received in New 
England, that in July Lord Shannon, with a fleet 
destined for that service, lay under orders for 
sailing, but that it was feared the w. winds would 
detain him until it was too late. Port Royal, 
which did not require so great force, and which 
might be attempted late in the year, was after 
wards made the only object. The Dragon and 
Falmouth, with a bomb ship and a tender, and 
two or three transports, left England in the spring, 
and Nicholson was on board one of them. They 
arrived at Boston July the 15th, and seem to have 
lain waiting there for orders, or until it should be 
made certain whether they were to be joined by 
any further force from England. On the 18th of 
September, a fleet sailed from Nantasket for Port 
Royal, consisting of three fourth rates, viz. the 
Dragon, Commodore Martin, the Chester, Mat 
thews, the Falmouth, Riddle; two fifth rates, 
the LeostafFe, Gordon, and the Feversham, Pas- 
ton, together with the Star bomb, Rochfort, and 
the province galley, Southack, with 14 transports 
in the pay of the Massachusetts, five of Connec 
ticut, two of New Hampshire, and three of 
Rhode island. These, with the tender and trans 
ports from England, made 36 sail. There was a 
regiment of marines, commanded by Colonel 
Redding, and four regiments raised in New Eng 
land, two commanded by Sir Charles Hobby and 
Colonel Tailer of Massachusetts bay, one by 
Colonel Whiting of Connecticut, and one by 
Colonel Walton of New Hampshire. Nicholson 
was general, and Vetch adjutant-general. One 
transport, Captain Taye, ran ashore at the mouth 
of the river and was lost, and 26 men were drown 
ed, the rest of the fleet arrived safe at Port Royal 
the 21th of September. The forces were landed 
without any opposition. Subercase, the governor, 
had only 260 men, and most of them he was afraid 
to trust out of the fort, lest they should desert to 
the English. As the army was marching up to 
the fort, several men were killed by the inhabitants, 
who fired from their houses and from behind their 
fences and made their escape ; and for three or 
four days, whilst the necessary preparations were] 
4 F 



586 



MASSACHUSETTS. 



[making by the English, the French threw shells 
and shot from the fort, and the bomb ship, on the 
other hand, plied the French with her shells. It 
was commonly said, after the return of the forces 
to Boston, that early intimation was given to the 
English that they would meet with no great diffi 
culty, a decent pretence for a surrender was all 
that was desired. On the 29th, the governor sent 
out a flag of truce, praying leave for some of his 
ladies, who were afraid, of the bombs, to be shel 
tered in the English camp. The officer, not ob 
serving the rules of war, was put under arrest, 
and an English officer sent to the fort to acquaint 
the governor with the reason of it. The 1st of 
October, the two engineers Forbes and Redknap 
had three batteries open, two mortars and 24 co- 
horn mortars ready, within 100 yards of the fort, 
and began their tiring, the French firing their 
shot and throwing shells at the same time. The 
same day, Colonel Tailer and Captain Abercrom- 
bie were sent with a summons to surrender, and in 
consequence thereof, a cessation of arms was 
agreed upon, and the terms of the capitulation 
were soon settled, and the next day the following 
articles signed. 

" Articles of capitulation agreed upon for the sur 
render of the fort at Port Royal, &amp;c. betwixt 
Francis Nicholson, Esq. general and com 
mander in chief of all the forces of her sacred 
Majesty Anne, Queen of Great Britain, &amp;c. 
and Monsieur Subercase, governor, &amp;c. for his 
most Christian Majesty. 

" 1. That the garrison shall march out with 
their arms and baggage, drums beating and colours 
flying. 

" 2. That there shall be a sufficient number of 
ships and provisions to transport the said garrison 
to Rochelle or Rochfort, by the shortest passage, 
when they shall be furnished with passports for their 
return. 

* 3. That I may take out six guns and two 
mortars, such as I shall think fit. 

(t 4. That the officers shall carry out all their 
effects, of what sort soever, except they do agree 
to the selling them ; the payment of which to be 
upon good faith. 

"5. That the inhabitants, within cannon shot 
of Port Royal, shall remain upon their estates, 
with their corn, cattle, and furniture, during two 
years, in case they are not desirous to go before, 
they taking the oaths of allegiance and fidelity to 
her .sacred Majesty of (ireat Britain. 

" 6. That a vessel be provided for the privateers 
belonging to the islands in America, for their 
transportation thither. 



" 7. That those that are desirous to go for 
Placentia in Newfoundland, shall have leave by 
the nearest passage. 

" 8. That the Canadians, or those that are de 
sirous of going there, may, during the space of one 
year. 

" 9. That effects, ornaments, and utensils of 
the chapel arid hospital shall be delivered to the 
almoner. 

" JO. I promise to deliver the fort of Port 
Royal into the hands of Francis Nicholson, Esq. 
for the queen of Great Britain, within three days 
after the ratification of this present treaty, witirall 
the effects belonging to the king, as guns, mortars, 
bombs, ball, powder, and all other small arms. 

" 11. I will discover, upon my faith, all the 
mines, fugasses, and casemates. 

" 12. All the articles of this present treaty shall 
be executed upon good faith, without difficulty, 
and signed by each other at her Majesty of Great 
Britain s camp before Port Royal fort, this second 
day of October, in the ninth year of her Majesty s 
reign, Annoque Domini 1710. 

" FRANCIS NICHOLSON. 
" SUBLRCASE. 

" Memorandum. The general declared, that 
within cannon shot of Port Royal, in the 5th 
article above said, is to be understood three Eng 
lish miles round the fort to Annapolis Royal, 
and the inhabitants within three miles to have the 
benefit of that article. Which persons, male and 
female, comprehended in the said article, accord 
ing to a list of their names given in to the general 
by M. Allein, amounts to 481 persons." 

The English lost 14 or 15 men in the expedi 
tion, besides the 26 drowned when the transport 
was lost. The fort had been neglected and was in 
a very bad state. Subercase told the general " he 
was very sorry for the king his master, in losing 
such a strong fort and the territories adjoining." 
This was the compliment to Nicholson, but it was 
in no condition to stand a siege. Charlevoix says, 
" Subercase s character suffered a great shock." 
He mentions several actions which other accounts 
take no notice of. t( The troops being landed and 
nothing to oppose their march, went on towards 
the fort ; but when they came within reach of the 
cannon, the governor caused so smart a firing^ as 
put them to a stand, killed a great many of their 
men, &amp;c." Again, " the 8th (N.S.) M. Suber 
case, having observed the spot where the enemy 
were about to erect their batteries, made so lucky 
a fire that Mr. Nicholson, after having lost a great 
many men, was obliged to retreat." 

The general having left a sufficient garrison] 



MASSACHUSETTS. 



587 



[under the command of Colonel Vetch, who was 
destined, in case of success, to the government of 
the country, returned with the fleet and army to 
Boston, arriving there the 26th of October. 

Whilst the forces were at Port Royal, it was 
thought proper at a council of war to send Castine, 
who we suppose was in the fort, and Major Living 
stone, to Canada, through the country, with letters 
to M. Vaudreuil, acquainting him that the coun 
try of Acadia was subdued, and that all the inha 
bitants, except such as were within cannon shot 
of the fort, were prisoners at discretion; and as 
the council had been informed that he had often 
sent out his barbarous Indians to murder the poor 
innocent women and children upon the frontiers of 
New England, if he continued that practice they 
would cause the same execution upon the people 
of Acadia or Nova Scotia, now absolutely in their 
power: but they abhorred such barbarities, and 
hoped he would give them no further occasion to 
copy after him, but rather would release and send 
home such prisoners as had been taken by the 
Indians. After a most fatiguing hazardous jour 
ney, having three Indians for their guides, they 
arrived at Quebec. The governor sent his answer 
to the message by two partisans, Rouville and 
Dupuis, by land through Albany, that they might 
be acquainted with the country, and more fit to be 
employed in making war upon any future occa 
sion. The sum of the answer was, that Nicholson 
had been so well taught the laws of war, as to know 
that they did not admit of reprisals upon such 
inhabitants as had surrendered upon an express 
promise of being well treated: That he, Vau 
dreuil, never knew the French charged with in 
humanity, and he was not afraid to appeal to the 
English prisoners, within his government, against 
such a charge ; they had often been redeemed 
from the Indians, at a great expence, and out of 
pure charity ; indeed the Indians themselves, or 
dinarily, did not treat them ill. But let that be as 
it would, the French were not accountable for the 
behaviour of the Indians ; it was not his fault that 
this unfortunate war was not over a longtime ago, 
and all the miseries which had been the consequence 
must be attributed to those who had refused the 
neutrality between the two colonies ; he was very 
ready lo agree to the exchange of prisoners, but 
he had not the command of those which were in 
the hands of his Indian allies. As for the menace 
of delivering up the Acadiaus to the Indians of 
New England, if the Indians of New France 
should refuse to deliver the English prisoners, it 
was contrary to all the rules" of justice and hu 
manity, and if it should be carried into execution 



he should be obliged to do as much to all the Eng 
lish he had in his power. This was all the effect 
of Livingstone s most fatiguing hazardous journey. 

The affair of the agency in England has often 
occasioned a division and contention in the general 
court. They who had served the province well 
and done every thing in their power, were thought 
not to have done enough. If the rights and claims 
did not appear in the same light to tlio. -e who 
judged of them in England, as they did to. the 
Massachusetts, they were too apt to attribute it 
to the want of skill or fidelity in those who ap 
peared for them. At this time a change in the 
agency was agreed upon from a different cause. 
The change of the ministry in England was as 
alarming to New England as to any part of her 
Majesty s dominions. Mr. Phips was deeply en 
gaged in the new measures. There could not 
then have been any apprehension of his removing 
to Ireland; but a whig people would not be satis 
fied with a tory agent. Sir H. Ashurst never had 
any great powers, and he was now declining in 
age and health. The party that used to support 
him set up his brother, Sir William Ashurst, a 
gentleman of superior character and real worth. 
Mr. Dudley did every thing in his power to pre 
vent the choice, but when he could not prevail, 
made a merit of accepting it. An address (o the 
queen was sent to Sir William, but he refused the 
agency ; he was well acquainted with the slights 
put upon his brother and the little or no reward 
given him for so long services. When he excused 
himself, he recommended a New England young 
gentleman, then in London, Jeremiah Dummer, 
Avho also procured from the principal merchants in 
London, trading to New England, letters in his 
favour. He was not at that time acceptable to 
Mr. Dudley, arid in a message to the assembly, 
he advised them to choose Henry Newman, a 
New England man, then in London also, a person, 
of great probity, who had lived some years in the 
Duke of Somerset s family, and who afterwards 
was secretary to the society for promoting Chris 
tian knowledge; but the choice fell upon Mr. 
Dummer, and the governor did not think proper to 
negative him*. 

Mr. Dudley found means to remove the preju 
dice of Sir William Ashurst. From this time, all 
his letters are in a different strain from what they 
used to be, and he represents the times to be such 
that there was no prospect of a better governor, 
and ad vises the people, if they could be tolerably 
easy, not to run the risk of a change. This was 
not the only time when such a word of advice to 
this as well as other colonies would have been sea-] 



588 



MASSACHUSETTS. 



[sonablc. Mr. Dummer, who was attaching him 
self to the new ministry and had great favour 
shewn him, engaged also in Mr. Dudley s interest. 
Mr. Phips, who at first opposed him, bad for 
sometime been very friendly to him. It was a rule 
with him to gain his enemies, he was sure of his 
friends. It requires much of that art and skill of 
which he is said to have been master, to render 
this rule, for any length of time, successful. He 
happened also, as we have observed, when he was 
in England, to be known to and favoured by Mr. 
Harley, and his interest there was so established 
that he was no longer in danger, until the death 
of the queen caused an entire revolution, both as 
to men and measures. In the province, some re 
ports against him were of so gross and criminal a 
nature, that although they might find some ready 
to believe them at first, yet time alone had sunk 
the credit of them, and the remembrance of lesser 
matters sunk with it, and the last days of his ad 
ministration were his best days. 

This year, the enemy made their first appear 
ance, in the spring, at York, but found the inha 
bitants upon their guard. In June, Colonel Hilton 
of Exeter, being in the woods with 18 men, was 
ambushed by a party, who fired and killed the 
colonel and two of his company, and took two 
prisoners, the rest escaping. Hilton was a good 
officer and had behaved well with Church in 
1704, andiipon other occasions ; but at this time 
was off his guard. One hundred men went out 
upon the alarm, but had no other success than to 
bring in the dead mangled bodies to a decent in 
terment. A few days after, 60 or 70 French and 
Indians appeared in the skirts of the town of Exe 
ter, but were alarmed by the firing a gun, and 
went off with four children only, which they pick 
ed up in the street or road at play, to the un 
speakable distress of their parents upon receiving 
the news. In their retreat they killed one man 
and took another prisoner. They then travelled 
w. and killed several of the inhabitants of Water- 
bury and Simsbury in Connecticut, struck down 
upon Brookfield and Marlborough, and from 
thence to Chelmsford, where Major Tyng was 
slain, an officer respected for his prudence and 
courage. 

The 2d of August, about 50 Indians came upon 
Winter harbour, and hovered about the place 
some time, until they had killed four or five and 
taken eight or ten of the inhabitants. They in 
sulted the fort and found the garrison too many to 
be taken ; but not enough to sally out and attack 
them. October the 1st, several persons, as they 
were going to meeting at Berwick, were way-laid, 



one of them killed, another had his horse shot 
under him, the rest escaping. The 10th of the 
same month, Bomazeen, with 60 or 70 more In 
dians, appeared at Winter harbour, killed three 
or four and took as many captives ; one of the 
latter was Johnson Harman, a noted officer in ex 
peditions, the next war, against the enemy. The 
Indians, after they had done the mischief, sent a 
flag of truce to the fort, and offered to ransom their 
prisoners, if a vessel should be sent to Kennebeck 
river to receive them. 

The forces had been scouring the woods all the 
summer, but the parties of the enemy avoided 
them. Towards winter, Colonel Walton, after 
his return from Port Royal, with 170 men ranged 
the c. country and killed a Norridgewock chief 
and six or eight others. He made a second march 
to Winnepisiaukee without any success ; but in 
the mean time the Indians he was hunting after 
were seeking for their own bloody game, more or 
less of which they met with at Coc?aeco, York, 
Wells, &amp;c. 

(Anno 1711.) After Port Royal was reduced, 
Nicholson went to England to solicit another ex 
pedition against Canada; and, although his in 
tention was known, there seemed to be no expec 
tation that he would succeed. The New England 
people, we have observed, were all whigs, and 
supposed the tory ministry to be determined upon 
a peace, and rather disposed to suffer France to 
recover part of what she had lost, than to make 
further acquisition from her ; and there was a 
general surprise at Nicholson s return to Boston, 
the 8th of June, witli orders from the queen to the 
several governments of New England, to New- 
York, the Jerseys, and Pennsylvania, to have 
their quotas of men in readiness for a fleet which 
was expected to arrive a few days after, and in. 
fact did arrive the 24th following. This was short 
warning. What was more extraordinary, ten. 
weeks provision for the army was to be procured at 
Boston. It was one reason given for this measure, 
that there might be no suspicions, in Europe, of 
the destination of this armament. It might well 
be doubted whether it would be possible to pro 
cure such a quantity of provisions at Boston in 
season, and if it was not, it would be impossible 
to proceed. This extraordinary measure increased 
a jealousy, began before, that it was not designed 
Canada should be taken, and that the blame 
should be cast upon New England. This jea 
lousy may have been as groundless as the charge, 
which Walker first, and after him, many other 
authors have brought against New England, for 
not affording that ready assistance which Avas] 



MASSACHUSETTS. 



5S9 



[expected ; but it certainly had this effect, to 
cause not only the government, but even private 
persons, to exert themselves with more zeal and 
vigour than had been done upon any other occa 
sion ; and the people submitted, not without re 
luctance it is true, to have their property taken 
from them, in a way and manner which we think 
the people of Great Britain or Ireland at this day 
would not submit to. A general meeting of all the 
governors was appointed, immediately after Ni 
cholson s arrival at New London, and they were 
sitting when the fleet arrived. The assembly hap 
pened to be sitting at Boston when the first orders 
came. The governor, without delay, recom 
mended to them a full compliance with the orders 
he had received. The first thing necessary was 
money. The credit of thelreasury was so low in 
England, that no merchants or private persons here 
would take bills, unless the drawer would make 
themselves responsible, and there was nobody 
authorised to draw such bills. The general court 
determined to issue 40,000/. in bills of credit, and to 
lend them to merchants and others for the term of 
two years. These persons with their bills of credit 
purchased bills of exchange upon the treasury in 
England, which it was hoped, before the expira 
tion of the two years, would be paid, and if they 
should not, it would be in the power of the go 
vernment to continue the loan, but there was no 
engagement to do it. The next difficulty to be 
removed was the extravagant price to which pro 
visions had started, upon the advice of this ex 
traordinary demand. For this purpose, an order 
passed the court, stating the prices of the several 
species of provisions necessary for the service. The 
owners of the provisions shut up their stores, or 
removed their provisions in order to conceal them. 
The demand which had raised the price, they 
urged, was the common chance in trade, which 
every merchant was justly entitled to. Another 
order soon passed the court, to impress all provi 
sions in whose possession soever, and for this pur 
pose to open all doors and enter. This effected a 
general compliance. The short time spent for this 
purpose, and the refusal of particular persons to 
submit at first, caused a charge from the officers 
against the country in general, for unnecessarily 
delaying the fleet and army ; and no notice was 
taken of the zeal of the government and this ex 
traordinary measure for the removal of these im 
pediments. The addition of so many mouths had 
caused a sudden rise of all poultry and fresh meat, 
and at that season of the year, if the usual con 
sumption had continued, the forces must have 
foiled of necessary refreshment. This considera 



tion induced many of the principal gentlemen in 
Boston, to deny themselves and to engage, while 
the fleet lay there, to eat salt provisions and no 
other in their families. The soldiers and seamen, 
some of them, deserted and were concealed by the 
inhabitants, who were justly censured for doing it; 
but not so the country, for in all countries there 
are more or less persons who for the sake of gain 
will do the same. A law against this offence was 
made, with a very severe penalty, and a more 
summary way provided for trial of the offence 
than ever had been in any instance before. The 
desertion of the men put the admiral out of temper, 
and he wrote the governor an angry letter, in 
which he tells him, the service had been pre 
judiced rather than forwarded since his arrival at 
Boston, and demands from the government a 
supply of men equal to the loss. This could be 
done in no other way than an impress. The in 
habitants, it must be owned, would not have sub 
mitted to it, but in general would have preferred 
a prison on shore to a man of war at sea. 

Besides the mistake, in the plan of this expedi 
tion, with respect to a speedy supply of provisions 
at Boston without previous notice, there was ano 
ther, in presuming that skilful pilots were to be 
obtained there. The best in the country were 
shipmasters, who had been once or twice up the 
river St. Lawrence. These were employed in 
other business, upon which their future support 
depended, and they were averse to leaving it ; but 
the government impressed them into the service, 
and afterwards was charged with their defect of 
skill, which, admitting it to be true, could not be 
helped. 

The troops were all landed upon Noddle s 
island, about a mile from the town, where they 
were every day exercised in a healthy air ; and it 
was allowed, that men were never landed and re- 
imbarkcd in better order. The land force, includ 
ing two regiments from New England, amounted 
to near 7000 men, an army more than equal in 
number to that which afterwards reduced Quebec, 
under general Wolfe; although, in 1711, it was 
not half so strong as in 1759. 

The fleet which arrived at Boston, consisted of 
15 sail of men of war and 40 transports, and all 
sailed again the 30th of July. Greater dispatch 
could not well be expected from such short warn 
ing. Nicholson set out for Albany the same day, 
to take the command of the forces which were to 
march by land. 

Nothing remarkable happened in the passage of 
the fleet to Gaspee, where it arrived the 18th of 
August and sailed again the 20th. The next day] 



590 



MASSACHUSETTS. 



[and the day after proving foggy, and the wind 
beginning to blow fresh at e. s. e. the ships brought 
to, with their heads to the s. being out of sight of 
land and out of soundings. This the admiral, in 
his own account, says, was by the advice of the 
pilots, both English and French, and that they 
were of opinion the fleet would drive into the midst 
of the channel or river. The New England pilots 
always denied they gave such advice, arid declared 
upon their oaths, their opinion was not followed 
nor regarded. Some of the principal persons on 
board one of the ships which belonged to New 
England, reported that upon the fleet s being or 
dered to lie with their heads to the s. the whole 
ship s company determined they must drive upon 
the n. shore, and they were confirmed in their for 
mer jealousy, that it was m;ver intended the fleet 
should arrive at Quebec. This, however, is in 
credible, and the admiral, who had not the charac 
ter of an abandoned man, was incapable of sacri 
ficing the lives of so many men ; and, it must be 
presumed, he would not have thrown away his 
own life, which was exposed as well as the rest. 
The pilots from Boston supposed the admiral had 
a very mean opinion of them, and laid greater 
stress upon the judgment of the French pilots, 
who through ignorance or from design occasioned 
this wrong measure. In two or three hours after 
the fleet brought to, some of the transports were 
among the breakers. Eight or nine ships were 
lost upon the rocks about midnight, 1000 of the 
men that were on board drowned, and about 600 
or 700 saved by the other ships. AH the men of 
war escaped ; the admiral s ship is said to have 
anchored, and the rest either stood oft or came to 
anchor ; and the next morning, the wind shifting 
to w. s. w. the admiral bore away for Spanish river, 
the men of war and transports following ; but the 
wind shifting again to e. they were eight days be 
fore they all arrived, and as they had the wind, 
might more easily have gone to Quebec. In a 
council of war, it was unanimously resolved, not 
only not to make any further trial to go up the 
river St. Lawrence, but also not to attempt any 
thing against Placentia in Newfoundland ; the 
fleet not being sufficiently victualled for either. 
They sailed the 16th of September, and the admiral 
arrived the 9th of October at Portsmouth, and the 
15th, his ship, the Edgar, blew up ; the cause not 
being known, jealous minds would suggest that 
even this was not without design. 

The admiral supposed in his account of the ex 
pedition, that if they had arrived at Quebec and 
landed their men, their misfortune would have 
been greatef still ; that the French would either 



have quitted the place and carried all their pro 
visions with them, or that they would have de 
fended the place until the provisions of the fleet 
and army were spent, and they must have laid 
down their arms ; or if they finally surrendered, it 
was not to be expected the provisions, for so small 
a garrison, would have lasted any time for 
12,000 men, and French and English must have 
starved together. Vaudreuil had made the best 
preparations he could for their reception, having 
early notice of their coming from the governor of 
Placentia. An English prisoner carried in there 
from Boston gave an account of Nicholson s ar 
rival, of the fleet that was to follow, and of the 
forces intended by way of the lake; and the cap 
tain of a privateer saw the fleet within 60 leagues 
of Boston. This intelligence was afterwards con 
firmed by an Onondago Indian, who came to 
Quebec to inform of the great preparations making 
at Albany. 

Nicholson had made but little progress in his 
march when he received the news of this disaster, 
and if the fleet had arrived safe, he would have 
been too late to have drawn any of the French 
force from Quebec, before so much of the provi 
sions of the fleet had been spent that it would not 
have been safe to have remained any longer ; and 
it is well he did not proceed, for as soon as Vau 
dreuil had advice of so many ships stove, and so 
many dead bodies with red coats drove upon the 
shore, and that the river was clear of ships, he or 
dered all the strength of Canada towards Montreal 
and the lake Champlain, which if Nicholson had 
passed, would have been sufficient to prevent his 
return. 

To complete the charge against the Massachu 
setts, they are said to have represented the naviga 
tion to Quebec to be easy and without hazard, of 
which they were wholly ignorant ; for the French, 
after 100 years experience, almost every year suf 
fered shipwreck, and sailing in the bay and river 
St. Lawrence was so hazardous that they could 
hardly obtain sailors for a voyage thither. The 
Massachusetts people knew very well that Phips 
and his fleet went up and down without difficulty 
in 1690; that flags of truce had frequently passed 
and repassed, and they supposed the French re 
presented the passage difficult, to deter other na 
tions, and experience now shows that they judged 
right. 

The American transports were all preserved, 
except one victualler, and the crew of that were 
saved. The disappointment and losswas grievous 
to New England. Some~ pious minds gave over 
all hopes of reducing Canada. So many attempts] 



MASSACHUSETTS. 



[blasted, plainly indicated, as they conceived, that 
Providence never designed the whole ?^. continent 
of America for one European nation. Upon the 
first news in England of the disaster, the blame was 
laid npon Governor Dudley, and it was said he 
would be removed, but his conduct soon appeared 
to have been unexceptionable. 

Upon the return of the Massachusetts troops, 
{hey gave an account of the freedom used by the 
sea and land officers, in attributing the whole mis 
fortune to the colonies. The forces were unrea 
sonably detained at Boston. The provisions fell 
short of what was expected. The pilots were ig 
norant and not fit to be trusted. The general court 
therefore thought that it was necessary to excul 
pate themselves, and that it would be prudent to 
lay no blame any where else. The governor in 
his speech, October 17th, says, " I condole with 
you upon the sorrowful disaster of the fleet and 
forces sent hither, by her Majesty s special favour 
to all her good subjects in the provinces of N. 
America. 1 have had time enough since the ac 
count thereof, to consider the several articles of her 
Majesty s commands to this government for the 
putting forward the expedition, and therein I can 
not charge this assembly with neglect in any parti 
cular ; but when I peruse the journal of the pro 
ceedings, I think there was all provision and ex 
pedition made, in every article referring to soldiers, 
artificers, pilots, transports, and provisions for the 
service of her Majesty s British forces, as well as 
our own ; which 1 hope you will see reason to con 
sider and represent home for our justification, that 
it may be demonstrated, that we were in earnest to 
do our duty to the utmost, for our own benefit and 
establishment, as well as her Majesty s honour and 
just rights." 

Three of the principal pilots in the service were 
sent to England, to be ready to give an account of 
their conduct, if inquiry should be made. A 
journal of the proceedings relative to the expedi 
tion was prepared and transmitted, together with 
an address to the queen. The instructions to the 
agent were given with prudence and caution. " It 
chiefly concerns us to set forth that we have done 
our duty, by giving all assistance in obedience to 
her Majesty s royal commands, as we have repre 
sented in our humble address herewith transmitted 
to Be presented by you, and will appear by the 
journal and orders accompanying the same. We 
comported with the supplies, in the large demands 
made upon us, to the utmost of our power, beyond 
what we had at first a reasonable prospect to have 
provided timely, having so short notice, but made 
our utmost efforts, and happily got through the 



same, in \vhirh you are to vindicate and justify the 
government. 

" It is not our province, nor must you enter 
thereinto, to fault or impeach others, for want of 
doing their duty, or for their conduct in that affair, 
any further than is absolutely necessary for our 
own vindication. If there be just cause therefore, 
her Majesty in her princely wisdom will direct (he 
inquiry thereinto." 

The pilots waited many months in England, 
ready to answer any questions, but none v.ete ever 
asked, nor was any inquiry ever made into the 
cause of the failure of the expedition. Upon the 
whole, it cannot be conceived that the admiral, 
general, and principal persons employed in the 
execution of this plan, pursued any particular 
measures in order to defeat and overthrow it ; that 
those who projected it in England, had not good 
reason to expect from the insufficient provision 
made that it must fail of success, and at best were 
all content that it should, is not so certain. 

Although the principal object of this expedition 
was not obtained, yet, in all probability, Annapolis 
Royal was saved by it from falling into the hands 
of the French. The garrison there was reduced 
to a handful of men. Between 200 and 300 of the 
New England forces were kept there, after the 
place was reduced, and four in five were dead, 
and they were afraid even of the Acadians alone, 
without any additional strength ; but the French 
court, sensible of their mistake in not giving more 
attention to the preservation of that country, when 
it was in their hands, pressed the governor of 
Canada, in the strongest manner, to exert himself 
for the recovery of it. A body of troops was 
raised and ready to depart from Canada, when the 
news arrived of the English fleet and other prepara 
tions making; and the men which were designed 
against Nova Scotia were detained at home to de 
fend Canada. The French inhabitants of Acadia, 
having notice of the force intended from Canada, 
grew insolent, and it was not safe for an English 
man to stir out of the fort. As soon as they heard 
of the disappointment, they became submissive 
again, and made acknowledgment of their faults ; 
but at the same time let V^audreuil know, that the 
French king had no better subjects, and necessity 
alone had brought them to this submission. These 
were the inhabitants round the fort, included in 
the capitulation. Many of those at a distance had 
not yet submitted to the English, and Captain 
Pigeon, an officer of the regulars, was sent up the 
river to destroy some of the French houses, as well 
as to cut timber for the repair of the fort. He 
was surprised by a great number of Indians, who] 



592 



MASSACHUSETTS. 



[killed the fort major, the engineer, ami all the 
boat s crew, and took 30 or 40 of the garrison pri 
soners. The stroke encouraged the inhabitants 
again to take up arms, and 500 of them, with as 
many Indians as they could collect, were prepar 
ing to attack the fort, expecting an experienced 
officer from Placentia to head them ; but the go 
vernor not being able to spare one, they laid down 
their arms again and dispersed. 

To meet the French or Indian enemy, who were 
expected upon the frontiers, Colonel Walton was 
sent, in the fall, with 180 men, as far as Penobscot, 
where he burned two vessels which were designed 
for privateers or cruizers, and took some pri 
soners. 

The year 1711 was rendered remarkable by a 
fire in the town of Boston, which from that time 
until the year 1760 was called the great fire. It 
was supposed to have been caused by the careless 
ness of an old woman, in or near what is called 
Williams s court : all the houses on both sides of 
Cornhill, from School street to what is called the 
Stone shop in Dock square, all the upper part of 
King street on the s. and n. side, together with the 
town-house, and what was called the old meeting 
house, above it, were consumed to ashes. 

(Anno 1712.) Early in the spring, the enemy 
shewed themselves, and made spoil upon Oyster ri 
ver, Exeter, Kittery, York, and Wells. In May, a 
party of English went up Merrimack river and 
killed eight Indians, without loss to themselves; 
but the Indians could not rest long without revenge. 
In June and July, they killed or took prisoners 
several from Berwick, Kittery, Wells, Dover, and 
Kingston. At Dover, apprehending they were in 
danger as they were scalping two children, for 
greater dispatch they took off both their heads, 
leaving the bodies a doleful spectacle to their un 
happy parents, in the fall, a great number of 
people being at a wedding of Captain Weelwright s 
daughter of Wells, the enemy surprised several 
of the company, and among the rest the v bride 
groom, Mr. Plaisted, son to a gentleman of Ports 
mouth. The Indians expected a good ransom lor 
such a prisoner, and, instead of carrying him to 
Canada, sent in a flag, and offered, upon payment 
of 3001. to release him, and the money was paid 
and the prisoner returned. We are tired of relating 
these inroads of the enemy, many of which we have 
given an account of in general terms, and avoided 
frequently enumerating circumstances which ex 
cite horror from the mere relation. This was the 
last action of any consequence. In the spring 
of 1713, after the peace of Utrecht was known in 
America, the Indians sent to Major Moody at 

2 



Casco, to pray that there might be peace between 
the English and them also, and proposed a treaty 
to be held there ; but the governor thought it 
more for his honour to oblige them to come to 
Portsmouth, the chief town of one of his govern 
ments, than to go to the borders of their usual re 
sidence ; and, upon the 13th of July, they entered 
anew into articles of submission and pacification, 
signed by a number of chiefs of their several tribes, 
wherein they ask pardon for all their past rebel 
lions and violations of former promises, and engage 
to demean themselves for the future as very obe 
dient faithful subjects of the crown of Great Bri 
tain. An observation occurs to us, which we may 
properly enough bring in at the close of this war. 

Notwithstanding the inhabitants in the colonies, 
in general, double their numbers, from their natu 
ral growth or increase, in 25 years at most, yet the 
growth of the Massachusetts colony and New 
Hampshire have borne no proportion to the rest ; 
and in the year 1713, there was not double the 
number of inhabitants in the Massachusetts pro 
vince, which the several colonies, of which it was 
formed, contained 50 years before. During this 
period there was no remarkable emigration to other 
colonies. There was vacant land sufficient to ex 
tend settlements upon, and as easy to be procured 
as any where else. The heavy taxes may have 
driven some to other governments, but the chief 
reason of the difference is the constant state of war 
which those two provinces were in, the Massachu 
setts especially. From 1675, when Philip s war 
begun, to I?f3, 5000 or 6000 of the youth of the 
country had perished by the enemy, or by dis 
tempers contracted in the service ; nine in ten of 
these would have been fathers of families, and, in 
the course of 40 years, have multiplied to near 
100,000 souls. 

We cannot avoid a reflection also upon the 
heavy burdens which the province subjected itself 
to during this war, we suppose beyond those of any 
other 10 years from the first settlement. The castle 
and other fortifications at Boston, the several forts 
in the e. country, the various expensive expedi 
tions actually prosecuted, and the preparations 
made for others, added to the constant defence of 
the extensive frontiers and to the support of the 
civil government, without any relief or compensa 
tion from the crown, certainly must have occa 
sioned such an annual burden as was not felt by 
any other subjects of Great Britain ; and the merit 
of the people of that day ought not to be forgotten. 

The settlement of the line of jurisdiction between 
the province and the colony of Connecticut, which 
was accomplished in the year 1713, after iuefiec-] 



MASSACHUSETTS. 



593 



[tual attempts for several years before, deserves par 
ticular notice. In 1636, the first settlers upon Con 
necticut river removed from the Massachusetts, and 
took possession of the country upon and near the 
river on both sides, from Springfield as low as 
Weathersfidd, inclusive of both, and managed 
their affairs by virtue of authority from the general 
court of the Massachusetts. In 1638, the inhabi 
tants of Springfield, which included what was after 
wards called Suflield, below, on one side of the 
river, and Enfield on the other side, having no 
doubt that they were within the limits of the Mas 
sachusetts patent, petitioned the general court that 
they might be separated from the other towns be 
low, and be received and continued as part of the 
colony, which was granted, and jurisdiction exer 
cised accordingly. In 1642, by order of the ge 
neral court, two mathematicians, as they are called 
in the records, Nathan Woodward and Solomon 
Saffery,runaline w. as they supposed, from a sta 
tion three miles n. of Charles river until they 
came to Windsor, upon Connecticut river, where 
it struck the house of Bissell who kept the ferry. 
The people who had settled upon Connecticut 
river had no better title to land or jurisdiction 
than possession, the grant made by the Massachu 
setts general court being a mere nullity. 

In 1630, the Earl of Warwick had obtained 
from the council of Plymouth a patent of the lands 
upon a straight line near the sea-shore towards the 
s. w.) w. and by s. or w. from Naraganset river 
40 leagues, as the coast lies towards Virginia, and 
all within that breadth to the S. sea, and yet, in 
1635, all the lands between Connecticut river and 
the Naraganset country were assigned by the same 
council to the Marquis of Hamilton. Lord Say 
and others had purchased the Earl of Warwick s 
title, and by their agents built a fort at the mouth 
of Connecticut river about the year 1635, and four 
or five years after Mr. Fenwick came over with 
design to take possession of the lands upon Con 
necticut river under Lord Say, &amp;c. and remained 
in possession of the mouth of the river until 1644, 
when the settlers purchased the title of the Lords, 
as it was called, and formed themselves into, or 
continued the form they had assumed, of a body 
politic. 

When the line was run by Woodward and Saf- 
fery, FVnwick was to have joined, as the Massa- 
chus&amp;cts commissioners for the united colonies af 
terwards affirmed, though the Connecticut commis 
sioners denied it, and in 164S, when a dispute 
arose about a duty required of Springfield for the 
support of the fort at the mouth of the river, the 
Massachusetts offered to run the line anew if Con- 

VOL. II. 



necticut would be at the charge, the Massachu 
setts having been at the sole charge before, but 
this was not agreed to, and the fort being burned 
down, and the controversy about the duty at an end, 
this line seems to have been acquiesced in, and in 
1662, Mr.Winthrop obtained from King Charles, 
a charter for the colonies of Connecticut arid New 
Haven united, the n. line whereof is intended to 
be the same with the s. line of Massachusetts. 
From this time, until aiter the incorporation or the 
Massachusetts by anew charter in 1691, we hear 
nothing about bounds, except some controversies 
between Springfield and Windsor about their 
towns grants, and letters from the authority of each 
government relative to it ; and, in 1686, many of 
the inhabitants of Roxbury pitched upon a tract 
of land to settle upon, which was bounded on the 
s. by Woodward and Saffery s line, and it was 
granted to them by the Massachusetts government 
and took the name of Woodstock. Grants were 
also made to particular persons of tracts of land 
near to this line. 

After the new charter, Connecticut made a more 
serious affair of what was called the Massachusetts 
encroachments, and in 1700, upon the appoint 
ment of a committee by Connecticut, with a gene 
ral power to settle the bounds between the two go 
vernments, the Massachusetts appointed a com 
mittee with a special limited power, viz. to find 
the southernmost line of the late colony of Massa 
chusetts bay as anciently run by Nathanael Wood 
ward and Solomon . Saffcry, and to make report 
thereof to the general court. This was not what 
Connecticut wanted, for they supposed Woodward 
and Saffery s line to be erroneous, however they 
appointed a committee to attend the work, who 
reported to their constituents that a line from three 
miles w. of Charles river, or Woodward and Saf 
fery s station, would run some miles to the n. of 
John Bissell s house, where Woodward ar.d Saf- 
fery supposed it to run, and in 1702 Mr. Win- 
throp, the governor of Connecticut, wrote to go 
vernor Dudley, and desired that the Massachusetts 
would join in ascertaining the difference of latitude 
between the Charles river station and Bisscli s 
house. There were other atlempts to bring this 
affair to a conclusion, but ineffectual, and in 
1708, by a state of the case read in both houses, it 
nppejirs that the Massachusetts intended " to rely 
upon the line formerly run, as it is therein said, by 
two skilful artists in the year 1612, and which has 
continued (he stated boundary for 66 years." They 
add, that Connecticut charter, which was granted 
in 1662, was bounded by the, v. line of the Massachu 
setts, which was not then an imaginary or untried] 
4 G 



594 



MASSACHUSETTS. 



[line, but well known to the gentleman who soli 
cited that charter, who if he had .thought it con- 
trovertible would doubtless have obtained an order 
for rectifying and adjusting it ; and supposing, 
which was not granted, that there should be any 
error or mistake in the line, yet, having been run 
and stated so long before the grant of Connecticut 
charter, and held by possession for 66 years, and 
I owns and plantations having been granted and 
settled upon the same, it was unreasonable, now, 
to draw it into question. 

There being so little prospect of the Massachu 
setts receding from a line of which they had so 
long been in possession, Connecticut made their ap 
plication to England, and we find by a letter from 
Governor Saltonstall of Connecticut, in 1710, that 
he was expecting orders concerning it. If any 
came, probably they were such as repeatedly after 
wards were sent to New Hampshire, viz. to settle 
the controversy by commissioners appointed or 
agreed upon by the general courts of each colony. 
Be that as it may, it is certain that Connecticut 
renewed their application to the Massachusetts, 
and at length commissions passed the seals of each 
government with ample powers to settle the con 
troversy. The Massachusetts were intent upon 
securing the property to such persons to whom 
they had granted lands and the jurisdiction of 
those towns which had been settled by them. Suf- 
field, Enfield, and Woodstock, were the only 
towns which could be affected. Connecticut was 
also apprehensive that part of the town of Sims- 
bury, which hfid been settled by that government, 
might fall within the Massachusetts. It was there 
fore settled as a preliminary, that the towns should 
remain to the governments by which they had been 
settled, and the property of as many acres as should 
appear upon a balance to have been gained by one 
government from the other, should be conveyed 
out of other unimproved lands as a satisfaction or 
equivalent, only, as there was about two miles 
which Windsor claimed upon the town of Suffield, 
there having been long contest between these two 
towns concerning the validity of the respective 
grants, it was agreed the two miles should belong 
to Connecticut if they fell within their line. 

Nothing could be more equitable nor tend more 
to the future peace and content of the inhabitants of 
the contested borders. 

Jt appeared, by the report of the commissioners, 
that 107,793 acres of land were due from the Mas 
sachusetts, who accordingly made a grant thereof 
to Connecticut. They accepted and made sale of 
the same, and applied the produce to the support 
of Yale college and other public uses, and the con 



troverted towns for many years after continued 
without molestation under the jurisdiction by which 
they were settled. 

The affairs of the war had so engaged the atten 
tion of all persons, that we hear little of party dis 
putes and discord for five or six years past; but 
as soon as they were delivered from enemies with 
out, a contention began within, from a new cause, 
the effects of which were felt many years together. 
The paper bills of credit were the cause of this 
contention. So many bills had been issued for the 
charges of the war, particularly the large sum of 
40,000/. issued for the Canada expedition, that 
they were become the sole instrument and measure 
of commerce, and silver and gold were entirely 
banished. Of two instruments, one in use in a 
particular state only, the other with the ^ hole 
commercial world, it is easy to determine which 
must leave that particular stute and which remain. 
The currency of silver and gold entirely ceasing, 
the price of every thing bought or sold was no 
longer compared therewith, but with the paper 
bills, or rather with mere ideal pounds, shillings, 
and pence. The rise of exchange with Eng ! and 
and all other countries, was not attributed to the 
true cause, the want of a fixed staple medium, but 
to the general bad state of the trade. It was 
thought that increasing the paper bills would en 
liven and reform the trade. Three parties were 
formed, one very small, which were for drawing 
in the paper bills and depending upon silver and 
gold currency. Mr. Hutchtnson, one of the mem 
bers for Boston, was among the most active of this 
party. He was an enemy, all his life, to a depre 
ciating currency, upon a principle very ancient, 
but too seldom practised upon, nil utile quod noti 
honestum. 

Another party was very numerous. These had 
projected a private bank, or rather had taken up 
a project published in London in the year 1684 ; 
but this not being generally known in America, a 
merchant in Boston was the reputed father of it. 
There was nothing more in it than issuing bills of 
credit, which all the members of the company 
promised to receive as money, but at no certain 
value compared with silver and gold; and real 
estates, to a sufficient value, were to be bound as 
a security that the company should perform their 
engagements. They were soliciting the sanction 
of the general court, and an act of government to 
incorporate them. This party generally consisted 
of persons in difficult or involved circumstances 
in trade, or such as were possessed of real estates, 
but had little or no ready money at command, or 
men of no substance at all ; and we may well] 
2 



MASSACHUSETTS. 



595 



[enough suppose the party to be very numerous, 
some, no doubt, joined them from mistaken prin 
ciples, and an apprehension that it was a scheme 
beneficial to the public, and some for party sake 
and popular applause. 

Three of the representatives of Boston, Mr. 
Cooke, son to the agent we have so often men 
tioned, Mr. Noyes, a gentleman in great esteem 
with the inhabitants in general, and Mr. Payne, 
were the supporters of the party. Mr. Hutchin- 
son, the other (an attempt to leave him out of the 
house not succeeding) was sent from the house to 
the council, where his opposition would be of less 
consequence. The governor was no favourer of 
the scheme, but the lieutenant-governor, a gen 
tleman of no great fortune, and whose stipend 
from the government was trifling, engaged in this 
cause with great zeal. 

A third party, though very opposite to the pri 
vate bank, yet were no enemies to bills of credit. 
They were in favour of a loan of bills from the go 
vernment to any of the inhabitants who would 
mortgage their estates as a security for the repay 
ment of the bills, with interest, in a term of years, 
the interest to be paid annually, and applied to 
the support of government. This was an easy 
way of paying public charges, which, no doubt, 
they wondered, that in so many ages the wisdom 
of other governments had never liscovered. The 
principal men of the council w^ie in favour of it, 
and it being thought by the first party the least of 
the two evils, they fell in with the scheme, and, 
after that, the country was divided between the 
public and private bank. The house of repre 
sentatives was nearly equally divided, but rather 
favourers of the private bank, from the great in 
fluence of the Boston members in the house, and 
a great number of persons of the town, out of it. 
The controversy had an universal spread, and di 
vided towns, parishes, and particular families. 

(4nnol7H.) At length, after a long struggle, 
the party for the public bank prevailed in the ge 
neral court for a loan of 50,000/. in bills of credit, 
which were put into the hands of trustees, and lent 
for five years only to any of the inhabitants at five 
per cent, interest, one fifth part of the principal to 
be paid annually. This lessened the number of 
the party for the private bank, but it increased the 
zeal and raised a strong resentment in those which 
remained. 

A Vessel which arrived at Boston from Ireland 
the 15th of September, brought the first news of 
the death of the queen, and the accession of King 
George I. and two days after a vessel arrived from 
some part of Great Britain with the printed pro 



clamation in the London Gazette. This the go 
vernor thought sufficient warrant, without express 
orders, for proclaiming the king in the province. 
The practice in the colonies has not been uniform 
on the like occasions. At New Hampshire, the 
king was proclaimed from the same intelligence, 
the 22d of September ; at Rhode island the 29th ; 
at New York the llth of October; at New Haven, 
in Connecticut, the 14th ; at Philadelphia the 27th; 
no express orders being received in any of those 
places ; but at Annapolis Royal it was delayed 
until the 2d of December. The propriety of pro 
ceeding without express orders has been ques 
tioned," but the absurdity of acts of government 
in the name and by authority of a prince, for 
months together, after certain intelligence of their 
demise, has generally influenced the governors to 
proceed. 

The secret designs of Queen Ann s last ministry 
were no where more suspected, nor more dreaded, 
than in the Massachusetts ; and the 1st of August 
was no where celebrated with greater joy during 
the whole of the king s reign. 

The Hazard sloop, sent express from England 
with orders to the government, was lost upon Co- 
hasset rocks, the 12th of November : the vessel 
being stove to pieces and no papers of any conse 
quence saved ; only enough were washed ashore to 
make certain what vessel it was, and one man had 
been landed and left at Nantucket. Six months from 
the king s accession expired, and no orders had 
arrived for continuing officers in their posts. The 
authority of the governor began to be called in 
question. By the charter, upon the death, re 
moval, or absence of the governor or lieutenant- 
governor,, and there being no person commission 
ed as governor within the province, in such 
cases the government devolves upon the council or 
the major part of them. The council deriving 
their authority from charter, and not from a royal 
commission, the act of parliament limiting the 
continuance in office to six months after the death 
of a prince, it was supposed, could not a fleet their 
authority. The advice of the miscarriage of the 
first orders went the first opportunity to England, 
and new orders were daily expected, and some 
were inclined to wait ; but, on the 4th of February, 
the council assumed the government, the licnte- 
nant-governor, being of the council, joining with 
the rest, and issued a proclamation tor all officers 
to continue in their posts, &amp;c. 

An instruction had been given by the queen, in 
1707, directing, that in case of the death or ab 
sence of the governor and lieutenant-governor, the 
eldest counsellor should preside in the province :"| 
^ 4 g - 



596 



MASSACHUSETTS. 



[but the charter giving the powers of government 
to the major part, this instruction was not re 
garded. 

The administration of the council was short, and 
nothing of moment was transacted. On the 2Jst 
of March the king s proclamation was received, 
and the governor rcassumed with as great parade 
as if he had been first entering upon the govern 
ment, but he had reason to expect his rule would 
t&amp;gt;e short. His friends in the province were in 
creased. Those who had been his greatest op-, 
posers had many of tlu-m changed sides, and were 
strongly attached to him, and used what interest 
they had with Sir William Ashurst, and others, 
that he might be continued, and at their request 
Ashurst appeared for him. The bankers were the 
chief of the disaffected, and Colonel By field, a 
gentleman of the council, father-in-law to the 
lieutenant-governor, went over to England to en 
deavour to supplant him, but wanted interest. 
In England Mr. Dudley lost his friends by the 
queen s death. Colonel Burgess, who had served 
under General Stanhope, was, by his interest, in 
February, appointed to the government, and his 
commissions passed the seals March the 17th, and 
Ashurst writes, that the general had promised to 
be answerable for his good behaviour. 

(Anno 1715.) Mr. Dudley met the assembly 
at the election in May, but made no speech, though 
he had never failed of doing it before. The coun 
cil and house chose his great adversary Mr. Cooke, 
whom he had so often negatived, into the coun 
cil, and, either from indifference or a spirit of for 
giveness before his political departure, he now ap 
proved of him. 

Colonel Burgess intended to stay a short time in 
England. The bank party were impatient for the 
removal of Dudley, who did not favour them, 
and whose second son William Dudley, vho be 
gan to have great weight in the house of represen 
tatives, was a violent opposer. An unusual step 
was taken that the governor s commission might 
be superseded. An exemplification of Burgess s 
commission was obtained, and that, with the new 
commission or warrant to the Lieutenant-governor 
Tailer, were published in Boston, at the same 
time, the 9th of November ; and threupon Tailer 
took upon him tlfe administration. It was ques 
tioned whether this was regular, the commissions 
lay three or four weeks for the council to consider 
of; but at length they advised to the publication. 
We know of no other instance of the publication of 
a governor s commission in the Massachusetts be 
fore his arrival in person. In Virginia it must 
have been practised, if a publication shall have been 



judged necessary ; several of their governors hav 
ing never been in the colony. The house of re 
presentatives, the first day of their sitting, No 
vember 23d, appointed a committee to consider of 
the commissions, but no public exception was 
taken. Mr. Dudley s friends were sensible he could 
continue but a short time, for the original com 
mission, with the new governor, would remove all 
doubt; he himself was in advanced life, near 70, 
and had felt so much of the burden of government, 
that he might well be weary of it, and, like his 
friend Mr. Stoughton, wish to retire. 

No New England man had passed through more 
scenes of busy life than Mr. Dudley. His friends 
intended otherwise. He was educated for the mi 
nistry, and if various dignities had been known in 
the New England churches, possibly he had lived 
and died a clergyman ; but, without this, nothing 
could be more dissonant from his genius. He soon 
turned his thoughts to civil affairs ; was first a de 
puty or representative of the town of Roxbury ; 
then an assistant ; then agent for the colony in 
England, w r here he laid a foundation for a com 
mission, soon after appointing him president of the 
council, first for Massachusetts bay only, but, 
under Andros, for New England. Upon the re 
volution, for a short time he was sunk in disgrace, 
but soon emerged. He appeared first in the cha 
racter of chief justice at New York, then return 
ing to England, became lieutenant-governor of the 
isle of Wight and member of parliament for New- 
town, both which places he willingly resigned for 
the chief command in his own country. Ambi 
tion was the ruling passion, and perhaps, like 
Ca;sar, he had rather be the first man in New 
England than the second in Old. Few men have 
been pursued by their enemies with greater viru- 
rence, and few have been supported by their friends 
with greater zeal. We have seen a second gene 
ration inherit the spirit of their ancestors, the de 
scendants, on one side, preserving an affection for 
his family and posterity, and on the other, re 
taining equal disaffection against them. Some of 
of his good qualities were so conspicuous that his 
enemies could not avoid acknowledging them. 
He applied himself with the greatest diligence to 
the business of his station. The affairs of the war 
and other parts of his administration were con 
ducted with good judgment. In economy he ex 
celled both in public and private life. He sup 
ported the dignity of a governor without the re 
proach of parsimony, and yet, from the moderate 
emoluments of his post, made an addition to his 
paternal estate. The visible increase of his sub 
stance made some incredible reports of gross bri-]| 



MASSACHUSETTS. 



597 



[bery and corruption to be very easily received ; 
but, in times when party spirit prevails, AY hat will 
not a governor s enemies believe, however inju 
rious and absurd ? At such a time he was charged 
with dispensing summiimjus to Leisler, and incur 
ring an aggravated guilt of blood beyond that of a 
common murderer. The other party, no doubt, 
would have charged the failure of justice upon 
him if Leisler had been acquitted. His cringing 
to Randolph, when in his heart he despised him, 
Avas a spot in his character ; and his secret insi 
nuations, to the disadvantage of his country, was 
a greater ; both being for the sake of recommend 
ing himself to court favour. We think it is no more 
than justice to his character, to allow that he had 
as many virtues as can consist with so great a 
thirst for honour and power. 

His life Avould afford convincing evidence, if 
there was any doubt, that an humble calm mind 
enjoys more happiness in private life than an ambi 
tious anxious mind in the highest station. No 
man in this history had seen more ofthetemporum 
varietales fortunaque vicissitudines which Cicero, 
in one of his epistles to Lucceius, says, afford a 
pleasing narration, however irksome to the man 
who has the experience of them. 

Colonel Tailor s strong attachment to the bank 
party procured him the administration for a few 
months ; but was the cause of his losing his com 
mission for lieutenant-governor immediately after. 
It was supposed, we know not upon Avhat grounds, 
that Colonel Burgess would favour the same party, 
and his arrival was every day wished for by them ; 
whilst the other party dreaded it, and laboured to 
prevent it. It was said also, that, in other re 
spects, he would by no means be agreeable to the 
country ; a gentleman of a more grave serious turn 
of mind would be more likely to be happy here him 
self, and to render the people so. Mr. Belcher, after 



wards governor, who was very opposite to (he bank 
party, Avas then in London, he joined with Mr. 
Dummer, the agent, and they engaged Sir Wil 
liam Ashurst with them, and prevailed upon 
Burgess for 10001. sterling, which Belcher and 
Dummer advanced equally between them, to re 
sign his commission, that Colonel Shute might b 
appointed in his stead. Colonel Tailer s friends 
had endeavoured to engage Ashurst in his favour, 
but to no purpose ; the same interest obtained the 
lieutenant-governor s commission for Mr. William 
Dummer, a New England gentleman, who had 
married a daughter of Mr. Dummer, one of the 
commissioners at Plymouth, and was in some post 
there himself; but, his Avife dying, he had re 
turned to his native country. 

Colonel Shute s family were, generally, dissen 
ters ; his father an eminent citizen in London ; 
his mother, daughter of Mr. Caryl, a dissenting 
minister of great note. His brother, afterwards 
Lord Barrington, Avas then a member of parlia 
ment, and at the head of the dissenting interest. 
The colonel began his education under Mr. Charles 
Morton, Avho, about the year 1684, came to New 
England, and Avas minister of Charlestown. After 
tuition under him he was sent to Leyden. He 
went after that into the army under King Wil 
liam, Avho made him a captain, served under the 
Duke of Marlborough, was a lieutenant-colonel, 
and wounded in one of the principal battles in 
Flanders. He had a good acquaintance, and Avas 
well esteemed at court ; had the character of a 
friend to liberty, and was of an open, generous, 
and humane disposition. A governor of his cha 
racter might be supposed to be Avelcome to New 
England men, but the interest of party prevails 
over all other considerations, and virtue, religion, 
private friendship, and public good, are all, at 
tmes, sacrificed to promote it.] 



END OF THE SECOND VOLUME. 
