PABLILLO, a settlement of the Nuevo Reyno 
de Leon in N.America; situate w. of the garri 
son of Santa Engracia. 

PABLO, S. or SAO PAULO. See PAULO. 

PABLO, a settlement of the province and 
corregimicnto "of Lipes in Peru, of the arch* 
bishopric of Charcas. It was also called Santa 
Isabel de Esmoruco, and was the residence of 
the curate. 

PABLO, another, of the province and corregi- 
miento of Otavalo in the kingdom of Quito, at 
the foot of a small mountain, from which issues a 
stream of water abounding in very small fish, 
called prenadillas, so delicate and salutary even 
for the sick, that they are potted and carried to 
all parts of the kingdom. 

PABLO, another, of the head settlement of the 
district of S. Juan del Rio, and alcaldia mayor 
of Queretaro, in Nueva Espana; containing 46 
families of Indians. 

PABLO, another, of the province and corregi- 
miento of Tinta in Peru ; annexed to the curacy 
of Cacha. 

PABLO, another settlement or ward, of the 
head settlement of the district of Zumpahuacan, 
and alcaldia mayor of Marinalco in Nueva Es 
pana. 

PABLO, another, of the head settlement of the 
district, and alcaldia mayor of Toluca in the same 
kingdom, containing 161 families of Indians; at 
a small distance n. of its capital. 

PABLO, another, a small settlement or ward 

VOL. IV. 



P A B 

of the alcaldia mayor of Guanchinango, in th 
same kingdom ; annexed to the curacy of the 
settlement of Pahuatlan. 

PABLO, another, and head settlement of the 
district, of the alcaldia mayor of Villalta, in the 
same kingdom ; of a cold temperature, and con 
taining 51 Indian families. 

PABLO, another, of the missions which were 
held by the Jesuits, in the province of Topia and 
kingdom of Nueva Vizcaya; situate in the middle 
of the sierrtt of Topia, on the shore of the river 
Piastla. 

PABLO, another, of the province of Barcelona, 
and government of Cumana ; situate on the skirt 
of a mountain of the serrania, and on the shore 
of the river Sacaguar, s. of the settlement of 
Piritu. 

PABLO, another, a small settlement of the 
head settlement of the district of Texmelucan, 
and alcaldia mayor of Guajozinco in Nueva Es 
pana. 

PABLO, another, of the district of Chiriqui, in 
the province and government of Veragua, and 
kingdom of Tierra Firme: a league and an half 
from its head settlement, in the high road. 

PABLO, another, of the missions held by the 
Portuguese Carmelites, in the country of Las 
Amazonas, and on the shore of this river. 

PABLO, another, of the missions which were 

held by the French Jesuits, in the province and 

government of French Guayana : founded in 

1735, on the shore of the river Oyapoco, and 

B 



2 PAC 

consisting of Indians of many nations converted 
to the Catholic faith. 

PABLO, another, of the province and alcaldia 
mayor of Chiapa, in the kingdom of Guatemala. 

PABLO, another, of the province and alcaldia 
mayor of Los Zoques, in the same kingdom. 

PABLO, another, of the province and govern 
ment of Moxos in the kingdom of Quito ; situate 
on the shore of the river Santa Ana. 

PABLO, another, formerly of this name, in the 
same province and kingdom, but which was en 
tirely ruined by an epidemical disease. 

PABLO, another, of the province and govern 
ment of Sonora : situate in the country of the 
Cocomaricopas Indians : founded in 1699 by the 
Jesuits, on the shore of the river Grande de (jrila. 

PABLO, a lake of the province and corregimi- 
ento of Otavalo in the kingdom of Quito, close to 
the settlement of its name ; a league long, and 
half a league wide, abounding in geese, widgeons, 
and other aquatic fowl, and surrounded with reed 
called there totoras. It receives its water from 
the mountain of Mojanda, and from it issues an 
arm, which is the river Blanco. On the e. side 
of it is an estate called Caxas. 

PABLO, a river of the province and govern 
ment of Veragua in the kingdom of Tierra Firme, 
which rises in the sierras of Guanico, on the 5. 
and empties itself into the Pacific. 

PABLO, another river, having the surname of 
Los Paeces, in the province and government of 
Buenos Ayres. It runs w. and enters the Jacegua 
between the Joseph Diaz and the Paso delChileno. 

PABLO, another, of the province and govern 
ment of Choco, in the NuevoReynode Granada. 
It rises from a lake and joins the river Quito, 
which rises from another lake, and these toge 
ther form the Atrato. 

PABLO, an island in the strait of Magellan, 
near the e. coast, opposite cape Monmouth. 

PABLO, another, a small island of the S. sea, 
in the bay of Panama, opposite the gulf of San 

- - i A 

Miguel. 

[PABO, the Mickmac name of a river, on the 
n. side of Chaleur bay, about six leagues from 
Grand Riviere, w.n.w. of cape Despair.] 

PABON, a small river of the province and 
government of Buenos Ayres, which runs n.n.e. 
and enters the Parama, between that De en 
Medio and the Caracanal. 

PABON, another, also a small river, in the 
same province, which runs s. and enters the Plata 
at its mouth, on the side opposite the capital. 

PAC, a small lake of the province and govern 
ment of Yucatan, 



PAG 

PAC, a small river of the province and govern^ 
ment of Guayana or Nueva Andalucia. It rises 
in the country of the ferocious Caribes Indians, 
and enters the Caroni, just after it is entered by 
the abundant stream of the Arui. 

PACABARA, a river of the province and go 
vernment of Moxos in the kingdom of Quito, 
which runs n. and enters the Beni. 

PACAIPAMPA, a settlement of the province 
and corregimiento of Piura ; annexed to the cu 
racy of Frias. 

PACAJAS, a river of the country of Las Ama- 
zonas, which runs n. between those of Jacunda 
and Guanapii, or Uanapu, and enters the Ma- 
ranon, or Amazon, in the arm formed by the 
island of Joanes. This river gives its name to a 
nation of Indians but little known, who dwell on 
the n. shore of the Maranon, nearly 80 leagues 
above the Paranaiba. 

PACAJES, a province and corregimiento of 
Peru; bounded by the province of Chucuito on 
the n. w.-, n. by the great lake of Titicaca; n.e. 
by the province of Omasuyos ; e. by the city of 
La Paz and province of Cicasica ; s. c. by the 
corregimiento of Oruro and province of Paria ; 
s. by the province of Charangas, and s.w. and w.. 
by the jurisdiction of Arica, the cordillera inter 
vening. Its length from the bridge of the river 
of the Desaguadero, which divides it from the 
province of Chucuito, as far as the province of 
Paria, is 56 leagues, and its greatest width 40. 

From the loftiness of its territory, and the 
proximity of the Cordilleras, its temperature is 
unpleasantly cold, and it is comparatively barren. 
Its productions are sweet and bitter papas, of 
which is made the chuno, or bread. There i&amp; 
also grown here an abundance of the grain, 
called canahua, serving as food, and for making 
chicha drink. They cultivate some bark, and 
breed many flocks of native sheep, alpacas, vi 
cunas, and vizcachas. Here are many estates or 
pastures of sheep, of the milk of which they 
make well-flavoured cheese, killing every year 
some of the ewes for meat, which being salted 
and hardened by the frost, they call chalonas; and 
these, with a considerable portion of the chuno, 
they carry for sale to the coast ; where they take 
in exchange wine, brandy, and cotton ; and from 
the province of Cochabamba, maize, wheat, and 
other seeds. 

This province was formerly very rich in mines, 
those of Verenguela, San Juan, and Tampaya, 
being the most celebrated; but these, together 
with another mine of emeralds, are no longer 
worked. Near the first of these mines, in which 



P A C 

were discovered 700 veins of metal, and from 
whence an immense quantity was extracted, there 
was a large population of Spaniards, at least as 
far as the remains and ruins of a large town tes 
tify. This province has also a mine of very 
white and transparent talc, which furnishes the 
whole of Peru for glasses of windows, both in the 
churches and houses. 

The corregidor used to collect a repartimiento 
of 96,505 dollars, and it paid an alcabala of 772 
dollars yearly. Its population consists of the 
following settlements : 

Caquiaviri, Asiento de San Juan 

Viacha, ^ Berenguela, 

Tiahuanaco, Calacoto, 

Huaqui, Caquingora, 

S.AndresdeMachaca, Callapa, 

Jesus de Machaca, (in Carahicara de Pacages, 
which is a Beataria Hulloma, 
with 12 nuns,) Achocalla, 

Santiago de Machaca, S. Pedro del Desagua- 

dero. 

PACAMOROS YAGUARSONGO, or SAN 
JUAN DE SALINAS, a province and government, 
vulgarly called De Bracamoros, in the kingdom 
of Quito, to the *.; antiently called Silla and 
Chacainga, and now San Jean, from its capital ; 
bounded n. by the territory of Zamora and the 
province of Loxa, w. by the province of Piura, s. 
by the river Maranon, or Amazon, and e. by the 
woods and territories of the Xibaros Indians. 
Its population is included in the cities of Loyola, 
Valladolid, Jaen, and Santiago de Las Montanas, 
which is entirely destroyed; the others being 
also reduced to miserable villages, having no 
thing more about them of a city than the name. 
This province is watered by the rivers Guanca- 
bamba, Chinchipe, Paracasa, Tururnbasa, Num- 
balle, Palanda, Simanchi, Sangalla, and San 
Francisco, the which divides the bishopric of 
Quito from that of Truxillo. 

It has rich gold mines, but not of the best 
quality, and it is but thinly peopled, and with 
out any commerce. .The pastures are excellent, 
and there is very good tobacco, wild wax, and 
cotton, and the very finest cacao, though not in 
abundance. It is very subject to invasions from 
the Xibaros Indians, who dwell in the woods on 
the e. 

It is governed by a governor, who resides either 
in Jaar the capital, or in the settlement of Tome- 
pen da. 

PACANA, or PACAXA, a river of the province 
and country of Las Amazonas, which runs/?, pass 
ing through the country of the Yurunas Indians, 



P A C 3 

and enters the Xingu in the great bend which it 
makes before it enters the Maranon or Amazon. 

PACANAS, Indians of N. America. They 
are a small tribe of about 30 men, who live oh 
the Quelqueshoe river, which falls into the bay 
between Attakapi and Sabine, which heads in a 
prairie called Cooko Prairie, about 40 miles 
s. w. ofNatchitoches. They are known to have 
emigrated from West Florida, about 40 years 
ago. Their village is about 50 miles s. e. of the 
Conchattas ; they are said to be increasing a 
little in number; to be quiet, peaceable, and 
friendly people. Their own language differs 
from any other, but they speak Mobilian. 

PACANTIRO, a small settlement of the head 
settlement of the district of Xacona, and alcaldia 
mayor of Z amoria in N ue va Espaiia. It contains 
eight families of Mustees, and as many of Mula- 
toes, exercised in agriculture; three leagues from 
its head settlement. 

PACARAN, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Canete in Peru. 

PACARAOS, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Canta in Peru, annexed to the 
curacy of Pari. 

PACARICTAMBO, a settlement of the pro 
vince and corregimiento of Piura in Peru, annex 
ed to the curacy of Frias. 

PACARNI, a settlement of the government of 
Neiba,in theNuevo Reynode Granada; annexed 
to the curacy of its capital : of an hot tempera 
ture, and abounding in gold mines, vegetable 
productions and cattle. 

PACAS, MELXORDOS, a settlement of the 
province and captainship of Para in Brasil; in 
the island of Caviana. 

PACASMAYU, a river of the province and 
corregimiento of Saria in Peru. It flows down 
from the mountains of Caxamarca, runs w. and 
laves the territories of San Pedro de Lloco, 20 
leagues from Lambayeque. Its shores are very 
delightful and charming, and it runs into the 
Pacific sea forming a bay, in which is caught 
excellent fish. Its mouth is in lat. 7 24 s. 

PACAYAAS, a settlement of the province and 
captains/lip of Para in Brasil; situate at the 
mouth of the river Tocantines. 

[PACAYITA, a volcano in Guatemala, in 
New Spain. In 1773, the lava which issued 
from it destroyed the city of St. Santiago, which 
was situated in the valley of Panchoi.J 

PACCHA, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Cuenca in the kingdom of Zui- 
to ; from which capital it is 56 leagues distant. In 
its district to the s. is an estate called Cuanacauri. 

B2 



4 P A C 

PACCHA, another settlement, in the province 
and corregimiento of Yamparaes and archbishop 
ric of Charcas in Peru. 

PACCHA, another, of the province and corre 
gimiento of Huanta in the same kingdom, annex 
ed to the curacy of Tiellas. 

PACCHA, another, of the province and cor 
regimiento of Loxa in the kingdom of Quito, 
near the river Tumblez. 

PACCHO, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Chancay in Peru. 

PACHABAMBA, a settlement ofthe province 
and corregimiento of Guarucco in Peru ; annexed 
to the curacy of Santa Maria del Valle. 

PACHACAMAC, a settlement of the province 
and corregimiento of Cercado in Peru, annexed to 
the curacy of Lurin : founded in the celebrated 
valley of its name, signifying in the Quechuan 
language Omnipotent, or Creator Preserver of all. 
Here the Indians had a magnificent temple 
dedicated to the invisible, supreme Being^, whom 
they acknowledged and adored. The Emperor 
Pachacutec, who was the tenth monarch of 
Peru, conquered this place with all its delightful 
and fertile territory, and founded there a house 
for Virgins, dedicated to the culture ofthe deity 
Pachacamac. Francisco Pizarro, when he con 
quered the kingdom, plundered this temple and 
the whole settlement of immense wealth, not 
withstanding the Indians had removed a great 
deal. In its vicinity is a small mountain, and a 
rivulet still keeping the same name. At the 
present day there is nothing remaining of the 
temple and the town but a few ruins. The 
illustrious Senor Don Bernardino de Almanza, 
Bishop of Santa Fe, had the honor of being curate 
here. It is 22 miles s. bv e. of Lima, in lat. 12 
19 s. 

PACHACHAC, a settlement of the province 
and corregimiento of Guarochiri in Peru, annexed 
to the curacy of Yauli. 

PACHACHACA, a river of the kingdom of 
Peru, which rises in the province of Aimaraes, 
runs n. traversing the province of Abancay, and 
enters the Apurimac : on it are more than 40 
bridges of cords and willow-twigs. 

PACHACONAS, a settlement ofthe province 
and corregimiento of Aimaraes in Peru. 

PACHACOTO, a settlement of the province 
and corregimiento of Guanuco in the same king 
dom as the former ; annexed to the curacy of 
Santa Maria del Valle. 

PACAMA, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Arica in Peru : annexed to the 
curacy ofCopta. 



P A C 

PACHANGARA, a settlement of the province 
and corregimiento of Caxatambo in Peru ; annex 
ed to the curacy of Churin. 

PACHAS, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Guamalies in the same kingdom 
as the former, to the curacy of which it belongs. 
It is in the centre ofthe province, near the river 
Maranon, which is called Quivilla, and is the 
residence ofthe corregidor. 

[PACHEA, the most . ofthe islands called 
the Pearl or King s Islands, all low and woody, 
and about 12 leagues from Panama. Within 
a league of this island there is anchorage in 17 
fathoms.] 

PACHECA, a small island ofthe S. sea, in the 
gulf and bay of Panama : in which the inha 
bitants of this capital have some plantations of 
maize and other grain for the food ofthe Negroes 
employed in the pearl fisheries on those coasts. 
[This is one ofthe beautiful islands within the 
semicircular bay from Panama to point Mala. 
These islands yield wood, water, fruit, fowls, 
hogs, &amp;c. and afford excellent harbour for ship 
ping, in lat. 8 3 n.l 

(TACHEGOIA, a lake of New South Wales, 
in N. America, in lat. 55 w.] 

PACHIA, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Arica in Peru, annexed to the 
curacy of Tacua. 

PACHICA, a settlement ofthe same province 
and corregimiento and kingdom as the former ; 
annexed to the curacy of Copta. 

PACHICA, another settlement, in the same 
province and kingdom ; annexed to the curacy of 
Cibaya. 

PACHICA, a river of the province and corre 
gimiento of Pataz in the same kingdom. It 
rises in the sierra., runs n- n. c. and enters the 
Ucayale. 

PACHINA, a lake ofthe province and govern 
ment of Moxos and kingdom of Quito ; in the 
territory of Massamaes Indians, between the 
rivers Maranon or Amazon and Napo. 

PACHINI, a settlement . of the province and 
corregimiento of Caxamarquilla in Peru. 

PACHITEA. SEEMANOA. 

PACHO, a settlement of the corregimiento of 
Zipaquira in the Nuevo Reyno de Granada; of 
an hot temperature, abounding in vegetable pro 
ductions. In its vicinity the Jesuits had one of 
the finest estates in the kingdom. It contains 200 
house-keepers, and lies at the back of the settle 
ment of Zipaquira, 14 leagues from Santa Fe. 

PACHUCA, a town and capital ofthe jurisdic 
tion and alcald m mayor of its name in Nueva 



P A C 



P A C 



3 



"Espafia : of a cold temperature, but beautiful to 
behold on account of the symmetry of its streets, 
publicplaces, and edifices, particularly of its parish 
church, which is most magnificent. It has like 
wise a convent of the missionaries of the bare 
footed Franciscans, another called the Hospital 
de San Juan de Dis, and an house of entertain 
ment of the monks of La Merced and several 
hermitages in the wards of the Indians, where 
mass is said. 

It was once more opulent, owing to its mines, 
which are now in a state of great decay, from 
their being partly filled with water which has 
flowed down from the sierra. Gemeli says 
that in the space of 60 leagues he counts more 
than 1,000 mines, and that from one only, called 
La Trinidad, were extracted in the course of 
10 years, 40 millions of dollars. In this town 
are the royal coffers, where the treasurer and 
accomptant reside, taking for the king one fifth 
of all the silver produced here. The trade of 
this metal is the principal of the place, although 
some of the Indians employ themselves in agri 
culture, sowing maize, French beans, and other 
seeds. Its population consists of 900 fami 
lies of Spaniards, Mustees, and Mulatoes, and 
120 of Indians, with a special governor subject 
to the alcalde mayor, but who resides in another 
town called Pachuquilla. The jurisdiction con 
tains the following settlements : 

Real del Monte, Zapotlan, 

Tezayuca, Acayuca, 

Huaquilpa, Tolayuca. 

[Pachuca and Tasco are the oldest mining- 
places in the kingdom of Mexico : and the neigh 
bouring village Pachuquillo, is supposed to have 
been the first Christian village founded by the 
Spaniards. The height of Pachuca is 8,141 feet, 
and it is 45 miles n. e. of Mexico.] 

PACHUCA, a lake formed to drain the waters 
from the heights of the above province ; in which 
there is a sluice, by which the waters may on 
occasion be turned into the lake Zumpango ; the 
said sluice having been made in 1628, and lately 
much improved. 

PACIFIC Sea, a name improperly given to the 
S. sea, as every one will maintain who has navi 
gated it : for, although the part between the tro 
pics may justify the name, the rest of it does not 
merit such a title, as being subject to violent 
tempests, in lat. 20 and 23, equally strong as 
any in Europe. The first Spaniards who navi 
gated this sea gave it the name of Pacific for the 
serenity and gentle gales which they experienced 
in their first voyages, persuading themselves 
that it was equally calm all over it ; but the fury 



of the tempests in the winter, and the dreadful 
agitation of its waters, declare it well worthy 
of another name. 

The pilots of this sea have constantly observed 
that when a n. wind is about to blow, there will 
appear one or two days previous to hover round 
the ships a marine bird, which they callquebranta- 
huesos (break-bones), and which is seen on no 
other occasion ; neither do they know to where 
it resorts. This bird is of a very singular figure, 
and a sure omen of bad weather. 

[PACKERSFIELD, a township of New 
Hampshire, Cheshire county, e. of Keene, on 
the head branches of Ashuelot river. It is 56 
miles w. of Portsmouth, was incorporated in 
1774, and contains 721 inhabitants]. 

PACKOLET, a river of the province and 
colony of S. Carolina, which runs s. e. and 
unites itself with Large river. 

PACLAS, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Luya and Chillaos in Peru ; 
annexed to the curacy of its capital. 

PACLLON, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Caxatambo, in the same kingdom 
as the former ; annexed to the curacy of Man- 
gas. 

[PACMOTE, a bay on the e. side of the island 
of Martinica, between Vauclin bay on the n. and 
Fere A nee or Creek on the s.] 

PA CO, a small island in the lake Umamarca, 
of the province and corregimiento of Omasuyos 
in the kingdom of Peru. 

PACOCHA, a port of the coast of the S. sea, 
in the province and corregimiento of Arica in the 
same kingdom. 

[PACOLET, a small river of S. Carolina, which 
rises in the White Oak mountains, and unites 
with Broad river, 32 miles above Tiger river, 
and 8 s. of the N. Carolina line. Its course is 
about s. e. and on it are the celebrated Pacolet 
springs, 17 miles above its confluence with. 
Broad river.] 

PACOMARCA, a settlement of the province 
and corregimiento of Chilques and Masques, in 
the same kingdom; annexed to the curacy of 
Pampacucho. 

PACORA, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Sana, in the same kingdom as 
the former : situate in the road of Valles, leading 
to Lima. 

PACORA, another settlement, in the province 
and kingdom of Tierra Firme and government 
of Panama, situate in a beautiful and extensive 
valley, which gives it its name, and through 
which a river runs. It is very fertile and of a, 
pleaiant temperature, and so healthy that all the 



6 PAD 

people of the neighbouring places come here to 
recruit their health. It abounds also in cattle, 
having excellent pastures; eight leagues from 
the capital. 

PACORA, the river which waters the valley 
aforesaid, runs s. until it enters the sea in the 
bay or gulf of Panama. 

PACTLICHAN, a settlement of the head set 
tlement of the district of Ancantepee, and alcaldia 
mayor of Tlapa, in Nueva Espana. It contains 
90 families of Indians, who employ themselves in 
cultivating and dressing cotton, and is of an hot 
temperature. 

PACA, a river of the province and govern 
ment of Buenos Ayres in Peru. It runs nearly 
due s. and enters the Plata, near the mouth where 
the Uruguay enters. 

PADAGUEL, a large lake of the kingdom of 
Chile, in the province and corregimiento of San 
tiago. It is formed of the rivers Colina and 
Lampa, the which, after a course of more than 
20 leagues, unite. This lake is more than two 
leagues long, is very deep, and in it are excel 
lent trout and bagres. The shores are very plea 
sant, covered with herbage and trees. It is at 
no great distance from the city of Santiago. 

PADAMO, a river of the province and govern 
ment of Guayana, which rises in the interior of 
the same, between the rivers Caura and Orinoco, 
and forming a curve to thes. enters the latter. 

PADDAVIRI, an arm of the river Parime or 
Paravillanas, one of the four into which it is di 
vided, and the second which enters the Negro. 

PADILLA, a town of the province and govern 
ment of Sierra Gorda in the bay of Mexico, and 
kingdom of Nueva Espana, founded in 1748 by 
the count of that title Don Joseph de Escandon, 
colonel of militia of Quereturo, who gave it this 
name of Dona Antonia de Pedilla, wife of the 
viceroy, who was then Count of Revillagigedo. 
It is small and poor, and has not increased in po 
pulation as was expected. 

PADOUCAS, or PADUCAS, a settlement of the 
province and government of Louisiana in N. 
America, on the shore and at the source of the 
river of its name, where there are also different 
villages of Indians of this name. 

[This once powerful Indian nation (of which 
our author speaks) has, apparently, entirely dis 
appeared; every inquiry made after them has 
proved ineffectual. In the year 1724, they resided in 
several villages on the heads of the Kansas river, 
and could, at that time, bring upwards of 2000 
men into the field. (See Mons. Dupratz History of 
Louisiana, page 71, and the map attached to that 



PAG 

work). The information that we have received 
is, that being oppressed by the nations residing 
on the Missouri, they removed to the upper part 
of the river Plate, where they afterwards had but 
little intercourse with the whites. They seem to 
have given name to the n. branch of that river, 
which is called the Paducas Fork. The most 
probable conjecture is, that being still fur 
ther reduced, they have divided into small wan 
dering bands, which assumed the names of the 
subdivisions of the Paducas nation., and are known 
to us at present under the appellation of Wete- 
pahatoes, Kiawas, Kanenavish, Katteka, Dotame, 
&amp;c. who still inhabit the country to which the 
Paducas are said to have removed.] 

The aforesaid river runs s. e. then e. and enters 
the grand river Misouri. 

PADRE, PUNTA DE, an extremity of the n. 
coast of the island of Cuba, between port Ma- 
lagueta and the bay of Xavara. 

PAECES, a nation of barbarous Indians of the 
Nuevo Reyno de Granada, who dwell in the 
woods near the cities of Cartago and Timana. 
They were ferocious and cannibals, and routed, 
in 1540, the Spanish troops of Aiiasco and Juan 
de Ampudia ; but they began to be reduced to 
the faith, together with the nation of the Yalcones 
in 1634. At present their numbers are much 
diminished. 

PAECES, a city of the province and govern 
ment of Popayan, in the kingdom of Quito, 
founded by captain Domingo Lozano, on the 
shore of the river Grande de la Magdalena in 
1563, in the valley of S. Saldana. It is nearly 
depopulated, since that it was destroyed by the 
Indians in the middle of the 16th century ; 60 
leagues from the city of San Juan de los Llanos. 

PAEZ, a river of the same province and go 
vernment as the former city. It rises in the 
valley of its name, passes .opposite the city of 
La Plata, and enters the Grande de la Magdalena 
at a small distance from this city. 

PAGAN, a small river of the province and 
colony of Virginia in N. America, and of the 
county of S. Isle of Wight. It runs e. and enters 
the sea at the mouth of the river John. 

PAGANAGANDI, a river of the province and 
government of Antioquia in the Nuevo Reyno de 
Granada. It rises at the foot of the sierras of 
Choco, and running n. w. enters the sea in the 
bay of Candelaria of the gulf of Uraba. 

[FACET S Port, a small harbour within the 
great sound of the Bahama islands, and in the 
most e. part of the sound.] 

PAGUAROS, a nation of Indians but little 



P A I 



P A 1 



Known, inhabiting the s. part of the river Ma- 
ranon, a little above the mouth of the Madera. 

PAGUILLAS, a settlement of the province 
and corregimiento of Atacama in Peru. 

[PAGtJISA, or PAQUISA, on the w. side of S. 
America, in lat. 21 55 5. and 10 leagues n. of 
the harbour of Cobija, in the bay of Atacama. 
Aguada de Paguisa, or the watering place of Pa- 
guisa, is 15 leagues from Cobija. The whole 
coast between is high, mountainous, and rocky, in 
the direction of n. n. e.~] 

PAHUATLAN, a settlement of the head set 
tlement of the district and alcaldia mayor of 
Guauchinango in Nueva Espaiia. It contains a 
convent of the order of San Agustin, and 490 
families of Otomies Indians, amongst which are 
included those of the wards of its district ; six 
leagues n. of its capital. 

PAICABI, a settlement of Indians of the king 
dom of Chile, situate on the coast, at the mouth 
of the river Tucapel, near the spot where the 
Indians put to death Pedro de Valdivia, conqueror 
of this kingdom. 

PAICANOS, a nation of Indians, of the pro 
vince and government of Santa Cruz de la Sierra 
in Peru, from which capital it is 20 leagues to the 
s. e. These Indians are poor, docile, and humble : 
the territory abounds in sugar-canes and cotton, 
and the climate is hot, save when the s. wind 
blows, which passing through the snow-clad 
mountains of the Andes, brings with it a refresh 
ing coolness. 

PAICO, a settlement of the province and cor 
regimiento of Lucanas in Peru. 

PAICO, a lake of the kingdom of Chile, be 
tween the rivers Valdivia and Callacalla. It is 
formed from the waste water of the Quillen. 

PAICOLLO^ SAN LUCAS DE, a settlement of 
the province and corregimiento of Pelaya and 
Paspaya in Peru. 

PAlJAN, or PAISAN, SAN SALVADOR DE, a 
settlement of the province and corregimiento of 
Truxillo in Peru, situate in the valley of Chi- 
in the hiffh road on the coast leading: to 



cam a, 



rom 



Quito, 30 miles from its capital, and eight 
the port of Malabrigo. 

PAILAS, a port of the river La Plata, in the 
province and government of Santa Cruz de la 
Sierra in Peru, n. of the capital. 

PAIME, a settlement of the jurisdiction of 
Muzo and corregimiento of Tanja in the Nuevo 
Reyno de Granada. It contains 150 house 
keepers, who live by cultivating sugar-canes, 
cotton, and other fruits of a warm and mild 
climate.. 



[PAINTED Post, a station, so called in New 
York state, inTioga county on then, side of Tioga 
river, between Bath and Newtown, 40 miles 
n. w. by w. of Lockhartsbrough, 45 s. e. of Wil- 
liamsburg on Genesse river, and 163 n. w. of 
Philadelphia. A post-office is kept here.] 

(^PAINTED Rock is on French Broad river, by 
which the line runs between Virginia and Ten 
nessee.] 

[PAINTER S Harbour, on the w. coast of Cape 
Breton island, is nearly due e. of East Point in 
the island of St. John s, lat. 46" 22 n. long. 
61" 16 ..] 

PAIPA, a settlement of the same province and 
corregimiento and kingdom as the former, situate 
near the road which leads to Santa Fe&amp;gt; between 
its capital and the lake of Toca or Totta. It 
was very large and populous in the time of the 
Indians, and was taken by Gonzalo Ximinez de 
Quesada in 1537. It is at present reduced to a 
miserable village, 15 miles n. e. of its capital. 

PAIPIRU, SIERRAS DE, some mountains of 
the province and captainship of Rey in Brazil, 
which run from w. toe. following the same course 
from the river Lavacuan to the brink of the 
great lake of Los Patos. In these mountains 
the Portuguese have some rich gold mines, to 
which they give the same name. 

PAIRA, a settlement of the province and go 
vernment of Quixos and Macas, in the kingdom 
of Quito, belonging to the district of the second. 

PAIRACA, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Aimaraes in Peru. Annexed to 
the curacy of Chuquinga. 

PAIRAPUPU, a small river of the province 
and colony of Surinam, or part of Guayana, 
possessed by the Dutch. It rises in the sierra 
of Usupama, and enters the Cuyuni. 

PAITA, a small city of the province and cor 
regimiento of Piura in Peru, situate on the coast 
of the S. sea, with a good port, and well fre 
quented by vessels from the kingdom of Tierra 
Firme, Acapulco, Sonsonate, &amp;c. Although this 
part, strictly speaking, is nothing more than a 
bay, it is considered one of the best in that coast, 
from the safety of its anchorage. It is the place 
where passengers disembark to go by land to 
Lima, and the other provinces of Peru, and 
where ships bound to Callao touch to take in 
provisions, &amp;c. ; since, without this precaution, 
it would be almost impossible to make that 
voyage, so tedious by the usually contrary winds. 

The town is situate on a&amp;gt; sandy soil, which pro 
duces neither a sprout of herbage, or drop of 
fresh water. This is, therefore, brought from ; 



8 P A I 

the settlement of Colan, and though of a whitish 
and unpleasant look, is, nevertheless, accounted 
wholesome, and supposed to be impregnated with 
the medicinal virtues of sarzaparilla, through a 
wood of which trees it passes. They bring it in 
balzas or rafts, on which they also carry maize 
and other productions to the ships ; but they 
have no other cattle than goats, though plenty 
of fish, and particularly the sea-cats, which they 
catch in abundance, and carry for sale to the 
other provinces, when dried, and where they are 
used in the same manner as dried cod-fish. 

The houses are low, and the walls of earth and 
cane, with the exception of the house of the cor- 
regidor., the parish church, and a convent of the 
order of La Merced, which are all of stone ; but 
the slight structure of their buildings is only 
adapted to this climate, where it is something 
wonderful to rain ; and thus, when a considerable 
shower fell in 1728, the greater part of the houses 
were quite demolished. 

The climate is dry and hot, though healthy. 
There is a small castle for the defence of the 
fort, on the top of a small mountain, called the 
Silla de Paita. The English admiral George 
Anson, took, burnt, and destroyed this city in 
1741. It is 494 miles n. by w. from Lima, and 
192s. by w. of Guayaquil, in long. 80 50 w. 
lat. 5" 5 . 

PAIRAPUPU, a point of land of the coast of 
Peru, in the same province and corregimiento. 

PAITANABA, a settlement of the province 
and corregimiento of Copiapo in the kingdom of 
Chile, on the shore of the river Huasco, not far 
from the junction of the two rivers which form 
this. 

PAITILLA , a point in the bay of Panama, on 
the coast of the S. sea, one league from that capital. 
It forms with the point of Chiriqui, a small road, 
which is dry at ebb-tide, and is the place where 
the canoes come to carry on the traffic of the 
place. 

PAITITI, GRANO, a province and extensive 
country of the kingdom of Peru, little known as 
being inhabited by infidel Indians ; among w r hom 
there are, however, some of the missions of the 
monks of San Francisco. 

PAIX, PORT DE. See PORT DE PAIX. 
PAI-ZAMA, a large rock of the province and 
government of Buenos Ayresin Peru, near the city 
of Ascension, in the road leading to Brasil; on the 
top of which rock are to be seen in the stone the 
marks of a man s feet, which, according to the 
tradition of the Indians, were of a certain person, 
who preached to their ancestors after the Deluge, 



PAL 

and whose name was Paizuma, the same which the 
rock still retains. Some historians pretend to 
prove, that it was the apostle S. Thomas, sup 
porting their argument by the tradition of similar 
phenonmena in various other parts of America. 

[PAJARO, PAJAROS, or PAXAROS, islands on 
the coast of Chile, on the S. Pacific ocean. These 
are three or four rocks, the largest of which is 
called Pajaro Ninno, or Paxaro Ninno, and two 
miles n. w. by n. from the southernmost point of 
the main or point Tortugas, that closes the port 
of Coquimbo.] 

[PAJAROS, LES, or ISLANDS OF BIRDS, a clus 
ter of small islands on the coast of Chile, 29 
miles n. n. w. of the bay of Coquimbo, and 66 
5. s. w. of the harbour of Guasco or Huasco. 
The island of Choros is four miles n. of these 
islands, towards the harbour of Guasco.] 
[PAJAROS. See PAXAROS.] 
[PAKANOKIT,the seat of Masassoit, the fa 
mous Indian chief, was situated on Namasket 
river, which empties into Narraganset bay.] 

PAKEBSEY, orPouGHKEEPSiE, a city of the 
province and colony of New York, e. of the river 
Hudson, and 62 miles n. of the city of New York. 
[See POUGHKEEPSIE.] 

PALACE, an ancient province of the Nuevo 
Reyno de Granada, now united to the pro 
vince of Popayan ; discovered by Sebastian de 
Benalcazar in 1536. Its natives are cruel and 
ferocious, and descendants of the Paeces. It is at 
present without inhabitants, although it has some 
gold mines not worked. 

PALACIO, a river of the province of Sucum- 
bios, in the kingdom of Quito, which runs from 
w. to e. and unites itself with the river which 
rises from the lake Mocoa, in lat. l u n. 

PALAGUA, a lake of the Nuevo Reyno de 
Granada, in the province of Muzo or of Los 
Marquetones ; formed from a waste water of the 
river Grande de la Magdalena. 

PALANCA, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Chochapoyas in Peru ; annexed 
to the curacy of Soritor. 

PALANDA, an ancient province of the king 
dom of Quito, belonging partly to the province 
of Jaen and partly to that of Piura, although 
the settlement remains in a very dilapidated state ; 
of the same name, and situate on the bank of a 
river, w. of the city of Loyola, in lat. 4 48 s. 

PALANDA, the aforesaid river, runs s. e. rising 
near the city of Valladolid ; waters the province, 
and enters the Chinchipe. 

PALANIZUELA, a settlement of the head 
settlement of the district of Juguila and akaldia 



V A L 

mayor of Xicayan in Nueva Espana. It contains 
24 families of Indians, and is 20 leagues e. of its 
head settlement. 

PALANTLA, a settlement of the head set 
tlement of the district of Zitlala and alcaldia 
mayor of Chilapa, in the same kingdom as the 
former. It contains 42 families of Indians, and 
is two leagues s. of its head settlement. 

PAL AT A, a river of the province and govern 
ment of Tucuman in Peru, and of the district 
and jurisdiction of the city of Salta. Its shores 
abound with the pasture of simbolar, resembling 
the cane, and with leaves like barley, and on 
which the mules thrive and fatten. It is also 
used by the natives for interweaving the heads 
of the carts used for transporting merchandize to 
Buenos Ayres. It runs e. and enters the Pasage. 

[PALATINE, New York. A part of this town 
was erected into two new towns by the legisla 
ture in 1797.] 

[PALATINE, or PALENTINE, a township in 
Montgomery county, New York, on the n. side 
of Mohawk river, and w. of Caghnawaga. In 
1790 it contained 3404 inhabitants, including 
192 slaves. In 1796, 585 of the inhabitants were 
electors. The compact part of it stands on the 
bank of the Mohawk, and contains a Reformed 
Dutch church, and 20 or 30 houses. It is 36 
miles above Schenectady.] 

[PALATINE Town, in the state of New York, 
lies on the e. bank of Hudson s river, and n. 
side of the mouth of Livingston river, which 
empties into the former; 10 miles n. of Rhyn- 
beck, and 14 southerly of Hudson s city.] 

PALATOS, a settlement of the jurisdiction 
and corregimiento of Bogota in the Nuevo Reyno 
de Granada. 

PALCA, a settlement of the province and cor 
regimiento of Angaraez in Peru ; annexed to the 
curacy of Acoria. 

PALCAMAYO, a river of the province and 
corregimiento of Pataz in Peru, which runs n. in 
the district of the missions of Caxamarquilla for 
many leagues, and then unites with the Pangon 
to enter in a very abundant stream the Ucayale. 

PALCAMAYO, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Tarma in Peru ; annexed to the 
curacy of Acobamba. 

PALCARO, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Cotabambas in Peru. 

PALCIPA, a lake of the province and go 
vernment of Tucuman in Peru, formed from the 
river Andahuilas in the confines of the kingdom 
of Chile. On its shore is a fort for defence 
against the Infidel Indians. 

VOL. IV. 



PAL 



9 



PALCIPA, an extensive, fertile, and delightful 
valley of the same province. 

PALCO, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Lucanas in Peru ; annexed to 
the curacy of Otoca. 

PALCO, another settlement, in the province 
and corregimiento of Concepcion in the kingdom 
of Chile, on the shore of the river Biobio. 

PALENA, a settlement of the province and 
government of Maracaibo in the Nuevo Reyno 
de Granada ; on the shore of the river S. Do 
mingo, to the s. of the city of Barinas Nueva. 

PALENQUE, a settlement of the province 
und kingdom of Tierra Firme, situate on the n. 
coast, in the jurisdiction of the city of Porto 
Bello, where terminates the jurisdiction of the 
province, and where that of the province of 
Darien begins. It is composed of negro refugee- 
slaves, who have, for the sake of better security, 
selected a place craggy and difficult of access on 
the shore of the river Sardinas. Many maintain 
their religion, and in 1743 they intreated the 
president of Panama that he would send them a 
curate. 

PALENQUE, another settlement, of the pro 
vince and government of Cartagena, and district 
of the town of Maria, n. of the Nuevo Reyno de 
Granada. 

PALENQUE, another, of the province and go 
vernment of Guayaquil in the kingdom of Quito, 
of the district of Baba ; situate on the shore of 
this river, to the n. of its head settlement, at 24 
leagues distance. 

PALENQUE, another, of the province and go 
vernment of Santa Marta in the Nuevo Reyno 
de Granada, on the sea-coast. 

PALENQUE, a river in the same province and 
kingdom as the former. It enters the Sebastian. 

PALENQUE, a point of land on the 5. coast of 
the island S. Domingo, between the point of 
Nizao and the river Ozama. 

PALENQUES, a barbarous nation of Indians 
of Guayana or Nueva Andalucia. They took 
this name from the estacades which they made for 
their defence, and which resembled trenches. It 
is not numerous, but ferocious, and dwelling on 
the borders of the Orinoco; bounded by the na^ 
tion of the Guamos. 

PALIZADA. See MISSISIPPI. 

PALLACTANGA, a settlement of the pro 
vince and corregimiento of Riobamba in the king 
dom of Quito ; celebrated for the rich mines of 
gold and silver in its district, and which were for 
merly worked to such profit as to exceed all the 
other mines of Peru ; one individual alone hay* 



JO 



ing a register, in which 18 veins of these metals 
were marked as his own property. These mines 
are no longer worked. 

PALLAHU A, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Arica in Peru; annexed to the 
curacy of Tacna. 

PALLALLA, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Angaraez in Peru, where there 
is a coal-mine not worked. 

PALLAQUEZ, SAN MIGUEL DE, a settle 
ment of the province and corregimiento of Caxa- 
marca in Peru. 

PALLAS, a settlement of the province and cor 
regimiento of Tarma in Peru ; annexed to the cu 
racy of Atabillosbaxos. 

PALLA3CA, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Conchucos in Peru. 

PALLATE, a bay on the s. coast of the island 
Jamaica. 

[PALLISER S Islands, in the s. Pacific ocean, 
are between 15 and 16 of s. lat. and from 146 to 
147 of w. long. From lat. 14 to 20 s. and long. 
138 to 150 w. the ocean is strewed with low half- 
overflowed islands, which renders it necessary for 
navigators to proceed with much caution.] 

PALMA, NUESTRA SENORA DE LA, a city of 
the corregimiento of Tunja, in the Nuevo Reyno 
de Granada; founded by Don Antonio de To 
ledo, in the country of the Colimas Indians, in 
1560, and not in 1512, as the Ex-jesuit Coleti as 
serts : translated to the spot where it now stands 
by Captain Gutierre de Ovalle in 1563 (and not 
in 1572, as that author also affirms), giving it the 
name of Ronda, in honour of his native place, but 
which it afterwards lost. 

It is of a moderately hot temperature, pro 
duces much cotton, maize, yucas, plantains, and 
sugar-cane, of which sugar is made in abun 
dance, with preserves, particularly of guayaba; 
and with these and some cotton and linen manu 
factures, it carries on a pretty trade. Money 
being very scarce here, articles of cotton are 
bartered for provisions, and nice versa. The 
principal food of the natives is what they call 
soata, which is composed of maize and reyamas. 
This city has, besides the parish-church, which is 
entitled Nuestra Senora de la Asuncion, a con 
vent of the religious order of San Francisco, so 
poor as to maintain only one individual. The 
copper mines, which are very fine, are worked. 

The inhabitants amount to 600 housekeepers, 
who by the commerce alone aforesaid of the sweets 
and linen^ have raised themselves to such a de 
gree of opulence and respectability as to vie with 
the inhabitants of the neighbouring town of 



PAL 

Pamplona, without the advantages of their silver 
and emerald mines. They have, however, 
fairer mine, the source of all happiness, virtue. 
It is this that renders them beloved and esteemed 
throughout the kingdom. This city is situate on 
the e. shore of the river Magdalena, 54 miles n. w. 
of Santa Fe, and 68 w. by s. of Tunja. Lat. 
5" 8 n. and long. 74 52 30 ? w. 

PALM A, a settlement of the head settlement of 
the district of Tamazunchale, and alcaldia mayor 
of Valles, in Nueva Espana; situate in a spot 
surrounded by serranias, in which dwell dispersed 
the Pames Indians. Few of these live in the set 
tlement, but prefer scattering themselves over the 
mountains and woods, according to their antient 
habits, and in different times of the year they 
take up their residence by the stalls where they 
pen their cattle. The population (including 
these mountaineers) amounts to 3000 families. 
It has a convent of the religious order of San 
Francisco, and is 22 leagues w. of its head set 
tlement. 

PALMA, another, of the head settlement of 
Zanguio, and alcaldia mayor of Zamora, in the 
same kingdom ; situate in an extensive and plea 
sant valley. 

It is of an hot and moist temperature ; bounded 
e. by the mountain of Las Canoas, and w. and n. 
by the sea of Chapala, from the shores of which 
it is distant a league and an half. Its population 
is of 24 families of Spaniards, Mustees, and Mu- 
lattoes, and 13 of Indians, who maintain them 
selves by fishing. Somewhat less than three 
leagues from its hea/d settlement. 

PALMA, another, of the province and corregi- 
miento of Valparaiso in the kingdom of Chile ; 
situate s. of the town of Santa Barbara. 

PALMA, another, with the dedicatory title of 
Nuestra Senora del Rosario, of the missions 
which are held by the religious order of S. Do 
mingo, in the district of the city of Pedraza, of 
the Nuevo Reyno de Granada. 

PALMA, a river of the kingdom of Brazil, 
which runs nearly w. with a slight inclination to 
s. w. and enters the Paratinga. 

PALMA, an island situate near the coast of the 
same kingdom as the former river, close to the 
mouth of the river La Plata. 

PALMA, another settlement, with the surname 
of Gorda, in the jurisdiction of Orizava, and al 
caldia mayor of Ixmiquilpan in Nueva Espana. 

PALMAR, SAN AGUSTIN DEL, a settlement 
and head settlement of the district of the alcaldia 
mayor of Tepeaca in Nueva Espana; of a cold 
and dry temperature, and containing 36 families 



PAL 

of Spaniards, 48 of Mustees, 12 of Mulattoes, and 
61 of Indians. Its territory is barren and fallow, 
so that the greater part of its inhabitants follow 
the trade of locksmiths. Eight leagues e. one 
quarter to s. e. of its capital. 

PALMAR, another settlement, of the province 
of Guayana and government of Cumana : one of 
the missions held there by the Capuchin fathers 
of Cataluna; situate s. of the city of S. Tomas. 

PALMAR, another, of the province and govern 
ment of Veragua, in the kingdom of Tierra 
Firme. 

PALMAR, another, of the province and govern 
ment of Yucatan in the kingdom of Guatemala, 
on the side of the point of Piedra on the coast. 

PALMAR, a bay on the coast of the S. sea, of 
the province and government of Darien, of the 
kingdom of Tierra Firme ; situate between the 
port Quemado and that of Pinas. It is a good 
port, called De la Hambre, where the river of 
the same name empties itself. 

PALMAR, a lake of the province and captain 
ship of Rey in Brazil, in the extremity of the 
coast formed by the river La Plata. 

PALMAR, a port on the coast of the S. sea, of 
the province and government of Esmeraldas, 
under the equinoctial line. 

PALMAR, a river of the province and govern 
ment of Guayaquil in the kingdom of Quito, of 
the district of Yaguache, to the n. It runs n. w. 
and enters the Babahoyo in lat. 1"45 s. 

PALMAR, a point of land of the interior points 
which form the entrance or channel of the lake 
of Maracaibo. 

PALMARES, SAN DIEGO DE LOS, or DE 
GUAMES, a settlement of the province and go 
vernment of Quixos and Macas in the kingdom 
of Quito : one of those which form the missions 
of the Sucunbios Indians, and which were held 
at the charge of the Jesuits. It is situate on the 
shore of the river Guames, near where it is en 
tered by the Putumayo. 

PALMARES, another settlement, of the pro 
vince and captainship of Rey in Brazil ; situate 
on the coast, near lake Charqueada. 

PALMAS, SALAZAR DE LOS, a city of the 
government of S. Faustino in the Nuevo Reyno 
de Granada : founded by Diego de Montes in 
1553, by way of security to the silver mines of 
S. Pedro, on the shore of a river which traverses 
a beautiful date-grove ; but its inhabitants shortly 
abandoned it being pressed sore by the infidels, 
who succeeded in destroying it. In 1555 it was 
re-peopled by Captain Diego Parada, with the 
name of Nirua, from its having been removed to 



PAL 



11 



the shore of this river : but here it had not better 
fortune than in the former place, and in 1583 it 
was founded a third time in the spot where it 
now stands, by the Governor Francisco de Ca- 
ceres, by order of the Colonel Alonso Estevan 
Rangel, for the head of the alcaldia mat/or^ 
which title the successors of the governor pre 
served for many years. 

It is of an hot temperature, and lies amongst 
some rough and craggy mountains ; but is very 
abundant in cacao, sugar canes, plantains, yucas* 
and maize. It has, besides the parish church, a 
chapel of Nuesta Senora de Belen. Its popula 
tion is composed of 400 housekeepers, and it is 
16 leagues n.n.w. of Pamplona ; from the ju 
risdiction of which it is divided by the river Sa- 
lazar, or Sulia. 

PALM AS, another city, with the dedicatory title 
of San Miguel, in the same kingdom : founded 
by Fernando Valdes in 1544, on the shore of the 
grand river Magdalena, n. of Santa Fe ; but it 
has fallen into such decay as to be nothing more 
than a miserable hamlet. 

PALMAS, a settlement, with the dedicatory 
title of San Juan, in the province and govern 
ment of Cartagena, of the same kingdom as the 
former cities. It belongs to the district of the 
jurisdiction of the town of Sinu, and is situate at 
the bay of this name, near the coast. 

PALMAS, another, with the dedicatory title of 
San Luis, of the missions which are held by the 
religious order of S. Domingo, in the district 
and jurisdiction of the city of Pedraza, of the 
Nuevo Reyno de Granada, on the shore of the 
river Canaguan. 

PALMAS, a river of the province and alcaldia 
mayor of Panuco in Nueva Espana, which runs 
into the sea in the bay of Mexico. 

PALMAS, another river, of the alcaldia mayor 
of Tabasco, in the same kingdom ; which also 
enters the sea between the rivers Santa Ana 
and De Dos Bocas. 

PALMAS, a bay on the coast of California, op 
posite Nueva Espana, between the bay of Cer- 
ralvo and the cape Porfia. 

PALMAS, a port of the province and govern 
ment of Santa Marta in the Nuevo Reyno de 
Granada, in the river Grande de la Magdalena, 
with a settlement of considerable traffic. 

PALMAS, another river, of the province and 
government of Venezuela in the same kingdom, 
which runs s. and enters the Manapire. 

PALMAS, another port, on the n. coast of the 
island of Cuba, between the port of Sama and 
the bay of Baxanas. 

c 2 



PAL 



PAL 



PALM AS, an island of the S. sea, discovered 
by Francisco Pizarro in 1527, who gave it this 
name from the number of palms found upon it. 
It lies in the bay of Chiramina, is a league and 
an half in circumference, opposite the mouth of 
the river San Juan, of the province and govern 
ment of Choco. Twenty-six leagues from the cape 
of Corrientes, and is desert and uncultivated. 

PALMAS, another river, of the island of Gra 
nada, one of the lesser Antilles of the French. 
It runs e. and enters the sea in lat. 12 4 n. 

PALMAS. Some islands of the N. sea, near 
the coast of the province and government of Da- 
rien, and kingdom of Tierra Firme. They are 
many, and form a semi-circle between the island 
Pinos and the Playon Grande and the bay of 
Mandinga. 

[PALMER, a rough and hilly township in 
Hampshire county, Massachusetts, 63 miles a . 
by s. of Boston ; it is situated on the n. side of 
Ouebang river, and bounded e. by Western in 
Worcester county. An act passed in last session, 
1796, to incorporate a society to make a turnpike- 
road between these two towns. It was incor 
porated in 1752, and contains 809 inhabitants. J 

[PALMER S River, a water of Narraganset 
bay, which empties with another small river, and 
forms Warren river, opposite the town of Warren.] 

PALMERAS, PUNTA DE, a point on the coast 
of Los Humos, of the province and captainship of 
Seara in Brazil ; between the island Corubun and 
port Tortuga. 

[PALMERSTON S Island, of which one in 
particular has been so named, is in lat. 18 10 s. 
and long. 163 20 w. and is the second in situation 
from the s. e. of a group of 9 or 10, all known 
by the same general name. It affords neither 
anchorage nor water ; but if the weather is mo 
derate, a ship that is passing the s. Pacific ocean 
in this track, may be supplied with grass for 
cattle, cocoa-nuts, fish, and other productions of 
the island. The principal island is not above a 
mile in circumference ; nor is it elevated more 
than three feet above the surface of the sea.] 

[PALMETTO, the most e. point of the bay 
so called, on the s. w. coast of the island of S. 
Christopher s, in the W. Indies. The shore is 
rocky, and a fort protects the bay. Also the most 
n. point of the island of Jamaica ; having Ma 
natee bay on the w. and Island bay on the e.] 

PALMILLA, SAN LUCAS DE LOS, a settle 
ment of the head settlement of the district and 
alcaldia mayor of Guejozinco in Nueva Espana. 
It contains 77 families of Indians, and lies n. of 
its capital. 



PALMILLA, another settlement, with the de 
dicatory title of Santa Cecilia ; a reduction of 
Indians made by the missionaries of the order oi 
San Francisco, in the district and jurisdiction 
of the alcaldia mayor of Guadalcazar in Nueva 
Espana. It contains 40 families of Indians, with 
out those who live dispersed about its precincts, 
and is 20 leagues from the head settlement of the 
district of Tula. 

PALMILLA, another, of the province and go 
vernment of Sierra Gorda in the bay of M exico, 
and kingdom of Nueva Espana, founded in 
1740, by Don Joseph de Escandon, Count of 
Sierra (jorda, colonel of militia of Queretaro. 

[PALMISTE Point, on the n. side of the 
n. w. part of the island of St. Domingo, three 
leagues s. of point Portugal, the e. point of 
the small island La Tortue, and five e. of Port 
de Paix.J 

PALMISTES, PUNTA DE, a point on the s. 
coast of the island of S. Christopher, one of the 
lesser Antilles, betw r een the river Pentecoste and 
the rivulet of Pelau. 

PALMITAL, a small river of the province 
and captainship of Portoseguro in Brazil. It rises 
near the coast, runs n. n. w. and enters the river 
of Las Piedras. 

PALMITO, a river of the province and coun 
try of the Canclos Indians, in the kingdom of 
Quito, which runs e. n. e. and enters the Bobo- 
nasa by the w. shore, between the Caspi-yacu to 
the n. and the Chambira to the s. in lat. 137 s. 

PALMITO, a point of land of the n. coast of the 
island Jamaica, between the river Annoto and 
the bay of Orange. 

[PALMYRA, a town and the only port of 
entry and delivery in the state of Tennesse, 
constituted a port of entry by law of the United 
States, January 31, 1797.] 

PALO, COLORADO, a settlement of the pro 
vince and corregimiento of Quillota in the king 
dom of Chile ; situate on the coast at the mouth 
of the river Limari. 

PALO, ARECIFE DEL, an island near the coast 
of Vera Cruz in the bay of Mexico and kingdom 
of Nueva Espana, between the island Verde and 
La Anegada. 

PALOMAS, Is LA DE LOS, an island in the 
gulf of Venezuela, at the entrance or mouth of 
the lake of Maracaibo, to the n. of the city. It 
has a small settlement of the same name, and 
is in lat. 10 56 n. 

PALOMETA, a small river of the province 
and government of Santa Cruz de la Sieri a in 
Peru. It rises from some very lofty mountains 



P A M 

to the w. of the settlement of Los Desposorios, 
runs n. and enters the Piray. 

PALOMINO, a river of the province and go 
vernment of Santa Marta in the Nuevo Revno 
de Granada, which rises in the sierra of the iPo- 
segueicas Indians, runs n. and enters the sea be 
tween the cape San Juan de Guia and the river 
Hacha. 

[PALOMINOS. Small islands on the coast 
of Peru, S. America ; three miles w. of St. Law 
rence island, or St. Lorenzo. They have from 
13 to 14 fathoms water on them.J 

PALOMOS, a barbarous nation of Indians, 
of the province of Gran Chaco in Peru. It 
extends from e. to w. from the river Bermejo, 
and the spacious llanuras of Manso to the s. 
These barbarians are ferocious, and issue from 
the woods to infest the neighbouring provinces ; 
and as a defence against them there is a fort 
called San Joseph, supplied by the Spaniards. 

[PALONQUE, the cape e. of Nisao point, 
at the mouth of Nisao river, on the s. side of 
the island of St. Domingo, in lat. 18 13 n. and 
long. 73 2 w. of Paris.] 

PALORA, a rapid river of the province and 
government of Macas in the kingdom of Quito, 
which rises in the province of Riobamba, to the 
n. of a lake of the mountain of Sangay, close to 
the settlement of Cebadas. It runs from w. to e. 
till it enters the Pastaza or Pastaca, and in the 
woods of its vicinity dwell some Indians of the na 
tion of Los Xibaros. Its mouth is in lat. 1 47 s. 

PALPA, a settlement of the province and cor- 
regimiento of lea in Peru ; situate on the shore 
of the Rio Grande, not far from the sea-coast. 

PALPACACHI, a settlement of the province 
and corregimiento of Cotabambas in Peru : an 
nexed to the curacy of Huaillati. 

PALPAL, a small river of the kingdom of 
Chile in the province and corregimiento of Itala. 
It runs n.n.zv. and unites itself with the Temuco 
to enter the Dinguilli. 

PALPA S, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Caxatambo in Peru ; annexed to 
the curacy of Gorgor. 

PALPAS, another settlement, in the same pro 
vince and kingdom as the former; annexed to 
the curacy of Churin. 

[PALTZ, NEW, a township on the w. side of 
Hudson s river in Ulster county, New York, 
about 18 miles n. of Newburgh, and 30 n.e. of 
Goshen. It contains 2309 inhabitants, including 
302 slaves.] 

PAMBAMARCA, a settlement of the pro 
vince and corregimiento of Lucanas in Peru. 



13 



PAMBAMARCA, a very lofty paramo or moun 
tain, always covered with snow, of the kingdom 
of Quito ; one of those chosen by the acade 
micians of the sciences at Paris, who visited this 
kingdom to measure one of the degrees of the 
equator, on which to make their observations. 
On it are seen the ruins of four fortresses of the 
Incas, called pucares, consisting of concentrical 
ditches of three or four rows, and in the interior 
one a wall or parapet. The exterior one, which 
was in general about two toises wide and as 
many deep, is in some parts so wide as to be 
seen at a league s distance ; and indeed it was 
altogether so ordered for the safety of the be 
sieged, that the inner border should command 
the exterior ones. At the top of this mountain 
there blows a constant wind, so strong that 
people can scarcely live in it. It is 20 milea 
with a slight inclination to the n. of Quito. 

PAIMAUNKE. See YORK. 

[PAMLICO Sound, on the e. coast of N. 
Carolina, is a kind of lake or inland sea, from 
10 to 30 miles broad, and nearly 60 miles in 
length. It is separated from the Atlantic ocean, 
in its whole length, by a beach of land hardly a 
mile wide, generally covered with small trees 
or bushes. Through this bank are several small 
inlets by which boats may pass ; but Ocrecok 
inlet is the only one that will admit vessels of 
burden into the districts of Edenton and Nevv- 
bern. This inlet is in lat. 34 54 n. and opens 
between Ocrecok island and Core bank. This 
sound communicates with Core and Albemarle 
sounds, and receives Pamlico or Tar river, the 
river Neus, besides other small streams. See 
OCRECOK, Cape HATTERAS, &amp;c.] 

PAMPACHIRI, a settlement of the province 
and corregimiento of Andahuailas in Peru. 

PAMPACOCHA, a settlement of the province 
and corregimiento of Canta, in the same kingdom 
as the former ; annexed to the curacy of Arahuay. 

PAMPACOLCA, a settlement of the province 
and corregimiento of Condesuios de Arequipa in 
the same kingdom. 

PAMPACUCHO, a settlement of the pro 
vince and corregimiento of Chilques and Masques 
in the same kingdom. 

PAMPADEQUES, SAN PABLO DB, a settle 
ment of the missions which were held by the Je 
suits, in the province and government of Mainas 
of the kingdom of Quito. 

PAMPAHUACIS, a barbarous nation of waiv 
like Indians, who dwell n. of Cuzco ; subjected 
to the empire by Huayna Capac, thirteenth empe 
ror of the Incas, 



14 



P A M 



PAMPAMARCA, a settlement of the province 
and corregimiento of Aimaraes in Peru. 

PAMPAMARCA, another settlement, in the pro 
vince and corregimiento of Parinacochas, of the 
same kingdom. 

PAMPAMARCA, another, of the province and 
corregimiento of Tinta or Canes, and Canches, 
same kingdom. , 

PAMPANO, a small river of the province and 
government of Maracaibo in the Nuevo Reyno 
de Granada : it enters the lake Atole at a small 
space from its head. 

PAMPAQUINCHIS, a settlement of the pro 
vince and corregimiento of Yauyos in Peru ; an 
nexed to the curacy of Huanic. 

PAMPAROMAS, a settlement of the province 
and corregimiento of Andahuailas in Peru ; an 
nexed to the curacy of Moro in the province of 
Santa. 

PAMPAS, a barbarous nation of warlike 
Indians of the kingdom of Peru ; extending n. 
and w. of the Paraguay, and bounded by Cordoba 
del Tucuman. 

PAMPAS, some extensive llanuras of the pro 
vince and government of Buenos Ayres, running 
s. for more than 300 leagues, as far as the pro 
vince ofCuyoof the kingdom of Chile. In them 
there lives some wandering barbarous nations of 
Indians, the Huarcas or Pampas, the Aucaes, 
Pehuenches, Pulches and Uncas;,who for the 
most part go about on horseback, robbing, 
plundering, and murdering the travellers which 
fall into their way : accordingly it is necessary, 
in passing from Peru to Chile, and vice-versa, 
that the carts (these being the vehicles used for 
the purpose) should go in large parties, so as to 
give a more effectual resistance to this race of 
banditti : nor is the same precaution unobserved 
by such as go to collect salt from the great 
saline grounds 200 leagues from Buenos Ayres ; 
this salt being extremely white, and of excellent 
quality, and employing, in conveying it, no less 
than 300 carts, which, although in close company, 
are not unfrequently attacked in their journey. 
They start about November, and are two months 
away on their rout. 

In these vast plains are found many tigers, 
leopards, ostriches, quiriquinchos or armadillos^ 
partridges, hares, and other animals. In the pas 
tures which are exceedingly fine, and in some 
parts so lofty as to cover a man on horseback, 
breed a great number of bulls, horses, and mules, 
descendants of those brought from Spain at the 
time of the conquest. Many troops of these 
wild animals, in their rout from one place to an- 



P A M 

other, will often meet and attack the unwary 
traveller, and even the aforesaid carts in their 
way from Buenos Ayres to Mendoza in the king 
dom of Chile. Sometimes proceeding- in multi 
tudes to drink at one of the many rivers which 
irrigate these parts, they will rush with such 
violence into the water that the foremost will be 
driven so deep into the mud by the pressure of 
those behind, as to be unable to extricate them 
selves, and there perish ; and this is the reason 
why there are constantly seen such heaps of 
bones on the banks of the abrevaderos or drink 
ing places. 

The Indians have an easy method of catching 
any of the above animals by a small cord of two 
yards long, with a ball of iron or stone at one 
end, at the other a piece of wood or some light 
substance : this they use as a sling, and such is 
their dexterity in throwing it that, without ever 
missing the animal aimed at amongst the vast 
herd, they cause it so to entwine its legs, that, in 
effort to escape, it immediately falls, and becomes 
an easy prey. 

Here are also many asses, by which, in this 
province as well as that of Tucuman, they produce 
a fine and numerous breed of mules, which are 
carried for sale to Peru. There are likewise 
many dogs, so voracious and bold, that, in lack of 
cattle to feed on, they will fall upon the people ; 
nor is it uncommon that, under such circum 
stances, travellers have been sacrificed to their 
greediness : these dogs will not merely attack 
cattle, but they will go in troops and fight the 
tiger, and although many of them, as is generally 
the case, will fall victims to their presumption, 
they never fail to be finally victorious, and glut 
themselves on its flesh : the same system of 
warfare they practise, but with less cost, upon 
the bulls. Those who have seen these engage 
ments represent them as horrible though extreme 
ly fine and amusing ; more so, perhaps, could 
they be witnessed in security. 

In these Pampas blow several strong winds 
very similar to hurricanes, which they call pam 
peros ; and so impetuous are they as to arrest the 
force and progress of the carts drawn by six oxen 
and with a load of upwards of 600 arrobas. 

PAMPAS, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Yauyos in Peru, in the district 
of which is a road leading down to the settlement 
of Tupe, called de las cinco mil escalones (of the 
5000 steps), since it is asserted that there are this 
number in its descent. 

PAMPAS, another, of the province and corre 
gimiento of Gviailasci in the same kingdom. 



P A M 

PAMPAS, another, of the province and corregi- 
miento of Conchucos in the same kingdom ; annex 
ed to the curacy of Pallasca. 

PAMPAS, another, of the province and corregi- 
mienlo of Gunata in the same kingdom. 

PAMPAS, another, of the province and corre- 
gimicnto of Canta in the same kingdom ; annex 
ed to the curacy of Arahuay. 

PAMPAS, another, of the province and corre 
gimiento of Guailasci in the same kingdom ; dis 
tinct from that aforesaid, and annexed to the 
curacy of Marco 

PAMPAS, a large river, of the province and 
corregimiento of Lucanas in the same kingdom of 
Peru. It rises n. of the settlement of Sora, runs 
n. and enters the Apurimac, in the province of 
Guanta. It has a bridge of hurdles, of 30 yards 
long and one and an half wide, over which pass 
the goods on their way from Lima to Cuzco. 

PAMPAYATA, a settlement of the province 
and corregimiento of Aimaraes in Peru, an 
nexed to the curacy of Moro in the province of 
Santa. 

PAMPICHI, a settlement of the province and 
kingdom of Guatemala, annexed to the curacy of 
Amatitan, to which it is very near. 

PAMPLONA, a city of the province and corre 
gimiento of Tunga in the Nuevo Reyno de Gra 
nada : founded by Captain Pedro de Ursua and 
Orlien de Velasco in 1549, according to the 
order of the Most Illustrious Piedrahita, and not 
Miguel Diez de Armendariz, as the Ex-Jesuit 
Coleti asserts, in 1558. He gave it the name in 
memory of his native place of Ursua, capital of 
Navarra. It is situate on a plain or llano called 
Del Espiritu Santo, surrounded on all sides by 
mountains, which make its temperature extremely 
cold. It is very fertile, and abounding in cattle, 
vegetable productions, sugar- engines, and cotton 
munufactures, with all of which it has a greatcom- 
merce, as well as by gold and copper taken from 
some mines, the last of which and the best was 
discovered in 1765. 

The parish church is one of the handsomest 
buildings in the whole kingdom. Here are beau 
tiful houses, public edifices and squares, an her 
mitage which is a vice-parish, and in which is 
venerated an image of Christ crucified, with two 
of the thieves, all being fine pieces of sculpture ; 
some convents of the religious orders of San Fran 
cisco, Santo Domingo, San Agustin, a college 
which belonged to the Jesuits, an hospital, and a 
monastery of nuns of Santa Clara ; the which, 
together with the whole city, suffered much from 
an earthquake which happened in 1644. 



PAN 15 

Its jurisdiction extends as far as Tunja, 24 
leagues further on the part towards J iron, and 
the same distance to the e. and towards the town 
of San Christoval. It has, besides the governor, 
a corregidor of Indians, and an alcaldia mayor of the 
mines. It has been the native place of Fr. Fran 
cisco Vivar, of the order of San Francisco, a man 
of great virtue and science, 185 miles n. e. of 
Santa Fe, 124 n. e. of Velez, 156 w. s. w. of Trux- 
illo, 110 w. s. w. of Merida, and 131 w. with a 
slight inclination to the s. of Varinas, in lat. 7 1 
30 V/ n. and Ion. 72 21 w. 

PAMTICOE, an abundant river of the pro 
vince and colony of N. Carolina ; which runs s. e. 
and enters the sea in the strait of its name. 

This strait is formed by the coast of S. Carolina 
and the island of Hateras. 

[PAMUNKY, the ancient name of York river 
in Virginia ; but this name is now confined to 
the s. branch, formed by the confluence of the 
N. and S. Anna. This and the n. branch, Matta- 
pony, unite and form York river, just below the 
town of De La War.] 

PAMURACOCHA, a lake of the province and 
corregimiento of Parinacochas in Peru. It is long 
and narrow. 

PAN, BOCA DE, a creek of. the coast of the S. 
sea, in the province and corregimiento of Piura 
and kingdom of Peru ; situate in the bay of 
Tumbes. 

PAN, DE AZUCAR, a settlement of the province 
and government of Paraguay, situate near the 
strait of its name. 

PAN, another settlement, of the missions which 
were held by the Jesuits in the Orinoco, and 
now under the charge of the order of the Capu 
chins. 

PAN, a very lofty mountain, of a conical figure, 
on the shore of the river La Plata, at its entrance; 
in the province and government of Buenos Ayres, 
close to the river Solis Chico. 

PAN, another, on the s. coast of the strait of 
Magellan, at the mouth of the river Jelouzelt. 

PAN, another, on the n. e. coast of the island of 
Martinique, between the bay of S. Jacques and 
that of Charpentier. 

PAN, a strait or narrow pass formed by the 
river Paraguay, in the province of this name. 

[PANA^an island on the coast of Peru, 35 miles 
s. s. w. of Guayaquil. At point Arena, which is 
the n. w. point, all ships bound farther into 
Guayaquil bay stop for pilots, as there is good 
anchorage over against the middle of the town, 
in five fathoms, and a soft oozy ground. It is 
also called Puna.] 



16 P A N 

[PANACA, a burning mountain on the w. coast 
of New Mexico, about three leagues from the 
volcano of Sansonate.] 

PANACACHI, a settlement of the province 
and corregimiento of Chayanta or Charcas in 
Peru. 

[PANADOU, or MENADOU, a bay on the 
coast of Cape Breton island, near the s. part of 
the gulf of St. Lawrence]. 

PANAMA, a city and capital of the kingdom 
and government of Tierra Firme ; founded on 
the coast of the Pacific or S. sea, upon an isthmus 
to which it gives its name, at the foot of a lofty 
mountain called Ancon. It was founded by 
Pedrarias Davila in 1518, in a part now called 
Panama la vieja (the old) where it was sacked 
and burnt in 1670 by the English pirate John 
Morgan, when it was in the following year trans 
lated to a league s distance by the Major-general 
Don Antonio Fernandez de Cordoba ; and was 
first fortified by Alonso Mercado de Villa-corta. 
It is irregularly and badly defended ; but has been 
one of the richest and most important towns of 
commerce in the whole world, as being the regular 
depot of all the goods going from Peru to 
Europe, before that the navigation of Buenos 
Ayres and of Cape Horn were so much practised. 

It is the head of a bishopric, created in 1521 ; 
has besides the cathedral, two parishes, one with 
the title of S. Felipe in the city, and another of 
the title of Santo Ava, in the suburbs without the 
wall, which are larger than the city itself: like 
wise the convents of the orders of San Francisco, 
S. Domingo, La Merced, the barefooted Angus- 
tins with the title of S. Joseph, a college which 
belonged to the Jesuits, with a seminary for stu 
dies, and an university founded by the bishop 
Don Francisco Xavier de Luna y Victoria in 
1571; an hospital of San Juan de Dios and a 
monastery of the nuns of Nuestra Senora de la 
Concepcion. 

In its early times it had a mint, which lasted but 
a short time. It was governed by a president 
and a tribunal of the royal audience, erected in 
1535, which was abolished in 1752, only a military 
o-overnor and viceroy being left. This city, 
from being once great and opulent, is reduced to 
a poor and miserable state from the decay of its 
commerce since that the galleons have ceased to 
go to Tierra Firme, and since that it had endured 
two dreadful conflagrations in 1737 and 1756. 
To the latter evil it was very liable, most of 
its houses being built of finely carved wood ; the 
cathedral, however, is of stone and of magnificent 
architecture. 



PAN 

The temperature of this city is burning hot. 
though the nights are fresh and agreeable. The 
territory is fertile but little cultivated, as the 
city is supplied with necessaries from the pro 
vinces and settlements of its jurisdiction, as well 
as from those of Peru by the S. sea, and from 
those of Europe and the foreign colonies by the 
N. sea, from whence it lies 11 leagues. It is ce 
lebrated for the meeting held in it by the Trium 
virate, who deliberated in 1525 concerning the 
discovery and conquest of Peru, who were Fran- 
ciso Pizarro, Diego de Almagro, and Hernando 
de Luque. 

The port is formed by some islands at the dis 
tance of two leagues and an half from the town, 
where vessels may lie sheltered from the winds. 
The tides are regular, and the high water is 
every three hours, when it runs to a great height, 
and falls with such rapidity as to leave three 
quarters of a league dry when down. 

The city of Panama has the arms which were 
granted it in 1521, by the emperor Charles V. 
with the title of very noble and very loyal ; a 
shield divided into a pale and gold field, having 
in the middle of the right side a yoke and a 
bundle of brown-coloured arrows, with blue 
points and silver feathers, this having been the 
device of the catholic kings : then in the other 
half, or the left side, two carvels, one above the 
other, and above them a star, which denoted the 
arctic pole, and in the orle of the shield castles 
and lions. It is the native place of father Agus- 
tin Hurtado, of the Jesuits ; put to death in the 
settlement of Gayes of the missions of Mainas, 
at the hands of the Indians, whilst instructing 
them in the faith in 1688 ; also of father Ignacio 
de Caceres, his companion. In lat. 9 30 n. 
loner. 79 19 w. 

Catalogue of the Bishops who have presided 
in Panama. 

1. Don Fr. Vicente de Valverde, a monk of 
the order of S. Domingo ; elected bishop of 
Santa Maria del Darien, the first church of the 
kingdom of Tierra Firme, in 1533. 

2. Don Fr. Juan de Quevedo ; a monk of the 
order of San Francisco, native of Bejori in the 
mountains of Burgos. He passed over to the 
church and returned to Spain, and had many 
disputes with Fr. Bartolome de los Casas, in 
presence of the emperor Charles V. on the sub 
ject of the liberty of the Indians, in which he 
was convinced and conquered by the bishop 
Casas ; he died at Barcelona. 

3. Don Fr. Juan de la Guardia, of the order 
of San Francisco, of whom we know no more 



PANAMA. 



17 



than that his name is mentioned in the catalogue 
of the bishops of that holy church. 

4. Don Fr. Martin de Bejar, of the order of 
San Francisco, native of Sevilla ; presented by 
the emperor Charles V. to be bishop of Santa 
Maria del Darien. In his time the See was 
translated to the city of Panama. 

5. Don Fr. Tomas de Berlanga, of the order 
of S. Domingo, native of the town of his name ; 
he passed to America, where he was provincial 
of his order, and elected bishop of Panama in 
1530. He renounced the bishopric in 1537 ; and 
died in his native place in 1551. 

6. Don Fr. Vicente de Peraza, of the order 
of S. Domingo, collegiate in the college of S. 
Gregorio de Valladolid. According to Fr. Alonso 
Fernandez, he was bishop in 1540. 

7. Don Fr. Pablo de Torres, of the order of 
S. Domingo, and not of San Geronimo, as Gil 
Gonzalez Davila wrongly asserts : he was bishop 
in 1560. 

8. Don Fr. Juan Vaca, of the order of S. 
Benito, abbot of the monasteries of Sahogun 
and Carrion ; presented by Philip II. to the 
bishopric of Panama, and died on his passage. 

9. Don Francisco Abrego, elected bishop of 
Panama in 1569 : he governed 15 years, and 
died in 1574. 

10. Don .Fr. Manuel de Mercado, of the order 
of San Geronimo : he entered Panama, and took 
possession of his bishopric in 1578, and died in 
1580. 

1 1 . Don Bartolome Martinez Menacho, native 
of Almendralejo in Estremadura, archdeacon of 
the holy church of Lima in 1587 : he was the 
first who made the visitation ; and passing to 
Santa Fe in 1593, he died at Cartagena. 

12. Don Pedro Duque de Ribera, collegiate 
of the college of Santa Maria de Jesus of Sevilla, 
and dean of the church of S. Domingo; elected 
bishop of Panama in 1594 : he also died at Car 
tagena, when about to take possession. 

13. Don Antonio Calderon, dean of the holy 
church of Santa Fe, bishop of Puerto-rico ; pro 
moted to the church of Panama in 1594 : he 
founded there a mass of the Virgin for every Sa 
turday, and another on Fridays, of Christ s pas 
sion ; he was promoted to the bishopric of Santa 
Cruz de la Sierra in 1605. 

14. Don Fr. Agustin de Carvajal, native of 
Mexico, of the order of S. Agustin, assistant ge 
neral of the same. When prior of his convent 
at Valladolid, he was elected to the bishopric of 
Panama, of which he took possession in 1608 : 
he consecrated the bells of its church, founded 

VOL. IV. 



the college of San Agustin with six collegiates, 
according to the Tridentine council, for the ser 
vice of the cathedral, and was promoted to the 
bishopric of Guamanga in 1612. 

15. Don Fr. Francisco de la Camera, of the 
order of S. Domingo : he passed to America as 
visitor of the provinces of Quito and Chile ; and, 
having finished the visitation, was presented to 
the bishopric of Panama, of which he took pos 
session in 1614 ; he endowed funds for two ad 
ditional collegiates in the college of San Agustin, 
and gave a prize of 300 dollars in the college of 
the Jesuits for promoting the study of the cases 
of conscience ; he also gave 4000 dollars for the 
finishing of the cathedral, which had been be 
gun, endowed two chaplains of the choir, and 
died in 1624. 

16. Don Fr. Christoval Martinez de Salas, 
Premonstratensian canon, native of Medina del 
Campo, definidor of his order, abbot of the con 
vent of Segovia, rector of the college of Santa 
Susana in Salamanca, and visitor-general of his 
order : presented by the king Don Philip IV. to 
the bishopric of Panama in 1625 ; endowed two 
masses sung to the Virgin on Wednesdays and 
Saturdays, gave 2000 dollars for building a col 
lateral chapel, and died blind and full of infir 
mities in 1640. 

17. Don Fr. Hernando Ramirez, a monk of 
the order of la Santisima Trinidad, native of the 
Arroyo del Puerco in the bishopric of Coria : he 
studied arts and theology in Salamanca, was 
vicar and preacher of the convent of Nuestra 
Senora de las Virtudes, procurator-general of 
his order at court, minister of the convents of 
Toledo, Fuente Santa, Alcala, and Talavera, 
commissary and visitor of the provinces of Ara- 
gon, Cataluna, and Valencia, provincial and 
vicar-general in that of Castilla ; elected bishop 
of Panama in 1640, he entered to take possession 
in 1643. In his time, when the city was on fire, 
he, abandoning his house to the flames, ran to 
save the sacred vases of the altar : he died in 
1652. 

18. Don Bernardo de Izaguivre, native of 
Toledo, fiscal of the inquisition of Cartagena of 
the Indies and of Lima, also inquisitor in the 
latter ; elected bishop of Panama in 1655 : he 
was promoted to the bishopric of Cuzco in 1660. 

19. Don Diego de Vergara, native of Lima, 
professor of sacred writings in its royal univer 
sity, penitentiary canon of its holy church, 
elected bishop of Panama in 1663 : he died be 
fore he could be consecrated. 

20. Don Sancho Pardo de Figueroa, native of 

n 



18 



PANAMA. 



Lima, dean of Truxillo, magisterial canon of the 
holy church of his native place : elected bishop 
of Panama in 1667, and promoted to the bishopric 
of Guamanga. 

21. Don Antonio de Leon, who was promoted 
to the bishopric of Truxillo in 1677, having been 
provisional president and captain-general by 
order of the king. 

22. Don Lucas Fernandez de Piedrahita, na 
tive of Santa Fe in the Nuevo Reyno de Gra 
nada, racionero and canon of this holy church, 
treasurer and chanter in the same, bishop of 
Santa Marta, and promoted to Panama in 1682 : 
he died in 1688. 

23. Don Diego Ladron de Guevara, collegiate 
mayor in the real de Alcala, canon of the cathe 
drals of Siqiienza and Malaga : presented to the 
bishopric of Panama in 1689, and promoted to 
that of Guamanga in 1699, when he was pro 
visional president. 

24. Don Fr. Juan de Arguelles, of the order 
of S. Agustin, native of Lima : elected bishop of 
Panama in 1694, and promoted to the bishopric 
of Arequipa. 

25. Don Fr. Manuel de Mimbela, of the order 
of San Francisco, native of Fraga in Aragon : 
he passed over as missionary apostolic to Zaca- 
tecas in Nueva Espana, where he was lecturer 
in theology, and twice guardian in his convent, 
and then returned to Spain as procurator-ge 
neral. After this, promoted to the church of 
Oaxaca ; and, before he took possession, to that 
of Guadalaxara. 

26. Don Fr. Juan Joseph de Llamas y Rivas, 
of the order of the Carmen Calzado, native of 
Murcia, provincial of his order in the province of 
Andalucia ; elected bishop of Panama, and after 
wards nominated provisional president, gover 
nor, and captain-general of the kingdom in 1716. 

27. Don Fr. Bernardo Serrada, of the order 
of Nuestra Seilora del Carmen Calzado, pro 
vincial in his religion ; elected bishop of Pa 
nama in 1720, and promoted to Cuzco in 1725. 

28. Don Agustin Rodriguez, curate of Hor- 
taleza in the bishopric of Toledo ; elected the 
aforesaid year of 1725, and promoted to La Paz 
in 1731. " 

29. Don Pedro Morcillo, who went as auxi 
liary bishop to Panama in 1732 : he died in 
1741. 

30. Don Fr. Diego de Salinas y Cabrera, of 
the order of San Agustin : he refused to accept 
the office. 

31. Don Juan de Castaneda, archdeacon of 
the holy cathedral church of Cuzco ; bishop of 



Panama in 1743, and promoted to that of Cuzco 
in 1749. 

32. Don Felipe Manrique de Lara, native of 
Lima; elected to the bishopric of Panama in 
1753, but he renounced it. 

33. Don Francisco Xavier de Luna y Vic 
toria, native of the same city of Panama ; founder 
of the university of San Xavier in the college of 
the Jesuits, presented to the bishopric of his 
native place in 1751, and to that of Truxillo in 
Peru in 1759. 

34. Don Manuel de Romani y Carrillo, native 
of Guamanza ; elected bishop in 1759, and pro 
moted to that of Cuzco in 1763. 

35. Don Miguel Moreno y Olio, native of Pa 
nama, canon of its holy church, commissary of 
the tribunal of the inquisition of Cartagena ; 
elected bishop in 1763, and promoted to Gua 
manga in 1770. 

36. Don Fr. Francisco de los Rios, of the or 
der of San Francisco ; elected, the above year, 
bishop of Panama : he died in 1777. 

37. Don Joseph Antonio Umeres de Miranda, 
inquisitor of the holy tribunal of La Fe in Car 
tagena of the Indies : elected bishop of Panama 
in 1777. 

Commandants-general, Presidents, and Gover 
nors, who have ruled in the Kingdom of Tierra 
Firme. 

1. Don Pedro Arias Davila, native of Segovia, 
brother of Count Punsolem-rostro ; elected by 
the emperor for his qualifications to command in 
Darien in 1514, where his glories were sullied 
from his having commanded, in a fit of passion, 
the heads of Vasco Nunez de Balboa and of 
Francisco Fernandez de Cordoba to be cut off : 
he governed until 1526, when his successor ar 
rived in, 

2. Don Pedro de los Rios, native of Cordoba, 
nominated on account of the complaints made 
against the former, and through the death of 
the Licentiate Lope de Sosa, also of Cordoba, 
who had been nominated, and had died suddenly. 
The clamours still persisting, the Licentiate An- 
tonio de la Gama was sent out as residentiary 
judge in 1528 ; and as successor to the govern 
ment was sent, 

3. Francisco de Barrionuevo, native of Soria, 
famed for his conquests in the islands of Puerto- 
rico and S. Domingo, appointed to the govern 
ment of Tierra Firme ; but receiving a commis 
sion to attend the treaty of pacification with the 
cazeque Enrique at S. Domingo, he did not take 
possession till 1533. 



PANAMA. 



19 



4. The Licentiate Pedro Vazquez de Acuna, 
who was nominated governor and residentiary 
judge ; and sore complaints having been raised, 
there was shortly sent out another in the per 
son of, 

5. Doctor Francisco Robles, with the same 
commission as the former : he entered on his of 
fice in 1539, filled it with prudence and justice; 
but whether it was the effect of the climate, or 
some malignant fate had sown the seeds of dis 
cord in this government, he could not escape, 
covered as he was with perfections, the shafts of 
calumny and malice. 

6. Pedro de Casaos, native of Sevilla, who, 
with the title of corregidor of Panama, was no 
minated by the king to govern it. In his time 
occurred the robberies and depredations per 
formed by Hernando Bachicao, captain Gon- 
zalo Pizarro. 

7. The Licentiate Don Pedro Ramires de Qui- 
nones, first president, with the title as such of 
that audience : he settled the existing disturb 
ances in the kingdom, and made war against the 
Negro Bayano, so as to succeed in restoring a 
perfect tranquillity. 

8. Juan de Bustos Villegas, who passed whilst 
governor of the plaza of Cartagena to the go 
vernment of Panama in 1551 : he died by a fall 
from his mule. 

9. The Licentiate Juan Lopez de Cepeda, 
who was oidor deacon of the island of S. Do 
mingo, when he went to Santa Fe in the same 
capacity : from thence he went to be alcalde del 
crimen of the audience of Panama, and promoted 
to Charcas in 1558. 

10. The Licentiate Francisco de Cardenas, the 
last robed president of Tierra Firme, from the 
establishment there of the commandancy-general 
of the kingdom, the city of Panama, its capital, 
being the place of arms, (plaza de armas): he 
died in 1594. 

11. Don Juan del Barrio Sepulveda, oidor 
deacon of the royal audience, provisional go 
vernor through the death of the former, and was 
holding the reins when arrived, 

12. Don Alonso de Sotomayor y Andia, Mar 
quis of Valparaiso, comendador of Villa-mayor in 
the order of Santiago, native of Tuxillo in Estre- 
madura, an officer of great credit in Flanders and, 
at Chile, where he had governed the king s ar 
mies : was at Lima, on his way to Europe, when 
he was nominated president of Panama, by the 
viceroy the Marquis of Canete, to defend the 
kingdom against an English armament, which, 
when arrived, he gloriously and completely re 



pulsed : he governed until 1596, when he passed 
to Spain. 

13. The aforesaid Juan del Barrio Sepul 
veda, oidor deacon of the audience, returned to 
be provisional governor till 1601, when there 



came, 



14. The same Don Alonso de Sotomayor, no 
minated by the king in consideration of his con 
duct and great ability in the fortification of the 
Plaza of Portobello, in company with the re 
nowned engineer Juan Baptista Antoneli. Al 
though he had received an order to proceed to 
the government of Chile, he embarked for Eu 
rope in 1605. 

15. Don Diego de Orozco, native of Lima. 

16. Don Rodrigo de Viveroy Velasco, in whose 
time the conquest and spiritual reduction of the 
Guaimies Indians of the province of Veragua 
was commenced by the religious order of S. Do 
mingo : his government ended in 1624. 

17. Don Alvaro de Quinones Osorio, knight 
of the order of Santiago, Marquis ofLorenzana : 
he governed until 1632, when he was promoted 
to the presidency of Guatemala. 

18. Don Sebastian Hurtado de Corcuera, pro 
moted from the presidency and captainship-gene 
ral of the Philippine isles in 1634, having held 
that of Panama only two years. 

19. Don Enrique Enriquez de Sotomayor, 
promoted from the government of Puertorico to 
this presidency, which he exercised until 1638, 
when he died, causing great sentiments of re 
gret. 

20. Don Inigo de la Mota Sarmiento, knight 
of the order of Santiago, chamberlain to his 
majesty the Archduke of Alberto, and of the 
supreme council and junta of war ; promoted to 
the government of Puertorico in 1639, and died 
at Portobello whilst assisting at the dispatch of 
the galleons under the charge of the general 
Don Francisco Diaz Pimienta, in 1642. 

21. Don Juan de Vega Bazan, who had been ad 
miral of galleons, nominated president, governor, 
and commandant-general of the kingdom of 
Tierra Firme. 

22. Don Juan de Bitrileante y Navarra, knight 
of the order of Calatrava : he died at Portobello, 
assisting at the dispatch of the armada of gal 
leons, commanded by admiral Don Juan de Ec- 
havarri, in 1651, as may be seen by the stone 
over his sepulchre in the church. 

23. Don Fernando de la Riva Aguero, knight 
of the order of Santiago, colonel, governor of 
Cartagena of the Indies, when he was nominated 
president of Panama : he died also at Porto~ 

D 2 



20 



PANAMA. 



bello, assisting at the dispatch of the galleons, in 
1663. 

24. Don Juan Perez de Guzman, knight of 
the order of Santiago, colonel, governor of Car 
tagena, and after having served in the militia 
and been governor of Antioquia and Puertorico, 
he was promoted to this presidency in 1665, 
through the death of the former. He went to 
retake the island of Santa Catalina, in the hands 
of the English pirate John Morgan, and was, 
nevertheless, deposed from the government by 
the viceroy of Peru, Count of Lemos, owing to 
some charges made against him by Don Bernardo 
Trilco de Figueroa, oidor deacon of that au 
dience. 

25. Don Agustin de Bracamonte, nominated 
provisional governor by the viceroy of Peru. 

26. The aforesaid Don Juan Perez, who was 
now fully and honourably acquitted of all the 
charges against him. In his time the city was 
ruined and destroyed by the English pirate in 
1670 ; when he was again suspended by the 
viceroy, and sent to answer for his conduct be 
fore the king. 

27. Don Antonio Fernandez de Cordoba, 
knight of the order of Santiago, nominated im 
mediately that the misfortune of the city was 
known, with orders to remove it to some more 
favourable spot. He accordingly embarked with 
a troop, called La Chamberga, and began to put 
his designs in execution on his arrival in 1671, 
when he died. 

28. Don Francisco Miguel de Marichalar, al 
calde del crimen of the royal audience of Lima, 
sent as provisional-governor by the viceroy, 
Count of Lemos : he ruled till the proprietor ar 
rived in 1676. 

29. Don Alonso Mercado de Villacorta, ma 
jor-general, who was serving as governor of the 
provinces of Tucuman, where he had performed 
singular services to the king. He was promoted 
to this presidency, and translated the city, as 
commanded, to the spot where it now stands ; 
who also began its fortification, as we find in 
scribed on the stone over the land-gates : but he 
died before he concluded his work, in 1681. 

30. Dr. Don Lucas Fernandez de Piedrahita, 
native of Santa Fe, bishop of the holy church of 
Panama, and celebrated author of the history of 
the conquest of the Nuevo Reyno de Granada. 
He entered through the death of the former, and 
through the nomination of the viceroy of Peru, 
Count of Castellar. Although he manifested great 
powers, his reign was of but short duration, 
since in 1602 the proprietor arrived. 



31. Don Pedro Ponte y Llerena, count of 
Palmar : he was the only president who ful 
filled the term of the appointment, eight years, 
and this, notwithstanding that certain charges 
were made against him by the ministers of that 
audience. 

32. Don Pedro Joseph Guzman, Davalos, 
Ponce de Leon, Santillan y Mesia, Marquis of 
La Mina, native of Sevilla, general of artillery, 
who, on account of his extraordinary services by 
sea and land, was nominated president of Pa 
nama, and commandant-general of the kingdom, 
of which office he took possession in 1690 : he 
governed five years, when by charges made 
against him, he was seized and treated with a 
rigour theretofore unexampled, being confined 
for four years without being allowed any com 
munication with any one whatever. 

33. Dr. Don Diego Ladron de Guevara, bi 
shop of that holy church : encharged with the 
government by the king until the arrival of the 
proper successor. 

34. Don Pedro Luis Henriquez de Guzman, 
Count of Canillas, knight of the order of Cala- 
trava, corregidor of Potosi : he took possession 
in 1696, and ruled to 1699, when, from the com 
plaints of the people against the violence offered 
to the Marquis of La Mina, a successor was no 
minated in, 

35. Don Joseph Antonio de la Rocha y Car- 
ranga, Marquis of Villa Rocha, knight of the 
order of Calatrava, general of the artillery in 
1699, when he entered into the presidency ; but 
he, in six months after, received a cedule, or 
dering him to give up the government to the 



same. 



36. Don Pedro Luis Henriquez de Guzman, 
Count of Canillas, on account of his having falsely 
given the king to understand of services he had 
performed for the kingdom, and robbing the go 
vernor of Cartagena, Don Juan Diaz Pimienta, of 
the honour of having routed the Scotch from 
Darien ; for he, the count, having barely sent 
home an account of the success, without mention 
ing who had performed it, the king nominated 
him as viceroy of Peru, by way of reward for his 
prowess ; but he did not reap any fruits of his 
stratagems, as he died the same year that he re 
ceived his appointment, in 1699. 

37. Don Fernando D Avila Bravo de Laguna, 
knight of the order of Santiago, major-general, 
native of Lima : he entered in 1702, and go 
verned till 1707, when he died. 

38. Don Juan Eustaquio Vicentalo, Tello, 
Toledo y Leca, Marquis of Brenes, knight of the 



PANAMA. 



21 



order of Santiago, native of Sevilla, nominated 
on the death of the former, by the viceroy of 
Peru, the Marquis of Casteldios-rius. He only 
governed five months when the successor ar 
rived, 

39. The aforesaid Marquis of Villa Rocha, 
whose reign was of no long duration, as he was 
suspended in a few days by a cedule transmitted 
at the the instigation of the audience, who had 
certain charges against him. 

40. Don Fernando de Haro Monterroso : he 
exercised the power for six months, until 1709, 
when the viceroy of Peru sent a minister of the 
audience of Lima to try him upon certain ex 
cesses which he had committed ; upon which he 
was taken prisoner to Spain, and died in a prison 
at the court of Madrid. 

41. Don Juan Baptista deOrueta y Irusta, al 
calde del crimen of the royal audience of Lima ; 
commissioned on the deposition of the former : 
he governed till 1710, when the successor no 
minated by the king arrived, himself returning to 
Lima to the execution of his office. 

42. Don Joseph de Larraneta y Vera, briga 
dier of the royal armies; serving in the govern 
ment of Portobello, with the optional quality of 
accepting the precedency and captainship-general 
of the kingdom, in case of a vacancy of the pre 
sent one, by a cedule from the king nominating 
him as it were viceroy : he took the reins in 
1710, and half of the following year had not 
elapsed before two successors arrived at once. 

43. The one, a person twice mentioned, the 
Marquis of Villa Rocha. His reign was so short 
that it could only be counted by hours, for hav 
ing reached the capital from the fort of Chapo, 
where he had been confined, he took possession, 
and at five in the evening of the same day ar 
rived, 

44. Don Joseph Hurtado de Amezaga, briga 
dier-general of the royal armies : he took pos 
session in 1711, and governed till 1716, when he 
was deposed by the king s order, deposition 
being committed to the charge of the bishop of 
that church, and the tribunal of audience being 
at the same time abolished. 

45. Don Fr. Juan Joseph de Llamas y Rivas, 
of the order of Nuestra Senora del Carmen, bi 
shop of Parama, who also by the above-men 
tioned commisson was encharged with the go 
vernment in 1716 ; and he held it till 1718, when 
arrived, 

46 Don Geronimo Vadillo, brigadier of the 
royal armies, promoted to the government of 
Cartagena, which he was then exercising, ac 



cording to the new establishment of five years 
provision in the governments which have no au 
dience : his government lasted till 1723. 

47. Don Gaspar Perez Buelta, who had been 
oidor of the audience then abolished, but which 
was by order of the king restored in 1723 : he 
was there provisional deacon for three months 
and an half, when he embarked for Peru ; pro 
moted to the audience of Lima at the beginning 
of 1724. 

48. Don Joseph de Alzamora y Ursino, who 
became deacon of the audience at the departure 
of the former, and as such encharged with the 
provisional government, the presidency and the 
commandancy-general, when in a month the pro 
prietor arrived. 

49. Don Manuel de Alderete, knight of the 
order of Santiago, field- marshal of the royal ar 
mies : he was promoted from the situation of 
viceroy of the Plaza of Cadiz to this presidency, 
and took possession in 1724 ; he governed till 
1730, when he was deposed, and taken captive 
to the castle of Chapo, and being sent from 
thence at the departure of registrar of the house 
of commerce, in the frigate of war the Ginovesa, 
which was wrecked upon the shoal of La Vivora, 
he was there drowned. 

50. Don Juan Joseph de Andia Vivero y Ve- 
lasco, Marquis of Villa-hermosa, brigadier-gene 
ral : he was governing at Cartagena, when he was 
promoted to the presidency of Panama, with a 
commission to depose the predecessor the afore 
said year of 1730 ; and having solicited a licence 
to return to Spain, he obtained the permission of 
his majesty, who exalted him to the rank of 
lieutenant-general, in 1735 ; and shortly after his 
arrival he was made grandee, with the title of 
Marquis de Valparaiso. 

51. DonDionisio Martinez de la Vega, briga 
dier-general of the royal armies ; promoted from 
the government to relieve the former governor in 
1735. He remained till 1743, when his successor 
arrived, nominated by the king. As a reward 
for his services in making a peace with the In 
dians, his majesty raised him to the rank of 
lieutenant-general, as also admitted him to be 
gentleman of the bed-chamber. In his time the 
English, commanded by admiral Vernon, took 
the city of Portobello and castle of Chagre : he 
died at Panama in 1744, whilst arranging his 
voyage to Spain. 

52. Don Dionisio de A^edo y Herrera, who 
had served in the presidency of Quito and com 
mandancy-general of this kingdom, and found 
himself at court when nominated by the king to 



22 



proceed to Panama, and to undertake the de 
fence of Tierra Firme, threatened by invasion 
from the English from the year 1739. He was 
charged with different commissions, on account 
of his knowledge of America and his zeal in the 
service of his king ; fulfilled his important duties 
with the greatest ability till 1749, when he was 
separated from his office through some calumnies 
made against him by the oidors of that audience, 
the origin of all the discords of this province. 
During his government he chastised the smug 
glers of the province of Nata, who to the num 
ber of 200, and supported by the English, had 
taken up arms against his majesty : he returned 
to Spain, where he was honourably acquitted. 

53. Don Manuel de Montiano, brigadier-gene 
ral of the royal armies : he was promoted from the 
government of Florida, and entered Panama in 
1749, when the audience was abolished through 
the representations made by the former, proving 
it to be the only means whereby to ensure the 
tranquillity of the government, as was in fact 
proved till 1750, when arrived, 

54. Don Antonio Guill, colonel of the regi 
ment of infantry of Guadalaxara, a man of great 
talent, virtue, and military experience : he was 
shortly removed to the presidency and captain 
ship-general of Chile in 1761, his short reign 
being universally regretted. 

55. Don Joseph Raon, brigadier of the royal 
armies : he governed for little more than two 
years, as having been removed to the presidency 
and captainship-general of the Philippine isles in 
1763. 

56. Don Joseph Blasco de Orozco, knight of 
the order of San Juan, colonel of the regiment of 
infantry of Burgos : he passed over to this go 
vernment in the aforesaid year, and died in 
1767. 

57. Don Vicente de Olaziregui, colonel of the 
regiment of infantry of Granada : he governed in 
1769, and died in 1773. 

58. Don Pedro Carbonel, colonel of the regi 
ment of infantry of Aragon, nominated in 1775 : 
he governed till 1779. 

59. Don Ramon de Carvajal, colonel of infan 
try, who was governing at Vique in the province 
of Catalujaa, when he was destined to the go 
vernment of Guayaquil in the kingdom of Quito, 
and before he took possession was promoted to 
this of Panama in 1780 ; which he exercised till 
1785, when the king nominated a successor in, 

60. Don Joseph Domas, brigadier of the royal 
armada, nominated in 1785. 

PANAMA, or DEL DARIEN Isthmus, a wide 



PAN 

strip of land uniting N. and S. America, washed 
on the n. by the N. sea, and on the s. by the 
Pacific or S. sea, and forming the gulf of Pa 
nama. Its width from the mouth of the river 
Chagre in the N. sea, to that of the river Cai- 
mito or Capina in the S. is 41 miles, and at its 
narrowest part, namely, from the mouth of the 
river Bayame in the gulf of Panama, to the bay 
of Mandinga in the N.sea, it is 20 miles only. 
Its length from e. to w. is more than 200 miles. 
The cordillera of the Andes mountains, which are 
the lowest here, traverses its whole length, and 
then splits itself into several branches in N. Ame 
rica. This isthmus belongs in part to the pro 
vince of Tierra Firme, and in part to that of 
Darien. The climate is nearly throughout hot 
and moist. It takes its name from the city of 
Panama, which is situate upon it, on the shore 
of the S. sea ; and in the opposite part, to the n. 
is Portobello, where there used to be celebrated 
the large fair of merchandizes on the arrival of 
the galleons, inasmuch as all the riches that 
were carried from Peru to the mother-country 
were brought by this isthmus, as also the effects 
returned from Spain to the former; the same 
being carried by a round-about journey of 18 
leagues, owing to the asperity of the mountains 
and the immensity of the rivers that obstructed 
a direct communication. 

In the time of Philip II. it was projected to 
cut through this isthmus and to unite the two 
seas ; and accordingly two Flemish engineers 
were sent to reconnoitre it, but they found in 
superable difficulties; and the council of the In 
dies having represented the mischief which might 
ensue to the monarchy in case the idea were 
carried into effect, it was ordained by the Spanish 
government, that no one should afterwards treat 
on the subject on pain of death. Eugenic Ray- 
nondi calls it Strait San Miguel, but improperly, 
as there is no communication between the two 



seas. 



[Of all the subjects, either of political or com 
mercial consideration, relating to the continent 
of America, none perhaps is of greater moment 
than this idea of the communication of the At 
lantic and Pacific oceans. For a diffuse disqui 
sition on this topic, as likewise of the relative 
facilities for effecting the same object with re 
gard to other parts of America, see Index to 
new matter respecting MEXICO, Chap. X.J 

[PANAMBUCO, a harbour or bay on the 
coast of Brazil. See PERNAMBUCO.] 

PANAO, a settlement of the province and cor- 
regimiento of Guanuco in Peru; annexed to the 



PAN 

curacy of Santa Maria del Valle ; situate on the 
confines of the Panataguas Indians. 

[PANAPA Island of the Orinoco. See Vol. HI. 
p. 491. of this Dictionary.] 

PANAQUIRE, a settlement of the province 
and government of Venezuela and NuevoReyno 
de Granada, founded in the seventeenth century 
for the greater convenience of commerce, after 
the establishment of the Guipuzcoanan com 
pany. 

PANATAGUAS, a barbarous nation of In 
dians of the kingdom of Peru, inhabiting the 
country bounded n. and e. by the province of 
Guanuco. From them are descended many other 
nations of different names, some of them having 
been reduced to the faith by the missionaries of 
the order of San Francisco in 1631 ; and although 
they once rebelled, putting to death their priests 
and flying to the mountains, they again returned 
to their obedience, since they are of a pacific 
and docile disposition ; and the first settlements 
which were made of them, have been ever since 
rapidly enlarging. 

PANCHES, a province and corregimiento of 
the Nuevo Reyno de Granada. Its length is 15 
leagues from e. to w. and its width 12 from n. to 
s. of an hot temperature and rough and craggy 
territory, full of mountains and ravines. It is 
watered by several rivers, the largest and principal 
of which is the Bogata. It is fertile in maize and 
vines, of which there are two gatherings yearly, 
although commercial regulations have prohibited 
the making of wine here. Here are, however, 
many sugar engines for the manufactory of sugar 
from the abundance of the canes. 

Its natives, and from whom it takes its name, 
are the most strong, robust, and valorous of any 
in the kingdom ; ferocious, of warlike appearance, 
and cannibals. They are at continual war with 
the Muzos, and did not marry the women of the 
same settlement, looking upon such as sisters : 
they adored the sun and moon, and although their 
number, with regard to other nations, was not 
large, they were so much feared by all, that the 
Zipas of Bogota had a garrison of them in the 
settlements on the boundary of their jurisdiction. 
Their arms were bows and arrows and wooden 
clubs. The greater part of them, at the present 
day, live in the woods and mountains. 

This province was conquered by Captain Venegas 
Carrillo, after that it had been attempted in vain 
by other Spaniards; but they have frequently 
risen in their different settlements and committed 
shocking murders. The capital is Tocaima. 

PANCHIMILCO, SAN JUAN DE, a settle- 



PAN 23 

ment of the head settlement of the district of 
Mazatepec, and alcaldia mayor of Cuernavaca, 
in Nueva Espana, on the shore of a river. It 
produces much maize, fruit, and cotton. Is five 
leagues from its head settlement, very close to 
the settlement of Tetelpa ; and contains only 26 
Indian families. 

PANCICHA, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Porco in Peru, on the shore of 
the river Pilcornayo. 

PANCITARA, a settlement of the province 
and government of Popayan, in the Nuevo 
Reyno de Granada. 

PANCRACE, S. a port of the w. coast of the 
river S. Lawrence in Canada, between the ri 
vers S. Nicholas and English. 

PANDABEQUES, a barbarous nation of In 
dians inhabiting the country of Las Amazonas, 
to the s. of the river Maranon or Amazons, and 
bounded by the Chingacuchuscas : reduced to 
the faith in 1652 by the missionaries of the Jesuits, 
who formed of them a settlement dependent upon 
that of Xiaweos, in the province of Muinas. 

PANDIYACU, a settlement of the province 
and corregimiento of Pasto in the kingdom of 
Quito. 

[PANDO, a parish of the province and govern 
ment of Buenos Ayres, situate on the small river of 
this name, near the sea-coast about 20 miles n. e, 
of Monte Video, inlat. 34 41 18", Ion. 55 49 4".] 

PANDO, a river of the province and govern 
ment of Buenos Ayres in Peru, which runs s. and 
enters the Plata at its mouth, betwen the rivers 
Solis Chico and Monte Video. 

PANDOMINE, a chain of mountains of the 
province and corregimiento of Loxa, in the king 
dom of Quito, between the mountains Colay- 
Sacapy to the n. e. and Sosoranga to the s. w. 
It runs from n. w. to s. e. and unites itself with 
the chain of Pichinche. 

PANDIERO, a settlement of the province 
and corregimiento of Sicasica, in Peru, eight 
leagues from its capital. 

PANECILLO, a small mountain in the llanura 
of Callo, in the province and corregimiento of 
Latacunga, and kingdom of Quito to the n. It is 
thought to have been made by the Indians, and 
stands near the antient palace of the princes of 
this kingdom, to serve as a place of look-out, 
from whence the whole of the surrounding coun 
try may be viewed. It is 85 fathoms high, mea 
sured perpendicularly ; is the figure of a very 
regular truncated cone ; and on the s. side it is 
washed by the river Callo ; and may be well dis 
covered by the height of Tio-pullu, and from the 



24 



PAN 



llanura of Mula-halo, as you proceed along the 
river Alajes, in lat. 44 32" s. 

PANECILLO, another, a small mountain of the 
same figure, and 100 Parisian toises high, near 
the city of Quito, and having at its skirts some 
houses of the suburbs. From its top may be 
seen the llanuras of Turu-bamba to the s. and of 
Inaquito Onaquito to the n. The skirts of this 
mountain are cultivated and sown with wheat, 
and in it is a quarry, from whence stone is ex 
tracted in large pieces for the works of the city. 
It had formerly a subterraneous rout cut through 
it by order of the prince, the symptoms of which 
are still observable on the part by Chimba-calle. 
In this mount spring various streams of delicious 
water, towards the Dominican convent, the best 
of which is drank at Quito. 

PANERIA, a river of the province and corre- 
gimiento of Pasto, in the kingdom of Quito, 
which runs e. and enters the Guames. 

PANGOA, a river of the province and cone- 
gimiento of Caxamarquilla, in Peru. 

PANGORA, a river of the province and corre- 
gimiento of Guanta in Peru. It rises in the pro 
vince of Castro- Virreyna, runs e. then turns n. 
and returning to e. unites itself in a large stream 
with the river La Sal, and these together run into 
the Angoyaco. 

PANGUE, a small river of the province and 
corregimiento of Maule, in the kingdom of Chile, 
which runs n. n. w. and enters the river Maule. 

PANHANONS, a river of the province and co 
lony of Pensylvania, in N. America, which runs n. 
then turns w. and enters the Ohio. 

PANIAS, a tribe of Indians of the province 
and government of Louisiana, where the French 
have a fort. They live in a settlement, situate 
on the shore of the river Arkansas. 

[With these Indians, the idea of the possession 
of soil is similar to that of the Ottoes. They 
hunt on the s. side of the river Plate, higher up 
and on the head of the Kanzas. A great pro 
portion of this country consists of open plains, 
interspersed however with groves of timber, 
which are most generally found in the vicinity of 
the water-courses. It is generally fertile and 
well watered : lies level, and free of stone. They 
have resided in the country which they now in 
habit since they were known to the whites. 
Their trade is a valuable one, from the large pro 
portion of beaver and otter which they furnish; 
and it may be expected yet to increase, as those 
animals are still abundant in their country. The 
periods of their residence at their village and 
hunting are similar to the Kanzas and Osages. 



P A IN 

Their population is increasing. They are friend 
ly and hospitable to all white persons ; pay great 
respect and deference to their traders, with whom 
they are punctual in the payment of their debts. 
They are, in all respects, a friendly, well-dis 
posed people. JThey cultivate corn, beans, me 
lons, &amp;c.] 

[PANIAS LOUPS, or WOLVES. These In 
dians are a branch of the Panias Proper, who sepa 
rated themselves from that nation many years 
since, and established themselves on a n. branch of 
the river Plate, to which their name was given. 
These people have no idea of an exclusive right 
to any portion of country. They hunt on the 
Wolf river, above their village, and on the river 
Plate, above the mouth of that river. This 
country is very similar to that of the Panias Pro 
per, though there is an extensive body of fertile 
well-timbered land between the Wolf river, be 
low their village, and the river Corn de Cerf, or 
Elkhorn river They cultivate corn, beans, &amp;c. 
The particulars related of the other Panias are 
also applicable to them. They are seldom visited 
by any trader, and therefore usually bring their 
furs and peltry to the village of the Panias Pro 
per, where they traffic with the whites.] 

[PANIAS PIQUE. These Indians have no inter 
course with the inhabitants of the Illinois ; the 
information, therefore, which we have been ena 
bled to obtain, with respect to them, is very 
imperfect. They were formerly known by the 
name of the White Panias, and are of the same 
family with the Panias of the river Plate. They 
are said to be a well-disposed people, and inhabit 
a very fertile country ; certain it is that they 
enjov a delightful climate.] 

[PANIAS REPUBLICANS, are a branch of Pania 
Proper, or, as they are frequently termed, the 
Big Paunch Indians. About ten years since they 
withdrew themselves from the mother-nation, 
and established a village on a large northwardly 
branch of the Kanzas, to which they have given 
name ; they afterwards subdivided and lived in 
different parts of the country, on the waters of 
Kanzas river ; but being harassed by their tur 
bulent neighbours, the Kanzas, they have lately 
rejoined the Panias Proper What has been said 
with respect to the Panias Proper is applicable 
to these people, except that they hunt principally 
on the Republican river, which is better stocked 
with timber than that hunted by the Panias.] 

PANICO, a settlement and alcaldia of the 
Portuguese, in the kingdom of Brazil, between 
the rivers Corixes and Tocantines, nearer the 
shore of the former than the second. 



P A N 



PAN 



PANIMA, a settlement of the province and 
government of Louisiana on the shore of the river 
Arkansas, with a fort built by the French. 

PANIMAHA, a settlement of the nation of 
the Bread Indians, in N. America, on the shore 
and at the source of the river Panis. In its 
vicinity are other settlements. 

PANIMALIAS, a settlement of Indians of the 
same nation as the former, situate also on the 
shore of the river by the other small settlements. 

PANINDIQUARO, SAN ANDRES DE, a set 
tlement of the head settlement of Puruandiro, and 
alcaldia mat/or of Y r alladolid, in the province and 
bishopric of Mechoacan ; situate in a flat bottom, 
of a hot and moist temperature, and containing 32 
families of Indians, who cultivate some wheat in 
its district: 18 leagues s. w. of Pasquaro. 

PANIO VASAS, a settlement of Indians of the 
province and government of Louisiana, on the 
shore of a small river which enters the Padoukas. 

PANIS, a settlement of Indians of the nation 
of this name, in the province and government of 
Louisiana in N. America, where the French had 
an establishment defended bv a fort. It is sur 
rounded with two small settlements on the shore 
of the river of its name. 

PANIS, another settlement, in the same pro 
vince, on the shore of the river Missouri, where 
also the French had a fort and establishment ; 
and round about it are upwards of 40 small set 
tlements of Indians. 

[The Indian tribe mentioned in the two above 
settlements, are called by the French Panis, 
and by the Spaniards Towiaches : the latter is 
the proper Indian name. They live on the s. 
side of Red river, by the course of the river, 
upwards of 800 miles above Natchitoches ; and 
by land, by the nearest path, it is estimated at 
about 340. They have, at present, two towns 
near together ; the lower town, where their chief 
lives, is called Niteheta, the other is called 
Towaahach. They call their present chief the 
Great Bear. They are at war with the Spaniards, 
but friendly to those French and American hun 
ters who have lately been among them. They 
are likewise at war with the Osages, as are 
every other nation. For many hundreds of miles 
round them the country is rich prairie, covered 
with luxuriant grass, which is green summer 
and winter, with skirts of wood on the river bank, 
by the springs and creeks. 

They have many horses and mules. They 
raise more corn, pumpkins, beans, and tobacco, 
than they want for their own consumption ; the 

VOL. IV. 



surplus they exchange with the Hietans for buf 
falo, rugs, horses, and mules. The pumpkin 
they cut round in its shreads, and w r hen it is 
in a state of dryness, that it is so tough it will 
not break but bend, they plait and work it into 
large mats, in which state they sell it to the 
Hietans ; who, as they travel, cut off and eat it 
as they want it. Their tobacco they manufacture 
and cut as fine as tea, which is put in leather 
bags of a certain size, and is likewise an article 
of trade. They have but few guns, and very 
little ammunition ; what they have they keep for 
war, and hunt with the bow. Their meat is 
principally buffalo ; seldom kill a deer, though 
they are so plentiful as to come into their villages, 
and about their houses, like a domestic animal. 
Elks, bears, wolves, antelopes, and wild hogs, 
are likewise plentiful in their country, and white 
rabbits, or hares, as well as the common rabbit : 
white bears sometimes come down amongst them, 
and wolves of various colours. The men gene 
rally go entirely naked, and the w r omen nearly 
so, only wearing a small flap of a piece of a skin. 
They have a number of Spaniards among them, 
of fair complexion, taken from the settlement of 
Santa Fe, when they were children, who live as 
they do, and have no knowledge of the place 
from whence they came. Their language differs 
from that of any other nation, the Tawakenoes 
excepted. Their present number of men is esti 
mated at about 400. A great number of them, 
about six years ago, were swept off by the small 
pox.] 

PANIS, a river of the territory in which the 
Indians of this name reside. It runs e. and 
enters the Missouri, in lat. 39 44 n. 

PANO, a river of the province and govern 
ment of Quixos and Macas, in the kingdom of 
Quito, which runs e. and uniting itself with the 
Tena enters the Hollin, in lat. 58 s. 

PANOJOUIS, a barbarous nation of Indians, 
little known, who inhabit the country of Las 
Amazonas, between the rivers Tigre and Cura- 
ray : from these are descended the Semigals. 

PANONKE, a lake of the province and colony 
of Sagadahook, formed from the river Penob- 
scot, at its mid-course ; on the confines of Nova 
Scotia, or Acadia. 

PANOS, a barbarous and numerous nation of 
Indians of the province of Las Amazonas, dwell 
ing in the woods near the river Ucayale to the e, 
bounded n. by the nation of the Cocamas, and s. 
by those of the Piros and Cunivos. They are 
ferocious, treacherous, and cruel : some were 



PAN 



PAN 



reduced to a settlement in 1608 ; but they rose in 
1723, and again retired to their native woods. 

[PANSE, DE LA, a branch of Wabash river, in 
the N. W. territory.] 

PANTALEON, 5. a settlement of the pro 
vince and government of Sonora in N. America, 
of the country and territory of the Apaches In 
dians ; on the shore of a river, between the set 
tlements of Rosario and San Eugenio. 

PANTALEON, another settlement, of the pro 
vince and government of Buenos Ayres in Peru ; 
situate on the shore and at the source of the 
river Las Conchas, and s. of the capital. 

PANTALEON, a lake of the same province and 
government as the former settlement, near the 
shore of the river Saladillo. 

PANTEPEC, a settlement and head settle 
ment of the district of the alcaldia mayor of 
Guauchinango in Nueva Espana. It contains 
470 families of Otomies and Totonacos Indians, 
and its territory is the most fertile of the whole 
jurisdiction ; producing in abundance, cotton, 
chile, tobacco, sugar, wax, maize, French beans, 
and various fruits. In its district are five wards, 
and it is 22 leagues n. of its capital. 

PANTEPEC, another settlement, of the pro 
vince and alcaldia mayor of Los Zoques in the 
kingdom of Guatemala. 

PANTIPATA, a settlement of the province 
and corregimiento of Abancay in Peru. 

[PANTON, a township in Addison county, 
Vermont ; situate on the e. side of lake Champ- 
lain, between Addison and Ferrisburg, and 
about 87 miles n. of Bennington. It contains 
200 inhabitants.] 

PANUAYA, a river of the province and cor 
regimiento of Mexico in Nueva Espana, which 
rises in the mountains of the sierra Nevada, and 
runs to empty itself in the lake of Chalco. 

PANUCO, a province and alcaldia mayor of 
Nueva Espana : bounded w. by theNuevo Reyno 
de Leon, and by one part of the audience of 
Guadalaxara, e. by the gulf of Mexico, 5. by the 
province of Tlaxcala and that of Mexico, and w. 
by the kingdom of Mechoacan. The tropic of 
Cancer traverses this province, so that it lies 
partly in the torrid, partly in the temperate 
zone ; 55 leagues long, and nearly the same wide. 
The part bordering upon the province of Mexico 
is the best and most fertile, and abounding in 
provisions, and having some gold mines and 
several salt earths ; but the other part, which 
is bounded by Leon, is miserable and barren. 
This country was one of the first discovered by 



Hernan Cortes, but its conquest and settlement 
caused him infinite labours. It is rather fertile 
and pleasant than rich, and by no means po 
pulous. 

PANUCO, the capital, situate on the shore of a 
river, from whence it takes its name; 39 miles 
from the sea, and 143 n. with a slight inclination 
to the e . of Mexico : founded by order of Her 
nan Cortes in 1520, with the title of San Estevan 
del Puerto. It contains about 500 families, and 
consists of some very neat houses of stone with 
roofs of palm leaves. The river is navigable for 
large vessels much above the city ; but the port 
has at its entrance a bar, so as to impede the 
passage of the vessels from coming up: a great 
disadvantage to its commerce. It is in lat. 
22 48 w. and long. 98 52" w. 

PANUCO, a settlement and real of silver mines, 
of the alcaldia mayor of Fresnillo in Nueva Es 
pana : of a small population, as being near to 
the city of Zacatecas, about three leagues dis 
tant. 

PANUCO, another settlement, of the province 
and government of Tucuman in Peru ; situate 
n. n. w. of the town of San Fernando. 

PANUELO, QUADRADO, a large square 
sand-bank, having in the midst several small 
isles, some of which are called Los Abrojos, 
and on which many vessels have been lost. 
This bank is n. of cape Rojo of S. Domingo, 
and e. of Los Caicos. 

PANUN, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Chancay in Peru ; annexed to 
the curacy of Canchas. 

PANZACOLA, a city and garrison of Flo 
rida, in the province of its name ; situate in the 
bay of Santa Maria de Galve : founded by D. 
Andres de Aveiola, by order of the viceroy of 
Nueva Espana, the Count de Galve, in 1596. 

It was formerly small, and is of a moderate 
temperature, the heat or cold never being ex 
cessive at the different seasons. The territory 
although sandy is fertile, and yields abundantly 
of whatsoever is sowed. It produces many wild 
fruits, such as bitter acorns, two kinds of wal 
nuts, the one of which is very delicate, medlars 
and chesnuts, which have the appearance of nuts, 
and are of the same taste as the Spanish nuts, 
and vines which yield large grapes of a purple 
colour and somewhat sour. 

In the forests are various sorts of wood, pine, 
sassafras, savines, and oaks ; of animals, as deer&amp;gt; 
cebolos, bears, and also of fowl as large as the 
turkies of Europe. 



PAO 

In 1719 this city was taken by the French, 
but restored in the same year by Alfonso Car- 
rascosa de la Torre, who constructed at the point 
of Sigiienza, one of those which form the en 
trance of the bay, a fort with the name of Prin 
cipe de Asturias; but the French, commanded 
by Count de Chamelin, returned again to attack 
it with a naval force, against which Don Afonso 
Carrascosa, with very limited means, in vain 
made an intrepid defence, and it was eventually 
burnt and destroyed. In 1762 it was ceded to 
the English by the peace of Versailles, and in 
1781 it was conquered and regained by the Spa 
niards under Count de Galves. Forty-five miles 
e.s.e. of Mobile, in lat. 30 33 n. and long. 78 
22 w. 

PAO, CONCEPCION DE, a town of the pro 
vince of Barcelona and government of Cumana : 
founded in 1744 by some islanders of La Marga 
rita and Trinidad, and other inhabitants of the 
Caracas who had their cattle and estates in this 
province ; situate at the source of the river of 
its name, and in its district its inhabitants, who 
(of all classes, should amount to 636 souls) have 
30 estates, consisting of some narrow glens 
planted Mith maize and yucas, also 19 farms of 
the larger cattle. 

The soil is the richest and most fertile of the 
province, and the natives being very laborious, 
it is extremely well furnished with provisions ; 
and its population, though small, instrumental 
to the guarding against invasion from the Ca- 
ribes Indians in the settlements of the missions 
of the Orinoco and llanos of San Juan. The 
geographer, Don Juan de la Cruz, places this 
city, in his map of S.America, in the province of 
Venezuela, to the 5. of the city of Valencia ; 
[but this is very erroneous, as it is situated 92 
miles s. by to. of Barcelona, 82 n.w. of St. Tome, 
and 152 s. e. of Caracas, in lat. 8 43 n. and 
long. 65 10 w.~\ 

PAO, SAN JUAN BAUTISTA DEL, a city of the 
province and government of Venezuela. Its 
population is 5400 souls. It has a large trade 
in horses, mules, and horned cattle, and a vast 
quantity of cheese is made here. The air is 
wholesome. The river Pao runs to the e. of the 
city, its course is n. and s. It discharged itself 
formerly into the lake of Valencia, but by a re 
volution of nature it is now made to fall into the 
Apure, and thus contribute to swell the Orinoco. 
A canal might easily be cut from about the 
source of the Pao to join the Orinoco, which 
would be of vast benefit to commerce, inasmuch 
as the trade from Venezuela to Guayana would 



PAP 



27 



not be liable to the interruption of enemies 
cruizers, and, in the event of an invasion of the 
latter province, it might receive early succour 
from the former. The city of Pao is in lat. 
9 22 n. and long. 68 21 w. and lies 105 miles 
s. w. of Caracas. 

PAO, a river of the former province and go 
vernment of Barcelona, and known also by the 
name of Macuros. It is large and abundant, 
rises at the back of the serrania, to the s. of the 
table-land of Guanipa, runs s. e. and collects 
some streams by the s. w. Near its source dwell 
some barbarian Indians of the Ivarecipes and 
Peritos Indians. It abounds in small fish, and 
on its shores grows excellent cacao. The geo 
grapher Cruz is also wrong respecting the course 
of this river, when he gives its source in the pro 
vince of Venezuela, and makes it enter the Por- 
tuguesa; the fact being that it runs into the 
Orinoco, 48 miles w. of St. Tome, and from 
whence it is navigable as far as the town of 
its name. Its mouth is on the n. shore of the 
Orinoco, in lat. 8 5 n. 

PAO, another, a small river in this province, 
which rises in the country and territory of the 
Pandacotos Indians, between the rivers Paragua 
and Arvi, runs n. and turning at mid-course to 
w. enters the latter of those two rivers. 

PAO, another, with the surname of Amarillo. 
in the province and captainship of Itamaraca in 
Brazil. It rises near the coast, runs e. and en 
ters the sea between the Doce, or Dulce, and the 
town of La Concepcion and fort of Orange. 

PAOBONCA, an island of the river Parana- 
pane, in the province and captainship of Rio 
Janeiro in Brazil. 

PAOS, a barbarous nation of Indians who dwell 
n. of the river Orinoco, and s. of the Apure. 
These barbarians are bounded w. by the Oto- 
macos, and n. w. by the Iraruros. Their con 
version was begun by the Jesuits in 1722. 

[PAPAGAYO, a gulf on the n. Pacific ocean, 
and on the w. side of the isthmus of Nicaragua, 
a small distance from the w. parts of the lake of 
Nicaragua, and in about lat. 11 10 n.~\ 

PAPAGAYOS, a settlement of the province 
and corregimiento of Cuyo in the kingdom of 
Chile, n. of the town of Corocoto. 

PAPAGAYOS, a bay, called also Puerto Sil- 
vestra, on the e. coast of the strait of Magellan, 
between cape Verde and cape S. Valentin. 

PAPAGAYOSO, a settlement of the province 
and captainship of S. Vicente in Brazil, at the 
source of a small river which enters the Uru 
guay. 



28 PAP 

PAPAGUAI, a mountain of Cayenne, on the 
skirts of which the French have an establish 
ment. 

PAPALLACTA, a settlement, formerly large 
and commercial, in the province and government 
of Quixos and Macas, of the kingdom of Quito, 
to the a\, and at present reduced to a miserable 
village. It has tor its parochial curate a re 
ligious of the order of S. Domingo, who is sup 
ported by the synod from the royal treasury of 
Quito. The inhabitants live by cutting wood 
and planks on the mountains, and by making of 
them vaulted roofs, which they call baleas. It is 
situate at the foot of the Cordillera of the Andes, 
on the n. shore of the river of its name, and in 
the road leading from Quito to Archidona, in 
lat. 22 19 s. 

PAPALLACTA, the aforesaid river, flows down 
from the mountain of Pambamarca, and enters 
the Maranon. 

[PAPALOAPAIN,a large river ofVeraCruz 
in New Spain, called also Alvarada. It rises in 
the province of Oaxaca, and being enlarged by 
the accession of lesser rivers, falls into the bay 
of Mexico, 35 miles s. e. of the citv of Vera 
Cruz.] 

PAPA LOTIPAC, the principal or head settle- 
rnent of the district of the alcaldia mayor of Cui- 
catlan in Nueva Espana ; of a cold and dry tem 
perature. Its population is composed of 142 fa 
milies of Cuicatecos Indians, and it is five leagues 
e. of its capital. 

PAPALpTIPAN, a ward of the alcaldia mayor 
of Guauchinango in Nueva Espana ; annexed to 
the curacy of Tlacuilotepec. 

PAPALOTLA, SANTO TORIBIO DE, a settle 
ment of the head settlement of the district and 
alcaldia mayor of Tezcoco in Nueva Espana ; si 
tuate in a valley which produces wheat, maize, 
French beans, fruits, and garden herbs, the trade 
and support of the inhabitants. These are com 
posed of 189 families of Indians, and 32 of Spa 
niards, Mustees, and Mulattoes. One league n. 
of its capital. 

PAPALOTLA, another settlement, with the de 
dicatory title of S. Miguel, in the head settle 
ment of the district of Santa Isabel, and alcaldia 
mayor of Cholula, in the same kingdom. It con 
tains 44 Indian families, and is half a league 
nearly n. of its head settlement. 

PAPALOTLA, a river of the same kingdom, 
which rises in the mountains e. of the city of 
Mexico, and enters the lake of this capital. 

PAPAMENE, a rapid river which flows down 
from the mountains of Fosca, to the e. of Santa 



PAP 

Fe, in the Nuevo Reyno de Granada. It runs 
through the llanos of San Juan and enters the 
Meta, and in its vicinity dwell the nations of the 
Guipis or Guaypis and Macos Indians. 

[PAPANAZES, Indians of Brazil. See ad 
ditional matter respecting the history, &amp;c. of 
this kingdom.] 

PA PAN TLA, an alcaldia mayor and jurisdic 
tion of Nueva Espana; for the most part of an 
hot and moist temperature, extending 15 leagues 
along the sea-coast to the leeward of V r cra Cruz, 
beginning at the bar of the renowned river of 
Nantla, where it is divided from that govern 
ment, and running as far as the bar of Cora- 
zones, which serves as limits to the jurisdiction 
of Guauchinango, and as an impediment to even 
the smallest vessels to enter ; this however not 
being the case with the bar of Nantla ; for al 
though over this the water is less deep by three 
or four yards, yet it is navigable for bilanders 
and small craft as far as the river of Los Bar- 
riles. 

This alcaldia has several other rivers, all 
abounding in various kinds of fish, and affording 
thereby a commerce to the natives. The shores 
of these rivers are lined with cedars, mulberries, 
and other trees for ship-building. Of these was 
the frigate called the Tecolutena built, and since 
that various others. This jurisdiction produces 
also much wax, which the Indians collect from 
the bee-hives abounding in the woods ; pita- 
trees, which they call here magueycs de lechugitla, 
and from the milk of which is distilled from the 
trees of Zapota, a kind of resin called chicle, 
serving as a medicine. On the mountains are 
found also fine baynilla, which is bought by- 
traders to carry to Europe. The cultivation of 
tobacco, to which the soil is peculiarly adapted, 
was once the chief article of trade here, but its 
demand has diminished in proportion as its cul 
tivation in the other provinces has become com 
mon. But the sugar cane is still cultivated to 
great profit, and of it loaf-sugar is made : also 
is cultivated maize, which yields two abundant 
crops annually, one in October, the other in 
April ; the only labour required in agriculture 
being the scratching up the ground with the 
point of a stake. Here is likewise grown a con 
siderable portion of Chile pepper, fruit, garden- 
herbs, and common pepper, like that of Tabasco, 
despised by the Indians from the smallness of its 
worth. In the llanos are some ranchos., in which 
are bred some neat cattle and horses. 

PAPANTLA, the capital, is the settlement of 
the same name. It contains 535 families of 



PAP 

Mexican Indians, 15 of Spaniards, and 200 of 
Mulattoes, divided into two companies of militia. 
In its church is venerated an image of Nuestra 
Senora de la Concepcion, of beautiful sculpture, 
the which 140 years back was found by a mariner 
on the sea-shore in a closed chest, with a direc 
tion on the top, signifying- Para JPapantla, (for 
Papantla), and which, he having- caused to be 
carried on the shoulders of Indians to the settle 
ment, was opened in presence of many persons, 
the said imag-e being- discovered within. A tem 
ple was then built for it, and a devout brother 
hood attached : 105 miles n. e. of Mexico, in 
lat. 20 27 n. Long. 97 36 30" w. 

The other settlements of this province are, 
Espinal, Chumatlan, 

Quazintla, Metlatlan, 

Chiquaoloque, Santo Domingo, 

Zozocolco, Cuahuytlan, 

San Mateo, Coatlan. 

PA PARE, a settlement of the province and 
government of Santa Marta in the Nuevo Reyno 
de Granada ; near the coast, on the shore of the 
Great Cienega, or swamp. 

PAPARO, a river of the province and govern 
ment of Cumana. 

PAPAS, a lake of the province and govern 
ment of Popayan in the kingdom of Quito, in the 
paramo or mountain of Guanacas ; and from it 
rises the great river of Magdalena. 

PAPA&amp;QUIARO, a settlement of the missions 
which were held by the Jesuits, in the province 
of Tepeguana and kingdom of Nueva Vizcaya ; 
founded on the shore of the river Las Nasas. 

PAPATERUANAS, a settlement of the pro 
vince and country of Las Amazonas, in the part 
possessed by the Portuguese, a reduction of the 
missions of the Carmelite fathers of that nation ; 
situate at the confluence of the rivers Paranaiba 
and Topinambaranas. 

PAPAXTLA, a settlement of the head settle 
ment of the district and akaldia mayor of Zo- 
chicoatlan in Nueva Espana ; containing 16 fa 
milies of Indians. 

PA PEG WAY, a large island of the coast of 
the province and government of Guayana, in the 
part possessed by the Dutch; at the mouth or 
entrance of the river Demerary. 

PAPILLONS, a bay on the n. w. coast of the 
island S. Christopher, one of the Antilles ; be 
tween the bays of Louvet and Ovignes, in the 
part possessed by the French before the island 
was ceded to the English at the peace of 
Utrecht. 



PAR 



29 



PAPIMOVAGANE, a lake of Canada in N. 
America ; of the district and country of the Pa- 
pinachois Indians. 

PAPINACHOIS, a bay on the n. shore of 
the river S. Lawrence, between cape Pidgeon 
and the island of Oziers. [It is five leagues s. w. 
of St. Margaret s river. An Indian nation of the 
same name inhabit the country s. of Piretibb lake 
in Lower Canada.] 

PAPOSO, a settlement of the province and 
corregimienio of Copiapo in the kingdom of Chile ; 
situate near the coast in the s. part. It has a 
large enclosure called the Chaco Baxo, in which 
the Indians catch the vicunas. 

[PAPPA Ford, on Peleson or Clinches river, 
lies five miles from Emery s river, and 18 from 
Campbell s station, near Holston.] 

PAPRES, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Quispicanchi in Peru. 

PAPUDO, a port of the kingdom of Chile, on 
the coast of the S. sea ; being a small retired bay- 
frequented by the vessels from Peru, to lade with 
the tallow, hides, and rigging of the settlements 
of Chicapa and Ligua ; a great preference being 
given to the hemp of this valley, it being the 
best made in the kingdom, and attributed to the 
waters here employed in its manufacture. The 
port is in lat. 32 36 s. 

PAPUJA, SANTIAGO DE, a settlement of the 
province and corregimiento of Asangaro in Peru. 

PAPULATLA , a settlement of the head settle 
ment of the district and alcaldia mat/or of Chilapa 
in Nueva Espana. It contains 71 families of In 
dians, and is one league n. of its capital. 

PAPUNACAS, a barbarous and ancient na 
tion of Indians, dwelling in the woods and forests 
s. of the Maranon, and near the 5. shore of the 
river Cayari. It is but little known. 

PAQUITANET, a small river of Louisiana 

N.America. It runs s. w. between those of 



ui 



Vieux deserts and Quiovecovet, and enters the 
Mississippi. 

PAQUTIGASTA, a settlement of the pro 
vince and government of Tucuman, s. of the 
settlement of Catamarca. 

PARA, GRAN, a province and captainship of 
the kingdom of Brazil, bounded n. by the king 
dom of Granada, the provinces of Guyanas, and 
the great bay formed by the Atlantic sea at the 
entrance of the river of Las Amazonas, e. by the 
captainship of Marauan, s. by the provinces of 
Goias and Matto Groso and the kingdom of Peru, 
and w. by the kingdoms of Peru and Granada. 

It is watered by a river of the same name, 



30 



PARA. 



which traverses it and enters the sea in the 
aforesaid bay. It is very fertile in sugar canes, 
of which sugar is made, as also in cotton, cacao, 
baynilla, and coffee, of which productions ship 
ments were made annually to Lisbon. The cli 
mate is extremely hot, and in the woods is a va 
riety of timber, excellent for either colour or du 
rability, and amongst the which is a tree much 
esteemed, and called here umiri^ the trunk of 
which distils a very fragrant balsam. Besides 
the aforesaid river," there are five others very 
large which irrigate this province, the Negro, 
Topajos, Cambeas, and Xingu, the which abound 
in fish, and in a particular sort, called the mana- 
ties. Their shores are covered with woods, in 
which are a variety of birds and quadrupeds. 
All of them run into the Maranon. The islands 
of Joanes or Marajo, of Cahete and others, be 
long to this district. 

[The trade (observes Mr. Andrew Grant) be 
tween Brazil and Europe is chiefly carried on by 
three principal points, viz. Rio de Janeiro, Bahia, 
or the bay De Todos Santos, and Grand Para. 

The captainship of Grand Para is the most n. 
of any of the Portuguese settlements in Brazil. 
Belen, the capital, is situated on the banks of 
the river Para or Amazonas, and defended by a 
strong fortress, named Notre Dame de las Mer- 
ces, erected at the mouth of the river De Muja, 
which forms the port of Para. This port is dif 
ficult of access, from the currents which run in 
different directions, and which are occasioned by 
a multitude of small islands, rendering the navi 
gation of ships slow and uncertain. But when 
once they get into the harbour, they anchor in a 
muddy bottom, with four, five, or six fathoms of 
water. The canal which leads up to it grows, 
however, more shallow every day, and in a short 
time it will not be navigable, if, as it must be 
supposed, the waters continue to deposit as much 
earth as they have done for the last century. 

The foundation of Belen, which is situated at 
about 20 leagues from the sea, was laid in 1615 
by Francis Caldeira. It stands on a spot of 
ground which rises about 13 feet above the level 
of the sea, and for a long time afforded only a 
mart for the articles collected by the wandering 
Indians in the neighbourhood, such as the wild 
cocoa, vat/niUa, tortoise and crab-shells, sarsapa- 
rilla, different kinds of balsams, cotton, &amp;c. 

The population of Belen amounts to about 
10,000 souls. The same indolence, superstition, 
and ignorance which characterise the Portuguese 
in general, are evident among the inhabitants of 



this city, though an equal degree of luxury does 
not prevail here as in the capitals of the more s. 
captainships. Another circumstance which has 
tended to modify the character of the Parabians 
is, that Negro slavery was introduced among 
them at a later period than in most of the other 
capfains/iips. Too poor to purchase these de 
voted victims of injustice and tyranny, they 
were long forced to content themselves with 
what feeble assistance they derived from the 
natives, who were longer kept in a state of sub 
jection in the n. parts of Brazil than in the cap 
tainships towards the s. 

In 1755 an exclusive company was appointed 
for Grand Para and M arafian, possessing a capital 
of about 125,000. Count d Oyeras was at the 
head of this monopoly. It was permitted to 
gain 15 per cent, exclusive of all expences, on 
articles of provisions, and to sell its merchandise 
at 45 per cent, more than they would have cost 
even at Lisbon. This company was also em 
powered to make its own price for what pro 
visions were furnished by the districts subject to 
its jurisdiction. These unjust and extraordinary 
privileges were granted to this company for 20 
years, after which period they could be renewed 
by application to the government of Portugal. 
It is easy to conceive the tendency which such a 
company must have had in paralizing the efforts 
of the colonists ; and, in fact, it was not until 
1778, at which period they were relieved from 
the oppression necessarily attending these exclu 
sive privileges, that the colony began to exhibit 
any signs of prosperity. 

The principal commodities received from Para 
are sugar, which is prepared in more than 30 in- 
genios, or sugar houses, in the interior of the 
district; coffee, cocoa, and Brazil wood, particu 
larly that species called by the Portuguese bura- 
pemina^ which is beautifully veined, and from 
which an odoriferous oil is extracted ; the bark 
is also burnt as a perfume. 

From the bark of a tree, called arariba, which 
is very common in the neighbourhood of Para, 
the inhabitants extract a fine purple colour, 
which is said to be extremely permanent. A 
new species of puchari, or precious fruit, is also 
met with in this division of Brazil. It does not 
attain to such a large size as the common kind ; 
but the fruit is more aromatic, and forms an ex 
cellent substitute for nutmegs. The real jalap- 
tree (convolvulus jalappa) abounds in Para ; as 
well as various kinds of contrayerva (dorstenia 
contrayeroa)) and many other medicinal plants.] 



PARA. 



31 



[Brazil abounds with gums of different kinds, 
well calculated to supply the place of gum ara- 
bic : the jutuicisica of Para is well calculated for 
making sealing-wax. Several parts of Para 
abound with yellow ochres (ochraferri), which is 
frequently intermixed with a red ochre, of as 
brilliant a colour as vermilion. White argil 
(argilln bolus alba), called by the colonists taba- 
tinga ; and likewise red bole (nrgilla bolus rubra)^ 
is very common in different parts of the province. 

The animals in this province are similar to 
those in the other districts of Brazil. Formerly 
the sale of the flocks which grazed in the island 
of Marajo was one of the principal resources of 
this colony ; but at present the number of oxen 
are greatly diminished. 

A large species of silk- worm (phalena atlas), 
whose ball is three times the size of the common 
silk-worm s, is found in great plenty in Para. 
It feeds on the leaves of the orange-trees, and 
the silk produced by it is of a dark yellow colour. 
Were this species cultivated with care, the silk 
obtained from them might prove a profitable ar 
ticle of commerce. The people of Minas Geraes 
have already set them the example, so far as re 
gards the common silk-worm. 

Eighty-seven miles from Para, on descending 
the river of the Amazonas, is a large tongue of land 
formed into several islands, the largest of which, 
that of Joannes, is very populous, and defended 
by a small fort. These isles belong to different 
Portuguese nobles, and have the title of baronies. 
A league and a half from the city stands the 
town of St. Georges dos Alamos, with a regular 
fortress. About 84 miles s. w. on the borders 
and on the w. side of the river Tocantines is 
another town, named Camuta, or Cameta, with 
the fort of Gurupa : along the river are the forts 
of Paru, which the French took and destroyed in 
the year 1698, of Tapergos, and Rio Negro. To 
the n. the province of Para is terminated by 
Cayenne ; on this side it is limited by the n. cape, 
where stands the fort of Cumanha, opposite that 
of Camon and that of Dos Aragoariz. In this 
province are four cities or towns ; viz. Para, St. 
Georges dos Alamos, Camonta, and Cahete, and 
about fifty thousand inhabitants. 

The Portuguese formed new establishments 
on the Rio Negro, where they discovered dia 
mond and gold mines : in 1766, four hundred 
soldiers and marines were sent from Lisbon, as 
well as workmen of all kinds ; and several fami 
lies were tempted, by the great encouragement 
offered them, to join this expedition, with the 
view of settling in this part of Brazil. 



During war with any nation which may be in 
possession of Guayana, this district would be 
much exposed to invasion from that quarter. Its 
great distance from Bahia, and even from Para 
and Maranan, renders it next to impossible for 
these provinces to afford it the necessary aid to 
repel an invading foe. 

The new colony of Rio Negro was extremely 
ill-conducted by Francois Xavier de Mendo^a, 
Minister of Marine. Sufficient advantages, in 
deed, have not yet been derived from this fine 
country, from the improper steps taken to colo 
nize it. It is true that the population of this 
district has been augmented by many families 
who have been forced to abandon G nay ana, from 
the bad success of the establishments attempted 
by France in the year 1764, along the banks of 
the Courou. It is a melancholy truth that colo 
nization which, if conducted with wisdom and 
benevolence, might prove a blessing to mankind, 
has in general proved most ruinous to those 
unfortunate individuals who, attracted by the 
love of gain, or driven from their country by 
the pressure of want, have sought an asylum in 
those new establishments. 

The government of Para is dependent upon 
that of Maranan, and this is separated from that 
of Para on the n. by the river Tocantines. 

The Portuguese were driven upon this pro 
vince by a storm in 1535, but did not form any 
settlement till 1599. The French, who invaded 
this colony in 1612, kept possession of it from 
that period till 1615, when it was wrested from 
them by the Dutch, from whom the Portuguese 
again recovered it in 1644. 

Before it was visited by the Portuguese, the 
chief employment of the savages was collecting 
the ambergrease which abounds on this part of 
the coast ; and this likewise became the occupa 
tion of the first European settlers. For many 
years after the re-settlement of the Portuguese, 
Maranan continued in a very languishing state, 
till some of the more enterprising colonists began 
to cultivate cotton, which is said to be superior 
to any other raised in the New World. For 
several years past, rice (oryza mutica), a species 
which is natural to Brazil, and differing from the 
aryza sativa^ in not being furnished with awns, 
has also been cultivated to a considerable extent, 
though it is inferior to Levant rice, and even to 
that produced in N. America. 

Several attempts were lately made to produce 
silk in this colony ; but either from the unfitness 
of the climate, the improper methods employed 
in the management of the insects, or from some] 



3-2 



PARA. 



[other cause, the project has proved wholly abor 
tive. The same want of success has not, how 
ever, attended the culture of indigo, as the nu 
merous plantations of this valuable vegetable 
are in a flourishing condition, and promise am 
ply to renumerate the proprietors. The finest 
Brazil arnotto is also brought from this district. 

The Island of St. Louis constitutes that part 
of the province of Maranan, which is by far the 
most populous. It is 26 leagues in circumference, 
extremely fertile, and only separated from the 
continent by a small river. The capital,^which 
is also named St. Louis, was built by the French 
in 1612. The only public building it contains wor 
thy of notice is the Episcopal Palace, the houses 
in general being ill-built and inconvenient. This 
town is defended by a citadel and several forts, 
and is the residence of the governor-general of 
the three northern provinces. All the trade of 
the island is transacted here ; the harbour is ca 
pacious, but might be greatly improved by art. 



The 



populati 
thousand 



ion of the island is estimated at about 



15 thousand souls. The plantations arc not 
here equally flourishing with those on the con 
tinent, particularly on the banks of the rivers 
Ytapicorie, Mony, &amp;c. 

Towards the eastern part of the interior of the 
province, the natives have not yet been reduced 
to complete subjection. This part of the country, 
which is elevated and of a sandy soil, is princi 
pally inhabited by shepherds. The surface of 
the ground, which is covered with saltpetre, is 
altogether appropriated to rearing horses and 
horned cattle, which are sold t6 considerable 
advantage in the neighbouring countries ; but 
the sheep degenerate there as well as in the other 
parts of Brazil, except about Coritibe. Un 
fortunately, the too frequent droughts, and the 
excessive heats, often destroy whole flocks, when 
sufficient attention is not paid to lead them in 
time to distant pastures. 

Mines of sulphur, alum, copperas, iron, lead, 
and antimony, are extremely common, though 
very superficial in these mountains, and yet none 
of them have been opened. In 1572, permis 
sion was indeed granted to work a silver one, 
which had been discovered three or four years 
before ; but the court soon after retracted this 
permission, for reasons that were never fully 
explained. 

This government consists of 8993 white men, 
17,844 negroes, or free Mulattoes, and slaves ; 
and of 38,937 Indians, either scattered or assem 
bled in 10 villages. The exports have not as yet 
been equal to this degree of population. Their 



value has never been estimated at more than 
o29,000 ; but since the suppression of the com 
pany already mentioned, it is to be presumed 
they must every year become more considerable. 

The ecclesiastical, the military, and civil esta 
blishment of Maranan, aro on the same footing 
as those in the other captainships of Brazil. In 
matters of consequence, however, this province, 
as well as that of Grand Para, is allowed to ap 
peal directly to the mother-country, without 
being obliged to appear before the two inter 
mediate tribunals of Bahia and Rio de Janeiro.] 

PARA, GRAN, the capital of the above province 
and captainship of the same name, and with the 
dedicatory title of Nuestra Senora de Belen. It is 
commercial, handsome, and rich, and adorned with 
beautiful edifices ; amongst these the most con 
spicuous are two parish churches," the convents 
of the monks of Nuestra Senora del Carmen, of 
La Merced, San Francisco, and S. Domingo, of 
the Capuchins and of the chapel of Christo, which 
belongs to the troops. It had a college of the 
Jesuits, under whose charge was a seminary for 
studies and the principal missions of the Mara 
nan. It has a citadel and a castle called Nuestra 
Senora de Las Mercedes, at the entrance of the 
bar upon the river, both of them being furnished 
with plenty of good artillery of brass and iron, 
and garrisoned with four companies with a com 
mandant and serjeant-major. It is the head of 
a bishopric erected by pope Clement XI. at 
the instance of king D.Juan V. in 1720; Don Fr. 
Bartolome del Pilas, a Carmelite monk, being 
nominated as its first bishop. It had, indeed, been 
made a bishop s see by pope Innocent XI. at 
the desire of king Peter II. and D. Fr. Manuel 
de la Natividad, provincial of the Capuchins of 
Corral, had been appointed to its functions, when 
D. Fr. Gregorio de Los Angeles, who had 
hitherto presided over it as belonging to the 
bishopric of Maranan, disputed the claims of the 
new-comer, and had litigations with the court of 
Rome, which were only put an end to by the 
death of the two rivals. 

The population of this city amounts to 4000 
housekeepers. [Mr. Mawe, however, takes the 
present population at ten thousand inhabitants. 

The town of Para, continues the same traveller, 
is situated on the river of its name, called by 
some Tocantines, the navigation of which is dif 
ficult, and is seldom attempted, except by small 
craft : the Confiance sloop of war with great 
care sailed up it, and anchored near the town, 
several days previous to the expedition against 
Cayenne. The inhabitants are in general very] 



P A It 

i poor, probably from want of commerce ; for 
although the great rivers Tocantines and Ama- 
zonas have their source, the latter in Peru, and 
the former in the captainship of Goyaz, though 
they receive almost millions of inferior streams 
in their course through immense tracks of territo 
ry, yet they are not productive of any commerce 
of consequence. The few exports from Para 
consist of a little rice and cocoa, a few drugs, &amp;c. 
to Maranan, from whence they are embarked 
for Europe. A few small brigs were sent hither 
from Barbadoes, after the taking of Cayenne : 
but the trade must be a bad one, as the inhabi 
tants are in general too poor to purchase English 
manufactures, except those of necessity ; nor 
could the produce of Para be an object of interest, 
as a cargo is at all times very precarious, and 
difficult to be obtained. 

The climate is hot, as may well be supposed, 
from its lying so near the equinoctial. Thunder, 
with lightning and rain, occur generally every 
afternoon, which cool the air very much, and 
render the heat less disagreeable. 

To the s. of Para is the captainship of Goyaz, 
bounded chiefly by Minas Geraes on the e. 
and Matto Grosso on the w. Its greatest extent 
in length is from lat. 6 to 21 30 s. Villa Boa, its 
principal town, is situate in lat. 16 22 s. about 
270 miles to the w. of Paracatu, from whence 
there is a good road. Here is a permutation- 
house, where all the gold found in the captainship 
is permuted. The governor is elected for three 
years, after which he is generally appointed to 
Bahia or Minas Geraes. In the captainship are 
many gold-mines, some of which produce gold 
of a very fine quality. Diamonds have been 
found in some parts, which are different in their 
appearance from those found in Cerro do Frio, 
having more brilliancy on their exterior ; but 
they are in general not of so pure a water, though 
of a very desirable size. As this fine district 
is so distant from the coast, it has very little 
commerce in any of its productions, except the 
valuable substances above-mentioned, and cattle, 
which are bred on the frontiers ; also some cotton, 
and occasionally a tew peculiar articles, which 
are sent to Rio de Janeyro. The mules on the 
return-journey are all loaded with salt, iron, 
cheap cotton-prints, woollens (particularly baizes), 
hats, fire-arms, powder and shot, and a variety 
of artificers tools. When any of the inhabitants 
have any thing peculiarly precious to dispose of, 
they generally take it tollio de Janeyro, and lay 
out the proceeds chiefly in the purchase of Negroes 
(they being at all times the first object), iron, 
alt, and other commodities. 



PAR 



3.1 



The population is very small in comparison to 
the extent of the district, but is likely to be in 
creased by new settlers ; although the indigent 
in Villa Rica, Tejuco, and other places in the 
mining country, are little inclined to remove 
out of society, even for the chance of riches ; in 
fact, having no Negroes fit to work, and being 
totally destitute of exertion themselves, all situa 
tions are to them indifferent. These are by no 
means the class of people who can be styled ad 
venturers. The poorer class of inhabitants who 
have obtained a small portion of gold, sometimes 
make a journey to Paracatu or Villa Rica to pur 
chase what Negroes they want. This captainship 
has been very little explored, and scarcely any 
thing is known of its productions beyond what is 
above stated, nor are any others sought after, 
though it cannot be doubted that there are many 
substances in all departments of natural history 
which might form the basis of a considerable 
commerce ; indeed, it is not unreasonable to pre 
sume that the soil contains the same variety of 
metals as the district of Minas Geraes. Many 
persons from thence speak of it with delight as 
being a fine country, having numerous rivers 
well stored with fish, and woods abounding with 
fine birds, which afford excellent diversion to the 
sportsman : also a great variety of animals. 

Para, together with Matto Grosso, and St. 
Paul s, communicates with the captainship of 
Goyas, by rivers which are navigable, though 
frequently interrupted by falls. The capital of 
Para is 60 miles from the mouth of the river, in 
lat. 1 30 s. and Ion. 48 33 a&amp;gt;.] 

PARA, a river of the above province and king 
dom, on the e. side of which the capital of this 
kingdom is situate. It is, properly speaking, one 
of the mouths of the Amazonas, formed by the 
island of Joanes. about 40 miles wide at its mouth. 
[This river is about 200 miles long.] 

PARA, another, a small river of the province and 
captainship of Espiritu Santo in the same king 
dom, rising in the mountains near the coast, run 
ning n. and forming various lakes. It then turns 
n. e. and enters the Paranauna with the name of 
Paracatus, opposite the settlement of Rosario, 

PARA, another. See PARANAIBA. 

PARA, a small island, near the coast of the pro 
vince and captainship of its name, between the 
island of Sipatubaand the bay of Cabelo de Velha. 

PARA, a settlement of the province and corre- 
gimicnto of Carrabaya in Peru. 

PARA, another, of the province and corregimi- 
ento of Lucanas in the same kingdom, annexed to 
the curacy of Paraisancos. 

PARA CAHUIN, a river of the division and 



VOL. iv. 



34 PAR 

district of Boroa in the kingdom of Chile, which 
runs . n. w. and enters the Cauten : at its source 
the Spaniards had built a fort which was destroyed 
by the Araucanos Indians. 

" PARACAS, a port of the S. sea, on the coast 
of the kingdom of Chile. It is small and of little 
security, and frequented by the vessels coming to 
this kingdom from Callao, in lat 29 II s. 

[Ships receive shelter here, when driven out of 
the harbour of Cangallan or Sangallan, which is 
three leagues s. e. of Carette Island, and n. n. w. 
of the island of Lobos.] 

PARACASSA, a river of the province and 
government of Jaen de Bracamoros in the king 
dom of Quito : it rises in the mountains of San 
tiago de Los Jorocos, and runs n. e. to enter the 
Maranon by its a?, shore, in lat. 4 42 s. 

[PARACATU, is the principal village or town 
of a district of the same name, which lies about 
90 leagues n. w. of Tejuco, bordering on the 
captainship of Goyas in Brazil, from which it is 
separated by a chain of high mountains that take 
a n. direction. The numerous rivers which rise 
on the e. side of the mountains, and flow into 
the great river St. Francisco, are rich in gold. 
The population of the village is estimated at 
above 1000 souls, and will shortly be very nume 
rous, as the reputed richness of some late dis 
coveries has tempted many families to migrate 
thither. It has all the advantages of a high and 
healthy situation, in the midst of a most fertile 
country, and has considerable intercourse with 
Sabora and Villa Rica, where the gold procured 
in its vicinity is permuted. It is governed by a 
captain Mor, who is subordinate to the governor 
of the latter place, to whom all disputes of conse 
quence are referred. To the s. is the rich dista- 
camcnto of Rio Plata, a river that yields fine 
diamonds, and has been much frequented by 
many adventurers, who, when discovered and 
seized, are called smugglers. A strong guard of 
soldiers is stationed here to prevent the precious 
stones from being sought for clandestinely.] 

PARACATUS, a small river of the province 
and captainship of Espiritu Santo in Brazil, which 
rises in the interior of the mountains, runs e. and 
enters with another small stream which it receives 
into the San Francisco. 

PARACAUSA, a river of the province and 
government of Jaen de Bracamoros in the king 
dom of Quito, which rises n. of its capital, and 
runs with various windings into the Maranon. 

PARACAY, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Nasca in Peru ; in the vicinity 
of which are some pools of water called Las 
Lagunillas. 



PAR 

PARACAS, a port of the S. sea, on the coast 
of the province andcorregimicnto of lea in Peru : 
little frequented by vessels, notwithstanding that 
it is convenient and sheltered. 

PARACEVINI, a river of the province and 
country of Las Amazonas : it is small, runs n. 
and enters the Madera. 

PARACHO, S. PEDRO DE, a settlement of the 
head settlement of the district of Arantzan and 
atcaldia mayor of Valladolid, in the province and 
bishopric of Mechoacan : it contains 78 families 
of Indians, and 11 of Spaniards, Mustees, and 
Mulattoes, dedicated to the cultivation of seeds, 
cutting of woods, making of earthen-ware, and 
saddles for riding : 12 leagues w. of its capital. 

PARACUARI, a settlement of the province 
and captainship of Para in Brazil ; situate in the 
island of Joanes or Marajo. 

[PARADISE, a township of Pennsylvania, in 
York county. 

PARADISE. See PLATE FORME.] 

PARADOS, NUESTRA SENORA DE Los, a 
settlement of the province and government of 
Buenos Ayres ; situate on the shore of the river 
Tandil, near the coast, which lies between the 
river Plata and the strait of Magellan. It is of 
Patagones Indians reduced to the faith. 

PARAGOANA, a point of land or cape, called 
also de San Roman, on the coast of the province 
and government of Venezuela, 13 leagues from 
the city of Coro. It runs into the sea for up 
wards of 1 1 leagues, and is very lofty and crag 
gy, and forms with the point of Coquibacoa the 
gulf of Venezuela ; in lat. 11 52 n. 

PAR AGUA, a river of the province and govern 
ment of Maracaibo, in the Nuevo Reyno de Gra 
nada. It rises at the foot of the Sierra Nevada, 
to the &amp;lt;?. of the city of Pedraza, runs s. s. e. and 
enters the Apure. 

PARAGUACA, a river of the province and 
captainship of Todos Santos in Brazil, which 
rises near the coast, runs e. and inclining to s. e. 
enters the bay. 

PARAGUAIRI, a town of the province and 
government of Paraguay ; situate to the e. of the 
city of Asuncion, on the opposite shore. 

PARAGUAN, a settlement of the government 
of Maracaibo, in the province of Venezuela and 
Nuevo Reyno de Granada ; situate in the penin 
sula formed by the cape San Roman on the s. op 
posite the coast. 

PARAGUAN A, a peninsula of the province and 
government of Venezuela, in the Nuevo Reyno 
de Granada. It is nearly of a square figure, and 
united to the rest of the coast merely by a very 
narrow isthmus, on which stands the city of Coro* 



P A R 



P A H 



PARAGUARI, a settlement of the missions 
held by the Carmelite fathers of Portugal in the 
country of Las Amazonas ; situate on the shore 
of this river, between that of Tefe and that of 
Yurba. Mr. Bellin calls it Paracari in his map 
and description ofOuayana. 

[PARAGU ARY, a parish of the province and 
government of Paraguay ; situate on a plain in 
the road from Asuncion to Villa Rica, and about 
31 miles from the former, in lat. 25 36 51" s. and 
Ion. 57" 19 50" w, \ 

PARAGUAY, a province and government of 
Peru, belonging to the viceroyalty of Buenos 
Ay res ; bounded by, or, more properly speaking, 
extending, on then, as far as, the lake Los Xarayes, 
[which bv the by is only the inundation of several 
rivers beginning in January and lasting three 
months] from whence issues the great river Para 
guay, which gives its name to the country ; ex 
tending e. as far as Brazil, and bounded s. by the 
missions of Parana, its jurisdiction ending at the 
river to the s. of the city of Asuncion, in lat. 26 48 
s. although it formerly extended as far as the em 
bouchure of the river Parana, in lat. 27 38 . It 
is bounded o&amp;gt;. by the country of Gran Chaco, in 
habited by many nations of infidel Indians, ex 
tending as far as the borders of the province of 
Tucuman, and divided from thence by the river 
Paraguay. 

Its extent is about 200 Italian miles from e. to 
ZD. and more than 300 from n. to s. It was dis 
covered by Sebastian Gaboto in 1526 ; is of a 
warm and moist temperature, from the number of 
w r oods, lakes, and rivers, with which it is covered, 
and from the various swamps, which are formed 
between the months of November and April, 
when the rains are most abundant. It is watered 
by an infinite number of rivers, the principal of 
which are, first that of its own name, and then 
those in the n. parts of Porrudos, Mboteley, To- 
bati, Ipane Piray, and others of less note ; and in 
the s. part, those of Canabe and Tibiquari, this 
dividing this province from that of the Rio de la 
Plata of Buenos Ayres. 

The woods are many and impenetrable, and in 
them grow in abundance sour oranges, citrons, 
limes, and other wild fruits, of which conserves 
are made. There are also trees of very good 
timber, and fine wood, such as cedars, petoroques, 
urundaiS) tajibos, and others ; of the first they make 
canoes and slabs, which they carry to Buenos 
Ayres for careening vessels and for other uses. In 
these woods are found a variety of birds and ani 
mals, such as rabbits, hares, partridges, wild- 
boar, deer, and other species of creatures less 
known, such as quiriquinchos, mulitas, and ape- 



riades ; but from the great quantity of neat 
cattle, the flesh of which is preferred to any 
other here, none of the above animals are ever 
hunted : sometimes, how r ever, the inhabitants 
will hunt geese, which abound in the lakes and 
the shores of the river, and kill great numbers. 
Here also breed goldfinches, nightingales, larks, 
green parrots, long-tailed parrots, others of most 
beautiful plumage, and peacocks ; nor are there 
wanting ostriches, and birds of prey ; amongst 
which there is one called tuca, resembling the 
crow, but having a beak which is singular, from 
being the length of a hand, and beautifully va 
riegated with a distribution of red, yellow, and 
black streaks. The water in which the tongue 
of this bird, which is a feather, has been steeped, 
is a sovereign remedy against the epilepsy, as 
has been proved by repeated experiments made 
in this country. 

The most ferocious animal is the tiger, of 
which there are great numbers, and which do 
great havoc amongst the cattle and the people. 
Here are bears, which are ant-eaters, with very 
long tongues ; and these they put into an ant s 
nest, and when they feel it covered with these 
insects they withdraw it, delighting in their food, 
Here is also found the great beast called the 
anta, and many monkies of various kinds, called 
in the language of the country car ay as. What 
are here called lions have no resemblance to 
those of Africa either in shape or ferocity. 

On the shores of the rivers breeds an animal 
called capihuara, which is amphibious, lives in 
the water, and breeds on land ; it resembles the 
pig, and differs from it only in the snout, which 
is shorter and less pointed. Nothing abounds in 
this province more than insects, and of these the 
plague of mosquitoes is equally distressing on the 
waters as on the land. Here are snakes both 
small and large, vipers, scorpions, &amp;c. and in 
some parts abound the murcielagos, which suck 
the blood of a person asleep, and endanger his 
life should he not awake in time Also, it is not 
uncommon to see a species of butterfly, called 
utas, which, in whatever part it bites, causes a 
humour to appear like gum, and then corrodes 
the part, forming a nidus for a little worm, 
which, although extracted, leaves behind an un 
seemly wound, which increases daily, and is only 
got rid of by a very particular and tedious me 
thod of cure. 

The principal commerce of this province is in 
certain species of leaves of trees, which grow 
on some mountains about 100 leagues from the 
capital, known by the name of the herb of Pari- 
guay. In the gathering and preparing of this 



PARAGUAY. 



herb both natives and strangers are employed, 
and the operation consists in drying- the leaves, 
which are scattered on shelves for the purpose 
over a fire, when they are crumbled into bits no 
bigger than sawdust ; and then they are put up 
into packages of from seven to eight arrobas each. 
There are two sorts of this leaf; the first, and 
which is most esteemed, is that which is made of 
the tender part of the leaves, and is called herb 
camini; the other, the inferior sort, is made of 
the thick part of the leaves, and has the name of 
herb de Pahs. The consumption of this article, 
not only in these provinces but in those of Peru 
and Chile, is incredible, since there is scarcely 
any person who does not take it two or three 
times in the course of the day, making an infu 
sion of it like tea, with warm water and sugar, 
and calling it mate. 

The second great article of commerce is the 
tobacco, although the exports of this have not 
been so great since that the king has established 
a manufactory of slack and twisted tobacco, on 
account of the royal warehouses. 

They also make some sugar here, and gather 
a good quantity of cotton ; and the product of 
these articles, which are carried to Buenos Ayres, 
returns in the shape of European goods. Its 
only communication with the province of the Rio 
de la Plata is by the Paraguay, and the ship 
ments from one place to the other are never less 
than 12,000 arrobas annually : not but that the 
journey is sometimes performed by land, but 
then it is along the coast of the river, and never 
undertaken but by the couriers, or some persons 
by way of express, who lay themselves open to the 
inconvenience and necessity of passing many ri 
vers by wading 1 or swimming, there being no fer 
ries, and likewise to the continual risk of being 
surprised by the infidel Indians, who are con 
stantly prowling along the river s banks : but it 
must be allowed that this latter objection is 
equally applicable to such as make the voyage ; 
since the Payaguas Indians who dwell upon the 
shores of the river are terrible pirates, infesting 
the passage with their canoes, and joining GO or 
70 of them together, there being in each six or 
seven men armed with lances and clubs ; so that 
it is necessary for vessels to go supplied with 
plenty of ammunition or under convoy. 

A few years since a peace was made with these 
Indians, and although great insolence was at 
first manifested by them as barbarians, many of 
them have become domesticated and live in the 
vicinity of the capital, where they make them 
selves useful by supplying fish. 
Nearly the whole of this province is sur 



rounded by enemies, who have never ceased to 
invade it since its foundation. These enemies 
are, to the w. the barbarian Indians, the Len- 
guas, Tobas, and Mosccbies ; on the 5. the Abi- 
pones ; on the n. the tribe of Guaycurus, com 
monly called Mbayas, and the Panaguas ; and in 
the &amp;lt;?. part alone is it free from any immediate 
host ; not but that on the mountains of the 
Yerva dwell the Monteses, who although they 
do not infest the settlements, give great annoy 
ance to the parties employed in procuring the 
herb paraguay, and have even, not unfrequentlv, 
attacked the Indians w r ho have been reduced to 
the faith and have settled on the frontiers : and 
very lately the Portuguese of Brazil, when, hav 
ing destroyed the various settlements on the e. 
and the city of Xerez on the n. which served 
as an outwork of defence against them, they 
pushed forward in that direction by the passage 
at which, at the present day, stand the settle 
ments of Cuba va and Matogroso, as far as the 
head settlements of the Moxos, to establish a 
commerce with Santa Cruz de la Sierra and La 
Paz ; for these infidels, like ants, once con 
vinced of the existence of a booty, although 
turned a thousand times out of their course, will 
still keep travelling on in pursuit of their object. 

All the aforesaid infidels have frequently in 
vaded, and still continue to invade, this country 
in the most unseasonable and unexpected times, 
when they put to death all they meet, plunder 
ing the women and children, and laying waste 
whatever comes in their way. They have at 
times made peace with different nations, but they 
break such alliances with the greatest impudence, 
and for this system of conduct the Gnaycurus, a 
ferocious and intractable race, are peculiarly no 
torious. 

In order to guard against these enemies which 
thus threaten the existence of the province, the 
inhabitants have found it necessary to enrol 
themselves in a volunteer militia, procuring 
arms and horses at their own expence, and 
forming themselves into garrisons in such parts 
as may be most required ; and, although this 
duty is somewhat irksome, an arrangement has 
been lately made by which each individual is 
dispensed from actual service for 22 days in each 
month, whenever the steps taken by the enemy 
may not require it otherwise : but should these, 
as it frequently happens, lay hands on the cattle 
or other goods of the community, they are all 
obliged to come into the field to redeem their 
possessions, and the persons thus called into 
service are indemnified by a fund, called the 
Composition Fund, which arises from certain 



P"A R A G U A Y. 



37 



mulcts exacted from such as will not attend ; 
the amount of these being 60 dollars for the fe 
derative part of the inhabitants, and 40 for the 
others. These dollars are not however of cur 
rent coin, but their value is taken in the articles 
and merchandises of the country, seldom more 
than one-fourth being- paid in specie ; a system 
equally adhered to in the commercial intercourse 
with Buenos Ayres. 

The presidios, or garrisons of this province, 
are 19 in number, without counting the capital, 
in which is a body of 350 guards-men, (as well 
of infantry as of horse),, and of the following- 
names : 

San Miguel, on the shore of the river. 

San Ildefonso, the same, and five leagues from 
the capital. 

San Joseph, eight leagues within land. 

Arecutacoa, 12 leagues on the coast. 

La Emboscada, two leagues from the former. 

Mandoviiay, on the shore of the river Tobati, 
at 18 leagues. 

Mainrimbi, eight leagues from the former. 

Urunday-Yuru, three leagues from the former, 
in land. 

San Geronimo, without the walls of the city, 
on the coast. 

Lambare, two leagues from the city. 

San Marcos, four leagues off. 

La Villeta, 10 leagues off. 

El Reducto, 12 leagues off. 

Santa Rosa, a league from the former, removed 
from the coast. 

San Fernando, two leagues from the river 
Tibiquari, and 40 from the city. 

That of Villa-rica. 

That of Curuguati. 

Besides these there are some boats to run 
along the coasts to impede the passes to the 
infidels, or to surprise and cut off their retreats. 

The aforesaid garrisons are not only a check 
to the Indians, but they can exclude from the 
navigation of the river any foreign vessel, inde 
pendently that it requires great skill in any na 
vigator unexperienced with these parts not to 
take a wrong course, from the number of mouths 
and creeks which present themselves, and which 
have often misled. 

The population of this province consists of two 
towns, called Espiritu Santo, and Villa-rica.; and 
of the following settlements of Indians. 
Ipane, Tobati, 

Guarambarej Los Altosj 

Ita, Itape, 

Yaguarin, Caazapa, 

Altira, Yuti. 



In which are 6000 inhabitants of all ages, men, 
women, and children ; and these united to the 
number contained in the town and vallies give a 
total of 56,000. 

The greater part are of the Guarani nation, 
descendants of those who were converted by San 
Francisco Solano and his companions, with the 
exception of some families of the Monteses, Can- 
guias, and other nations since reduced. Here 
are also four new reductions made, which were 
under the charge of the Jesuits, called San Es- 
tanislao, San Joaquia, Nuestra Senora de Belen, 
and El Santo Corazon. In each of these settle 
ments is an Indian corregidor without jurisdic 
tion, and appointed only to regard the proceed 
ings of the other corrcgidors, and to cause to be 
fulfilled the orders of the curate and of the ad 
ministrator of the goods of the settlement. Each 
of them has two alcaldes, and the other officers of 
the cabildo, and these, as well as the corregidor, 
are elected by the influence of the curate, who 
knows the abilities of his Indians ; but these elec 
tions are afterwards confirmed by the governor 
of the province ; and to the curate is assigned 
10 per cent, of the profits of his settlement. 
Ever since the first establishment of these settle 
ments, there is allotted to each the territory 
thought necessary for sowing of seeds and the 
breeding of cattle, and when the harvest is 
gathered in, it is put into one common granary, 
to the end that it may be divided equally amongst 
all, as their necessities may require, by the ad 
ministrator ; the same practice being observed 
with regard to tlie rations of meat. With the 
excess of the corn and cattle a means is procured 
af adorning the churches, of assisting the sick, 
and of promoting public works. Neither Spa 
niards, Mulattoes, nor Negroes are admitted into 
these settlements except as traders. 

The ecclesiastical government is well orga 
nized under the religious order of San Fran 
cisco, and amongst the first converters are enu 
merated Fr. Alonso de Buenaventura, and Fr. 
Juan de San Bernardo, a lay-brother, who suf 
fered martyrdom under the Caazapas Indians. 
At day-break mass is said every morning, with 
fine music, and on festival days somewhat later, 
with a discourse regularly by the curate. This 
finished, the cubildo goes to receive its orders for 
the day, and the same are imparted to the whole 
settlement, that every one may know his occu 
pation. Tlie matrons have their tasks assigned 
to them proportionate to their strength and ca 
pacity, and the unmarried and girls remain sing 
ing and reciting prayers for the morning, after 
the mass is finished, in the court-yard of the. 



PARAGUAY. 



church, and repeat the same at night-fall. The 
rest of the day they are employed in assisting 
their mothers, whilst the men are employed in 
different handicraft works, as carpentering, sculp 
ture, musical instrument making, weaving, and 
other mechanical arts and employments, for 
which they have excellent masters. Every night 
the cabildo comes to the curate to inform him 
of what has happened in the course of the day, 
and the people, after saying the rosary, betake 
themselves to rest. 

These Indians cannot be said to pay any other 
tribute than personal service to those under 
whom they live, notwithstanding it has been at 
tempted by the king to introduce a different sys 



tem. In the settlement of Itape, for instance, 
there is no vassalage, but the Indians there assist 
with their persons and rafts all those who pass 
in the time of the floods a large arm of the river 
Tibiquari, by which lies the road to Villarica. 

This province has suffered, from its first forma 
tion, various convulsions and alterations, from 
being divided into parties, formed from vain 
ideas of honour or interest, and has been the 
scene of great bloodshed. To its bishopric, 
which was erected in 1547, belong also the 
settlements of Parana, situate to the s. e. and of 
which we speak in their proper place. [See PA 
RAGUAY River.] 



TABLE of the Population of the Government of Paraguay, according to AZARA S Work, 

published in 1809. 



NOTE. The letter c, indicates city ; t. town ; p. parish ; ,s. settlement of Indians ; m. settlement of Mulattocs or 
people of colour. 


Names of the cities, towns, settlements, and 
parishes. 


Years of 
their 
foundation. 


Latitude south. 


Longitude west 
from London. 


Number o 

souls. 


Yta, s 


1536 
1536 
1538 
1538 
1538 
1538 
1538 
1538 
1673 
1G07 
1610 
1592 
1592 
1555 
1609 
1698 
1634 
1614 
1627 
1633 
1622 
1706 
1685 
1746 
1749 
1760 
1536 


1 II 

25 30 30 
25 33 20 
25 27 44 
25 29 48 
25 18 1 
25 16 6 
25 16 45 
25 16 16 
25 52 
26 11 18 
26 36 56 
26 48 12 
27 8 40 
27 14 52 
26 54 36 
26 53 19 
27 18 55 
27 20 16 
27 26 46 
27 23 45 
27 7 23 
27 7 35 
27 2 36 
25 1 47 
24 38 31 
23 26 17 
25 16 40 

Carried fo 


1 II 

57 25 2 
57 18 14 
57 33 15 
57 30 16 
57 26 42 
57 18 30 
57 13 59 
57 8 59 
56 39 33 
56 29 49 
56 16 48 
56 58 54 
56 48 34 
55 35 14 
56 44 14 
56 54 39 
56 19 29 
55 52 59 
55 47 35 
55 38 39 
55 32 29 
55 44 59 
56 5 6 
56 13 20 
56 36 15 
57 8 
57 41 4 

rward . 


965 
2093 
278 
368 
200 
869 
972 
932 
124 
725 
674 
1144 
1097 
806 
864 
1283 
1036 
1409 
1514 
1430 
2267 
1017 
1185 
854 
729 
361 
7088 

32,284 


Ya"uaron, $ 


Ypane, s 


Guarambare, s 




i 
Altos, s 


Atira, s 


Tobaty, s 


Ytape, s 


Caazapa, s 


Yuty, ^ 


S. Maria de Fe, s 


Santiago, s 


S. Ignacio Miri, s 


S. Iriacio Guazu, s 


Santa Rosa, 5 




Ytapua, s. 


Candelaria, s 


Santa Ana, s 


Corpus, 5 


Trinidad, s 


Jesus, s 


S. Joaquin, s 


S. Estanislado, s 


Belen, s 





PARAGUAY. 



39 



Names of the cities, towns, settlements, and 
parishes. 


Years of 
their 
foundation. 


Latitude south. 


Longitude west 
from London. 


Number of 
souls. 


Brouffht forward . ... 








32,284 

3813 
2187 
825 
1769 
1551 
979 
2254 
972 
3014 
1232 
866 
427 
1227 
715 
654 
620 
3595 
1066 
733 
540 
2352 
507 
5305 
2235 
1720 
3098 
458 
3346 
1894 
1136 
858 
1500 
659 
1730 
621 
520 
840 
644 
1519 

92,347 
5,133 




1635 
1718 
1766 
1785 
1773 
1784 
1715 
1760 
1576 
1773 
1785 
1789 
1781 
1758 
1770 
1783 
d. 1640 
1770 
1770 
1783 
1769 
1775 
1640 
1728 
1775 
1714 
1777 
1725 
1733 
1777 
1783 
1766 
1787 
1779 
1790 
1791 
1740 
1653 
1555 

n settlemt 


o / // 

25 15 30 
25 23 50 
25 20 
25 10 25 
23 23 8 
24 6 12 
24 28 10 
24 33 35 
25 48 55 
25 44 42 
25 58 2 
26 54 46 
25 29 36 
25 26 34 
25 30 27 
25 45 43 
25 27 54 
25 24 21 
25 22 28 
24 23 25 
25 29 19 
25 36 51 
25 21 45 
25 24 44 
25 21 14 
25 30 56 
26 10 
25 45 31 
25 58 26 
26 13 13 
25 54 7 
26 54 
26 11 21 
26 52 24 
27 13 57 
26 50 43 
25 7 42 
25 54 56 
27 19 28 

mts not comprise 
T 


o / // 

57 32 19 
57 35 26 
57 41 4 
57 31 49 
57 16 4 
56 58 29 
56 54 25 
56 57 7 
56 31 59 
56 34 12 
56 32 19 
56 18 49 
56 47 15 
56 30 
56 52 6 
56 53 2 
57 4 37 
57 9 24 
57 3 19 
57 13 6 
57 15 12 
57 19 50 
57 31 48 
57 24 6 
57 37 
57 36 25 
58 3 48 
57 16 56 
57 14 49 
57 50 
57 9 1 
57 1 7 
57 15 23 
58 11 28 
57 20 34 
57 49 17 
57 24 5 
57 21 18 
55 34 39 

Total of souls, 
&amp;gt;d in the above, 

rial population, 








Concepcion, t 




















til- 75 r 
















Capiata, p. . . . /* . 




























TabaDv, m. 


T f j a 
l&amp;gt;oreto, o. 


Spaniards inhabiting India 


97,480 


" 



P A R A G U A Y. 



Bishops who have presided in Paraguay. 

1. Don Fr. Juan de los Barrios y Toledo, of 
the order of San Francisco, native of the town of 
Pedroche in Estremadura : he was one of the 
first of the religious who passed over to Peru, 
was elected first bishop of Paraguay in 1547, and 
after passing to his church, was promoted to that 
of Santa Marta in the Nuevo Hey no de Granada 
in 1550. 

2. Don Fr. Tomas de la Torre, of the order 
of S. Domingo, whom the father Pedro Xavier 
de Charlevoix wrongly denominates, Fr. Pedro 
de la Torre: he was of the order of S. Francisco: 
elected in 1552, and took possession in 1555. 

3. Don Fr. Fenian Gonzalez de la Cuesta : 
elected in 1559. 

4. Don Fr. Juan del Campo, of the order of 
San Francisco, presented in 1575 : he lived but 
a short time. 

5. Don Fr. Ahmso Guerra, of the order of 
S. Domingo ; presented in 1577, and promoted 
to the bishopric of Mechoacan. 

6. Don Fr. Juan de Almaraz, of the order of 
San Agustin, native of Salamanca, master in 
his religion, calificador of the holy office, pro 
fessor of writing, prior various times in his con 
vent of Lima, preacher of great repute, and pro 
vincial : elected bishop of Paraguay in 1591, 
but he died before he received the notice, in the 
following year. 

7. Don Tomas Vazquez del Cano, magisterial- 
canon of the holy church of Valladolid ; pre 
sented to the bishopric of Paraguay in 1596 : he 
died before he was consecrated. 

8. Don Fr. Baltasar deCovarrubias, of the order 
of San Agustin, native of Mexico; presented to 
the bishopric of Paraguay in 1601, and promoted 
to Nueva Carceres in the Philippines the same 
year. 

9. Don Fr. Martin Ignacio de Loyola, of the 
barefooted order of S. Francisco : he took the 
habit in the convent of Alaejos, passed to Ame 
rica with the title of commissary of twenty reli 
gious persons, returned to Spain, and was lec 
turer in theology in the convents of Cadahalso 
and Segovia, and presented by his majesty 
Philip III. to the bishopric of Paraguay in 1601 : 
afterwards promoted to the archbishopric of 
Charcas in 1607. 

10. Don Fr. Reginald de Lizarraga, of the 
order of S. Domingo, native of Lima : he was 
presented to a degree in his religion, and pro 
moted from the church of Imperial in Chile, to 
this of Paraguay in 1607. 

1}. Don Lorenzo de Grado, native of Sala 



manca, where he studied and graduated as licen 
tiate : he passed over to Peru, and was there 
made archdeacon of Cuzco, and elected bishop of 
Paraguay in 1607 : promoted to that church in 
1618. 

12. Don Fr. Tomas de Torres, of the order 
of S. Domingo, native of Madrid, collegiate in 
the college of San Gregorio de Valladolid ; pre 
sented to a mastership in his religion, destined 
as its general in Flanders ; and after having 
read theology in many convents, and studied in 
the university of Lobaina for eight years and an 
half; he returned to Spain, was prior of the 
convents of S. Domingo de Zamora anddeNuestra 
Senora de Atocha in Madrid, and was presented 
by king Philip III. to the bishopric of Paraguay 
in 1619, and in 1625 promoted to that of Tu- 
cuman. 

13. Don. Fr. Agustin de Vega, of the same 
order as the former, native of Lima, provincial 
of his religion, calificador of the holy office, pre 
sented to this bishopric in 1625 : he died the 
same year, before he took possession. 

14. Don Fr. Christoval de Aresti, of the order 
of San Benito, native of Valladolid : he took the 
habit in the royal monastery of San Julian of 
Sanios in Galicia, was lecturer of arts in San 
Vincenti of Oviedo, abbot of Corneliana, pro 
fessor of writing, twice abbot of Samos, and difi- 
nidor general ; elected to the bishopric of Para 
guay in 1626, and to that of the church of Buenos 
Ay res in 1635. 

15. Don Fr. Francisco de la Serna, of the 
order of San Agustin, native of the city of Gua- 
nuco in Peru : he studied and read arts and theo 
logy in the convent of Lima, was noon and even 
ing lecturer in its university, twice provincial 
calificador of the holy office, presented to tiie 
bishopric of Paraguay in 1635, and promoted to 
that ofLaPaz in 1640. 

16. Don Fr. Bernardeno de Cardenas, of the 
order of San Francisco, native of the city of 
Chuqniavo in Peru, lecturer of theology, difini- 
dor, vicar, guardian, and visitor of his religion, 
preacher apostolic, a true father to the needy 
and to the Indians, in the conversion of whom 
he laboured much ; presented to the bishopric of 
Paraguay in 1638, and settled in his commission 
in 1640. In his time there was great disputes 
and contentions with the Jesuits : he was pro 
moted to the church of Popayaan in 1637, but 
renounced the offer from his advanced age, 
though he was at last prevailed to accept that 
of Santa Cruz de la Sierra in 1666. 

17. Don Fr. Gabriel de Guillistegui, of the 



PARAGUAY. 



41 



order of San Francisco, commissary-general of 
his religion ; elected bishop of Paraguay in 1666, 
and promoted in the same year to that of La 
Paz, which he renounced : he made the visita 
tion of the missions of the Jesuits in that pro 
vince by a special commission from the king, 
and was promoted to the bishopric of La Paz in 
1671. 

18. Don Fernando de Balcazar, native of Lima, 
chanter of the holy church of Truxillo, theologi 
cal canon, treasurer and archdeacon in the church 
of his native place, elected bishop of Paraguay 
in 1672 : he died before he was consecrated. 

19. Don Fr. Faustino de las Casas, of the order 
of La Merced ; elected bishop of this church in 
1672, where he governed till 1683. 

20. Don Fr. Sebastian de Pastrana, of the 
order of La Merced, native of Lima, provincial 
and professor of Santo Tomas in its university, 
and bishop of Paraguay. 

21. Don Juan de Durana, archdeacon of Are- 
quipa, his native place, bishop elect of Para 
guay, but he never took possession ; so that 
the court were induced to confer upon him the 
appointment of coadjutor for upwards of 20 years 
after, to the end of his life. 

22. Don Fr. Joseph de Palos, of the order of 
San Francisco, native of Morella in the kingdom 
of Valencia, guardian in many convents of S. 
and N. America, where he was charged with va 
rious important commissions which he fulfilled 
with ability : he was living retired in the settle 
ment of La Sal, when he was nominated as titu 
lar bishop and coadjutor of the bishopric of Pa 
raguay during the sickness of the proprietor in 
1724 : he died with universal regret in 1738 ; 
and his life was not only memorable for his own 
singular talents, but through the tragical fate of 
Joseph de Antequera. 

23. Don Fr. Joseph Cayetano Palavicini, of 
the order of San Francisco, a theologist, califi- 
cador of the holy office, preacher general, difi- 
nidor of his province of Charcas, and pro- minis 
ter of the same to vote in the general chapter: 
elected bishop of Paraguay in 1739 : he was pro 
moted to Truxillo in 1748. 

24. Don Fernando Perez de Oblitas, native of 
Lima; elected in 1748, and promoted to the 
church of Santa Cruz de la Sierra in 1756, with 
out ever having passed to his diocess. 

25. Don Manuel de la Torre, elected in the 
aforesaid year ; promoted to the church of Bue 
nos Ayres in 1763. 

26. Don Manuel Lopez de Espinosa, elected 
in the above year : he died in 1772. 

YOL, iv. 



27. Don Fr. Juan Joseph Priego, of the order 
of San Francisco : he died in 1779. 

28. Don Fr. Luis de Velasco, of the order of 
San Francisco ? native of Madrid ; elected in 1779. 

Governors of the province of Paraguay. 

1. Don Manuel de Frias, first governor of this 
province ; nominated by the king, when it was 
separated from the jurisdiction of the province of 
the Rio de la Plata, and when the limits of both 
were settled in 1 620 : he had many disputes with 
the bishop, with respect to the rights of patron 
age ; when this prelate thought proper to ex 
communicate him, and to take the adminstration 
of the settlements out of the hands of the mis 
sions of the Jesuits ; a step which was con 
demned by the council of the Indies: he go 
verned till 1630. 

2. Don Luis de Cespedes, distinct from an 
other of the same name who was governor of 
Buenos Ayres and the Rio de la Plata : he took 
possession of the government of Paraguay the 
aforesaid year, and exercised it till 1636. 

3. Don Martin de Ledesma, nominated to suc 
ceed the former : he governed till 1639. 

4. Don Pedro de Lugo y Navarro, knight of 
the order of Santiago : he had a commission from 
the king to visit the settlements of the missions 
of the Jesuits, and to give them redress and 
protection against the insults of the Mamelucos 
Indians : he succeeded in completely routing 
these, and thereby revenged the death of his 
friend and companion, father Romero, a Jesuit, 
who was killed by them : he governed till 1642. 

5. Don Gregorio de Hinestrosa, native of 
Chile, in whose time occurred the disgraceful 
dissentions between the bishop Don Fr. Bernar 
dino de Cardenos and the Jesuits, the which laid 
the foundation of the disorders which this pro 
vince afterwards suffered, and which were not 
put a stop to trll that the governor removed 
the bishop of its diocess, he being, in return, 
thrice excommunicated : this government lasted 
for five years, until 1648. 

6. Don Diego de Escobar Osorio, oidor of the 
royal audience of Charcas, who, from the critical 
state in which affairs were left by his prede 
cessor, reigned but a short time ; for his death 
was hastened, and he died in 1649. 

7. Don Fr. Bernardino de Cardenos, bishop of 
this diocess, who was tumultuously proclaimed 
by his partizans as governor in the vacancy : he 
began his reign by exterminating the Jesuits 
from the city, as well a&amp; from the other settle 
ments, and causing them, to leave the country 

G 



PARAGUAY. 



and to embark, with great violence. This gave 
rise to fresh disputes, and the Jesuits, by virtue 
of the pontifical bull which they possessed, esta 
blished a judge conservator. In the mean time 
the audience of Charcas disapproved this intru 
sive government, and nominated, provisionally, 

8. Don Andres Garavito of Leon, knight of 
the order of Santiago, oidor of the aforesaid au 
dience of Charcas, and whilst he was proceeding 
to his destination, Don Sebastian de Leon, a 
colonel, who was rejected by the bishop, who de 
fended himself by some armed Indians ; but 
these dissentions were soon put to an end on the 
arrival of the aforesaid governor Garavito ; and 
he took possession of the government and held it 
till 1651, when he returned to the duties of his 
place. 

9. Don Juan Vazquez of Valverde, oidor of 
the same royal audience as the former, and no 
minated by it as provisional governor, with a 
special commission of visiting the province, and 
of examining into the late occurrences : he en 
tered the government in 1661 and held it till 
1665. 

10. Don Felipe Rege Corbulon, till 1679. 

11. Don Juan Diaz de Andino, till 1685, when 
he died. 

12. Don Antonio de Vera Moxica, nominated 
provisionally by the viceroy of Peru. 

13. Don Baltasar Garcia Ros, serjeant-major 
of the plaza of Buenos Ayres, appointed here as 
a recompense by the king, for his services per 
formed in the conquest of the colony of Sacra 
mento, established by the Portuguese on the 
shore of the river La Plata of Buenos Ayres : 
he entered the government in 1705, with a par 
ticular charge to make the visit of the settle 
ments of the missions of the Jesuits, which he did, 
rendering an accurate account of his discoveries 
to his majesty. 

14. Don Juan Gregorio Bazan de Pedraza. 

15. Don Diego de los Reyes Balmaseda, na 
tive of the port of Santa Maria : he entered in 
1717, but the constant complaints made against 
him, and particularly of his partiality towards 
the Jesuits, obliged the audience of Charcas to 
nominate a provisional judge visitor, the same 
being made also provisional governor by the 
viceroy of Peru in 1721, and the person so ap 
pointed was, 

16. Don Joseph de Antequera y Castro, knight 
of the order of Alcantara, fiscal-protector of 
the Indians of the audience of Charcas. His 
unlucky stars had brought him hither to meet his 
death on a scaffold, in the city of Lima, through 



some riots which had lately arisen by certain 
misunderstandings between the bishop Don Fr. 
Joseph de Palos and the Jesuits. 

17. Don Martin de Barua, nominated provisi 
onally by the field-marshal Don Bruno Mauricio 
de Zavala, by special commission of the viceroy, 
the marquis del Castelfuerte, to pacify the pro 
vince, the administration of which underwent 
some changes from some representations which 
he made to the king concerning the Jesuits : he 
governed five years. 

18. Don Bartolome de Aldunate, captain of 
horse of the garrison of Buenos Ayres: who did 
not arrive to take possession, although nominated 
by the king. 

19. Don Iquacio de Soroeta, who had been 
corregidor of Cuzco : accredited for his skill and 
justice, and nominated by the viceroy of Peru in 
1730 : his entry was disputed by the inhabitants, 
who took up arms against him, and obliged him 
to fly. 

20. Don Isedro Mirones y Benavente, oidor 
of the audience of Charcas, whose prudence 
and talents, testified by his pacification of the dis 
turbances of the province of Cochabamba, led 
to his election to Paraguay by the viceroy, that 
he might call his talent into action on similar 
circumstances ; but, whilst on his journey, he 
received intelligence that the proper successor 
appointed by H. M. had arrived ; and upon this 
he returned to his former office. 

21. Don Manuel Augustin de Ruiloba, who 
was general of Callao, and general of the armies 
of Peru, when he entered Asuncion, 1733; but 
being out with a troop, and some Indians of the 
missions, for the purpose of quelling some dis 
turbances, and being deserted by his party, he fell 
a sacrifice at the hands of the insurgents in the 
same year. 

22. Don Fr. Juan de Arregui, of the order of 
San Francisco, bishop of this diocess, and pro 
claimed governor by the insurgents ; and, 
although he was endeavouring to escape secretly 
from the city, he was brought back and forced to 
reign till the arrival of the judge Don Juan Vaz 
quez de Aguero, as visitor, nominated by the 
king. 

23. Don Bruno Mauricio de Zavola, field- 
marshal and governor of Buenos Ayres ; promoted 
to the presidency of Chile, and ordered by the 
viceroy, the Marquis de Castelfuerte, to proceed 
with a force to Paraguay, to quell the disturban 
ces there ; accordingly causing himself to be ac 
knowledged governor, in 1735 he dispersed the 
insurgents, inflicted punishment on the chief 



PARAGUAY. 



43 



offenders, and re-established the peace of the pro 
vince ; afterwards, by a special commission from 
the Viceroy, he resigned the goverment to, 

24. Don Martin Joseph de Echaure, captain 
of dragoons : he remained here till 1755. 

25. Don Rafael de la Moneda. 

26. Don Marcos Larrazabal. 

27. Don Pedro Melo, of Portugal ; lieutenant 
colonel of dragoons of the regiment of Sagunto : 
he governed from 1777 to 1795. 

28. Don Joaquin de Alos, formerly captain of 
the infantry regiment of Aragon and Corregidor 
of Quispicanchi in Peru : nominated in 1785. 

PARAGUAY, a river which gives its name to 
the former province, and was first navigated by 
Sebastian Gabota, a Venetian, in 1526 : it rises 
in the great lake of LosLareyes orLaraye, in lat. 
24 18 s. and runs from n. to s. as far as the river 
Corrientes, and from thence s. w. to the city of 
Asuncion. Here it again takes its course to the s. 
to unite itself with the rivers Parana and Virmejo, 
in lat. 27 41s. On the w. near its banks, dwell 
the nations of the Guaicurus and Abipones In 
dians, and on the e. the Guaranies, Tobatines 
and Payaguas. This river is joined by the Tiba- 



quira, Lanabe, Upacay or Pirayu, Xexuy, Pil- 
comayo, Confuso, Guarumbare, Yuguy, Mboeri, 
Verde, Corrientes, and others of less size. The 
Portuguese of the colony of Sacrament, used to 
pass from the Parana to this river to get to the 
river Icipotiva or Yauri, by which they went to 
Matogroso, which is near the shore of the Itenes, 
w of the mines ofCuyaba. This river has many 
islands, abounds in excellent fish, and its shores 
are covered with lofty trees, which form extreme 
ly thick woods, in which dwell a multitude of 
rare birds and animals. 

[The fine river Paraguay (observes Mr. Mawe, 
the traveller) has its remote springs to the w. 
of the heads of the Arinas, in lat. 13 and after 
a 5. course of 600 leagues, enters the ocean 
under the appellation of the Rio de la Plata. 
The heads of the Paraguay are 270 miles n. e. 
from Villa Bella, and 164 miles K. from Cuiaba, 
and divided into many branches, and already 
forming complete rivers ; which, as they run s. 
successively unite, and form the channel of this 
immense river, which is immediately navigable. 
To the w. a short distance from the main source 
of the Paraguay is that of the Sypotuba, which 
disembogues on its w. bank, in lat. 15 50 after 
a course of 60 leagues. In the upper part of 
this river, and near its w. branch, called the Ju- 
rubanba, was formerly a gold mine, which was 
worked with considerable profit ; but the supe 



rior advantages derived from others subsequently 
explored in Matto Grosso and Cuiba, caused it to 
be abandoned, and its site is not now known with 
certainty. The little river Cabaral, also aurife 
rous, enters the Paraguay on the w. side three 
leagues below the mouth of the Sypotuba. On 
the banks of the latter lives a nation of Indians, 
called Barbados, from the distinction peculiar 
to themselves, among all the Indian nations, of 
having large beards. 

The Boriras Araviras inhabit the banks of the 
Cabaral : they are a mixture of two different 
nations, who in the year 1797 sent four chiefs of 
their tribe, accompanied by their mother, to 
Villa Bella, in order to solicit the friendship of 
the Portuguese. The nation called Pararione 
lives in their neighbourhood, close by the Sypo 
tuba. A league below the mouth of the Cabaral, 
on the e. bank of the Paraguay, is Villa Maria, a 
small and useful establishment, founded in 1778. 
Seven leagues s. of Villa Maria, and on the w. 
bank of the Paraguay, the river Jauru disem 
bogues into it in lat. 16 24 . This river is re 
markable for the boundary-mark erected at its 
mouth in 1754, as well as for being entirely 
Portuguese, together with lands on its s. bank, 
and bordering on tbe Spanish possessions. It 
rises in the plains of the Parexis in lat. 13 54 , 
and long. 58 14 , and running s. to lat. 15 43 , 
the situation of the Register of the same name, it 
there turns to the s. e. for 60 miles, till, by an 
entire course it reaches its junction with the Para 
guay. There are salt-water-pits, which in part 
have supplied Matto Grosso ever since its foun 
dation with salt : they are in the interior of the 
country, seven leagues from the Register, and 
extend to a place called Salina de llmeida, from 
the name of the person who first employed him 
self in these works. 

These salt-pits are situate along the margins of 
broad marshy bottoms, in which are found fish 
of the same kind with those in the Paraguay. 
The Salina de Almeida is not far distant from the 
bank of the Jauru, and the great quantity of saline 
liquid found in it continues three leagues further 
to the s. where a junction is formed with another 
from the w. called Pitas, w. of which are high 
and dry plains, where are found numerous large 
circles, formed by a species of palm called Caran- 
das. These plains terminate nine leagues w. of 
the Salina de Almeida, in a large pool of marsh, 
called Paopique, which runs to the s. 

The confluence of the Jauru with the Paraguay 
is a point of much importance : it guards and 
covers the great road between Villa Bella Cuia.-~[ 

G 2.. 



PARAGUAY. 



[ba, and their intermediate establishments, and in 
the same manner commands the navigation of 
both the rivers, and defends the entrance into 
the interior of the latter captainship. The Para 
guay from this place has a free navigation up 
wards, almost to its sources, which are scarcely 
70 leagues distant, with no other impediment 
than a large fall. These sources are said to 
contain diamonds. 

The mark placed at the mouth of the Jauru is 
a pyramid of beautiful marble, brought to this 
distant point from Lisbon. It bears inscriptions 
commemorative of the treaty between the courts 
of Spain and Portugal, by which the respective 
territories, of which it stands as the boundary, 
were defined. 

The lofty chain of mountains, which extends 
from the sources of the Paraguay near its e. bank, 
border the river opposite the mouth of the Jauru, 
and are terminated seven leagues below it by the 
Morro Excalvado in lat. 16 43 . E. of this 
mount or point, all is marsh, and nine leagues 
below it there flows into the e. side of the Para 
guay a deep stream or river, called Rio Novo, 
discovered in 1786, which may hereafter afford a 
navigation to near St. Pedro del Rey, when the 
aquatic plants that obstruct its channel are re 
moved. The most distant sources of this river 
are the rivulets of Sta. Anna, Bento Gomez, and 
others which cross the great road of Cuiaba to 
the w. of Cocaes. In lat. 17 33 , the w. banks of 
the Paraguay become mountainous at the n. 
point of the Serra da Insua, which, three leagues 
to the s. makes a deep break to form the mouth 
of the lake Gaiba. This lake extends w. and 
there is a broad canal of four leagues in ex 
tent, which comes from the n. communicating 
from the above lake to that of Uberava, some 
what larger than the Gaiba, situated exactly con 
tiguous to the Serra da Insua, on its n. side. Six 
leagues and a half below the mouth of the Gaiba, 
and opposite this mountainous bank of the Para 
guay, is the mouth of the St. Lourengo, formerly 
called Porrudos. Twenty-six leagues above this 
the river Cuiaba enters its w. bank in lat. 17 20 , 
and long. 56 50 : these two rivers are of great ex 
tent ; that of Louren9o has its sources in lat 15, 
40 leagues e. of the town of Cuaiba, receiving (be 
sides the branches crossed by the road from 
Goiaz) other great streams on its e. side, such as 
the Paraiba or Piquiri, which receives the Jaquari 
and the Itiquira, all of moderate size, and navi 
gable. The Itiquira has been navigated to its 
heads, from whence the canoes were dragged 
ver land to the Sucuriu, which falls into the 



Parana four leagues below the mouth of the 
river Tiete on the opposite side. The rivers 
Itiquira and Sucuriu were found to have fewer 
and smaller falls than the Taquari, and the land 
passage is much shorter and more convenient 
than that of the Camapuao, so that this naviga 
tion is preferable to that by the two last-men 
tioned rivers : it is attended by only two obsta 
cles many Indians, and a want of provisions. 

The navigation to the town of Cuiaba by the 
river of that name, from its above-mentioned con 
fluence, is short and easy : in the first 10 leagues, 
after passing the two small islands on Ariacuni 
and Tarumas, occurs a large plantation of bana 
nas, formed on an embankment on the e. side of 
the river. Three leagues above this place the 
Guacho-uassu enters the Cuiaba by its e. bank, 
and on the same side, seven leagues farther, the 
Guacho-mirim. From this point the river winds 
in a n. n. e. direction, 11 leagues to the island of 
Pirahim, and from thence makes a large bend to 
the e. receiving numerous streams, and passes 
the town of Cuiaba, which is situated a mile to the 
e. of it. This town is 96 leagues to the e. of 
Villa Bella, and the same distance by water from 
the confluence of its river with the Paraguay. 
It is large, and, together with its dependencies, 
may at present contain 30,000 souls. It is well 
provided with meat, fish, fruits, and all sorts of 
vegetables, at a much cheaper rate than at the 
sea-ports. The country is well adapted for 
cultivation, and has rich mines, but in some 
places little water to work them in dry weather. 
They were discovered in 1718, and have been 
estimated to produce annually above 20 arrobas 
of gold of extremely fine quality. 

Twenty leagues s. w. of the town of Cuiaba is 
the settlement of St. Pedro del Rey, the largest 
of all the adjacent settlements, and contains full 
2,000 inhabitants. It is situate near the w. side 
of the rivulet Bento Gomez, which, at the dis 
tance of a league and a half s. of the settlement, 
forms a large bay, called Rio de Janeiro. The 
river Cuiaba has its sources 190 miles above the 
town, and its banks are cultivated through the 
greater part of its extent, including 14 leagues 
below the town, down the stream. Four leagues 
below the principal mouth of the river Porrudos, 
the Paraguay is bordered by the mountains that 
separate it from Gaiba on its w. bank, and in this 
place they obtain the appellation of Serra das Pe- 
dras de Amolar, from being composed of a stone 
of which whet-stones are made. This is the only 
spot which is not inundated by the floods of the 
river, and is therefore much visited by the canoes] 



PARAGUAY. 



45 



[that navigate it. These Serras terminate two 
leagues to the s. in those of the Dourados, imme 
diately below which there is a channel on the w. 
side of the Paraguay, which, piercing between the 
two high detached mounts, called Cheines, leads 
to the lake Mendiuri, six leagues long, and the 
largest on the Paraguay. 

From the Dourados, the Paraguay runs s. to the 
Serras of Albuquerque, where it touches direct 
ly on the n. point, on which is situated a town of 
that name. These Serras form a compact square 
of 10 leagues, and contain much calcareous stone ; 
the land is considered the best on either side the 
Paraguay, from the river downwards, and only 
equalled by that on the w. margins of the lakes 
Mandiuri and Gaiba. From Albuquerque the 
Paraguay, turns to the s. w. It skirts its Serras, 
which terminate at the end of six leagues higher 
up in the Serra do Rabicho, opposite which, on 
the n. bank of the river, is situated the lower s. 
mouth of the Paraguay -mirim. This is an arm 
of the Paraguay, which, terminating here, forms 
an island 14 leagues in length from n. to s. : it is 
the usual channel for canoes in times of inunda 
tion. From the mouth of the Paraguay-mirim 
the river takes a s. direction to the mouth of the 
Taquari, navigated annually by flotillas of canoes 
and other craft, which come from St. Paul s to 
Cuiaba, and even as far as the Register of Jau- 
ru, when their destination happens to be Villa 
Bella. 

As this navigation is an object of great impor 
tance, from its connecting two distinct districts, 
the following compendious description of the 
rout pursued in it may not prove uninteresting. 
It is abstracted from the diary of a man of science, 
who performed the journey a few years ago, in 
the month of October, when the Paraguay begins 
to retire to its own channel. The description 
may commence at the Taquari, as the voyage 
from thence to Cuiaba and the Jauru has already 
been detailed. The largest of the many mouths 
of the Taquari in the Paraguay is in lat. 19 12 , 
and long. 54 5 . In the first ten leagues of navi 
gation, the channel of the river is lost, as it crosses 
some large plains, covered with water to the 
depth of several feet. This is contiguous to Ta 
quari, a place where the river is much confined. 

From this place it is 20 leagues to the resting- 
place of Allegre, in lat. 18 12 , and this space 
contains, on both banks of the Taquari, many 
entrances into the paths, which lead in time of 
the floods to various distant places on the Para 
guay, Poi rudos, and Cuiaba. From this resting- 
place there are 30 leagues of navigation, on the 



course of the river e. to the fall of Barra, where 
it is impeded and unnavigable above a mile, 
though a part of it may be passed in a half-loaded 
and part in empty canoes. At the head of this 
fall the river Cochim enters the Taquari, and the 
navigation here quits the latter for the Cochim. 
At its mouth it is 20 fathoms broad, and a league 
upwards receives on its s. bank the Taquari-mi- 
rim, a river nearly as broad as itself. A little 
above this confluence is situated its first fall, 
which is called Da Ilha, and may be passed in 
empty canoes. A league above is the fall of 
Giquitaya, passed with half cargoes, and a league 
and a quarter farther, that of the Choradeira, the 
current of which is very rapid. Beyond this is 
the fall of Avanhandava-uassu, where the cargoes 
are carried over land for half a mile, and the 
canoes are conducted through a difficult channel 
of three fathoms, at the end of which they are 
pushed over the rocks in order to pass the head 
or cataract. Half a league above is the fall Do 
Jauru, so called from a river of that name, which 
enters the Cochim above it, on the n. side. From 
this confluence upwards there occurs seven falls 
in the course of five leagues and a half, in the 
midst of which distauce the river cuts and is en- 
channelled in a mountain, through which it runs 
smoothly, although scarcely five fathoms broad, 
and receives on its s. side the stream of the Pare- 
dao, which is said to be auriferous. Haifa league 
above the last of the seven falls before-mentioned 
are three successive ones, called Tres Irmdos, 
and at an equal distance above them, that of 
Das Furnas, which is passed laboriously with 
canoes unloaded. From this place the navigation 
continues on the Cochim through a succession of 
falls, until that river is joined by the Camapuao, 
eight yards in breadth at its mouth. From this 
point to its junction with the Taquari, the course 
of the Cochim is 30 leagues. 

The river Camapuao, along which the naviga 
tion is continued, becomes narrower on passing 
some rivulets that flow into it, and so shallow, as 
to be in general scarcely two feet deep, and the 
canoes are rather dragged than navigated along 
its sandy bed. After two leagues of this labour, 
they quit the Camapuao-uassu, leaving it on the 
right hand, choked with fallen trees, &amp;c. and 
enter into the Camapuao-mirim, up which they 
proceed one league, when they reach the fazenda, 
or estate of the same name. This is an important 
establishment, belonging to the Portuguese, in 
the centre of those vast and desert regions that 
interverne between the great rivers Paraguay 
and Parana, 90 leagues s. s. w. in a direct line] 



PA R A G U A Y. 



[from the town of Cuiaba. The place seems very 
proper for a Register, to prevent the smuggling 
of gold in this route, and to fix the duties on 
goods passing to Cuiaba and Motta Grosso. 
*The canoes and cargoes are transported from the 
Fazenda de Camapuao by land about a mile to 
the river Sanguixuga, the principal source of 
the Rio Pardo. From the end of the land pas 
sages the navigation continues down the Sanguix 
uga, and, in the interval of three leagues, they 
pass four falls to the Rio Vermelho (so called 
from the colour of its waters), which enters the 
Pardo. Half a league from the mouth of the 
Vermelho the Pardo has the fall of the Pedras 
de A molar, and a league below receives on its s. 
side the river Claro, from which, after proceeding 
two leagues of level stream, there occur nine falls 
in the space of two leagues more. The passage 
of them occupies 12 or 14 days in going up the 
river, though only one returning. Below the 
last of these, called the Bangue, the river Sucuriu 
enters the Pardo on its s. side. Three leagues 
below the mouth of the Sucuriu, is the cataract 
of Curare, about eight yards high, to avoid which 
the canoes are hauled over-land through a pas 
sage of 100 yards. From this cataract, in the 
space of 10 leagues, there occur 10 falls, which 
occupy 15 or 20 days, in ascending the river, 
though only one in descending. The breadth of 
the Rio Pardo in this part is 22 fathoms. Two 
leagues below the last of these falls is a deep inlet 
of 390 fathoms ; half a league lower the canoes 
are hauled over a space of land of 150 yards. 
Haifa league further is the fall of Sirga Negra ; 
one league further, that of Sirga Matto ; and a 
little more than a league from thence, the great 
cataract, or Salto da Cajuru, ten yards in height, 
to avoid which, the canoes are hauled through a 
narrow channel here formed by the river. A t a 
distance equal to the preceding is the Cajurii- 
mirim, and immediately after is found the fall of 
Da Ilha, the thirty-third and last on this river. 
Six leagues below this fall, the Rio Pardo re 
ceives on its n. side the river Orelha da Anta, 
(so called from abounding with ants) ; and four 
leagues lower down, on the same side, the Orelha 
da Ou9a, from the mouth of which, after 11 
leagues of navigation, is found the junction whicli, 
the river Anhandery-uassu makes from the s. 
with the Pardo, which, from the passage of Cama 
puao to this point, completes a s. e. course of 45. 
leagues in extent. The Anhandery and the Par- 
do from their confluence, run 16 leagues of na 
vigation w. in one channel, and disembogue in 
the w. bank of the Parana in lat. about 21. The 



velocity of the current of the Rio Pardo is very 
irregular ; it may be navigated downward in five 
or six days, but cannot be ascended in less than 
20 or 30, and that by hauling, for the force of the 
the stream in some places is too great for oars. 

The river Parana is of great breadth and 
weight of water, and is navigated against its cur 
rent up to the mouth of the Tiete. In the first 
three leagues occurs the island of Manuel Ho- 
mem. Five leagues above this island the Rio 
Verde falls into the Parana, by a mouth of 42 
fathoms, on its w. bank, and at an equal distance 
above, on the opposite c. side, the river Agua- 
pehy enters, by a mouth apparently above 20 
yards wide. Eight leagues above this river, and 
on the w. side of the Parana, the large river Sucu 
riu has its mouth, at least 53 fathoms wide, and, 
after four leagues of navigation further, on the 
Parana, is found the mouth of the large and 
interesting river, the Tiete. The distance be 
tween the rivers Tiete and Pardo, according to 
the winnings of the Parana, may be estimated at 
thirty-five leagues ; the direction n. inclining to 
the e. Passing up the Tiete, in the first three 
leagues is found the great Salto de Itapura (a 
great cascade), to avoid which the canoes are 
dragged 60 fathoms over land. A league above 
is the difficult fall of Itapura-mirim ; another 
league upwards are the three falls, called Tres 
Irmaos, and little more than that distance onward, 
that of Itapuru, half a league long ; two leagues 
further is the fall of U-aicurituba-mirim, and in 
the upper part of it the small river Sucury enters 
the Tiete upon its n. bank. One league above it 
is the fall of Utupiba, a quarter of a league in 
length. The same distance above is the fall of 
Araracangua-uassu, which is passed with unload 
ed canoes. Five leagues above this is found the 
Araracangua-mirim ; one league further, the 
Arassatuba, and at the same distance, the U-aicu- 
rituba, from which, in the space of nine leagues, 
occur seven falls. Three and a half leagues 
above the last of them is that of the Escaramunca, 
so called from the abrupt windings of the river 
among a thousand rocks and stoppages. Two 
leagues above this is the large fall of A van- 
handava, where the canoes are unloaded, and 
their cargoes carried half a mile over land, and 
the canoes hauled the greatest part of the way, 
to avoid a cataract 16 yards perpendicular. A 
league and a half above this is the fall of Avan- 
handava-mirim, and very near it, that of the 
Campo, from which there are 14 leagues o clear 
navigation to those of the Camboyu-voca, and 
next to the Tambau-mirim and Uassu, both] 



PARAGUAY. 



47 



[within the compass of two leagues. One league 
further is the fall of Tambitiririca ; three leagues 
from thence, the U-amicanga, and a little more 
than two leagues upwards, the Jacuripipira enters 
the Tiete, on the n. side, and has a mouth 15 
fathoms broad. A league and a half above this is 
the Jacuripipira-mirim, six leagues from whence 
is the fall ofCongouha, a league in length. For 
the space of eight leagues from this there are six 
falls, of which the last is Banharem. From this 
it is three leagues and a half to the mouth of the 
Paraniaba, 38 fathoms broad : it enters the Tiete 
on the n. ; and the latter river from this point 
immediately narrows itself to 40 fathoms wide. 
From the mouth of the Paraniaba there is a 
navigation of four leagues to the small fall of 
Ilha, and 14 leagues more, with frequent wind 
ings, to that of Itahy, near a populous village, 
called Jundahy. Six leagues from this is the 
fall of Pedrenegoa, which is a quarter of a league 
long ; and half a league above it, the river Sore- 
caba, which comes from the town of the same 
name, in lat. 23 35 , empties itself on the s. into 
the Tiete. Near this town are several mountains, 
called Guaraceaba, some of which abound with 
rich oxide of iron, which, on smelting, has proved 
very good. Upon them grows fine timber for 
machinery, and wood of every size fit for re 
ducing into carbon. Numerous streams flow 
from them, which may be employed to great 
advantage, and their base is washed by the river 
Campanhes, near the Capivara, both of which 
empty themselves into the Tiete at a short dis 
tance. From the river Sorecaba it is only six 
leagues to Porto Felix, where all the embarkation 
is now made to Matto Grosso from St. Paul s, 
the distance being about 23 leagues from that 
city. Through this conveyance, salt, iron, am 
munition, clothing for the troops, &amp;c. are sent 
annually by government. Trading parties fre 
quently arrive at St. Paul s from Cuiaba in the 
montl^of February, and return in April or May. 
Resuming our account of the Paraguay, it is 
to be observed that the Embotetieu enters that 
river five leagues below the mouth of the Ta- 
quari, and on the same side. It is now called 
Mondego, and was formerly navigated by the 
traders from St. Paul s, who entered by the An- 
handery-uassu, the s. branch of the Pardo. On 
the n. bank of the Mondego, 20 leagues above its 
mouth, the Spaniards founded the city of Xerez, 
which the Paulistas destroyed. Ten leagues 
above this place, in the mountains that form the 
upper part of the Embotetieu, there is a tradition 
that there are rich mines which w r ere discovered 



50 years ago. One league below the mouth of 
the Mondego there are two high insulated mounts, 
fronting each other on the Paraguay : at the ex 
tremity of the s. declivity of the mount on the 
W. side, near the bank of the river, is the garri 
son of New Coimbra, founded in 1775 ; it is the 
last and southermost Portuguese establishment on 
the great Paraguay. Eleven leagues to the s. of 
Coimbra, on the w. side of the Paraguay, is the 
mouth of Bahia Negra, a large sheet of water 
of six leagues in extent, being five leagues long 
from n. to s. : it receives the waters of the wide- 
flooded plains and lands to the 5. and zo. of the 
mountains of Albuquerque. At this bay the 
Portuguese possessions on both banks of the Para 
guay terminate. From thence the river con 
tinues to lat. 21, where, on its w. bank, is situ 
ated a hill known to the Portuguese by the name 
of Miguel Jose, crowned with a Spansihfort with 
four pieces of artillery, called Bourbon. Three 
leagues above this the little river Guirino falls 
into the Paraguay on the e. side. Nine leagues 
to the s. of the above fort, and in lat. 21 22 , are 
other mountains on both sides the Paraguay, 
which command this river ; for the c. side is sur 
mounted with a lofty chain, extending to the in 
terior of the country, near which is the sugar- 
loaf mount : the opposite side is equally moun 
tainous, but not so high or extensive ; and in 
the middle of the river there is a high rocky 
island, which, with the mountainous banks on 
each side, forms two channels of about a musket- 
shot across. This, in case of war between the 
neighbouring nations, would be a post of the 
highest importance, as it forms a natural barrier, 
which w r ould require little fortification to render 
it an effectual obstacle to invasion. Here ter 
minate those extensive inundations, to which 
both banks of the Paraguay are subject : the^y 
commence at the mouth of the Jauru, and to this 
point cover an extent of 100 leagues from n. tos. 
and 40 in breadth at their highest floods, forming 
an apparent lake, which geographers of former 
days, as well as some moderns, have termed the 
Xarayes. This inundation confounds the chan 
nel of the great Paraguay with those of its vari 
ous confluents, in such a manner that, from 20 
to 30 leagues above their regular mouths, it is 
possible, in time of the floods, to navigate across 
from one to the other, always in deep water, 
without ever seeing or approaching the banks of 
the Paraguay. During this wonderful inunda 
tion, the high mountains and elevated land which 
it incloses appear like so many superb islands, 
and the lower grounds form a labyrinth of lakes,] 



PARAGUAY. 



[bays, and pools, many of which remain after the 
floods have subsided. From the intricacy of 
these inundated plains, the navigation is rendered 
impracticable to all who do not unite experience 
with skill. From this position, (the only barrier 
on the Paraguay), the banks downward are in 
general high and firm, particularly the e. or 
Portuguese side. In lat. 22 3 5 , a considerable 
river empties itself into it, which the Spaniards, 
at the demarcation in 1753, would have to be the 
Corrientes, whereas the heads of this river are 
20 leagues n. of the real Corrientes mentioned in 
the treaty. 

Between the Paraguay and the Parana there 
runs from n. to s. an extensive chain of moun 
tains, which have the appellation of Amanbay ; 
they terminate to the s. of the river Iguatimy, 
forming a ridge running s. and w. called Mara- 
cayer. From these mountains spring all the 
rivers which, from the Taquari s. enter the Pa 
raguay, and from the same chain also proceed 
many other rivers, which, taking a contrary di 
rection, flow into the Parana ; one of them, and 
the most s. being the Igoatimy, which has its 
mouth in lat. 23 47 , a little above the Seven 
Falls, or the wonderful cataract of the Parana. 
This cataract is a most sublime spectacle, being 
distinguished to the eye of the spectator from 
below by the appearance of six rainbows, and 
emitting from its fall a constant cloud of vapours, 
which impregnates the air to a great distance. 
On the n. side of the Igoatimy, 20 leagues from 
its mouth, the Portuguese had formerly the for 
tress of Bauris, which was abandoned in 1777. 
The Igoatimy has its sources 10 leagues above 
this place, among high and rugged mountains. 
The river Xexuy enters the Paraguay on the e. 
side in lat. 24 II 7 , twenty leagues below the 
Ipane, another small river, called the Ipane- 
mirim, intervening. 

This is a summary description of Portugueze 
Paraguay, to the point where the territory ought 
(as our tourist observes) to extend ; and such is 
the situation of this great river, that the above- 
mentioned rivers, which concentrate towards the 
interior of Brazil, enter it on the e. side; not one 
enters it on the w. from the Jauru to the parallel 
of the Ipane. Many parts of the banks of all 
those rivers are laid under water at the time of 
the floods, and the plains are covered to a con 
siderable depth. 

A river of such vast size as the Paraguay, in a 
temperate and salubrious climate, abounding 
with tish, bordered by extensive plains and high 
mountains, intersected by so many rivers, bays. 



lakes, and forests, must naturally have drawn 
many of the Indian nations to inhabit its banks: 
but, immediately after the discovery of the new 
continent, the incursions of the Paulistas and 
Spaniards seem to have dispersed and destroyed 
the numerous tribes: the Jesuits transplanted 
many thousands to their settlements on the L T ra- 
guay and Parana. Other nations fled from the 
avarice of the new settlers to countries less fa 
voured, but more secure by reason of their dis 
tance, and the difficulty of approach. This emi 
gration of one nation to districts occupied by an 
other, became the fruitful source of inveterate 
and sanguinary wars among them, which tended 
to reduce their numbers. There are, however, 
still some Indians left on the borders of the Pa 
raguay, among whom theGuaycurus, or Cavalier 
Indians, are principally distinguished for valour. 
They occupy the lands from the river Taquari, 
extending s. along all the rivers that enter the 
Paraguay on the e. side, as far as the river 
Ipane, and in like manner, on the opposite 
bank, from the mountains of Albuquerque down 
wards. They have made war repeatedly on the 
Spaniards and Portuguese, without ever being 
subdued. They are armed with lances of extra 
ordinary length, bows, arrows, &amp;c. They make 
long incursions on horseback into the neighbour 
ing territories ; they procure horses in exchange 
for stout cotton cloaks, called ponchos, which 
they manufacture. There are other Indian na 
tions inhabiting these large tracts, some of whom 
have intermixed both with the Portuguese and 
Spaniards, there being few of the latter on any 
part of the confines without some traces of In 
dian physiognomy. 

From the river Xexuy, downwards, the Para 
guay takes its general course s. for 32 leagues to 
the city of Asuncion, the capital of Paraguay, 
and the residence of its governor. This city is 
situated on an obtuse angle made by the e. bank 
of the river ; the population is by no means 
trifling, and there are some Portuguese among 
the inhabitants. The government is of vast ex 
tent, and its total population is given by dif 
ferent authorities at from 97,000 to 120,000 souls. 
The land is fertile, and contains many rich 
farms : its principal product is the matte, which 
is exported to Tucuman and Buenos Ayres, from 
whence it is sent to various parts of the Spanish 
dominions, along the coast of Chile and Peru, 
being a general article of consumption among all 
ranks of people. Its other products are hides, 
tobacco, and sugar. From Buenos Ayres large 
boats arrive at the city of Asuncion, after two or ] 



PAR 

three months passage ; the only difficulty in na 
vigating is the great weight of the waters of the 
Paraguay, which flow with great rapidity : but this 
disadvantage is lessened by favourable winds, 
which blow the greater part of the year from the s. 

Six leagues below Asuncion, on the w. side of 
the Paraguay, the river Pilcomayo enters that 
river by its first mouth ; its second is 14 or 16 
leagues lower. In this space some other smaller 
rivers enter on the e. side, and amongst them 
the Tibiquari, on an arm of which, 20 leagues 
s. e. from Asuncion, is Villa Rica, a large Spanish 
town, with much property in cattle on its exten 
sive plains. The river veimecho enters the a), 
side of the Paraguay, in lat. 26 45 . On a re 
mote upper branch of this river is the town of 
Salto, near an accessible fall : it is an important 
point to the Spaniards who are transporting their 
goods from Buenos Ayres, Tucuman, &amp;c. to 
Upper Peru.] 

PARAGUAYAURA, a small river of the 
province and government of Cumana, which rises 
in the sierra of Imataca, runs s. and enters the 
Cuyuni by the n. side. 

PARAGUAYJES., a settlement of the province 
and government of Buenos Ayres ; situate near 
the river Hueque-Leuvu. Near it, on the s. are 
two large lakes abounding in salt. 

PARAGUAYO, an abundant river of the 
country of Las Amazonas, which rises in the 
mountains of the Andes in the kingdom of Peru, 
runs for many leagues towards the n. collecting 
the waters of many others, until it enters that of 
Las A mazonas. 

PAR A HAM, a settlement of the province and 
government of Guayana. 

PARAHIBO, a river of the kingdom of Bra 
zil, which rises in the country of the Mari- 
quitas Indians, runs n. and turning its course to 
n. n. e. enters the sea, forming a great mouth or 
port close to cape Negro. 

PARAIBA, a province and captainship of the 
kingdom of Brazil: one of the 14 which compose 
it, and of the smaller. It takes its name from a 
river, by which it is irrigated and fertilized ; 
bounded n. by the river Grande, e. by the Bra 
zilian sea, s. by the province of Itamaraca, and 
divided from the same by the river Paraiba, and 
w. by the territory of the barbarous nations of 
the Tiguares and Petiguares Indians. This pro 
vince abounds more than any other in Brazil 
wood, and has many engines for making sugar, 
this being its principal article of commerce with 
Europe. The Petiguares Indians, enemies to 
the Portuguese, continually infest and destroy 

VOL. IV. 



PAR 



49 



their settlements. The climate is benign and 
the soil fertile. The French took possession of 
this beautiful country, keeping it till 1584, when 
they were driven out by the Portuguese. 

pTfcis captainship was bestowed by John III. 
on the celebrated historian De Bauos ; but he 
was compelled to restore it to the government 
after having nearly ruined himself by his unsuc 
cessful attempts to colonize it.] 

PARAIBA, the capital, is of the same name, a 
city and head of the bishopric, called also City 
de Federico and Nuestra Senora de las Nieves. 
It is situate opposite the fort of Tamaraca, at 
the s. mouth and shore of the river of its 
name ; is large, well peopled, mercantile, and 
rich. The buildings are handsome, particularly 
the cathedral-church, which is magnificent. It 
is defended by three forts ; two situate on islands, 
with the names of San Antonio and La Restinga, 
and the third on the point of Santa Catalina. It 
enjoys a fine healthy air and good climate. The 
Dutch, commanded by Captains Longk and War- 
denburg, took it in 1635, but it was afterwards 
recovered by the Portuguese, being under the 
dominion of the kings of Spain. 

[The above capital was built at the expence of 
the king. It stands near the river Paraiba, at 
the mouth of which is the harbour. A handsome 
custom-house has been erected near it, and a 
pentagonal fort, named St. Catherine, which de 
fends the entrance into this harbour. Seven or 
eight ships of about 250 tons burden used an 
nually to enter this port from the mother-coun 
try, loaded with different articles for the use of 
the colony. Their homeward bound cargoes 
consisted chiefly of sugar, more of which is 
raised in the n. captainships than in those of the 
s. ; especially since the discovery of the gold 
mines, which have rendered the inhabitants of 
these last districts more negligent respecting the 
improvement of their plantations. There are 21 
sugar houses in this province, and the sugar mar 
nufactured in them is said to be superior to any 
other in Brazil. 

Besides sugar, they also export dying woods, 
several sorts of drugs, and other valuable com 
modities, and it is generally allowed that these 
. captainships are the most populous, and the 
inhabitants in very easy circumstances, though no 
mines have yet been wrought in these parts. 
The capital is computed to contain nearly 4000 
souls, and the province about 20,000.] In lat. 
6 57 30" s. Long. 35 W 30" w. 

PARAIBA, a large river of the above province 

d kingdom, which rises in the mountains of the o&amp;gt;. 



an 



50 



PAR 



P A R 



and runs e. fertilizing the country of the Tigua- 
res, Petiguares, and Viatanis Indians. Its shores 
are covered with villages and sugar engines, 
and in the woods are quantities of Brazil-wood. 
At its embouchure it forms the great bay of Pa- 
raiba, which has at its entrance the island of 
San Antonio. 

PAR AID A, another small river, in the province 
and captainship of Espiritu Santo in the same 
kingdom. It flows down from the mountains, 
runs e. and enters the sea. 

PA RAID A, another large river, in the pro 
vince and captainship of Rio Janeyro; it has its 
source in the captainship of Sao Paulo in the 
mountains, within 10 miles of the sea in the 
bay of Cairussu. [From its source it has a very 
peculiar course, for the first 95 miles it runs w. 
by s. then turns n. for 2a miles, afterwards e. ap 
proaching its source within 23 miles, then wind 
ing its course in a serpentine direction through 
the captainship of Rio Janeyro, and enters the 
Atlantic ocean very much augmented by nume 
rous inferior rivers. In lat. 21 34 30" s.~] 

PARAIBA, another river, of the province and 
government of Guayana, which rises in the in 
terior of the same, near the sources of the Caura, 
and running n. enters in a very abundant stream 
into the Orinoco ; and, according to Don Juan 
de la Cruz, first into the Caroni. 

PARAIGUA, SIERRA DE, some very lofty 
mountains of the province of Barcelona and go 
vernment of Cumana, which run nearly from e. 
to w. parallel with the river Orinoco. 

PARAI-GUAZU, a small river of the pro 
vince and government of Paraguay, which runs 
e . and enters this river near the city of Asun 
cion. 

PARAINABA, a large river of the province 
and country of Las Amazonas, entering with a 
large stream into the river of this name, after 
running many leagues and collecting the waters 
of 30 other rivers. 

PARAISANCOS, a settlement of the pro 
vince and corregimiento of Lucanas in Peru. 

PARAMARIBO, a city of the Dutch, in the 
part which they possess in Guayana ; the capital 
of the colony of Surinam ; situate on the w. side 
of the river, 10 miles from the sea, upon a sandy 
rock, which causes the streets to be very easy to 
the tread. It has this name from a settlement of 
Indians, which it formerly was. In the hot sea 
sons the sand becomes so burning as to penetrate 
the soles of the shoes and blister the feet. 

The houses, which amount to the number of 
800, are very regularly built, and nearly all of 



them without windows, on account of the heat ; 
and attached to them are pleasant gardens. To 
about three feet in height they are of brick, and 
upwards of wood, with the exception of the 
houses of the governor and commandant, which 
are of stone, although the former are sumptuous. 
In all the streets there is before the houses an 
orange-grove, which buds twice a year. The 
city-house is in a handsome spot, and surrounded 
also by orange-trees ; and here is the slave- 
market. It was, indeed, at first used as a bury- 
ing-ground, but from fear of any infection from 
the bodies, they were carried afterwards to the 
extreme part of the town, and interred in a rising 
ground. Divine service is performed here every 
Sunday, in Dutch in the morning, and after 
mid-day in French, there being two ministers 
for the former and one for the latter of these 
duties. Although a poor person is rarely seen 
here, there is a house for the reception of or 
phans, and of such as from age are incapacitated 
for labour, and thus the streets are entirely free 
of beggars. Here is a superb Lutheran church, 
situate on the shore of the river, where a sermon 
is preached every Sunday, morning and evening; 
also two synagogues of Portuguese and German 
Jews, that of the former being the best. 

The plaza, or place of arms, is garrisoned by 
two battalions of infantry, and these with the 
artillery-men form a body 1200 strong, whose 
pay is furnished one half by the society of the 
Jesuits, and the other half by the inhabitants of 
the colony : also for them is provided an hospi 
tal, with physicians, surgeon, drugs, &amp;c. Besides 
this troop the inhabitants are formed into three 
companies of militia, who are obliged to take up 
arms at command ; and in the plantations on the 
banks of the river are as many more companies, 
who at the first signal gun are to repair armed 
to the city. 

The governor of this colony formerly settled 
all the differences without appeal, but a council 
was afterwards established, composed of 13 per 
sons, over which the governor is president ; nor 
can any one aspire to be of this council, except 
he have great influence in the country. [In lat. 
5 53 n. and long. 55 12 o&amp;gt;.] 

PARAMAXIBO, a settlement of the same 
colony and government as the former city ; si 
tuate on the shore of the river Surinam. It be 
longs to the Dutch, and has more than 400 
houses, and is of an healthy climate. 

PARAMERIN, a small river of the province 
and captainship of Todos Santos in Brazil. It 
runs w. and turning n. n. ?, enters the Rio Real, 



P A R 

PARAMOS. Some very lofty mountains of 
the cordillera of the Andes ; the heights of which 
are exceeding, but vary so much that the skirts 
of some rest upon the tops of others. They are 
the whole year round covered with snow, which 
is become hardened by time, so as to cause the 
temperature to be cold in the extreme, and to 
render them totally uninhabitable. 

The most celebrated of these mountains are in 
the kingdom of Quito ; and the lower parts of 
them are covered with a kind of straw like 
esparto (mat-weed), although less harsh, which 
grows in such abundance, and to such an height, 
as to be in some parts half a yard and in others 
three-quarters. Amongst this grows a tree, 
called quinual, of a strong wood and small dark 
green leaf, and rough to the touch ; also a plant, 
peculiar to the climate, called by the Indians palo 
de luz (tree of light), the which is about three 
feet high, grows in one perpendicular stem till 
the upper part, where it shoots some small 
branches, these also producing others, on each 
of which sprout two leaves. This plant being 
cut near the root and lighted when green, serves 
the Indians as a candle, and burns like one till 
the whole of the stick is consumed. There also 
grows in these paramos the achupalla, composed 
of stalks, like those of the savila, the trunk of 
which, when tender, serves for the Indians as 
salad, like that of the palmito. The canchalagua 
and the contrayerva, well known for their virtues, 
are also found here, as is the puchugchu^ which is 
a sort of bread formed of an herb, the leaves of 
which are round and of the figure of the musk- 
flower, and which unite and knit themselves to 
gether with such force as to form a body of two 
feet in diameter, so hard as to resist the weight 
of a man. 

Notwithstanding the severity of the climate of 
the Paramos, there are not wanting animals to 
breed upon them, such as deer and foxes : and 
birds, as partridges and condors, which are birds 
of prey, and of a magnitude above any of the 
feathered race ; and to them are these mountains 
peculiar, for they never leave them but in search 
of prey, when they fly into the valleys to pounce 
upon the lambs, which they carry up with their 
tallons in the air. The Indians have a method 
of catching them by anointing a concealed net 
with certain herbs which stupifies them ; but 
they are generally aware of the mischief, and 
betake themselves to flight. Here is also a 
bird which they call the zumbador^ which seldom 
allows itself to be seen though continually heard ; 
and another, to which they give the name of 
eancion, the note of which is like the bandurria. 



PAR 



51 



PARANA, a large and navigable river of the 
province and government of Paraguay, traversing 
this province from n. e. to w. It rises in the 
province of Minas Geraes to the s. of the city 
of Va. da. S. Joas del Rey, in some lofty 
sierras, and takes its course for the space of 
300 leagues, receiving innumerable other rivers 
which are on the n. part, the Iguayri, Pardo, 
Monici, Amamboy, Itaimbe, Guazuygua, Yaca- 
guaju, Itabo, Acaray, Munday, Tenibey, Pira- 
yubi, Pirapopo, Aguapey, and others ; and on 
the s. part those of Anemby, Aguapeyo, Para- 
napane, Huibay, Piquiri, Yari, Itapitay, Yacoy, 
Guiraitagua, Yequeimari, Piracabi, Cay, Iguazu, 
Paranay, Ibiray, Muruara, and others. 

At the distance of 125 leagues from its mouth 
it has two falls which impede its navigation, so 
that the boats are obliged to be carried for some 
little distance by land. The whole of that ex 
tent of its course s. from the river Paranape to 
27 or 28, is called Guayra. The country is of 
a fine temperature and very fertile, and popu 
lous in former times ; and in some valleys to 
wards the e. from the Uruguay, the territory 
of which they called Tape, dwelt some Indians, 
of whom are descended those of the missions of 
the present day, and lately converted. Those of 
the river Guayra call themselves Guaranis, and 
the others Tapes, being as it were a colony of 
the former. All of them spoke, and still speak, 
the same idiom, Avhich is the Guarani, and with 
greater or less purity, the other nations of the 
Guaicurus, the Chiriguanos, &amp;c. 

This country was discovered by Alvar Nunez 
Cabeza de Vaca, in 1541, he being governor of 
Paraguay ; and he took possession of it in the 
name of the king, calling it the province of Vera. 
The inhabitants were laborious, lived in settle 
ments, sowed maize twice a year, cultivated 
yucas or mandioca, bred fowl, and eat human 
flesh, not only of their own prisoners, for they 
were very warlike, but even that of their own 
dead. 

Two monks of the order of San Francisco, 
called Fr. Bernardo de Armenta, and Fr. Alonso 
Lebron, who accompanied the governor in his 
voyage, were the first who gave these Indians 
the first insight into religion. Some years after 
wards others of their order came, and obtained 
great fruit by their labours ; but he that laboured 
most, and who stayed amongst them 50 years, 
was the venerable Fr. Luis de Bolanos, com 
panion of San Francisco Solano, who, accom 
panied by many other religious, erected many 
chapels or churches in Guayra, establishing six 
reductions^ and uniting the Indians in settlements 
H 2 



5*2 



PARANA. 



and in large and convenient parts on the shores 
of the rivers Ibajiba, Paranape, and Pirapo, 
and, for their instruction in their catechism, he 
made himself master of the Guarani tongue, 
many of his orations in this language having 
been since printed by the Jesuits. 

This great missionary, bent down with years 
and infirmities, and finding it impossible for him 
longer to fulfil his wonted duties, went with 
gladness to welcome the arrival of some Jesuits, 
entrusting them with his flock ; but such was the 
veneration of the Indians for their old masters, 
that they were with difficulty persuaded by the 
venerable Franciscan to accept of the offices of 
the new comers ; he at last, however, persuaded 
them, by assuring them that the Jesuits were 
their brothers, and that the only difference be 
tween the one and the other was the dress. The 
Jesuits followed up the advantages of their pre 
decessors, and founded some fresh settlements 
or doctrinal establishments in 1614. But the 
Mamelucos Paulistas of Brazil made various ir 
ruptions against those settlements, in order to 
entrap prisoners, which they might carry to sell 
to work in the mines of that kingdom and at the 
sugar engines ; nor did they carry thither less, 
at different times, than 100,000 souls ; and on 
this account the missionaries found themselves 
under the necessity of withdrawing the settle 
ments to a spot where they now stand ; where, 
being still infested, a permission was obtained 
from his majesty for these Indians to carry fire 
arms for their defence, in 1639, although they 
were not brought into action till some time 
after, when, being well instructed by the Jesuits, 
they succeeded in completely routing their ene 
mies. 

These settlements are nearer to Paraguay and 
Buenos Ayres than they were formerly, and of 
the 30, which was their number, 13 belong 
to the bishopric of the former, and the 17 others 
to the latter : the former were also of the tem 
poral government of that province till 1726, 
when the king ordered that they should all be 
dependent on the government of Buenos Ayres. 
They are of the following names : 
San Ignacio Guazu, Santa Rosa, 
San Cosme, Candelaria, 

Itapua, Santa Ana, 

La Trinidad, Loreto, 

Jesus, San Ignacio Miri, 

Santiago, Corpus Christi. 

NuestraSenora deFe, 

Of the which eight are to the s. of Parana, and 
the five others to the n. These last were ceded 
by the king to the crown of Portugal in 1755, in 



exchange for the colony of Sacramento; but this 
plan was disagreable to the Indians, who took 
up their arms against the Spaniards and Portu 
guese who were unitedly endeavouring to force 
them to the treaty, and such was their resolution 
that it was at last annulled. These settlement!? 
contain 41,000 souls, who cultivate the same fruits 
as those of Paraguay, but in greater abundance, 
namely wheat, maize, sugar, herb of Paraguay, 
tobacco, cotton, seeds, fruit and garden-herbs, 
besides the cutting of some trees to make planks. 
The territory abounds in such large and fine 
pastures that when the Jesuits quitted the coun 
try, there were found in the 30 settlements no 
less than 769,589 horses, 13,905 mules, and 
271,537 heads of sheep. The government, arts, 
and manufactures established here by the same 
missionaries, has for many years been a problem 
which could not be solved : whether, in fact, all 
this should prove, as some will have it, the per 
fection of a republic, or, as others, that it should 
be looked upon as a tyrannical despotism eager 
only for its own interests. More on this subject 
may be seen in the " Christianismo felice" of 
Muratori, the Italian, and in the general collec 
tion of the documents for the extermination of the 
Jesuits, printed by order of the government. 

In this province there is a constant tradition that 
the evangelist and apostle St. Thomas preached 
here. Dr. Xarque, dean of Albarracin, lays it 
down in his own mind as a fact, nor did he dwell 
a short time in the country. Besides this, there 
is in a certain road leading from Brazil, in the 
midst of unfrequented woods, a kind of bower or 
avenue, indisputably the work of art, which the 
Indians have always called the path of St. 
Thomas; also in the province of Paraguay is to 
be seen a cave, not a work of nature but of art, 
the which is seven yards long and proportion- 
ably wide, with a floor level and plain, and a 
roof composed of one flat stone, perfectly free 
from any inequalities of surface : this cave is in a 
lofty mountain, and both the mountain and the 
cave bear the name of St, Thomas ; and it is 
there thought that the saint used to make the 
same cave his abode, and that he there used to 
preach to the Indians of those valleys. Here also 
is found an hollow rock which is difficult of 
entrance, but in which is found the prints of 
feet and hands, the same phenomena existing in 
other parts of the coast of Paraguay ; and all 
agree in asserting that they are of that apostle, 
and that he first taught them the use of the herb 
of Paraguay. This at least cannot be doubted 
but that they knew the use of it before the arrival 
of the Spaniards. 



PAR 

The Indians of Brazil concur with this tradi 
tion, and assure us that the apostle St. Thomas 
landed at the port of Todos Santos, opposite the 
bar of San Vincente. Now, if to all these asser 
tions we take into consideration the information 
given by the Indians to the conquerors of Peru, 
respecting the orgin of the cross of the settle 
ment of Carabuco in the province of Omasuyos ; 
if we consider the stone which was found in the 
curacy of Ay aviri, of the province of Yauy os ; the 
signs at Caxamarca, and the vestiges of our reli 
gion found in a cave near Tarija, it may be in 
terred that it is most probable that St. Thomas 
did actually preach the gospel in these coun 
tries. 

[But to return to the description of the Parana. 
This great river (observes the traveller Mawe), 
which the first discoverers considered as the 
chief, on account of its abundant waters, unites 
with the e. side of the Paraguay in lat. 27 16 ; 
and their united streams take the name of the 
Rio de la Plata, which originated in the follow 
ing circumstance. Martini de Jousa, the first 
donatory of the captainship of St. Vicente, fur 
nished Alexo Garcia with an adequate escort to 
explore the hitherto untrodden wilds to the w. 
of the extensive coast of Brazil. This intrepid 
Portuguese, by the route of the Tiete, reached 
the Paraguay, which he crossed, and penetrated 
considerably into the interior, from whence he 
returned, it is said, loaded with silver, and some 
gold ; but he halted on the Paraguay, and waited 
for the coming of his son, a youth of tender 
years, with some of his people, whilst he sent 
forward an account of the discovery. He was 
surprised by a body of Indians, who killed him, 
took his son prisoner, and carried off all his 
riches ; the year following, 60 Portuguese, who 
were sent in search of Garcia, shared the same 
fate. The Spaniards who first settled on this 
river, seeing so much silver amongst these In 
dians, and supposing it to be the produce of the 
country, called the river La Plata. The Parana 
derives its principal sources from the w. side of the 
mountains of Mantiqueira, 25 leagues w. of the 
town of Paraty. For further descriptions con 
nected with this article, see Paraguay.] 

PARANA, a settlement of the island of Joanes 
or Marajo in Brazil ; on the n. coast, at the same 
mouth or entrance of the river of Las Amazonas. 

PARANA, another, a small river of the king 
dom of Brazil, which runs w. n. e. and enters the 
Preto or De Palma. 

PARANAGUA, a town of the province and 
captainship of San Vincente, in Brazil ; situate 



PAR 53 

on the shore of the river of its name, at the en 
trance of the bay of Ipetuba. 

The aforesaid river runs e. and enters the sea 
in the bay of Ipetuba. 

PARANAIBA, a large and abundant river of 
the province and captainship of Portoseguro in 
Brazil ; it runs s. s. e. for many leagues, and 
enters by the n. side into the Grande del Parana 
near its source. The ex-Jesuit Coleti asserts 
that it enters the Maranon by the w. part, below 
where it receives the Ginapape. On its shores 
dwell many nations of barbarous Indians, who 
are not known. 

PARANAIBA, another abundant river, in the 
province and government of Guayana. It is an 
arm of the Maranon, which runs out forming a 
curve, and returns to enter the same river, form 
ing the large island of Ramos. 

PARANAMERIN, or PARAMERI, a small 
river of the province and captainship of Seara in 
Brazil, which runs n. and enters the sea between 
the rivers Paragii and Iquarazii. 

PARANAMIRI, a river of the province and 
country of Las Amazonas. It is an arm of this 
which communicates with the lake Araraba, and 
forms the island of Variquiri. 

PARANAPANE, MINAS DE, some very rich 
and abundant gold mines of the province and 
captainship of San Vincente in Brazil. They lie 
between the rivers Yapo and Yaguariba, near 
where the Jesuits had the settlement of their 
missions, called San Francisco Xavier, in the 
province of Guayra, and which w r as destroyed by 
the Portuguese of San Pablo. 

PARANAPE, a large and abundant river of 
the province and government of Paraguay, and 
which enters the Parana. 

PARANAPITINGA. See YAGUXPIRI. 

PARANAPURAS, ENCARNACION DE, a set 
tlement of the province and government of Mai- 
nas in the kingdom of Quito ; a reduction of the 
missions of this name by the Jesuits, on the shore 
of the river also so called. 

This river rises in the cordillera of the Andes, 
runs e. and, making a curve, enters the Guallaga, 
by the side of the settlement of Yurimanguas. 

PARANAUNA, a river of the province and 
captainship of Portoseguro in Brazil. It rises in 
the mountains near the coast, runs n. and enters 
the head of the Grande del Francisco. 

PAR ANA Y, a small river of the province and 
government of Paraguay, which runs w. and 
enters the Parana between those of Caruguampu 
and Piray. 

PARANGATECUTIRO, SAN JUAN DE, a 



54 



PAR 



settlement of the head settlement of the district of 
Uruapan, and cdcaldia mayor of Valladolid, in the 
province and bishopric of Mechoacan. It con 
tains 62 families of Indians, and is 10 leagues e. of 
its head settlement and 18 from the capital, and 
in it is a beautiful convent of the monks of San 
Agustin. 

PARANGS, a barbarous nation of Indians, 
who inhabit the woods of the province and govern 
ment of Nainas, between the river Blanco to the 
$. and the Curaray to the n. and bounded w. by 
the nation of the Iquitos. 

PARAPAMENA, a large and abundant river 
of the province and captainship of San Pablo in 
Brazil. It rises w. of the capital, and running 
w. n. w. enters the Parana. Don Juan de la 
Cruz wrongly calls it Paranapane. 

PARAPITI, a river of the province and 
government of Santa Cruz de la Sierra in Peru. 
It rises in a large lake in the territory of the 
Pampas de Huanacos, and shortly after loses 
itself in another lake, where the river Ubay 
heads. Some call it the Apure ; on its shores are 
seen the ruins of the antient capital of the province 
which was destroyed by the infidel Indians. 

PARAPITINGA, a lake of the province and 
captains/lip of Portoseguro in Brazil. It is form 
ed from a waste water of the river Paracatus, to 
the e. of the town of Minas Generates. 

PARAPU, a small river of the province and 
government of Guayana or Nueva Andalucia, 
which rises n. of the lake in which the river Ma- 
caoza heads, runs e. and enters the Maranon. 

PARAPURA, a settlement of the province and 

S&amp;gt;vernment of Venezuela in the Nuevo Reyno de 
ranada ; situate on the shore of the river Gua- 
rico, and s. s. e. of the lake Tacarigua. 

PARAQUARO, a settlement of the head set 
tlement of the district and akaldia mayor of 
Tanzitaro in Nueva Espana. It is of an hot 
temperature, situate in a beautiful and spacious 
valley ; abounding in salubrious waters, and 
affords fine crops of rice, with which the various 
provinces of the kingdom are supplied, and in 
the traffic of which this place is always filled 
with traders, 11 leagues s. of the capital. 

PARAQUARO, another settlement, with the de 
dicatory title of San Agustin, in the province 
of Cinagua of the same kingdom. It is of an hot 
temperature, contains 27 families of Indians, and 
is annexed to the curacy of Turicato ; abounds in 
maize, fruit, and larger cattle. But it is subject 
to the epidemic disorder of garrapalas (ticks), 
which the Indians call turicotas^ and which are 
extremely noxious ; 37 leagues s. e. of its capital. 



PAR 

PARARCA, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Parinacochas in Peru. 

PARARE, a river of the province and govern 
ment of San Juan de Los Llanos in the Nuevo 
Reyno de Granada. It runs nearly due e. and 
enters the Cazanare close to the settlement of the 
reduction of San Salvadar. 

PARARIN, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Guailas in Peru. 

PARARUMA, a very lofty rock of a pyrami- 
dical form on the shore of the river Orinoco, the 
base of it being more than half a league in circum 
ference ; it is all of one piece, and can only be 
ascended on two sides with great difficulty. The 
top, which at a distance appears like a spear, is a 
plain of an oval figure, surrounded by a border or 
breast-work of the same stone ; but the soil is 
very fertile. The Indians of the Saliva nation 
have here a beautiful garden, always irrigated by 
an hidden stream of water which flows in the same 
rock. Here are plantains, pines, and various 
fruits in abundance ; but the greatest attraction 
of this spot is a certain bower, whither the In 
dians come to shelter themselves from the heat, 
and occasionally to amuse themselves, observing, 
from that eminence, the vessels passing along the 
river, and which are discernible at an immense 
distance. 

PARAS, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Vilcas Huaman in Peru ; annex 
ed to the curacy of Totos, celebrated for the 
first quicksilver mine, having been discovered 
there by Pedro Contreras, native of San Lucar 
de Barrameda in 1560, in company with Enrique 
Garces, a Portuguese, the viceroy of Peru at the 
time being Don Garcia Hurtado de Mendoza, 
Marquis of Canete ; but this mine was abandoned 
after three years, the profit not equalling the 
expenccs. 

PARASIS, a nation of barbarous Indians, who 
inhabit the n. w. shore of the river Paraguay, 
and the w. of the lake of Los Xarayes ; bounded 
on this part by the Moxos, and s. by some tribes 
of the Chiquitos. 

PARATAPA,asmall river of the province and 
government of Guayana or Nueva Andalucia, 
which runs e. in a serpentine course, and enters 
the Ami by this rhumb. 

PARATARI, a small river of the province 
and country of Las Amazonas, in the territory 
possessed by the Portuguese. An arm of this 
river returning into its native bed, forms a small 
island. 

PARATECA, a village and settlement of the 
Portuguese, of the province and captainship of 



P A 11 



PAR 



Todos Santos in Brazil ; situate on the w. shore 
of the Grande de San Francisco, and at the mouth 
where this enters the Rans. 

[PARATEE, a bay on the s. w. side of the 
island of Jamaica. It is s. e. of Banister bay ; 
its s. e. point is also called ParateeJ] 

PARATI, or ANGRA DE Los REYES, a small 
town of the province and captainship of Rio Ja- 
neyro in Brazil : situate near the coast, and 
opposite the Isla Grande. 

PARATINGA, a large river of the kingdom 
of Brazil, which rises in lat. 8, runs many leagues 
to s. s. w. and enters the Tocantines, opposite the 
Real of La Asuncion. 

PARATININGA. See XINGU. 

PARATINI, a river of the province and cap 
tainship of Hey in Brazil, which runs 5. and turn 
ing e. enters the grand lake of Los Patos. 

PARATIPANA, a small river of the province 
and captainship of Para in Brazil, which runs n. 
n. w. and enters the Xingu. 

PARAVARI, a large river of Peru, which 
rises in the province and corregimiento of Cara- 
baya, afterwards unites itself with the Beni, and 
thus forms the Castela. On its shores are many 
Indian nations, of whom nothing is known. 

PARAVINANAS. SeePARiME. 

PARAUPASA, a river of the kingdom of 
Brazil, which rises in the mountains of the Caria- 
putangas Indians, runs e. and enters the Piloens 
near the town of Boa. 

PARAUTE, a settlement of the province and 
government of Maracaibo in the Nuevo Reyno 
de Granada ; situate on the e. shore of the lake of 
Marcaibo, and of the river of its name. 

This river, which is small, rises in the country 
of Giraharas Indians, runsty. and enters the lake. 

[PARAYBA. See PARAIBA.] 

PARAZU, a small river of the province and 
captainship of Seara in Brazil, which runs n. and 
enters the sea between the Iguarazu and the 
Paranamerin. ^ 

PARCELA, BAXO DE, a shoal on the coast of 
the province and captainship of Rio Janeyro in 
Brazil, close to cape Santo Tome. 

PARCO, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Chilques and Masques in Peru; 
annexed to the curacy of Acchaamansaya. 

PARCOS, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Angaraez, in the same kingdom 
as the former ; 16 leagues from Guamanga, and 
13 from Guancavelica. 

PARCU, an ancient and small province of 
Peru, belonging at present to Cuzco. It was 
conquered and united to the empire by the Inca 
Viracocha, eighth emperor. 



PARDO, a river of the province and govern 
ment of Paraguay, which runs 5. and enters the 
great river of the Portuguese. It is also called 
Anemby. 

PARDO, another, a small river in the territory 
ofCuyaba of the kingdom of Brazil, which runs 
s. s. w. and enters the Parana. 

PARDO, another, called also Colorado, which 
runs nearly s. and turning n. n. w. enters the 
Parana by the s. side in a very large stream. 

PARDORA, a settlement of the province and 
captainship of Pernambuco in Brazil ; situate w. 
of the city of San Augustin, near the coast. 

[PARt)UBA, a bay on the coast of Brazil, 10 
leagues w. n. w. of Brandihi bay.] 

PARE, a settlement of the corregimiento of the 
jurisdiction of Velez in the Nuevo Reyno de 
Granada, of a hot but healthy temperature ; and 



having a soil abounding 



111 



wheat and maize, of 



which it gathers two crops annually, in yucas, 
plantains, and sugar canes, which are worked in a 
great number of sugar engines which it has, and 
which render it a settlement of as considerable 
commerce as any in that kingdom. It contains 
600 housekeepers, and is seven leagues from the 
city of Velez. 

PARE, a small river of the province and 
government of Guayana or Nueva Andalucia, 
which rises n. of the settlement of San Joseph de 
Mapoyes, runs e. and then turning s. enters the 
Manapiari. 

PAREDONES, a settlement of the province 
and corregimiento of Maule in the kingdom of 
Chile, annexed to the curacy of Vichuquen. 

PAREDONES, another settlement, in the island 
of Cuba ; on the n. coast, opposite the isle of 
Guinchos. 

PAREDONES, some shoals or rocks, near the 
coast of the province and government of Carta 
gena and Nuevo Reyno de Granada. 

[PAREN, a lake of Chile, S. America.] 

[PARHAM, town and harbour, on the n. side 
of the island of Antigua, in the W. Indies. The 
harbour is defended by Byram fort, at Barnacle 
point, on the w. side, and farther up by another 
fort on the e. side. The town is regularly built, 
and lies at the head of the harbour, and in St. 
Peter s parish.] 

PARHAM, a city of the island of Antigua, one 
of the Antilles; on the n. coast, with a good 
port. 

PARI, a settlement of the province and corre 
gimiento of Canta in Peru. 

PARI, an abundant river of the above province 
and kingdom, which rises in the lake Chinchai- 
cocha of the province of Tarma. laves the pro- 



56 PAR 

vinces of Canta, Xauja, and Huanta, runs s. till 
it reaches the province of Guarochiri, where it 
forms an elbow, and turning e. after collecting 
the waters of various other rivers, enters the 
Maranon, with which some have wrongly iden 
tified it. 

PARI, another, a small river of the province 
and government of Guayana or Nueva Andalucia, 
one of those which enters the Orinoco by the e. 
side. 

PARIA, a province and corregimiento of the 
kingdom of Peru, in the archbishopric of Char- 
cas ; bounded n. by the provinces of Pacages, 
n. e. by the jurisdiction of the town of Oruro, e. 
and s. e. by that of Porco, s. w. by that of Lipes, 
and za. by that of Carangas. It is of a cold tem 
perature, and the vegetable productions are those 
peculiar to the sierra ; such as papas, bark, 
barley, &amp;c. It has large breeds of smaller cattle, 
some also of larger, and of llamas, vicunas, and 
huanacos. Here are salt mines, and a lake from 
which much is extracted ; also various streams of 
warm water. 

The corregidors of Oruro being alcaldes may- 
ores of the mines of the district of Veinte Leguas 
and Paria, the capital of this province, and the 
settlement of Sepulturas, being included in the 
same limits ; they appropriated to themselves, 
some years since, some silver mines of the cor- 
dillera of Condocondo, and some gold mines, of 
which many have filled with water, and others 
are not worked from the great expence. In this 
province runs a large river from the province of 
Pacages, which is called the Desaguadero, taking- 
its source in the great lake Titicaca or Chu- 
cuito ; and which being passed in various parts 
in rafts made of tortora or reed, runs s. e. and 
forms a lake of three to four leagues long and 
two wide, in which breeds a fish, called by some 
suckes, and by others bagres. 

This river, as being very abundant, and the 
lake continuing always at one height, it caused a 
suspicion that its waters had a subterraneous 
vent ; and in fact it is found to have a whirlpool, 
over which some old rafts being permitted to 
float, where, after giving two or three turns, 
sucked down. The water is thought to find itself 
a passage into the sea under the cordillera, and 
through the shore, close to the port of Iqueique. 
In 1748 its waters increased to an immense 
height, and it was concluded that some raft had 
blocked up its subterraneous passage ; a circum 
stance most likely, since, after a time, they sub 
sided to their ordinary state. One part of this 
province is inundated in the rainy seasons for 
many leagues. 



PAR 

The inhabitants, who amount to 10,000, make 
cheeses of sheep s milk, much esteemed in other 
provinces for their delicacy. Its corregirtor used 
to have a repartimiento of 50,200 dollars, and 
paid an alcava/a of 401 dollars yearly: the capital 
is the town of the same name. 

[The natives of this province, as well as those 
of Guayana and Debaiba, were originally very 
zealous in their worship of the devil and idols, to 
whom they sacrificed men, and then eat them ; 
when their gods were angry, they punished them 
selves with fasting. Their priests were stoned or 
burned, if they married against their vow of 
chastity. They believed in rewards and punish 
ments after this life. The spot in the moon they 
held to be a man imprisoned there for incest with 
his sister. They fed yearly the departed souls 
with maize and wine. They held the souls of great 
men only, and such as were buried with them, 
immortal. Their great men s funeral pomps 
were celebrated yearly with much lamentations, 
drinking, and bestial ceremonies, both men and 
women casting aside all modesty. These sub 
jects are further treated off by the authors, P. 
Martyr, Gomara, Linschoten, Cieza, &amp;c.J 

PARIA, the lake of which we have above spoken, 
which receives the waters of the river by a chan 
nel of 80 fathoms. These waters are of very 
bad quality, but abound in excellent fish, and are 
thought, with great reason, to have a subterrane 
ous vent. 

PARIA, a province. See ANDALUCIA. 
PARIA, a gulf, between the coast of the province 
of Cumana to the s. s. w. and w. n. w. and the 
island Trinidad to the n. e. and s. e. terminating 
by the n. at the cape of Las Salinas and that of 
San Joseph, and by the e. at the cape or point of 
Blanquizales ; its entrance at the former part 
being by the mouth of the Drago or Dragon, at 
the latter by the point of Galera. Its extent 
from e. to w. is 88 miles, and from n. to s. 50, 
and off the coast of the island of Trinidad is very 
good anchorage. 

[This gulf is called by the Spaniards Triste 
(Sad), but as the whole of the coast of Tiera 
Firme which surrounds the gulf goes by the 
name of Paria, the English and the French geo 
graphers have given that name to the gulf itself. 
What these two latter nations mean by the gulf 
Sad, is a gulf which lies between cape Coderas 
and point Hicacos. 

From the two lands to the n. of this gulf, jut 
out two points, between which are three islands, 
which are nearly e. and w. of each other, and con 
sequently close the gulf to the n. excepting four 
channels left between the islands called Dra- 



PAR 

gon s mouths. The largest of these channels, 
being 6 miles broad, is that to the w. between 
the point Pena of Cumana, and the island named 
Chacachacares. There are several rocks above 
water in the channel lying close to the point, 
and one hidden rock two cables length from the 
island. 

Between this island and the next, which is 
called Navios, there is a second channel named 
Ship Channel (des vaisseaux,) which, as it runs 
from n. to n. e. is very good for vessels entering 
the gulf, but very bad for going out. The third 
channel is formed by the preceding island, and that 
which lies next to the e. named Monos ; it is called 
de Huevos, or Channel of Eggs. It runs from 
n. n. e. to 5. s. e. ; it is, like the preceding, better 
for entering than leaving the gulf. The fourth 
channel is formed by the preceding island M o- 
nas, and the w. n. w. point of Trinidad, and is 
called Apes Mouth. It is narrow and danger 
ous, on account of a rock in the middle of the 
passage. The small vessels that enter by this 
passage always pass between the rock and Tri 
nidad. 

This gulf forms one of the finest ports in the 
world ; its size and extent has been already men 
tioned ; it has in every part good anchorage, the 
bottom being mud, except by Camana, where 
there are some sands and banks, and the water is 
shallow. On the 5. some of the mouths of the 
Orinoco fall into the gulf in many branches, and 
with great velocity. It is probable that the 
Orinoco originally may have separated the island 
of Trinidad from the main land, and have also 
produced the four channels which are above des 
cribed. The current is certainly always run 
ning out, and for which reason, it is impossible 
for ships to enter if the winds are not favourable 
and sufficiently strong. 

On the coast of Paria there are several ports 
and roadsteads, which render the communication 
with Trinidad very easy.] 

PARIA, a point of the coast of the former gulf, 
which runs into the sea for many leagues, opposite 
the island ofTrinadad, and which is called alsode 
Megillones : in lat. 9 12 n., long. 62 I w. 

PARIACACA, a settlement of the province 
and corregimiento of Huarochiri in Peru. 

PARIACOTO, a settlement of the province 
and corregimiento of Guailas in Peru ; annexed 
to the curacy of Llautan in the province of Santa. 

PARIAGUAN, a settlement of the province 
of Barcelona and government of Cumaana, at 
the foot of the sierra of Paraigua, on the shore of 
the river Ipire. 

VOL. IY. 



PAR 



57 



PARIAHUANCA, a settlement of the province 
and corregimiento of Xauja in Peru, annexed to 
the curacy of Cochangara. 

PARIAMARCA, a settlement of the province 
and corregimiento of Canta in Peru, annexed to 
the curacy of its capital. 

PARIANCHARCA, a settlement of the pro 
vince and corregimiento of Tama in Peru. 

PARIARCA, a settlement of the province 
and corregimiento of Guamalies in Peru. 

PARICATUBA, a lake of the province and 
country of Las Amazonas, in the Portuguese 
possession, opposite the strait of Pauxis. 

PARIDA, CAYO DE LA, a rocky isle or shoal 
near the coast of Florida, at the extremity of the 
same between El Gran Martin and the Cayo 
Vizcaino. 

[PARILLO, a town of Peru, generally called 
Santa ; which see.] 

PARIME, an immense lake of the province of 
Dorado, being the deposit of the waters of in 
finite rivers, some of which are very large, which 
enter by a very wide arm of the river Branco 
and others. Some modern authors would have 
it, that this lake is merely fabulous and imaginary ; 
but, according to the late advices, it is said to be 
real and existing. Its extent is not known, but 
it varies according to its different parts : it is of 
a square figure, and the greater part of the tra 
vellers allow it to be 82 leagues long from e. to w. 
so as to resemble a little sea, its waters even 
being salt. 

From the mountains to the w. of it, flow down 
many rivers, all of which run into it, and on the 
n. side it has a channel by which it runs out into 
the river Paraba. In the midst of it are many 
islands, and in the mountains dwell many na 
tions of infidel Indians, supposed to be in pos 
session of that beautiful country the Dorado, but 
which, from the solicitude it has caused, has 
been fatal to so many. 

On the n. n. e. the river Cuyuni rises from this 
lake, and laves the territory of the Dutch colo 
nies, and afterwards unites itself with the Eseqiu&amp;gt; 
bo ; on the s. rises the Parana-piiinga or Ya- 
guapira, which means white water, the which 
enters the Maranan by three mouths by the n. 
part, and was discovered in 1745. Another 
river, also of the same name as the lake, issues 
from it. 

[It is now discovered beyond all question, and 
according to the latest maps and manuscript 
drawings of that country? that this lake is nothing 
but an overflow of tne head branches of the 
Branco, in the valley of Parimo.] 
I 



58 



PAR 



The above-named river, which is very large, 
runs continually s. collecting the waters of several 
other rivers, and, making various turns, enters 
the Negro by four mouths or arms, called Dara, 
Podaviri, Varaca, and the Principal mouth. From 
the spot where the first arm divides itself to its en 
trance into the Negro, it is called Paravillanas. 

PARINA-COCAS. See PARINACOCHAS. 

[PARINA, a point n. w. of the harbour of 
Payta, on the coast of Peru. The country within 
the point is high and mountainous. Between 
Payta and it is a large bay, having shoals. The 
land is low, and some white hills are found all 
the way.] 

PARlNACOCHAS, a province and corregimi- 
ento of the kingdom of Peru ; bounded n. by the 
province of Aimaraes, n. w. by that of Vilcas 
huaman, e. by that of Chumbivilcas, s. by that 
Condesuyos de Arequipa, and w. by that of 
Lucanas. Its length from n. e. to s. w. is 35 
leagues, and its width 12 by the opposite rhomb, 
though rather irregular, as are all the provinces 
of the sierra. Such being its situation, it is ex 
tremely cold, with exception of some ravines, 
where the temperature is so benign that pears, 
and other kinds of fruits, except chirimoyas, 
will grow all the year round, and this more par 
ticularly in the settlement of Pause, and in some 
others, where they grow wheat, beans, and bar 
ley in abundance. Here are breeds of cattle, 
particularly of the lanigerous sort, from the 
fineness and plenty of the pasture. They weave 
here some cloth, which they call chuspas^ ciimbes^ 
and lliellas of beautiful fabric, for which purpose 
they cultivate a sort of grain which they call the 
magno. In the mountains are found many hua- 
nacos, which are used in droves for carrying 
light burthens. 

In the curacy of Pullo,are various mines of gold, 
which they dress with quicksilver ; but the qua 
lity of that metal is uncertain, and the emolument 
it produces is not easily calculated ; but it ought 
not to be small, as a very considerable proportion 
of labourers and traders find employment by it. 

There are here salt mines, various streams of 
warm medicinal waters, and a lake of seven leagues 
long and one wide, on which breeds a kind of 
white bird, whose name, in the language of the 
country, is panuira, and it is from a corruption 
of this word, and the adjunct cucha. which sig 
nifies lake, that we have parinacocha. Many of 
the inhabitants, as well Indians as Mustees, are 
engaged in the occupation of drovers, and carry 
from the province of Cumana to that of Cuzco 
and other parts, wine, brandy, /V, olives, dried 



PAR 

fish, and prawns ; taking in exchange dried beef, 
tallow, papas , chuno, and clothes. The inha 
bitants, who are divided into 30 settlements, 
should amount to about 11,300. The corregidor 
used to have a repartimiento of 86,400 dollars, 
and it paid an alcavala of 691 dollars annually. 
The capital is the settlement of Pausa ; the 
others are, 

Coracoa, Quechualla, 

Chumbi, Pampamarca, 

Pullo, Huanicatas, 

Pararca, Huarhua, 

Pausa, Taurisma, 

Cascara, Ampi, 

Colta, Pausa. 

Oyolo, Mongui, 

Corculla, Arcos, 

Lam pa, Chiapi, 

Zayla, Quilcata, 

Charcana, Huataca, 

Andamarca. Opahuacho, 

Rebacaico, Alpabamba. 

Bellinga, Casiri. 

PARINACOTA, a settlement of the province 
and corregimicnto of Arica in Peru ; annexed to 
the curacy of Copta. 

PARIQUIZES, a river of the province and 
country of Las Amazonas in the Portuguese pos 
sessions. It rises between the rivers Juamunda 
and Guatuma, runs s. and enters the second just 
before this enters the Maranon. 

PARIS, a settlement of the island of Barba- 
does, in the district and parish of S. Thomas, on 
the w. coast, n. e. of the city of Bridge-town. 

PARIS, a small river of Louisiana in N. Ame 
rica, which runs w. and enters the Mississippi, 
between those of Mine and La Roche. 

[PARIS, a thriving township of excellent land 
in New York state, Herkemer county. It is 
s. w. of Whitestown six miles, from which it 
was taken, and incorporated in 1792. In 1795 
four townships were taken from it, viz. Hamil 
ton, Sherburne, Brookfield, and Sangersfield. 
It contained, by the state census of 1796, 3459 
inhabitants, of whom 564 were electors. Iron 
ore is found in the vicinity of Paris. Hamil 
ton academy is situated in this town, in Clinton 
parish, where also a Congregational church has 
lately been erected, and marks of rapid progress 
in improvements and wealth are visible.] 

[^PARIS, an island on the coast of S. Carolina; 
which see.] 

PARITA, a settlement of the alcaldia mayor of 
Nata in the kingdom of Tierra Firme, near the 
coast of the S. sea. It produces maize, yucas. 



PAR 

and pigs, with which it supplies the capital of 
Panama, from whence it is 40 leagues distant. 

PARIVA, a river of the province and govern 
ment of Maracaibo in the Nuevo Rejno de Gra 
nada. It enters the Zaripa. 

[PARKER S Island, in Lincoln county, dis 
trict of Maine, is formed by the waters oflienne- 
beck river on the w. by the sea on the s. by Je- 
remysquam bay on the e. and by a small strait 
which divides it from Arrowsick island on the n. 
It derives its name from John Parker, who pur 
chased it of the natives in 1650 ; and a part of 
it still remains to his posterity. It is in the 
township of Georgetown ; which see.] 

[PARKER S River, takes its rise in Rowley, 
in Essex county, Massachusetts, and after a 
course of a few miles, passes into the sound 
which separates Plumb island from the main 
land. It is navigable about two miles from its 
mouth, where a bridge crosses it 870 feet long 
and 26 feet wide, consisting of solid piers and 
eight wooden arches. It is on the post-road 
from Boston n. and was built in 1758. It is 
supported by a toll.] 

PARMUNCA, an extensive and beautiful 
valley of the kingdom of Peru, to the n.w. of 
Cuzco. It is fertile, of a sandy soil, and was 
anciently called Chimu, a name of one of the 
Indian chiefs. The Inca Pachacutec subjected 
and united it to the empire. La Martiniere calls 
it Parmonga, citing Mr. de 1 Isle, who is no au 
thority ; but Garcilaso Inca calls it Parmunga. 

PARNAIBA, a river of the kingdom of Brazil, 
in the territory of Cuyaba. It is small, runs 
s.s.w. and enters that of Las Porrudos. 

PARNAPICABA, a settlement of the province 
and captainship of San V^incente in Brazil; at 
the skirt of a mountain of the same name, and 
near the river Itaman. 

PARNASO, a very lofty mountain of the pro 
vince and government of Guayana, or part of 
the country of Las Amazonas possessed by the 
Dutch. 

PARO, a small island of the S. sea, near the 
coast of the province and government of Costa 
rica in the kingdom of Guatemala. It is in the 
gulf of Nicoya in the middle of its entrance. 

PAROQUE, a small river of the province 
and captainship of Todos Santos in Brazil, which 
rises near the coast, runs s. and enters the sea 
by the side of the bay. 

PARQUIN, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Chancay in Peru ; annexed to 
the curacy of Canchas. 

PARRA, a small island of the gulf of Pa- 



P A R 



59 



nama, between the islands Chapira and Cheto, 
and one of those called Las Perlas, on account 
of the pearls found there. In lat. 8 26 n. 

PARRAL, SAN JOSEPH DEL, a settlement 
and real of silver mines, of the province of 
Tepeguana, and kingdom of Nueva Vizcaya, 
and one of the most populous settlements in that 
kingdom : of a mild temperature, fertile, and 
abounding in fruits, grain, and cattle ; situate 
on the bank of the stream of Oro. In its vi 
cinity are several mines, and different missions 
which were held by the Jesuits, as also the sum 
mer retreats which they call Del Canutillo. At 
nine leagues distance to the n. is a. cultivated 
estate, and where there are large breeds of 
cattle, called San Pedro. Seventy-five leagues 
n. n. w. of the capital, Guadiana, in lat. 27 10 . 
long. 261 30 . 

[PARRAMORE, one of the small islands in 
the Atlantic ocean, which line the e. coast of 
Northampton county, Virginia.] 

PARRAS, a town of the same province and 
kingdom as the former settlement ; situate in the 
vicinity of the -lake of its name, or of San Pedro 
and the stream of the Guanabal. In its district, 
especially to the s. are many cultivated estates 
and grazing lands, such as are those of Los Pa- 
tos, El Alamo, La Pena, and Oldin. Fifty 
leagues n. w. of the capital, Guadiana, in lat. 
26 35 . Long. 263 40 . 

[A species of wild vine found in this beau 
tiful situation has procured it the name of Par- 
ras from the Spaniards. The conquerors trans 
planted to this place the vitis vinifera of Asia ; 
and this branch of industry has been found to 
succeed very well.] 

PARRAS, another settlement, in the the same 
province and kingdom as the former town : one 
of those which compose the missions which were* 
held by the Jesuits. 

PARRAGOTES, a nation of barbarous In 
dians of Equinoctial France, near the n. coast 
of Cayenne ; bounded by the nation of the Su- 
payes, and having a communication and com 
merce with the Dutch, but being inveterate 
enemies to the French, fighting them whenever 
they meet them. Some geographers call them 
Paracotes. 

PARRILLA, SANTA MARIA DE LA. See 
SANTA. 

PARRIPARIES, a barbarous nation of In 
dians of the Nuevo Reyno de Granada, de 
scendants of the Panches. They dwell to the 
w. of the grand river of La Magdalena, and 
are bounded by the Amurcas and Calandaimas, 
i 2 



60 



PAR 



are few in numbers, but ferocious and cruel, and 
consequently feared by other nations. 

[PARR Town, a new and thriving town in 
Nova Scotia.] 

[PARR S Point, is the s.e. point of Half- 
moon bay, on the n. e. side of the island of St. 
Christopher s, in the W. Indies. The coast here 
is rocky.] 

[PARSONSFIELD, a township of the dis 
trict of Maine, in York county; situate on the 
New Hampshire line, between Great and Little 
Ossipee rivers, and is 98 miles n. of Boston. 
It was incorporated in 1785, and contains 655 
inhabitants.] 

PARTIDAS, ROCAS, some shoals of the S. 
sea, close to the coast of the province and go 
vernment of Veragua in the kingdom of Tierra 
Firme, opposite the settlement of San Pablo. 

PARTIDO, a river of the province and alcal- 
dia mayor of Nicoya, in the kingdom of Guate 
mala. It rises near its capital, runs n. n. w. and 
enters the great lake of Nicaragua. 

[PARTIDO, a small island, under the high 
hill of St. Martin, in the s.w. part of Campea- 
chy gulf. It lies in the fair- way across the bay 
from cape Catoche to Vera Cruz.] 

[PARTRIDGEFIELD, a township of Mas 
sachusetts, in Berkshire county ; 26 miles w.n.w. 
of Northampton, and 128 w. of Boston. It was 
incorporated in 1775, and contains 1041 inha 
bitants.] 

PARU, a town of the province and country 
of Las Amazonas, in the part settled by the Por 
tuguese ; situate towards the n. and on the shore 
of that river, where the Portuguese have built a 
fort. The town is in lat. 1 39 s. 

PARU, a river of this province, called by the 
Portuguese, Ginapape, it flows down from the 
Sierras de Tumucucuracjue to the s. and enters 
the Amazonas on the n. side, at no great distance 
from its mouth. 

PARU, another river, of the province and go 
vernment of Caguan, in the Nuevo Reyno de 
Granada. It rises in a llanura^ runs n. e. and 
enters the Caura. 

PARU, a whirlpool of the river Caura, very 
large and rapid in the part where this river is 
entered by the Iniquari. 

PARUASI, a river of the province and go 
vernment of Guayana, or Nueva Andalucia. It 
runs n. through the territory of the Mapoyes In 
dians, abounds in excellent fish, and enters the 
Orinoco by its s. part. 

PARUIPA, a small river of the province and 
captainship of Portoseguro in Brazil. It rises 



PAS 

near the coast, runs e. and enters the sea be 
tween the rivers Caravelas and Perecipe. 

PARULARI, a river of the province and 
country of Las Amazonas in the Portuguese 
possessions. It is the same as the Apulaila- 
vare, which at its source has this name. 

PARARUMA, a river of the province and go 
vernment of Guayana or Nueva Andalucia. It 
is one of those which enter the Orinoco, opposite 
the mouth of the Sinaruco. Mr. Bellin calls it 
Paruma. 

PARUPO, a river of the same province and 
government as the former. It rises from a lake 
which is near the settlement of Tapia, and enters 
the Arui by the e. part. 

PARURO, a settlement of the province and 
corregimicnto of Chilques and Masques in Peru. 

PASAGE, or DOTACIONES, a settlement 
and garrison of the kingdom of Nueva Vizcaya. 
where there are 33 men and a captain to guard 
against the incursions of the infidel Indians. 
It is situate in a very fertile territory, where 
there are many gardens, in which are culti 
vated in abundance fruit trees and vines. It 
is equally surrounded by many estates, which 
are fertile in grain and cattle. Towards the 
n. runs a spacious and pleasant plain. Thirty 
leagues n. n. e. of the capital. 

PASAGE, a small city of the island of Ja 
maica; situate in the road which leads from 
Puerto Real to Spanish Town, seven miles s. e. 
of the latter, at the mouth of the river Cobre, 
where the English have a fort furnished with 10 
or 12 canon. It is a place of much commerce, 
and its population consists of 400 houses. 

PASAGE, a settlement of Indians of the nation 
of Los Colorados, who dwell in the mountains 
of this name in the province and corregimiento of 
Latacunga in the kingdom of Quito. 

PASAGE, another, of the province and go 
vernment of Tucuman in the district and juris 
diction of the city of Salta; situate on the shore 
of the river of its name, or otherwise called 
Salado. 

PASAGE, a river of the same province. See 
SALADO. 

PASAGE, another river, in the strait of Ma 
gellan, which enters the sea opposite the narrow 
pass of this name. 

PASAGE. This narrow pass is where the 
strait is most contracted, and is the third and 
last pass to enter the S. sea. 

PASAGERO, a small isle of the N. sea, be 
tween the Antilles, e. of the island of Puerto 
j and between this and St. Thomas. 



PAS 

PASAGOCHI, a settlement of the missions 
which were held by the Jesuits in the province 
of Taramara and kingdom of Nueva Vizcaya. 
Thirty -two leagues w. s.w. of the town and real 
of the mines of San Felipe de Chiguagua. 

PASAMACADIE. [See PASSAMAQUODDY.] 

PASAMACADIE, an island situate near the 
coast, of the same province, within a bay, to 
the n. of Grand Menan. 

PASAMAYO, or PASAMAYU, a river of the 
kingdom of Per . It rises in the province and 
corregimiento of Canta, in the sierra which di 
vides this province from that of Chancay, from 
whence it runs w. and then into the S. sea, form 
ing a small bay. Eighteen miles s. of the town 
of Chancay. 

PASAO, or PASADO CABO, a point of the 
coast of the S. sea, in the province and govern 
ment of Guayaquil and kingdom of Quito. It is 
about 25 miles to the s. of the equinoctial line, 
and on it is a signal-house to give intelligence of 
vessels appearing on the coast. 

PASAOS, or PASAVES, a barbarous nation 
of Indians, of the province and government of 
Guayaquiland kingdom of Quito. They inhabit 
the w. part, and were bounded formerly by the 
Ration of the Mantas. The emperor Huaina- 
Capac, thirteenth monarch of Peru, conquered it, 
and fixed in its territory the boundary of the 
empire by this part, on the coast of the Pacific 
sea. This nation is at the present day extinct. 

PAS AT ARIA, a river of the province and 
country of Las Amazonas in the Portuguese pos 
sessions. It is an arm of the Maranon or Ama 
zonas, which runs in a curve, and forming an 
island, returns back into itself. 

PASATRES, a settlement of the province and 
captainship of Rey in Brazil ; situate at the 
source of the river Negro. 

PASCA, a settlement and head settlement of 
the district of the corregimiento of this name, in 
the Nuevo Rey no de Granada. It is of a benign 
temperature, abounding in the vegetable produc 
tions of a warm and cold climate, and is very 
healthy. Forty-eight miles s. with a slight in 
clination to the w. of Santa Fe. 

PASCA, another settlement, of the province and 
corregimiento of Cicasica in Peru ; on the shore 
of the lake Chinchaicocha. 

[PASCA, another, of the province and govern 
ment of Mariquita, in the Nuevo Reyno de Gra 
nada, on the shore of the river Cauca.] 

PASCA, another, a large and abundant river 
which irrigates theprovince of Tocayma, in the 
Nuevo Reyno de Granada, and which united 



PAS 



(31 



with the Sumapaz, enters the grand river Mag- 
dalena, with the name of Fusagasuga. In its 
vicinity a famous battle was fought between Sa- 
guanmachipa, zipa or king of Bogota, and Uza- 
tama of Tunja, when the former was victorious. 

PASCAGOULA, a settlement of Indians of 
the province and government of Louisiana, on 
the shore and at the mouth of the river of its 



name. 



[These Indians live in a small village on Red 
river, about 60 miles below Natchitoches ; are 
emigrants from Pascagola river in W. Florida ; 
25 men only of them remaining speak Mobilian, 
but have a language peculiar to themselves ; 
most of them speak and understand French. 
They raise good crops of corn and garden 
vegetables ; have cattle, horses, and poultry 
plenty.] 

PASCAGOULA, a bay of the above province, 
between the bay of Movila and the river Pas- 
cagpula. 

PASCAGOULA, this river runs s. e. and enters 
the sea between the former bay and that of San 
Luis. 

[The river Pascagoula passes through the 
Georgia western territory, pursues a s. by e. 
course through W. Florida, and empties into the 
gulf of Mexico by several mouths, which toge 
ther occupy a space of three or four miles ; which 
is one continued bed of oyster-shells, with very 
shoal water. The westernmost branch has four 
feet water, and is the deepest. After crossing 
the bar there is from three to six fathoms water 
for a great distance, and the river is said to 
be navigable more than 150 miles. The soil 
on this river, like that on all the others that 
pass through Georgia into the gulf of Mexico, 
grows better as you advance to its source.] 

PASCAMAYO, a port of the coast of Peru 
in the province and corregimiento of Sana : near 
it are the ruins of the ancient Lambayeque. 

PASCATA, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Asangaro in Peru ; annexed 
to the curacy of Sandia, in the province of Ca- 
rabaya. 

[PASCATAQUA, or PISCATAQUA, is the 
only large river whose whole course is in New 
Hampshire. Its head is a pond in the n. e. corner 
of the town of Wakefield, and its general course 
thence to the sea is s. s. e. about 40 miles. It 
divides New Hampshire from York county in 
the district of Maine, and is called Salmon Fall 
river, from its head to the lower falls at Berwick, 
where it assumes the name of Newichawannock, 
which it bears till it meets with Cochecho river. 



62- 



P A S 



which comes from Dover, when both run toge 
ther in one channel to Hilton s point, where the 
w. branch meets it : from this junction to the 
sea the river is so rapid that it never freezes ; 
the distance is seven miles, and the course gene 
rally from s. to s. e. The w. branch is formed 
by Swamscot river, which comes from Exeter, 
Winnicot river, which comes through Greenland, 
and Lamprey river, which divides Newmarket 
from Durham; these empty into a bay four 
miles wide, called the Great Bay. The water, 
in its further progress, is contracted into a lesser 
bay, and then it receives Oyster river, which 
runs through Durham, and Back river, which 
comes from Dover, and at length meets with 
the main stream at Hilton s point. 

The tide rises into all these bays, and branches 
as far as the lower falls in each river, and forms 
a most rapid current, especially at the season of 
the freshets, when the ebb continues about two 
hours longer than the flood ; and were it not for 
the numerous eddies, formed by the indentings 
of the shore, the ferries would then be impas 
sable. 

At the lower falls in the several branches of 
the river are landing-places, whence lumber and 
other country produce is transported, and vessels 
or boats from below discharge their lading ; so 
that in each river there is a convenient trading 
place not more than 12 or 15 miles distant from 
Portsmouth, with which there is constant com 
munication by every tide. Thus the river, from 
its form and the situation of its branches, is ex 
tremely favourable to the purposes of navigation 
and commerce. A light-house, with a single 
light, stands at the entrance of Piscataqua har 
bour, in lat. 43 n. and long. 70 43 .] 

PASCO, a settlement of the province and corrc- 
gimiento of Xauja in Peru ; the residence of the 
treasurer, and place of the royal coffers. 

PASCO, another settlement, in the province and 
corregimiento of Tarma, of the same kingdom. 

PASCONO, a settlement of the province and 
government of Antioquia in the Nuevo Reyno de 
Granada ; situate on the shore of the grand river 
Magdalena. 

[PASCUARO. See PASAUARO.] 

PASIGA, a river of the province and govern 
ment of Darien in the kingdom of Tierra Firme. 
It rises in the mountains of the 5. coast, and runs 
into the sea at the side of the point of Men- 
glares. 

PASIMONI, an abundant river of the pro 
vince and government of Guayana or Nueva 
Andalucia. It rises in the mountains to the w. 



PAS 

of the great lake Parime, and enters, divided into 
two arms, by the one into the river Negro, by 
the other into the channel of Casiriaque, forming 
a great island. Its shores are covered with trees 
of wild cacao. 

PASO, a settlement of the province and cor 
regimiento of Cochabamba in Peru. 

PASO, another settlement, which is small, in 
the government of Neiva and Nuevo Reyno de 
Granada ; situate on the shore of the grand 
river Magdalena, where it is entered bv the Pao. 
It is much reduced, and its inhabitants, who 
scarcely amount to 20 Indians, are employed in 
procuring the gold from the lavaderos (washing- 
places) in which it abounds. It is eight leagues 
from its head settlement. 

PASO, another settlement and garrison, with 
the additional title Del Norte, in the Nuevo 
Reyno de Vizcaya of N. America ; founded to 
restrain the infidel Indians. One hundred and 
seventy-five leagues n. of the capital, Durango. 

[This presidio, or military post, on the right 
bank of the Rio del Norte, is separated (says 
Humboldt) from the town of Santa Fe by an un 
cultivated country of more than 300 miles in 
length. We must not confound this place, 
which some manuscript maps in the archives of 
Mexico consider as a dependance of New Bis 
cay, with the Presidio del Norte, or De las Jun 
tas, situated further to the s. at the s. side of the 
mouth of the Rio Conchos. Travellers stop at 
the Paso del Norte to lay in the necessary pro 
visions for continuing their route to Santa Fe. 
The environs of the Paso are delicious, and re 
semble the finest parts of Andalucia. The fields 
are cultivated with maize and wheat ; and the 
vineyards produce such excellent sweet wines 
that they are even preferred to the wines of 
Parras in New T Biscay. The gardens contain 
in abundance all the fruits of Europe, figs, 
peaches, apples, and pears. As the country is 
very dry, a canal of irrigation brings the water 
of the Rio del Norte to the Paso. It is with 
difficulty that the inhabitants of the presidio can 
keep up the dam, which forces the waters of the 
rivers when they are very low to enter into the 
canal (azequia). During the great swells of the 
Rio del Norte, the strength of the current de 
stroys this dam almost every year in the months 
of May and J une. The manner of restoring and 
strengthening the dam is very ingenious. The 
inhabitants form baskets of stakes, connected to 
gether by branches of trees, and filled with earth 
and stones. These gabions (cestones) are aban 
doned to the force of the current, which, in its 



PAS 

eddies, disposes them in the point where the canal 
separates from the river.] 

PASO, another, with the dedicatory title of 
Nuestra Senora de Guadalupe. See this article. 

fPASPAYA, a province in the archbishopric 
of La Plata. It is mountainous, but abounds in 
grain, pulse, and fruits.] 

PASPAYA, a settlement and capital of the 
above province and corregimiento, [about 76 miles 
s. of the city of Chusiquisaca or La Plata.] 

PA SPAY A, a river of this province and corre- 
gimiento. 

PASPE, a bay of the s. coast of Nova Scotia 
or Acadia, between port Prospect and point 
Blanche. 

PASPEBIA, a settlement of the same province 
and colony as the former bay ; situate near the 
s. coast, in the interior of the port of Castors. 

PASQUA, a valley of the province and go 
vernment of Cumana, on the confines of the 
province of Venezuela, between the rivers Huare 
and Manapire. 

PASQUA, an island near the coast of the pro 
vince and captainship of Ilheos in Brazil ; situate 
at the mouth of a great port formed by the bar 
of Camamu and the point Saguaripa Vieja. 

PASQUA, a point, with the surname of Mala, 
in the island of Puerto Rico, and looking to the 
island of S. Thomas. 

PASQUAL, a small river of the province and 
captainship of San Vincente in Brazil. It runs e. 
and enters the sea in the bay of San Vincente. 

PASQUAL, a point of land on the s. coast, and 
in the part possessed by the French of the island 
S. Domingo ; between the bay of Mesle and the 
isle of Orange. 

PASQUAL, a mountain of the province andcp- 
tainship of Portoseguro in Brazil; between the 
rivers Jaco and Sarnabitiva. 

PASQUARO, or UTZILA, the capital of the 
province and bishopric of Mechoacan in Nueva 
Espana, once the court of the king Calzontzi. 
It is of a cold and moist temperature. The 
principal buildings are not without elegance, 
and it is situate in a delightful country, as 
being just at the entrance of the sierra, sur 
rounded by mountains covered with fine foli 
age ; also in the gardens, which it has in its 
llanuras, are abundance of fruits and flowers of 
different kinds. 

Towards the n. part is a great lake, 12 leagues 
in circumference, and so abounding in excellent 
fish as not only to provide this city but also that 
of Valladolid and other settlements ; great por 
tions also being at times sent to Mexico, where 



PAS 



63 



they are sold as great dainties. In the middle 
of this lake are some small islands, inhabited 
by Indians living in huts, who make a daily trade 
by the fish they catch in their canoes. 

The plain on which the city stands being sur 
rounded with rising grounds, there is an en 
trance by a wide causeway entirely of stone, 
and the first building which you discover on 
the e. side is a chapel, in which is venerated 
the image of Christ crucified ; which spot they 
call the Humilladero (place of humiliation), since 
here it was that the Indians surrendered them 
selves to the Spaniards. The parish-church, 
which was first began to be erected where it now 
stands, by the first bishop, but which, from not 
being concluded, was removed to Valladolid, is 
as to what exists of it, a sumptuous edifice. One 
nave only is finished out of the five which should 
render it complete ; but this is the admiration of 
architects, who confess that were it finished ac 
cording to the design, it would be unrivalled by 
any building in America. In this church are two 
winding stair-cases made of stone, and which are 
so nicely constructed that it is a common amuse 
ment for the Indians to seat themselves at the 
top and let them slip round and round to the 
bottom. The other staircase is a lofty pillar, 
with two fans leading different ways, so that two 
persons may descend out of different doors, and 
without seeing each other. 

This city Tias the convents of the religious 
orders of San Francisco, San Agustin, San Juan 
de Dios, a college which belonged to the Jesuits, 
and which is the second that was founded in 
Nueva Espana after that of Mexico, its general 
being Francisco de Borja, who sent to it one of 
the images of Santa Maria of Rome. In this 
college are interred Don Vasco de Quiroga, se 
cond bishop of that diocess, and the venerable 
brother Pedro Calzontzi, nephew of the king of 
the province, who, taking the habit of the Je 
suits, lived a holy life in the profession of 
school-master, and died by an epidemic dis 
order which he caught in the discharge of his 
duties, and whilst assisting the sick. Here is 
also another sumptuous temple, dedicated to 
Maria Santisima, with the title of La Salud, 
destined as a monastery for the nuns of Santa 
Catalina. In one of the wards of the city is 
venerated a miraculous effigy of Santo Christo 
de Tupataro, found by an Indian in 1748, in the 
heart of a tree which he was cutting down, with 
the cross, nails, and other insignia, perfectly 
wrought. 

The population of this city is composed of 500 



64 PAS 

families of Spaniards, Mustees, and Mulattoes, 
and of 2000 Indians, who occupy themselves in 
the commerce and labour of the copper mines in 
the vicinity of the city, as also in making sugar, 
and in selling the merchandise of the country. 
It is the head of the alcaldia mayor, and the 
residence of the alcalde mayor, who nominates 14 
lieutenants for so many other districts of the ex 
tensive jurisdiction into which it is divided. 
[Thirty-one miles s. w. of Valladolid, and 125 w. 
of Mexico, in lat. 19 29 30" n. and long. 101 
21 .] 

The settlements of which its jurisdiction con 
sists are the following : 

Tacambaro, San Juan Copaquaro, 

Cocupao, Arentapaqua, 

S. Francisco Iguatzeo, Quintzio, 
San Pedro Cucuchu- Turiquaro, 

chau, Santa Clara del Cobre, 

San Diego Cocupa, Opopeo, 
Santa F6, S. Francisco Uruapan, 

S. Geronimo Purun- Jucotacato, 

choquaro, San Gregorio, 

Reyes de Tirindaro, San Lorenzo, 
NaVanja, Santiago Angagua, 

S. Francisco Tarexero, San Juan Parangare- 
Cuenco, cutiro, 

Sipiajo, San Salvador, 

Comauja, San Pedro Sacan, 

Santiago Azajo, Santa Ana Tzirosto, 

Santa Ana Zacapo, San Marcos Apo, 
S. Francisco Etuquaro, Xapuquirio, 
San Miguel del Monte, San Francisco Corupo, 
Capuyo, San Felipe de los Cer- 

Indaparapeo, ros, 

Santiago Inguyo, Guango, 

S. Miguel Tarimbaro, San Antonio Urecho, 
Santiago de la Pnente, Echucandiro, 
Santa Maria Siqui- Santiago Undameo, 

nam, Tiripitio, 

San Luis Naguatzen, Aruramba, 
San Francisco Cheran, Acutzio, 
Santa Maria Coma- San Juan Puruandiro, 
chuen, San Francisco Anga- 

San Geronimo Arant- moqutiro, 

zan, Santiago Conguripo, 

S. Pedro Paracho, S. Andres Panindi- 

S. Juan Pomaquaran, quaro, 
S. Mateo Aguiran, Sta. Maria Aquanato, 

Santa Maria U rap ichu, S.Miguel Epexam, 
S.BartolomeCucucho, Santiago Numaran, 
Sta Cruz Tanaco, Rincon de Zaragoza. 

[The town of Pa c quaro seems for nothing more 
notable than for containing the ashes of a man, 
whose memory, after a lapse of two centuries 



P A S 



and a half, is still venerated by the Indians, the 
famous Vasco de Quiroga, alluded to by our au 
thor, and who died in 1556 at the village of Urua- 
pa. This zealous prelate, whom the indigenous 
still call their father ( Tata don Vasco) , was more 
successful in his endeavours to protect the unfor 
tunate inhabitants of Mexico than the virtuous 
bishop of Chiapa, Bartholome de las Casas. 
Quiroga became in an especial manner the bene 
factor of the Tarasc Indians, whose industry 
he encouraged. He prescribed one particular 
branch of commerce to each Indian village. 
These useful institutions are in a great mea 
sure preserved to this day. The height of Pas- 
cuaro is 2200 metres (or 7217 feet). Its present 
population 6000.] 

[PASQUIARO, a small town of the inten- 
dancy of Durango, to the s. of the Rio de Nasas. 
Population 5600.] 

[PASQUOTANK, a county of N. Carolina 
in Edenton district, n. of Albemarle sound. It 
contains 5497 inhabitants, including 1623 slaves.] 

fPASQUOTANK, a small river of N. Carolina, 
which rises in the Great Dismal Swamp, and 
passing by Hertford, falls into Albemarle sound.] 

[PASSAGE Fort, a small town of the island 
of Jamaica ; situate in the road between Port 
Royal and Spanish town, seven miles s. e. of 
the latter, and at the mouth of Cobre river, 
where is a fort with 10 or 12 guns. It has a 
brisk trade, and contains about 400 houses, the 
greatest part of them houses of entertainment.] 

[PASSAGE Island, lies across the mouth of the 
river Cobeca, near the n. w. part of the island of 
Porto R co. The harbour for ships is at the e. 
end of the island.] 

[PASSAGE Islands, Great and Little, two of 
the Virgin islands in the W. Indies, near the e. 
end of the island of Porto Rico. Lat. 18 20 w. 
Long. 65 17 / w.~] 

[PASSAGE Point, in the straits of Magellan, 
lies at the a\ end of Royal Reach, and five leagues 
W.n.zo. of Fortescue s bay.] 

[PASSAIK, or PASAICK, is a very crooked 
river. It rises in a large swamp in Morris 
county, New Jersey, and its course is from 
w. n. w. to e. s. e. until it mingles with the 
Hackinsak at the head of Newark bay. It is 
navigable about 10 miles, and is 230 yards wide 
at the ferry. The cataract, or great falls, in this 
river, is one of the greatest natural curiosities in 
the state. The river is about 40 yards wide, and 
moves in a slow, gentle current, until, coming 
within a short distance of a deep cleft in a 
rock which crosses the channel, it descends and 



PASSAMAQUODDY. 



[falls above 70 feet perpendicular, in one entire 
sheet, presenting a most beautiful and tremen 
dous scene. The new manufacturing town of 
Patterson is erected on the great falls of this 
river ; and its banks are adorned with many 
elegant country seats. It abounds with fish of 
various kinds. There is a bridge 500 feet long, 
over this river, on the post road from Philadel 
phia to New York.] 

[PASSAMAQUODDY, a bay and river, near 
which is the division line between the British 
province of New Brunswick and the United 
States of America. The island of Campo Bello, 
in the N. Atlantic ocean, is at the middle or w. 
passage of the bay, in lat. 45 n. and long. 66 
52 / w. The distance of Cross Isle, Machias, to 
W. Passamaquoddy head is nine leagues n. e. by 
e. and from the head over the bar to Allen s Isle 
n. n. w. two leagues. When you corne from the 
$. w. and are bound into W. Passamaquoddy, 
you must give the Seal Hocks a birth of three 
quarters of a mile before you haul in from the 
harbour, as there is a whirlpool to the e. of them. 
The bay is about a league from this point. It is 
high water here at the full and change of the 
moon, about the same time as at Boston. There 
are three rivers which fall into this bay ; the 
largest is called by the modern Indians, the 
Scoodick ; but by De Mons and Champlaine, 
Etchemins. Its main source is near Penobscot 
river, and the carrying-place between the two 
rivers is but three miles. See NEW BRUNSWICK. 
The mouth of Passamaquoddy river has 25 fathoms 
water. 

The following official document consists of the 
joint address of his Majesty s council and the 
house of representatives of the province of New 
Brunswick, in general assembly, respecting the 
islands in Passamaquoddy Bay, which had been 
claimed by the Americans, and gives a just idea 
of their importance to the British government. 

Having long entertained a confident hope, that 
the possession of Moose island, Dudley island, 
and Frederic island, in Passamaquoddy Bay, 
usurped by the state of Massachusetts, would 
never be sanctioned by an act, or avowed acquies 
cence on the part of his Majesty s government ; 
but that his Majesty s indisputable right to these 
islands would in due time be effectually asserted ; 
it is with very great concern that we now find, 
from a passage in a letter from Mr. Merry to 
your honour, stating the communications made 
to him by Mr. Madison, the American secretary 
of state, on the subject of these islands, that the 
United States do actually consider their present 

VOL. IV. 



possession as having been so sanctioned ; and 
that they are prepared to construe his Majesty s 
forbearance in his behalf, as having already war 
ranted their claim of an entire right to these 
islands. 

In the letter above referred to, Mr. Merry states, 
" that the American minister observed to him, 
that since his Majesty s government have allowed 
the United States to remain in possession of the 
above-mentioned islands, the waters which sur 
round them, to the distance to which the jurisdic 
tion of any territory is usually understood to ex 
tend, ought equally to be considered as American ; 
and added, that although he could not properly 
refer, on this occasion, to the convention between 
his Majesty and the United States, concluded in 
London, on the 12th of May, 1803, because it had 
not been ratified, nevertheless, by that convention, 
the islands in question were declared to belong to 
the United States ; an arrangement which would 
probably be confirmed whenever the matter of the 
boundary line between the two territories should 
again be brought into discussion ; the more so, 
because it was not the article respecting the e. 
boundary on the side of New Brunswick which 
occasioned the convention to remain unratified." 

As a hope may be entertained that the conven 
tion referred to by Mr. Madison respecting these 
islands may not yet be ratified, we request your 
honour to transmit to his Majesty s ministers 
this our joint address, on a subject of such im 
portance to his Majesty s government, and the 
rights and interests of his faithful subjects in this 
province. 

After the full discussion of the question of 
right to these islands, in the correspondence 
between his Majesty s ministers and his excel 
lency the lieutenant-governor of this province, 
on former occasions, particularly his excellency s 
dispatch to his Grace the Duke of Portland, 
dated 5th August, 1799, and the letters and do 
cuments therein mentioned, it may be thought 
superfluous to do more than generally to refer to 
those papers on the present occasion. We trust, 
however, that the magnitude of the object will 
justify our attempt to bring within a small com 
pass the result of those discussions, adding thereto 
some further observations which more imme 
diately press upon our attention, and which we 
hope will merit the consideration of his Majesty s 
ministers. 

That part of the second article of the treaty of 
peace between his Majesty and the United States 
which respects the present question is expressed 
as follows : " East, by a line to be drawn along] 

K 



PASSAMAQUODDY. 



[the middle of the river St. Croix, from its mouth 
jn the Bay of Fundy, to its source, &amp;c. compre 
hending all islands within 20 leagues of any part 
of the shores of the United States, and lying 
between lines to be drawn due e. from the point 
where the aforesaid boundaries between Nova 
Scotia on the one part, and E. Florida on the 
other part, shall respectively touch the Bay of 
Fundy, and the Atlantic Ocean, excepting such 
islands as now are, or heretofore have been, 
within the limits of the said province of Nova 
Scotia." 

6 The islands hereby granted are evidently such, 
and such only, as are within 20 leagues of the 
coast, and also lie between those parallels of 
latitudes by which the shores of the ceded country 
are limited at their n. and s. extremeties. Hence 
all islands, not with those parallels, however near 
they may be to the shore, are certainly excluded 
from the grant : and of those which are within 
the parallels, all such as then were, or ever had 
been, within the limits of Nova Scotia, are also 
excluded. From the treaty of peace, therefore, 
the United States can derive no shadow of claim 
to the islands in question ; and his Majesty s 
original right to them remains entire and incon- 
testible. 

* For, we believe, it has never been contro 
verted, -even by the American government, that 
these islands always before the treaty of peace, 
were comprehended within the limits, and con 
stituted a part of the province of Nova Scotia, 
which it was the obvious intention of the treaty 
to reserve to his Majesty, by its utmost limits ; 
a reference to the original boundaries of the 
province in Sir William Alexander s patent, and 
to the description of the boundaries in all the 
commissions to his Majesty s governors of the 
province and the actual grant of two of these 
islands to Francis Bernard, and others, by letters 
patent under the seal of the province of Nova 
Scotia, bearing date the 30th October, 1765, 
place this fact beyond all dispute. 

These islands, at the time when the province of 
New Brunswick was erected in the year 1784, 
were all possessed and inhabited by his Majesty s 
subjects ; they were, by an act of the general as 
sembly of the province, passed in January 1786, 
for the purpose of dividing the several countries 
into towns and parishes, expressly made a part of 
the parish of W. Isles, in the county of Charlotte ; 
and their inhabitants yielded obedience to the 
laws of the province, in attending to the several 
duties which they were called upon to perform 
by the courts and magistrates established and 



appointed in that county ; and we cannot but 
consider it as a matter of serious regret, that 
the possession of these islands, shortly after 
wards usurped by the State of Massachusetts, 
and hitherto continued, has given rise to a claim 
of territorial right, on the part of that state, 
founded merely upon that possession. 

We now beg leave briefly to hint at some of 
the mischiefs and inconveniences which have re 
sulted from this continued usurpation. Very 
large quantities of lumber, furnished from the 
neighbouring parts of the province, are purchased 
by the American subjects, and carried to these 
islands for exportation ; which lumber is paid for 
with prohibited articles from the United States; 
and they in the same manner engross almost the 
whole of the produce of the fisheries among these 
islands, which is also paid for in the same man 
ner ; and thus we sustain a double injury. The 
W. India islands are, in a great measure, pre 
cluded from receiving their supplies of fish and 
lumber in British bottoms ; and large quantities 
of contraband goods are introduced into this pro 
vince, to the great injury of the commercial 
interests of Great Britain, as well as of the fair 
merchants and traders residing here. 

Their situation enables the inhabitants of these 
islands to engross a very great proportion of the 
plaster trade from this and the neighbouring pro 
vince of Nova Scotia, which is now become of 
great magnitude and extent, whereby his Majes 
ty s subjects are deprived of a very highly valu 
able carrying trade in this article. 

These islands are become places of refuge for 
insolent debtors, and disorderly persons of every 
description, particularly of deserters from his 
Majesty s service : all attempts to recover whom 
are insolently resisted. 

By the possession of these islands, great facility 
is given to the conveyance, in small vessels, of 
contraband articles of every description to vari 
ous parts of this province and Nova Scotia : so 
that the fair British merchant can have no equal 
competition with these illicit traders, even in the 
sale of British and W. Indian goods. 

Whereas, on the contrary, if these islands were 
in the possession of his Majesty s subjects, very 
large quantities of fish and lumber would be 
thereby furnished by them for the supply of the 
British W. [ndia islands, the present ruinous 
contraband trade greatly interrupted, and a very 
beneficial carrying trade, in the article of plaster 
of Paris, in a great measure secured. 

Or, if the Americans were dispossessed of these 
islands, there is no other situation in that neigh-J 



PASSAMAQUODDY. 



67 



[bourhood which could give them the advantages 
arid opportunities to injure the trade of this pro 
vince, which they now enjoy. 

4 To these considerations it may be added, that 
in case of hostilities at any time in the United 
States, or countenance given by them to hostile 
attacks from any other country, the province, by 
the possession of these islands, would, in that 
quarter, be rendered more secure from attack, 
and capable of defence. 

Impressed with the importance of the foregoing 
considerations, we indulge the hope, that the 
transmission of the address by your honour to 
his Majesty s ministers may be productive of 
important benefits to the interests and welfare of 
his Majesty s subjects in this province. 

(Signed) 

G. D. Ludlow, Speaker of the Council. 
A.Botsford, Speaker of the House of Assembly. 

Presented in March, 1807. 
Transmitted in June, 1807.] 

[PASSAMAQUODDY Post-Office, on the above 
described bay, is kept at a little village at the 
mouth of Cobscook river, 17 miles this side Bre 
wer s, the easternmost post-office in the United 
States, 20 n. e. of Machias, 378 n. e. of Boston, 
and 728 in alike direction from Philadelphia ; the 
above distances includingthe turnings of the road.] 

[PASSAM AQUODDlES, a tribe of Indians 
who inhabit near the waters of Passamaquoddy 
Bay.] 

[PASSAO, a cape on the coast of Peru, on the 
S. Pacific ocean, under the equator.] 

[PASSO MAGNO, a river of Florida, in lat. 
S6n.l 

[PASSUMPSIC, a small river of Vermont, 
runs a s. course and empties into Connecticut 
river, below the Fifteen-Mile-Falls, in the town 
of Barnet.] 

[PASSYUNK, a township in Philadelphia 
county, Pennsylvania.] 

PASTA, a settlement of the province and 
government of Popayan and Nuevo Reyno de 
Granada; founded near the coast of the S. Sea, 
on the shores of a lake of the same name, and w. 
of the capital. 

PASTAGOROS, or PANTAGOROS, a nation 
of barbarous Indians of the Nuevo Reyno de 
Granada, who inhabit the woods to the e. of the 
grand river Magdalena. They are cruel, feroci 
ous, and treacherous, and use poisoned arrows. 

PASTAR, a settlement of the province and 
government of Popayan in the Nuevo Reyno de 
Granada. 



PASTAZA, or PASTACA, a large and naviga 
ble river of the kingdom of Quito ; which rises 
in the sierra of the provinces of Riobamba and 
Latacunga, runs for more than 100 leagues till it 
enters the Maranon or Amazon by the s. shore, 
with four mouths, and forming three islands near 
the settlement of Banos, by which it passes. It 
receives on the e . side 25 rivers, and on the w. 
15, and from that place takes the name of Pas- 
taza, first running into those of San Felipe, 
Patate, and others of the villages by which it 
passes. In the woods of its vicinity towards the 
w. dwell some barbarian Indians, the Muratas 
and Xibaros, and towards the e. the Gaes, Semi- 
gaes, and Mainas Zimarrones. Its mouth is in 
lat. 48 3" s. 

PASTEPEC, SAN JOSEPH DE, a settlement 
of the district and head settlement of Tlacolula, 
and alcafdia mayor of Xalupa in Nueva Espana ; 
founded at the skirt of a mountain, which gives 
it its name ; of a mild temperature, but far from 
being fertile. One league and a half e. n. e. of 
its head settlement. 

PASTO, a district and corregimiento of the 
province and government of Popayan in the 
Nuevo Reyno de Granada; one of the 11 into 
which the same is divided, and the most s. : bound 
ed s. by the province of Ibarra. It is extremely 
abundant in fine pastures, and consequently in 
cattle, so that, on this account, its first founders 
gave it this name. It is irrigated by several 
large rivers, which incorporate themselves with 
the Napo and Putumayo, to enter the Maranon 
or Amazon ; and on the s. flow down from the 
cordillera, the river Guachicono, S. Jorqe, and 
Masamorras, which enter the Patia. 

It is of an hot temperature, and produces much 
wheat and of so fine a quality, that in no part of 
the world is the bread so fine as here. It has 
some gold mines, which are little worked from 
the want of Indians and Negroes ; the former 
being exempt from this labour by a royal edict, 
and devoting themselves rather to agricultural 
pursuits. In the woods are certain trees which 
distil a resin here called mopa-mopa, and of which 
they make all sorts of varnish, which is so durable, 
that neither have boiling water or acids any 
effect on it. The method of applying it is by 
putting into the mouth a part of the resin, and, 
when it is moistened, by rubbing the brush upon it, 
and then applying it to the object to be painted, 
when it becomes dry, and of a most beautiful and 
lively colour, imitating the China colours ; and 
with this particular recommendation, that it 
never fades, nor does moisture have any effect 



08 PAS 

upon it. The pictures and articles painted in 
this manner, are carried by the Indians to be 
sold at Quito and the other settlements of the 
kingdom, where they are in high estimation. 

In this province the rivers of Guaitara and 
Juanambu are passed en taravita, each person 
paying a silver-real, and the same being the 
price for every horse-load ; and the settlements 
of the above names take care to be well provided 
with ropes, and other articles necessary for this 
purpose. The population consists of 33 settle 
ments, which are as follows : 

Yascual, Pupiales, 

Ancuya y Abades, Potosi, 

Biusaco and Juan- Gualmata, 

ambu, Ingenios, 

Sapuyes, Sibunday, 

Tambo Pintado, Huacca, 

Jongobito, Tulcan, 

Mocoa, Carlozama, 

Yayanquer, Cumbal, 

Funes, Mayasquer, 

Sucumbios, Mallama, 

Puntal, Puerres, 

Tussa, Males, 

Hipiales, Canchala, 

Tuquerres, Galea, 

Mocondino, Anope or Guaypi, 

Nanegal, Esmeraldas. 

The capital is the city of the same name, with 
the dedicatory title of San Juan, and the surname 
of Villaviciosa ; founded by captain Lorenzo de 
Aldana, in 1539, in an extensive llanura. It is 
of a severe climate, but healthy, and fertile in 
vegetable productions, seeds, and sugar canes, 
of which they make much sugar. It is situate at 
the skirt of a mountain, at the top of which is a 
volcano, which, ever since the conquest, had 
never ceased to vomit fire and ashes until the 
year 1727, since which time, as no eruption has 
appeared, it is thought that all the inflammable 
materials have been consumed. 

It has a very good parish church, the convents 
of the order of San Francisco, Santo Domingo, 
San Agustin, La Merced, a college which belong 
ed to the Jesuits, a monastery of nuns of LaCon- 
cepcion, and two hermitages at the entrance and 
egress of the city. 

Its population is composed of 8000 souls, 
amongst whom are many noble, though poor, 
families. The natives are very clever and indus 
trious workmen ; their wooden manufactures 
are much esteemed in all parts, and they have a 
method of varnishing them with something that 
resembles japan. Eighty five miles nearly s. s. w. 



PAT 

of Popayan, and 115 n. n. e. of Quito, in lat. 1 
14 , and long. 77 6" w. 

PASTOCA, a very lofty mountain of the pro 
vince of Pasto in the Nuevo Reyno de Granada, 
near its capital ; on its top is a lake of more than 
24 leagues long, and in its waters, which are 
always very cold, no fish will breed. 

PASTORA, LA DIVINA, a settlement of the 
province and government of La Guayana or 
Nueva Andalucia ; situate on the shore of the 
river Yaruario. 

PASTORIA, a large lake of the province of 
Tepeguana in Nuevo Vizcaya. It is formed of 
different streams of very fresh and wholesome 
water, and on its shores graze an infinite number 
of lesser cattle. 

PASUCHUA, a very lofty mountain or paramo 
of the kingdom of Quito, continually covered 
with snow. 

PASUDO, ASUNCIONDE, a settlement of the 
province of Pataz and of the missions of Caxa- 
marquilla, which are held at the charge of the 
religious observers of San Francisco ; on the 
shore and at the source of the river Guallaga. 

PASUNDELE, a settlement of the Indians of 
the kingdom of Chile, on the shore of the river 
Comoleuun. 

PASUQUE, a settlement of the Nuevo Mex 
ico in N. America ; situate on the shore of the 
river Grande del Norte, between those of Sitaj 
and Tesuque. 

PATA, a settlement of the province and corre- 
gimiento of Angaraez in Peru, annexed to the- 
curacy of Yulcamarca. Its natives are much 
given to carpenters-work, and make with great 
neatness tables, saddles, and benches, with which 
they trade with the other provinces. 

PAT A, a settlement in the province and govern 
ment of S. Juan de Los Llanos in the Nuevo 
Reyno de Granada. 

PATA, a river, of the same province and king 
dom as the former settlement, which enters the 
Magdalena, opposite the settlement of Neiva 
Vieja. 

[PATAGOA, a river on the coast of Brazil, 
which enters the ocean s. w. of Rio Janeyro.] 

PATAGONES, or TIRUMENOS, a barbarous 
nation of Indians, who live in the mountains and 
woods of the lands of Magellan, n. of the strait, 
and e. of the kingdom of Chile, in the province 
called Chica. They go entirely naked and wan 
der about, sustaining themselves by the chace. 
They are of lofty stature, well made and valorous, 
but treacherous ; some have pretended that they 
were formidable giants, and called their country 



PAT 

de Los Gigantes (of the giants). The father 
Torrubia, in his Gigantologia, printed in 1756, 
to prove the existence of the giants, quotes the 
Patagonians of the lands of Magellan ; but who 
ever scrutinizes the strength of what he adv ances, 
will see that according to all appearance and 
agreeably with the assertion of D. Proxpero del 
Aguila, he brings forward nothing of greater 
authenticity than what had already been pro 
duced. Mr. Fraser, in his voyage to S. America, 
assures us of the existence of these giants, not 
only as he had seen them himself but by an im 
plicit credit of others who had also been eye-w it- 
nesses to them ; and he thus asserted them to 
be of nine or 10 feet in height. 

The general received opinion is, that they are 
certainly above the common stature, but not 
giants ; and with all the proofs and reasons pro 
duced by the father Torrubia, we cannot but 
rather give our assent to what is told us by Sir 
Hans Sloane, in his celebrated work inserted in 
the Philosophical Transactions, No. 404, and ex 
tracted as a supplement to the celebrated Cham 
bers Dictionary, as also to what has been so 
judiciously suggested on the subject by Dr. D. 
Casimiro, first professor of botany in the royal 
garden, in the translation of the voyage of com 
mandant Byron. Fernando de Magallanes was 
the first who knew these Indians, when he arrived 
at port S. Julian, in 1519. 

The country abounds in stags, wolves, bears, 
tigers and ostriches. The names given by Mr. 
de la Martiniere to the different tribes of Envo, 
Kemenetes, Kennecas, and Karaykes, are mere 
fables and inventions, of which we cannot discover 
the origin, as are also the provinces in which the 
said tribes are said to live, and which that author 
calls Cossi, Karay, Karamay, Morena, Coin, &amp;c. 
Now, all that we can assert on the subject, is, 
that we call the coast of the Patagonians all 
that extent from the mouth of the river La 
Plata as far as the straits of Magellan, and that 
the same was reconnoitred, by order of the king, 
in 1745, by the naval captain D. Joaquin de 
Olivares, accompanied by the fathers Joseph Ca- 
rodiel and Joseph Quiroga, of the company of 
Jesus, and the pilot D. Diego Varela ; and that 
the extent of coast, included under the above 
title, is between lat. 36 40 and 52 20 s. and 
extends from Cape Antonio, to the bay of S. 
George, to the 5. e. From all the above we con- 
elude, that the Patagonians are a very large race 
of men, and that they are very numerous. 

PATAGAHATCHE, a river of the province 



PAT 



(39 



and colony of S. Carolina, which runs s. and 
enters the Chichachas. 

PATAHUASI, a settlement of the province 
and corregimiento of Catabambas in Peru ; an 
nexed to the curacy of Llaqua. 

PATAMACK. [See PATOWMACK.] 

PATAMBA, a settlement of the head settle 
ment of the district, and alcaldia mayor of Peri- 
ban in Nueva Espaiia. It contains 292 fami 
lies of Indians, and 12 of Spaniards, Mustees, 
and Mulattoes ; also a convent of the monks of 
S. Francisco. Its commerce consists in making 
cups, jars, and other vessels of a very cele 
brated clay found in its district, and much 
esteemed in the other jurisdictions as giving a 
great fragrance to the water when drank, and 
inasmuch as it is also asserted to have bene 
ficial virtues against the flux of blood. A little 
more than eight leagues e. of its capital. 

PATAMBUCO, a settlement of the province 
and corregimiento of Carabaya in Peru; annexed 
to the curacy of its capital. 

PATAMfcRAGOUCHE, a settlement of In 
dians of Nova Scotia, on the e. coast and at 
the strait of Canseau. 

PATANEIMA, a port of the province and 
government of Caracas in the Nuevo Reyno de 
Granada, to the w. and at a small distance from 
Port Cabello. 

PATAPA, SANTA MARIA DE, a settlement 
of the head settlement of the district, and al 
caldia mayor of Tehuantepec in Nueva Espana. 
It is of a mild temperature, contains a convent 
of the order of S. Domingo, and has a scanty 
population, employed in agriculture. Twelve 
leagues n. of its capital. 

[PATAPSCO, a navigable river of Mary 
land, which empties from the n. w. into Chesa- 
peak bay ; its mouth being formed by North 
point, and Bodkin point on the s. which last is in 
lat. 39 W n. It rises in York county, Penn- 
sylvani, and pursues a s. and s. e. course till it 
reaches Elkridge landing, about eight miles s. w. 
of Baltimore ; it there turns e. over falls, and 
widens into a broad bay-like stream to its mouth. 
It is about 30 or 40 yards wide just before it 
communicates with the bason, on which stands 
the large commercial town of Baltimore. The 
first discoverer called it Bolus river, from the 
red earth found near it, resembling bole-am 
moniac. It is navigable for vessels drawing 18 
feet water to Fell s point at Baltimore ; but the 
falls a little above Elkridge landing, prevents the 
navigation farther.] 



70 



P A T 



PATAQUENA, a settlement of the province 
and corregimiento of Chumbivilcas in Peru ; an 
nexed to the curacy of Libitaco. 

PATARI, a river of the province and govern 
ment of Esmeraldas in the kingdom of Quito ; 
which runs from e. to w. and united with the 
Agua Sucia, forms the Tululvi. 

PATASASA, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Guanta in Peru ; annexed to the 
curacy of Guamanguilla. 

PATATE. a district of the province and cor- 
regimiento of Ambato in the kingdom of Quito. 
It extends between two low chains of mountains, 
and is divided by the river of its name : is of an 
hot temperature, and territory fertile in all kinds 
of vegetable productions, and particularly in 
sugar canes. The mountain Tunguraqua, which 
is situate to the s. renders it somewhat unplea 
sant, from the continual winds blowing from that 
quarter ; but it is well peopled, and has some 
pretty and well cultivated gardens. 

Its name is taken from that of the principal 
settlement, situate on the e. shore of the river. 
Here is manufactured much sugar, the which is 
greatly esteemed in all the kingdom from the su 
perior quality of the sugar canes. There is one 
day in the week fixed for a holiday or public 
fair, at which meet numbers of people from Am 
bato, Tacunga, Rio Bamba, and Quito. In lat. 
lSlf 

PATATE, the aforesaid river rises in the pro 
vince and corregimiento of Tacunga, of the same 
kingdom. It is formed by other smaller rivers, 
such as that of San Felipe, which rises in the 
paramo of Cotopaxi, that of San Miguel, near the 
settlement of this name, and that of Ambato. It 
takes, itself, its name from the settlement by 
which it passes in a large stream, following its 
course to s. e. until it enters the river Pastaza, 
in the province and government of Mainas. 

[PATAVIRCA. See PATIVILCA.] 

[PATAZ, a jurisdiction in the diocess of 
Truxillo in S. America. It is situate among 
the mountains, and lias a variety of products, 
of which gold is the chief. The capital is the 
city of the same name, 97 miles e. of Truxillo.] 

PATAZ. See CAXAMARQUILLA. 

PATAZ, a settlement of the former province 
and corregimiento : also thus called as being the 
capital. 

PATAZCACHA, a settlement of the province 
and corregimiento of Larecaja in Peru ; annexed 
to the curacy of Guamanguilla. 

PATCOOTYEAK, a river of the province 



P A T 

and colony of Nova Scotia, which rims s. then 
turns s. e. and enters the great bay of Fundy. 

[PATEHUCA, or PATIOCA, a town of Mexico 
in N. America, having a silver-mine in its vi 
cinity ; n. n. e. of Mexico.] 

PATESONS, a small river of the province 
and colony of Virginia in N. America. It 
runs n. e. 

PATI, a river of the province of Bogota in 
the Nuevo Reyno de Granada. It rises from the 
lake Guatavita, and forming nearly a circle, di 
rects its course through Santa Fe to enter the 
Magdalena. 

PATIA, a settlement of the province and go 
vernment of Popayan in the Nuevo Reyno de 
Granada. 

PATIA, a large and abundant river of this pro 
vince, which is the boundary line to the kingdom 
of Quito. It runs from n. to s. for many leagues, 
traversing the celebrated valley to which it gives 
its name, and after collecting in its course the 
waters of the Mayu, turns w. laves the province 
of Barbacoas, and enters the Pacific or S. Sea by 
1 1 mouths which form different islands ; between 
lat. 2 W n. 

PATIA, the aforesaid valley is between the two 
chains of mountains, or cordilleras, in the pro 
vince of Popayan, and extend from n. to s. for 
many leagues. The climate is very hot and un 
healthy, and consequently barren. The territory 
is unpeopled, but produces excellent cotton, of 
which no use is made. 

[PATIENCE, an island in Narraganset bay, 
Rhode Island, and lies s. e. of Warwick neck, 
three-fourths of a mile. .It is about two miles 
long and one broad.] 

PATINO, a point on the coast of the pro 
vince and government of Darien, and kingdom of 
Tierra Firme of the S. Sea, within the gulf of 
San Miguel. 

PATIVA, a small river of the province and 
captainship of Los Ilheos in Brazil. It rises near 
the coast, runs e. and enters the sea between the 
rivers Grande and Juzia. 

PATIVILCA, or PATIVIRCA, as others have 
it, a settlement of the province and corregimiento 
of Santa in Peru ; situate in the road which they 
call De Valles, and which leads from Paita to Lima : 
[74 miles n. of that city.] It has 50 or 60 houses, 
with a proportionate number of inhabitants, but 
very few Spaniards. In its vicinity, towards the 
n. are seen the ruins and remains of a palace and 
fortress of the Incas of Peru, which, from the size 
of the stones and thickness of the walls, should 



PAT 



PAT 



71 



appeal; to have been works of great magnificence. 
Along; the whole road from this settlement to the 
town of Guarmey, we find ruins of other edi 
fices equally sumptuous ; and it is proved that 
these were the places which the Incas used for 
their recreation. 

PATLA, SANTA MARIA DE, a settlement of 
the head settlement of the district of Olintla, and 
alcaldia mayor of Zacatlan in Nueva Espana ; 
situate in a delightful glen, watered and fertilized 
by various rivers. Nine leagues from its head 
settlement. 

PATO, a settlement of the province and go 
vernment Santa Marta in the Nuevo Reyno de 
Granada, and of the district of the Rio del 
Hacha ; situate on the shore of this river, to 
the n. of its capital. 

PATO, a river of the province and government 
of Popayan in the same kingdom ; which rises in 
the paramo of Guanacas, runs s. c. and enters the 
Caqueta by the n. part, in lat. 1 31 n. 

PATO, a small island, situate at the mouth of 
the gulf of Triste or Los Dragos, near the coast, 
in the Nuevo Reyno de Granada. 

PATO, another, a small river of the province 
arid government of Guayana or Nueva Andalu- 
cia, which, according to Mr. Bellin, enters the 
Meta. 

PATOS, LAGUNA GRANDE DE, a large lake 
in the province and captainship of Rey in Brazil. 
It is many leagues in length from n. to s., is 
near the coast, and on its side the Portuguese 
have established two guards, called, the one Del 
Norte, the other De la Cabellada. 

PATOS, another lake, in the province and cap 
tainship of Todos Santos in the same kingdom. 
It is at the foot of the sierra of Mongavein, 
between the river Real and that of Paramerin. 

PATOS, a river in the province and govern 
ment of Florida, which runs s. and enters the 
sea to the w. of the river Apalacliicola. 

PATOS, another, a small river of the province 
and captainship of Rey in Brazil, which runs e. 
and enters the sea in the bay of Biraguera. 

[PATOWMACK, or POTOMACK, a large and 
noble river, which rises by two branches, the n. 
and the s. which originate in and near the Al- 
leghany mountains, and forms, through its whole 
course, part of the boundary between the states 
of Virginia and Maryland. Its course is n. e. 
to Fort Cumberland, thence turning to the e. it 
receives Conecochague creek from Pennsylvania; 
then pursuing a s. e. course, it receives the She- 
handoah from the s. w. ; after this it runs a s. e. 
and s. course till it reaches Maryland point ; 



thence to its mouth it runs s. e. In its course it 
receives several considerable streams, which are 
described under their respective heads. The 
distance from the capes of Virginia to the termi 
nation of the tide water in this river, is above 
300 miles including the windings ; and navigable 
for ships of the greatest burden nearly that dis 
tance. From thence this river, obstructed by 
four considerable falls, extends through a vast 
tract of inhabited country towards its source. 
Early in the year 1785, the legislatures of Vir 
ginia and Maryland passed acts to encourage 
opening the navigation of this river. It was esti 
mated that the expence of the works would 
amount to 50,000 sterling, and 10 years were 
allowed for their completion. This noble river 
passes by many flourishing towns; the chief of 
which are, Shepherdstown, Georgestown, Wash 
ington city, Alexandria, New Marlborough, and 
Charlestown or port Tobacco. It is 7| miles 
wide at its mouth, 4 at Nomony bay, three at 
Aquia, 1 1 at Hallowing point, and 1| at Alex 
andria. Its soundings are seven fathoms at the 
mouth, five at St. George s island, 4| at Lower 
Matchodic, three at Swan s point and thence up 
to Alexandria. The tides in the river are not 
very strong, excepting after great rains, when 
the ebb is pretty strong ; then there is little or 
no flood, and there is never more than four or 
five hours flood, except with long and strong s. 
winds. In order to form just conceptions of this 
inland navigation, it would be requisite to notice 
the long rivers which empty into the Patow- 
mack, and survey the geographical position of 
the w. waters. The distance of the waters of 
the Ohio to Patowmack will be from 15 to 40 
miles, according to the trouble which will be 

. . 

taken to approach the two navigations. The 
upper part of this river, until it passes the Blue 
ridge, is called, in Fry and Jefferson s map, 
Cohongoronto.l 

[PATRICK, St. a small town, the chief of 
Camden county, Georgia ; situate on Great Sa- 
tilla river, about 32 miles from its mouth, and 
the same distance n. zo. of the town of St. 
Mary sJ 

[PATTERSON, a town in Bergen county, 
New Jersey, called so in honour of the governor 
of the state of that name, and now oiie of the 
judges of the supreme federal court. It was 
established in consequence of an act of the le 
gislature of New Jersey, in 1791, incorporating 
a manufacturing company with peculiar privi 
leges. Its situation on the great falls of Pas- 
saic river, is healthy and agreeable. It now con- 



72 P A T 

tains about 50 dwelling-houses, independent of 
those appropriated for tli machinery ; and it is 
certainly one of the most convenient situations 
for a manufacturing town of any on the conti 
nent. This company was incorporated to en 
courage all kinds of manufactures, and the sum 
of 500,000 dollars was soon subscribed ; but for 
want of experience, and a proper knowledge of 
the business, much was expended to little pur 
pose ; and they were at last reduced to the ne 
cessity of having recourse to a lottery to assist 
them in carrying their plan into execution. It 
is said that matters are now conducted more 
judiciously, and that the undertaking promises to 
be useful to the public, and beneficial to the pro 
prietors. It is 19 miles n. e. of Morristown, and 
10 n. of Newark.] 

[PATUCKET, a small village about four 
miles n. e. of Providence, a busy place of con 
siderable trade, and where manufactures of seve 
ral kinds are carried on with spirit. Through 
this village runs Patucket, or Pawtucket river, 
which empties into Seehonk river at this place. 
The river Patucket, called more n. Blackstone s 
river, has a beautiful fall of water, directly over 
which a bridge has been built, on the line which 
divides the commonwealth of Massachusetts from 
the state of Rhode Island ; distant about 37 miles 
s. by w. of Boston. The confluent stream emp 
ties into Providence river about a mile below 
Weybossctt, or the Great bridge. The fall, in 
its whole length, is upwards of 50 feet ; and the 
water passes through several chasms in a rock, 
which, extending diametrically across the bed of 
the stream, serves as a dam to the water. Se 
veral mills have been erected upon these falls ; 
and the spouts and channels which have been 
constructed to conduct the streams of their re 
spective wheels, and the bridge, have taken very 
much from the beauty and grandeur of the scene ; 
which would otherwise have been indescribably 
charming and romantic.] 

PATUGOA, a river of the province and cap 
tainship of San Vincente in Brazil ; runs s. and 
enters the sea opposite the Isla Grande. 

PATURE, a point on the w. coast of the 
island S. Domingo, and in the part possessed by 
the French, between the Cayo Icarnier and the 
Trou Forban. 

PATUTE, a settlement of Indians of the 
Tuneba nation, a reduction of missions which 
were held by the Jesuits in the Nuevo Reyno de 
Granada ; situate near the river Cazanare. The 
natives are weak, idle, and are subject to a dis 
order similar to St. Anthony s fire, which they 



P A U 

call carate, and paint their skin of various co 
lours. They maintain themselves by collecting 
and selling the resins of certain trees of two 
kinds, called, the one carana, and the other 
otoba : they both have a fetid smell, but are 
good for curing the itch, worms which are apt 
to breed in the feet, and crab-lice. After the 
abolition of the order of the Jesuits, these mis 
sions fell under the charge of the religious order 
of S. Domingo. 

PATUXED, a large, handsome, and conve 
nient bay, of the province and colony of New 
England. 

PATUXENT, or PATUXET, a river of the 
province and colony of Maryland in N. America. 
[This river, which is navigable, rises about 10 
miles w. e. of Washington, empties into the w. side 
of Chesapeak bay, between Drum and Hog island 
points, 15 or 20 miles n. of the mouth of the Pa- 
towmac. It admits vessels of 250 tons to Not 
tingham, nearly 35 miles from its mouth, and of 
boats to Queen Anne, eight miles higher. Pa- 
tuxent is as remarkable a river as any in the 
bay, having very high land on its n. side, with 
red banks or cliffs. When you double Drum 
point, you come too in 2^ and 3 fathoms water, 
where you will be secure from all winds.] 

PAUCANNA, a river of the province and 
government of San Juan de los Llanos in the 
Nuevo Reyno de Granada. It rises s. of the 
Sinaruco, and, forming a curve in its course to 
the e. enters the Orunuco, collecting in its mid- 
career the waters of the Sinaruco. 

PAUCAR, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Tarma in Peru ; annexed to the 
curacy of Caina. 

PAUCARA, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Angaraez in the same kingdom 
as the former. Seven leagues from Guancavelica 
and 22 from Guarnanga. 

PAUCARA, another settlement, in the province 
and corregimicnto of Lucanas in the same king 
dom ; annexed to the curacy of Paico. 

PAUCARBAMBA, a settlement of the pro 
vince and corregimicnto of Guanta in the same 
kingdom. 

PAUCARBAMBILLA, a settlement of the 
same province and kingdom as the former ; an 
nexed to the curacy of Mayoc. 

PAUCARCOLLA, a province and corregimi- 
cnto of Peru : bounded n. e. by the lake of Ti- 
ticaca, and being surrounded on the e. by the 
lake and the province of Chuicuito, n. by that 
of Lampa, w. by the province Moquehua, and 
s. by the provinces of Arica and Pacajes. It is 



, PAD 

86 leagues long, and 28 broad. The principal 
rivers by which it is laved are, the Suches and 
the Taraco. It is of a generally cold temperature, 
and in the parts near the lake are cultivated 
papas, bark, barley, and other seeds peculiar to 
Puno. 

The principal occupation of the inhabitants is 
in breeding neat cattle, sheep, and pigs, as also 
sheep of the country, or llamas. Here are many 
vicunas, xizcachas, deer, cut/es, partridges, and 
water fowl of the lake ; from which also there 
is a good supply of fish, both for this and the 
other provinces situate on its shore. The natives 
make voyages to the other provinces of the coast 
to carry chunos, dressed hides, and thread, and 
to take in exchange wines, brandies, and other 
productions. From the wools of the cattle the 
Indians fabricate their clothes, dying them of 
various colours. 

The capital of this province was the settlement 
of the same name, and afterwards, from the po 
pulation of this having declined, it was that of 
Huancane, until the discovery of the mines of 
Laicacota, when the latter asiento became the 
chief town ; and after that, and at the present 
day, the town of Puno. 

This province has various other rich mines 
in the mountains of Cancharani and of San Jo 
seph, which have been worked with great be 
nefit ; particularly the former. On the n. of the 
aforesaid mountains is the mountain called Del 
Azogue (quicksilver), as having veins of this 
metal, and which in the time of the viceroy, the 
Count de Alva de Liste, was worked to such ad 
vantage as to excel both in the quality and 
quantity of its metal the mine of Guancavelica : 
for motives, however, of higher consideration, its 
further working was prohibited by the govern 
ment ; but since that time large proportions of 
silver have still been extracted from those moun 
tains, and from that of Cancharani not less than 
50,000 marks annually. 

The Indians of some settlements of this pro 
vince, who breed cattle, have a traffic of carrying 
to the mineral engines and mills much cow-dung, 
which they call taquia, and which they use for 
heating the metal instead of wood and coal, these 
articles being extremely dear. This practice is 
also adopted in the other provinces of the same 
temperature. 

It had a repartimiento of 102.880 dollars, and 
it paid an alca cala of 832 dollars annually. Its 
inhabitants consists of more than 26,000 souls, 
divided into the following settlements : 

VOL. IV. 



P A U 



73 



Huancane, 

Toqupani, 

Hinchupalla, 

Ticani, 

S. Pedro de Vilques, 

Cojata, 

Moxa. 



Concepcion de Puno, 

S. Pedro de Icho, 

Paucarcolla, 

Tiquillaca, 

Conima, 

Coata, 

Capachica, 

Iscallani, 

PAUCARCOLLA, a settlement of this province, 
which, as we have observed, was the capital, 
until that having greatly fallen off in population 
it resigned this title in favour of the settlement 
of Huancane. It is situate on the shore of the 
lake Titicaca. Its natives became voluntarily 
subject to Iloque Yupanqui third emperor of 
Peru. It is inhabited by some Spanish families, 
and is of an healthy but cold climate. 

PAUCARPATA, a settlement of the province 
and corregimiento of Arequipa in Peru. 

PAUCARTAMBO, a province and corregi 
miento of Peru ; bounded n. w. and w. by that 
of Calca and Lares, n. e. and e. by the frontier 
of the infidel Indians, and s. by that of Quispi- 
canchi. Its length is 26 leagues from n. to s. 
and from six to seven in width. Its temperature 
is cold on the heights, but in the low parts mo 
derately warm. It produces a good quantity of 
wheat, barley, maize, papas, seeds, and other 
fruits. It is a ravine or large valley terminating 
in the mountains of the Andes, in which different 
fruit trees grow, such as papayas, lemons, water 
melons, some cotton, and coca in abundance. 
The trees here are of excellent wood, and amongst 
the rest are fine cedars. Also here are parrots 
of different kinds, monkeys, tigers, and venom 
ous reptiles. 

Through this province passes a river, which 
comes from the lakes of the cordillera of Vilca- 
nota, which, augmented by the waters of vari 
ous small rivers and streams, forms a consider 
able body of water, in which they catch soles, 
dories, olive-fish, and other fish ; this river bear 
ing^ the name of the province. 

Towards the frontiers of the infidel Indians it 
is not remembered that any conversions having 
been made ; but, in 1767, a Dominican priest of 
the province of Quito, who arrived here whilst 
on the charitable commission of collecting funds 
for the building of the church of his convent, 
visited the mountain, and brought back with him 
some 300 barbarian Indians who, notwithstand 
ing their inconstancy and rudeness, give grounds 
of expectation of a numerous conversion. 

In the mountains of this province are clear in- 



74 



P A U 



dications of mines both of silver and gold, since 
the Indians, in some of the streams, pick up 
little lumps of these metals. There are no mines, 
however, that are worked, although there is 
evidently one of quicksilver. Its corregidor had 
a repartimiento of 59,600, dollars, and it paid an 
alcabala of 467 dollars annually. The inhabi 
tants should amount to about 8000. The ca 
pital is the settlement of the same name, situate 
on the e. shore of the river of its name, 33 miles 
e. n. e. of the city of Cuzco, in lat. 13 28 s. 
nnd the settlements of its jurisdiction are, 
Paucartambo, Huayac, 

Calle, Huancana, 

Colquepata, Cedros, 

Challabamba, Chimor, 

Catca, Amparaez. 

Catcay, 

PAUCARTAMBO, a settlement and asiento of 
mines of the former capital. 

PAUCARTAMBO, another, of the province and 
corregimiento of Tarma in the same kingdom : 
where a fort has been built to restrain the incur 
sions of the infidel Indians, the Chunchos inhabit 
ing the mountains. 

PAUCARTAMBO, a river of the province and 
corregimiento of its name, which rises near the 
capital, runs n. and joining itself with the Vil- 
comayo, the Vilcobamba, and afterwards the 
Apurimac, runs many leagues with various wind 
ings through the territory of the missions of 
Caxaraarquilla, and reaches the Maranon or 
Amazon with the name of Ucayale, with a much 
enlarged stream. 

PAUCAS, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Conchucos in Peru ; annexed to 
the curacy of Uco. 

PAUCHUTLA, a settlement of the head 
settlement of the district and alcaldia mayor of 
Zochiacatlan in Nueva Espana : of an hot tem 
perature, and containing 50 families of Indians. 
Two leagues n. of its capital. 

PAUCURA, a large and extensive valley of 
the province and government of Autoquia, in the 
Nuevo Reyno de Granada; bounded by the 
valley of Picara. 

PAUHANAM, a river of the province and 
colony of Virginia in N. America. 

PAU JI, a settlement of the province and go 
vernment of Venezuela in the Nuevo Reyno de 
Granada, on the coast. 

[PAUKATUCK, a small river which empties 
into Stonington harbour, and forms a part of 
the division line between Connecticut and Rhode 
Island.] 



P A U 

[PAUL S BAY, ST. on the n. w. shore of the 
river St. Lawrence, in N. America, is about six 
leagues below Cape Torment, where a chain of 
mountains of 400 leagues in length terminate 
from the w.~] 

[PAUL S BAY, ST. on the n. w. coast of New 
foundland Island. Lat. 4950 / w. long.5745 a&amp;gt;.~l 
[PAUL S ISLAND, ST. an island in the strait 
between Newfoundland and Cape Breton islands. 
It is about 15 miles n. e. of North Cape, in Cape 
Breton. Lat. 47 W n. long. 60 2 . w.] 

[PAUL, ST. a town of N. America, in New 
Mexico, situated at the confluence of the two 
main head branches of the Rio Bravo.] 

[PAUL, ST. the most s. of the Pearl islands, in 
the gulf of Panama, S. America. In the n. side 
is a safe channel ; where, if necessary, there is a 
place for careening ships.] 

[PAUL S, ST. a parish in Charlestown dis 
trict, S. Carolina, containing 3433 inhabitants; of 
whom 276 are whites, and 3202 slaves.] 

[PAULINGSTOWN, or PAWLING, a town 
ship in Duchess county, New York, lying on the 
w. boundary of Connecticut, and has South and 
East Town on the s. In 1790, it contained 4330 
inhabitants, of whom 42 were slaves ; in 1796, 
there were 560 of the inhabitants qualified 
electors.] 

[PAULIN S KILL. See SUSSEX COUNTY, 
New Jersey.] 

PAULO, S. or S. PABLO, a city of the pro 
vince and captainship of S. Vicente, in the king 
dom of Brazil, the capital of a small republic, 
separate from the government of the Portuguese, 
having its own laws, but tributary to this crown. 
It had its origin from some Mamelucs, a people 
composed of desperate banditti of all nations and 
colours, who, not conforming to the customs of 
more civilized life, and alike averse to all law, 
retired to the mountainous parts of the country, 
the same, however, not being deficient in natural 
fertility, and even in gold-mines. Here their 
numbers daily increased, till they became so 
formidable and independent as to call themselves 
the Paulistas, or inhabitants of the city of S. 
Paulo. This was the capital of their territory, 
and great was the zeal and skill they have mani 
fested in its defence, and in the maintenance of 
their self-established rights : they were, however, 
at last overcome, and rendered so far tributary 
to the Portuguese monarch, that they were to 
pay to him the fifth part of what they extracted 
from their mines. These mines are exceedingly 
rich, and to work at them they are sedulous in 
their endeavours to entrap Spaniards, Portu- 



PAULO. 



75 



o-uese, and Indians. They have no religion 
whatever, but some dealings with the Spaniards 
and Portuguese of Paraguay. 

The city is situate on an eminence, surrounded 
by the most craggy and inaccessible mountains, 
on the s. shore of the river Harihambu, or Tiete, 
in 46 38 to. long. 23 32 lat. s. 

[The following particulars relating to this city 
are extracted from the work of Mr. Mawe, the 
traveller St. Paul s, he observes, although on 
an elevated site, is not observed at any great 
distance in the road from Todos Santos. In its 
immediate neighbourhood the river runs parallel 
to the road, which it sometimes partially over 
flows, and covers with sand. To his left he ob 
served a large astallage, or inn, where numbers 
of mules are unloaded, and travellers commonly 
pass the night. It consists of a very large shed, 
supported upon upright pieces of timber, with 
separate divisions for receiving the cargoes or 
burdens of the mules, each traveller occupying 
as many as his goods require ; and there is a 
piece of ground, of about a hundred yards in 
circumference, planted with small upright stakes 
at ten or fifteen feet distance, to which the 
bridles of the mules are tied while they are fed, 
saddled, and loaded. These astallages are com 
mon in all parts of Brazil. 

On entering the town, he was struck with the 
neat appearance of its houses, stuccoed in va 
rious colours ; those in the principal streets were 
two or three stories high. 

St. Paul s is situated on a pleasing eminence 
of about two miles in extent, surrounded on 
three sides by low meadow-land, and washed at the 
base by rivulets, which almost insulate it in rainy 
weather ; it is connected with the high-land by 
a narrow ridge. The rivulets flow into a pretty 
large stream called Tieti, which runs within a 
mile of the town in a s. w. direction. Over them 
there are several bridges, some of stone and 
others of wood, built by the late governor. 
The streets of St. Paul s, owing to its elevation, 
(about 50 feet above the plain) and the water 
which almost surrounds it, are in general re 
markably clean ; the material with which they 
are paved is lamillary grit-stone, cemented by 
oxide of iron, and containing large pebbles of 
rounded miartz, approximating to the conglo 
merate. This pavement is an alluvial formation 
containing gold, many particles of which metal 
are found in the chinks and hollows after heavy 
rains, and at such seasons are diligently sought 
for by the poorer sort of people. 

This city was founded by the Jesuits, who were 



probably tempted by the gold mines in the vici 
nity, more than by the salubrity of its air, which 
however is not excelled by any on the whole 
continent of South America. The medium of 
the thermometer here is between 50 and 80 de 
grees ; in a morning Mr. Mawe observed it at 
48, and even lower, though he was not there 
in the winter months. The rains are by no 
means heavy or of long continuance, and the 
thunder-storms are far from being violent. The 
cold in the evenings was frequently considerable. 

Here are several squares, and about thirteen 
places of religious worship, namely, two con 
vents, three monasteries, and eight churches, the 
greater part of which, as well as of the whole 
town, is built of earth. The mode of erecting 
the walls is as follows : a frame is constructed of 
six moveable planks placed edge-wise, opposite 
each other, and secured in this position by cross- 
pieces bolted with moveable pins. Earth is put 
in by small quantities, which the workmen beat 
with rammers, and occasionally moisten with 
water to give it consistency. Having filled the 
frame or trough, they remove it and continue the 
same operation till the whole shell of the house 
is completed, taking care to leave vacancies, and 
put in the window-frames, door-frames, and 
beams, as they proceed. The mass, in course of 
time, becomes indurated, the walls are pared 
perfectly smooth inside, and take any colour the 
owner chooses to give them ; they are generally 
enriched with very ingenious devices. This 
species of structure is durable ; some houses thus 
built have lasted two hundred years, and most of 
them have several stories. The roofs are made 
to project two or three feet beyond the wall, in 
order to throw off the rain to a distance from the 
base ; spouts might be a more effectual preserva 
tive against wet, but their use is little known 
here. They cover their houses with gutter-tiles; 
but though the country affords excellent clay and 
plenty of wood, very few bricks are burnt. 

The population of this place amounts to full 
15,000 souls, perhaps nearer 20,000 ; the clergy, 
including all ranks of religious orders, may be 
ranked at 500. They are in general good mem 
bers of society, free from that excessive bigotry 
and illiberality which is the reproach of the neigh 
bouring colonies : and their example has so be 
neficial an effect on the rest of the inhabitants, 
that, according to Mr. Mawe s testimony, no 
stranger will be molested while he acts as a gen 
tleman, and does not insult the established re 
ligion. 

No endemial diseases at present prevail here.] 

L2 



PAULO. 



[The small-pox formerly, and indeed of late, made 
great havoc among- the inhabitants ; but its pro 
gress has been checked by the introduction of 
vaccine innoculation. Professors attended at a 
large hall belonging to the governor, to which 
the public were invited, and the operation was 
performed gratis. It is to be hoped, that the 
credit of this preventative will make its way 
among the people here, for they are not compe 
tent to enter into the merits of that controversy 
which injured it in Europe. 

Here are few manufactures of any consequence ; 
a little coarse cotton is spun by the hand, and 
woven into cloth, which serves for a variety of 
wearing apparel, sheets, &amp;c. They make a 
beautiful kind of net- work for hammocks, which 
are fringed with lace, and form an elegant piece 
of furniture, being slung low, so as to answer 
the purpose of sofas. The ladies are particu 
larly fond of using them, especially when the 
heat of the weather disposes them to ease and 
indolence. The making of lace is a general em 
ployment for females, some of whom excel in it. 
The shopkeepers here are a numerous class, who, 
as in most colonial towns, deal in almost every 
thing, and sometimes make great fortunes. Here 
are few doctors of medicine, but many apothe 
caries ; some silversmiths, whose articles are 
equally indifferent both in metal and workman 
ship ; tailors and shoemakers in great numbers ; 
and joiners, who manufacture very beautiful 
wood, but are not so moderate in their charges 
as the former classes of tradesmen. In the out 
skirts of the city live a number of Creolian In 
dians, who make earthen-ware for culinary pur 
poses, large water-jars, and a variety of other 
utensils ornamented with some taste. The 

freatest proportion of the inhabitants consists in 
irmers and inferior husbandmen, who cultivate 
small portions of land, on which they breed large 
stocks of pigs and poultry for sale. With these 
the market is generally well supplied, and in the 
fruit season is also stored with pines, grapes, 
guavas, bananas, a few apples, and an enormous 
quantity of quinces. 

Esculent plants are grown in great profusion 
and variety. Here is a favourite bulbous root 
called the cara, which is equal to the best potatoe, 
and even more farinaceous ; it grows to about 
five inches in diameter, and affords excellent 
food, either boiled or roasted. Here are fine 
cabbages, salad-herbs, turnips, cauliflowers, arti 
chokes, and potatoes ; the latter, though very 
good, are little used : the sweet potatoe is in 
greater request among the natives. Maize, beans. 



green-peas, and every species of pulse, flourish 
amazingly. Fowls are cheap ; some are bought 
at three-pence and six-pence each ; small pigs 
from one to two shillings, and flitches of bacon, 
cured after the mode of the country, at about 
two-pence per pound. Turkeys, geese, and ducks, 
are abundant, and reasonable in price ; the latter 
are of the Muscovy breed, enormously large, 
some weighing ten or fourteen pounds. Here is 
a singular breed of cocks ; they resemble the 
common English in plumage and shape, but they 
crow very loud, and continue their last note for 
a minute or two. When their voice is good, 
they are much esteemed, and are sent for as cu 
riosities from all parts of Brazil. The cattle are 
in general good, considering that so little atten 
tion is paid to feeding them; when their pastures 
are full of grass, they are tolerably fat, but when 
otherwise, they become lean. A drove may be 
bought at 24s. or 30s. a head ; beef at about a 
penny or three halfpence per pound. The cur 
riers have a singular method of blackening- cow 
hides and calf-skins : when they have prepared 
them for that operation, they search tor some 
mud-hole at the bottom of a ferruginous stratum, 
a ditch for instance ; with the mud they cover 
that side of the skin required to be stained ; and 
they prefer this material to the solution of cop 
peras, probably with reason, as the sulphate of 
iron formed by the decomposed pyrites acts more 
mildly in this state than when applied in the 
common way. 

The horses are very fine, and in general do 
cile ; when well trained they make excellent 
chargers. Their size is from 12| to 14| hands, 
and they vary in price from 3 to 12. Mules 
are considered more useful beasts of burden. 
The breed of sheep is quite unattended to, and 
mutton is rarely or never eaten. Here is a very 
fine and large breed of goats, whose milk is 
generally used for domestic purposes. The dogs 
are very indifferent, and of no distinct race. 

Mr. Mawe, in his walks round the city, had 
frequent opportunities of examining the singular 
succession of horizontal strata, that form the 
eminence on which it stands. They lie in the 
following order: first, one of red vegetable 
earth of variable depth, impregnated with oxide 
of iron ; below that, sand and adventitious matter 
of different shades of colour, as ochre-red, brown, 
and dusky yellow, together with many rounded 
pebbles, which indicate it to be of rather recent 
formation ; it varies in depth from three to six 
feet, or perhaps to seven, and its lower part is 
uniformly yellow : under this is a bed of ex-] 



PAULO. 



77 



fceedingly fine clay of various colours, but for the 
the most part purple ; the white and yellow is 
the purest in quality ; it is interveined with thin 
layers of sand in various directions. Then suc 
ceeds a stratum of alluvial matter, which is very 
feruginous ; it rests on a half-decomposed sub 
stance, apparently migrating from a granite, in 
which the proportion of feld-spar exceeds that 
of the quartz and mica. The whole is incum 
bent on compact granite. The sides of the mount 
are steep, and in some places nearly perpen 
dicular. 

The fertility of the country around St. Paul s 
may be inferred from the quantities of produce, 
with which, as we have stated, its market is sup 
plied. About a century ago, this track abound 
ed with gold ; and it was not until they had 
exhausted it by washing, that the inhabitants 
thought of employing themselves in husbandry. 
As they did so more from necessity than from 
choice, they were tardy in pursuing those im 
provements which other nations have made in 
this noble art, and, pining at the disappearance 
of the precious mineral, considered their new 
occupation as vile and degrading. Indeed 
throughout the whole of Brazil, the husbandmen 
have ever been considered as forming a class 
greatly inferior in point of respectability to the 
miners ; and this prejudice will in all likelihood 
subsist until the country shall have been drained 
of its gold and diamonds, when the people will be 
compelled to seek in agriculture a constant and 
inexhaustible source of wealth. 

Mr. Mawe thus describes the system of farming 
which at present prevails in the neighbourhood 
of St. Paul s. Land, in this extensive empire, is 
granted in large tracks, on proper application ; 
and we may naturally suppose that the value of 
these tracts depends more or less on their situa 
tion. It therefore becomes the first object of a 
cultivator, to look out for unoccupied lands as 
near as possible to a large town ; good roads and 
navigable rivers are the desiderata next in point 
of consequence which he attends to. When he 
has made choice of a situation, he applies to the 
governor of the district, who orders the proper 
officers to mark out the extent required, generally 
a league or a league and a half square, sometimes 
more. The cultivator then purchases as many 
Negroes as he can, and commences his operations 
by erecting habitations for them and himself, 
which are generally miserable sheds, supported 
by four posts, and commonly called ranches. 
His Negroes are then directed to cut down the 
trees and brushwood growing on the land, to 



such an extent as he thinks they will be able 
to manage. This done, they set fire to all they 
have cut, as it lies on the ground. Much of the 
success of his harvest depends on this burning ; 
if the whole be reduced to ashes he expects a 
great crop ; if, through wet weather, the felled 
trees remain only half burnt, he prognosticates a 
bad one. When the ground is cleared, the Ne 
groes dibble it with their hoes, and sow their 
maize, beans, or other pulse ; during the operation 
they cut down any thing very much in the way, but 
never think of working the soil. After sowing 
as much seed as is thought requisite, they prepare 
other grounds for planting cassada, here called 
mandioca, the root of which is generally eaten as 
bread by all ranks in Brazil. The soil for this 
purpose is rather better prepared ; it is raked up 
in little round hillocks, not unlike mole-hills, 
about four feet asunder ; into which are stuck 
cuttings from branches of the plant, about an inch 
thick, and six or eight long ; these soon take root, 
and put forth leaves, shoots, and buds. When 
enough has been planted for the entire consump 
tion of the farm, the owner, if he is rich enough, 
prepares means for growing and manufacturing 
sugar. He first employs a carpenter to cut 
wood, and build a mill with wooden rollers for 
crushing the canes, by means of water if a stream 
is at hand, if not, by the help of mules. While 
some of the Negroes are assisting the carpenter, 
others are employed in preparing ground in the 
same way as for mandioca. Pieces of cane, con 
taining three or four joints, and in length about 
six inches, cut from the growing stem, are laid in 
the earth nearly horizontally, and are covered 
with soil to the depth of about four inches. They 
shoot up rapidly, and in three months have a 
bushy appearance not unlike flags ; in 12 or 15 
months more they are ready for cutting. In 
rich virgin soil it is not uncommon to see canes 
12 feet high, and astonishingly thick. 

The Indian corn and pulse are in general ripe 
in four months or 18 weeks. The average return 
is 200 for one ; it is a bad harvest when it falls 
short of 150. 

The mandioca is rarely ready to take up in less 
than 18 or 20 months ; if the land be suitable, it 
then produces from six to 12 pound weight per 
plant. They grow very little indigo in this 
neighbourhood, and what they have is of indif 
ferent quality. Their pumpkins are of enormous 
size, and sometimes are served up as table-vege 
tables, but more frequently given as food to the 
horses. Melons are here scarcely palatable. 

In no branch of husbandry are the farmers so] 



PAULO. 



[defective as in the management of cattle. No 
artificial grasses are cultivated, no enclosures are 
made, nor is any fodder laid up against the season 
of scarcity. The cows are never milked regu 
larly ; they seem to be considered rather as an 
encumbrance to a farm than a valuable part of 
the stock. They constantly require salt, which is 
given them once in 15 or 20 days, in small pro 
portions. Their dairies, if such they may be 
called, are managed in so slovenly a manner, 
that the little butter that is made becomes rancid 
in a few days, and the cheese is good for nothing. 
In this essential department they are deplorably 
deficient ; rarely indeed is there to be seen a 
farm with one convenience belonging to it. For 
want of proper places in which to store their 
produce, they are obliged to lay it in promiscuous 
heaps ; and it is not uncommon to see coffee, 
cotton, maize, and beans, thrown into the corners 
of a damp shed, and covered with a green hide, 
one half is invariably spoiled by mould and putri 
dity, and the remainder is much deteriorated, 
through this idle and stupid negligence. 

They feed their pigs on Indian corn in a crude 
state ; the time for confining them to fatten is at 
eight or 10 months old ; and the quantity con 
sumed for the purpose is eight or 10 Winchester 
bushels each. When killed, the lean is cut off 
the sides as clean as possible, the fat is cured 
with very little salt, and in a few days is ready 
for market. The ribs, chine-bone, and lean parts 
are dried for home consumption. 

The farm-houses are miserable hovels of one 
story, the floor neither paved nor boarded, and 
the walls and partitions formed of wicker-work 
plastered with mud, and never under-drawn. 
For an idea of the kitchen, which ought to be the 
cleanest and most comfortable part of the dwell 
ing, the reader may figure to himself a filthy 
room with an uneven muddy floor, interspersed 
with pools of slop-water, and in different parts 
fire-places formed by three round stones to hold 
the earthen pots that are used for boiling meat ; 
as green wood is the chief fuel, the place is almost 
always filled with smoke, which, finding no chim 
ney, vents itself through the doors and other 
apertures, and leaves all within as black as soot. 
Indeed, the kitchens of many opulent people are 
in not much better condition. 

It may well be imagined that in a country like 
this, a stranger finds the greatest comfort and 
enjoyment out of doors. The gardens in St. 
Paul s and its vicinity, are laid out with great 
taste, and many of them with curious elegance. 
The jasmine is every where a favourite tree, and 



in this fine climite bears flowers perennially, a? 
does the rose. Carnations, pinks, passion-flowers, 
cocks-combs, &amp;c. grow in great plenty; one of 
their most estimable shrubs is the Palma Christi, 
which gives fruit the first year, and yields abun 
dance of castor-oil, which all families possess in 
such quantity, that no other sort is burnt. 

Bees are by no means uncommon ; they are 
easily domesticated, and, we believe, are perfectly 
harmless. Their honey is pleasant; the wax, 
particularly that generally sold, which is taken 
from their nests in old forest-trees, is very foul, 
but might be purified by a very simple process. 
The woods contain a great variety of animals of 
the monkey kind, and also beasts of prey, some 
of which have tolerable good fur. Among these 
may be classed a peculiar species of the otter. 
Insects are numerous, but the mosquitos are not 
so offensively so as in the Rio de la Plata. The 
animalculum, called the niagua, or jigger, is trou 
blesome ; it beds itself under the nails of the toes,, 
and sometimes of the fingers, but it may easily be 
banished by extracting it and its bag of eggs with a 
needle, and filling the cavity with calomel or snuff, 
for fear any should have remained. Reptiles are 
very numerous ; toads are accustomed in the 
evenings to crawl upon the foot paths, and even 
infest the streets of the city. The sorocooco or 
jararraca (serpents) are said to be very dan 
gerous. 

The woods produce large and durable timber, 
well calculated for building. Of their trees, all 
of which retain their Indian names, some yield 
very fine gums. The jacaranda, called in Eng 
land rose-wood, is here very common. Many 
of their shrubs bear beautiful flowers, and are 
very aromatic. Among the innumerable creep 
ing plants which clothe the soil of their uncleared 
lands, there are some distinguished as infallible 
antidotes to the bite of venomous reptiles ; one 
in particular, called the corazao de Jesu, with 
heart-shaped leaves, is universally esteemed. 

Mr. Mawe, during his stay at this city, was 
invited by the governor to visit the old gold 
mines of Jaragua, the first discovered in Brazil, 
which were now his property, together with a 
farm in their vicinity, distant about 24 miles from 
the city. 

He thus explains the mode of working these 
mines, more fitly to be denominated washings. 

Suppose a loose gravel-like stratum of rounded 
quartzose pebbles and adventitious matter, in 
cumbent on granite, and covered by earthy 
matter of variable thickness. Where water of 
sufficiently high level can be commanded, the] 



PAULO. 



79 



[ground Is cut in steps, each 20 or 30 feet wide, 
two or three broad, and about one deep. Near 
the bottom a trench is cut to the depth of two or 
three feet. On each step stand six or eight 
Negroes, who as the water flows gently from 
above, keep the earth continually in motion with 
shovels, until the whole is reduced to liquid mud 
and washed below. The particles of gold con 
tained in this earth descend to the trench, where, 
by reason of their specific gravity, they quickly 
precipitate. Workmen are continually employed 
at the trench to remove the stones, and clear 
away the surface, which operation is much as 
sisted by the current of water which falls into it. 
After five days washing, the precipitation in the 
trench is carried to some convenient stream, to 
undergo a second clearance. For this purpose 
wooden bowls are provided, of a funnel shape, 
about two feet wide at the mouth, and five or six 
inches deep, called gamellas. Each workman 
standing in the stream, takes into his bowl five or 
six pounds weight of the sediment, which gene 
rally consists of heavy matter, such as oxide of 
iron, pyrites, ferruginous quartz, &amp;c. of a dark 
carbonaceous hue. They admit certain quan 
tities of water into the bowls, which they move 
about so dexterously, that the precious metal, 
separating from the inferior and lighter sub 
stances, settles to the bottom and sides of the 
vessel. They then rinse their bowls in a larger 
vessel of clean water, leaving the gold in it ; 
and begin again. The washing of each bowlful 
occupies from five to eight or nine minutes ; the 
gold produced is extremely variable in quantity, 
and in the size of its particles, some of which are 
so minute, that they float, while others are found 
as large as peas, and not unfrequently much larger. 
This operation is superintended by overseers, 
as the result is of considerable importance. 
When the whole is finished, the gold is borne 
home to be dried, and at a convenient time is 
taken to the permutation office, where it is 
weighed, and a fifth is reserved for the prince. 
The remainder is smelted by fusion with muriate 
of mercury, cast into ingots, assayed, and stamped 
according to its intrinsic value, a certificate of 
which is given with it : after a copy of that in 
strument has been duly entered at the mint-office, 
the ingots circulate as specie. 

But to return to the description of St. Paul s. 
This city is seldom visited by foreigners. The 
passes to it from the coast are so singularly si 
tuated, that it is almost impossible to avoid the 
guards who are stationed in them, to inspect 
all travellers and merchandize passing into the 



interior. Soldiers of the lowest rank on these 
stations have a right to examine all strangers 
who present themselves, and to detain them and 
their property, unless they can produce passports. 
The dress of the ladies abroad, and especially 
at church, consists of a garment of black silk, 
with a long veil of the same material, trimmed 
with broad lace ; in the cooler season black 
cassimere or baize. In the same veil they almost 
always appear in the streets, though it has been 
partially superseded by a long coat of coarse 
woollen, edged with velvet, gold lace, fustian, or 
plush, according to the rank of the wearer. This 
coat is used as a general sort of undress, at home, 
in their evening walks, and on a journey, and the 
ladies, whenever they wear it, appear in round 
hats. The appellation of Paulista is considered 
by all the females here as a great honour ; the 
Paulistas being celebrated throughout all Brazil 
for their attractions, and their dignity of cha 
racter. At table they are extremely abstemious ; 
their favourite amusement is dancing, in which 
they display much vivacity and grace. At balls 
and. other public festivals they generally appear 
in elegant white dresses, with a profusion of gold 
chains about their necks, their hair tastefully dis 
posed and fastened with combs. Their conver 
sation, at all times sprightly, seems to derive ad 
ditional life from music. Indeed the whole range 
of their education appears to be confined to super 
ficial accomplishments ; they trouble themselves 
very little with domestic concerns, confiding what 
ever relates to the inferior departments of the 
household to the negro or negra cook, and leav 
ing all other matters to the management of ser 
vants. Owing to this indifference, they are total 
strangers to the advantages of that order, neat 
ness and propriety, which reign in an English 
family : their time at home is mostly occupied in 
sewing, embroidery, and lace-making. Another 
circumstance repugnant to delicacy is, that they 
have no mantua-makers of their own sex ; all 
articles of female dress here are made by tailors. 
An almost universal debility prevails among 
them, which is partly attributable to their ab 
stemious living, but chiefly to want of exercise, 
and, in some degree, to the frequent warm bathings 
in which they indulge. They are extremely 
attentive to every means of improving the de 
licacy of their persons, perhaps to the injury of 
their health. 

The men in general, especially those of the 
higher rank, officers, and others, dress superbly ; 
in company they are very polite and attentive, 
and show every disposition to oblige ; they are] 



80 



P A U 



[great talkers and prone to conviviality. The 
lower ranks, compared with those of other colo 
nial towns, are in a very advanced state of civili 
zation. It were to be wished that some reform 
were instituted in their system of education ; the 
children of slaves are brought up during their 
early days with those of their masters ; they are 
play-mates and companions, and thus a familiar 
equality is established between them, which has 
to be forcibly abolished when they arrive at that 
age, at which one must command and live at his 
ease, while the other must labour and obey. It has 
been said, that by thus attaching the slave to his 
master, in early youth, they ensure his future 
fidelity ; but the custom seems fraught with many 
disadvantages, and ought at least to be so modi 
fied as to render the yoke of bondage less galling 
by the recollection of former liberty. 

The religious processions here are very splen 
did, grand, and solemn ; they have a striking 
effect, by reason of the profound veneration and 
enthusiastic zeal manifested by the populace. 
On particular occasions of this kind all the inha 
bitants of the city attend, and the throng is fre 
quently increased by numbers of the neighbour 
ing peasantry for several leagues round. The 
balconies of those houses, which command the 
best views of the spectacle, are crowded with 
ladies in their gala dresses, who consider the day 
as a kind of festival ; the evening is generally 
concluded by tea and card parties or dances. 

A traveller has no difficulty in accommodating 
himself in the general mode of living at St. Paul s. 
The bread is pretty good, and the butter tolera 
ble, but rarely used except with coffee for break 
fast or tea in the evening. A more common break 
fast is a very pleasant sort of beans, called feijones^ 
boiled or mixed with mandioca. Dinner, which 
is usually served up at noon or before, commonly 
consists of a quantity of greens boiled with a little 
fat pork or beef, a root of the potatoe kind, and a 
stewed fowl, with excellent salad, to which suc 
ceeds a great variety of delicious conserves and 
sweet-meats. Very little wine is taken at meals ; 
the usual beverage is water. On public occa 
sions, or when a feast is given to a large party, 
the table is most sumptuously spread; from 
30 to 50 dishes are served up at once, by which 
arrangement a succession of courses is obviated. 
Wine circulates copiously, and toasts are given 
during the repast, which usually occupies two or 
three hours, and is succeeded by sweet-meats, 
the pride of their tables ; after coffee the com 
pany pass the evening in dancing, music, or 
cards. 



P A U 

On the two first days of Lent, which are here 
celebrated with great festivity, persons of both 
sexes amuse themselves by throwing at each 
other balls, of artificial fruit, such as lemons or 
oranges, made very delicately of wax, and filled 
with perfumed water. The lady generally be 
gins the game, the gentleman return it with such 
spirit that it seldom ceases until several dozens 
are thrown, and both parties are as wet as if they 
had been drawn through a river. Sometimes a 
lady will dexterously drop one in to the bosom of 
a gentleman, which will infallibly oblige him to 
change his linen, as it usually contains three or 
four ounces of cold water. On these days of 
carnival the inhabitants parade the streets in 
masks, and the diversion of throwing fruit is 
practised by persons of all ages. It is reckoned 
improper for men to throw at each other. The 
manufacture of these missiles, at such periods, 
affords no inconsiderable occupation to certain 
classes of the inhabitants ; and in the capital of 
Brazil many hundreds of people derive a tem 
porary subsistence from the sale of them. The 
practice is very annoying to strangers, and not 
unfrequently engenders quarrels, which terminate 
seriously .J (Mawe s Travels.) 

[PAULSBURGH, a township in Grafton 
county, New Hampshire, on the head waters of 
Amonoosuck river, and through which passes 
Androscoggin river.] 

[PAULUS Hook, in Bergen county, New Jer 
sey, is on the w. bank of Hudson river, opposite 
New York city, where the river is 2000 yards 
wide. Here is the ferry, which is perhaps more 
used than any other in the United States. This 
was a fortified post in the late war. In 1780, 
the frost was so intense, that the passage across 
the river here was practicable for the heaviest 
cannon.] 

PA UN A, GRANDE, a settlement of the juris 
diction of Muzo and corregimiento of Tunja, in 
the Nuevo Reyno de Granada. It is of an hot 
temperature, abounding in maize, cotton, sugar 
cane, rice, 1/ucas, and plantains. The natives 
make much thread, linens, and sweetmeats, of 
which their commerce consists. The population 
should be 100 housekeepers and 50 Indians. 

[PAUNCH Indians, of N. America, who are 
said to be a peaceable, well-disposed nation. 
Their country is a variegated one, consisting of 
mountains, valleys, plains, and woodlands, irre 
gularly interspersed. They might be induced to 
visit the Missouri, at the mouth of the Yellow 
Stone river; and from the great abundance of 
valuable furred animals, which their country, as 



PAW 

well as that of the Crow Indians, produces, their 
trade must become extremely valuable. They 
are a roving people, and have no idea of exclu 
sive right to the soil.] 

PAURAUTE, a river of the province and 
government of Venezuela, in the same kingdom 
as the settlement of Pauna. It rises in the moun 
tains of Carora, runs w. and empties itself into 
the lake of Maracaibo, in lat. 10 12 n. 

PAUSA, a settlement and captainship of the pro 
vince and corregimiento of Parina Cochas, in Peru. 

PAUSA, another, in this province, annexed to 
the curacy of Pacca. 

PAUTE, a large and abundant river of the 
province and corregimiento of Cuenca, in the 
kingdom of Quito : it rises in the mountains of 
Tarqui, to the s. of that city, from the union of 
the rivers Machangara and Matadero, which 
unite themselves half a league from the settle 
ment of Jadan, and of two others, called Yu- 
nuncay and Tarque. These four running to the 
n. and receiving, after five leagues, those of 
Azogues and Santa Barbara, arrive at Cuenca, 
and there turning to e. n. e. and then e. till they 
pass the settlement to which they give a name, 
water and fertilize the valley ; and here they 
take their name, forming together one large na 
vigable stream, which, afterwards changing that 
name for Mayu, enters the Santiago in lat. 4 1 
s. On its shores is abundance of gold, and, in 
the district of Cuenca, they are covered with 
sugar-cane plantations and gardens, which ren 
der then very agreeable. By this river you may 
reach, by a four day s voyage, the province and 
country of the Xibaros Indians. 

PAUTE, a settlement of the same province and 
kingdom. 

PAUTE, a large, beautiful, and fertile valley of 
the same. 

PAUTIGUI, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Caxamarquilla in Peru. 

PAUTO, a settlement of the missions that 
were held by the Jesuits of the province and go 
vernment of San Juan de los Llanos of the 
Nuevo Reyno de Granada, to the e. of the moun 
tains of Bogota. It is a reduction of Indians of 
the Guajiba nation, situate near the source of 
Ihe river of its name ; is of an hot climate and 
fertile territory, and abounding in cotton, dates, 
and plantains, and other fruits peculiar to the 
country. 

PAUTO, a river of this province and kingdom, 
which rises near the settlement of Cazanare, and 
enters the Meta, being just before divided into 
two arms. 

[PAWLET, a township in Rutland county, 
VOL. iv. 



PAX 



81 



Vermont, having 1458 inhabitants. Jt stands 
on the New York line, has Wells on toie . and 
Rupert in Bennington county on the s. and is 
watered by Pawlet river, which joins Wood creek 
and the confluent stream, falls in South bay at 
Fiddler s Elbow. Haystack mountain is in this 
township.] 

[PAWTUCKET Falls, in Merrimack river, 
are in the township of Dracut.l 

[PAWTUXET, a village in the township of 
Cranston, Providence county, Rhode Island.] 

PAUXIS, a strait called Pungu or Puerta, 
where the Maranon or Amazonas is found en 
trenched in a very narrow channel. Here the 
Portuguese have a fort on the n. shore, [called 
Obidos orPauxis. The river Maranon or Ama 
zonas is 905 fathoms wide, and at this place ends 
the tide-water.] Just before this strait the Ma 
ranon or Amazon receives the waters of the river 
of Los Trompetas, in about lat. 2 s. 

PAXARA, a large island of the N. Sea, in the 
province and government of Maracaibo, in the 
Nuevo Reyno de Granada, at the mouth of the 
great lake of this name. 

PAXAROS, Island of, which is small, within 
the port Deseado, on the coast between the river 
La Plata and the straits of Magellan, opposite 
the island of Olivares. 

PAXAROS, another, a small island of this name; 
and one of those which are at the s. point of the 
Caico Grande and the Panuelo Quadrado. 

PAXAROS, another, a small isle near the coast 
of Brazil, in the province and captainship of Por- 
toseguro, close to the bank of Los Escollos. 

PAXAROS, another island near the coast of the 
kingdom of Chile, in the province and corregi 
miento of Coquimbo, close to that of this name. 
[See PAJAROS.] 

PAXAROS, some other small isles or farallones 
of the Archipelago of the Antilles, between the 
islands Granada and Bequia. 

PAXAROS, some other islands, near the coast 
of the province and captainship of Sergipe, in 
Brazil, at the mouth or entrance of the river 
Grande de San Francisco. 

PAXAROS, a mountain, called Ancon de Paxa- 
ros, on the w. coast of the straits of Magellan, 
between the point of Nuestra Senora de Gracia, 
and the Entrada Real del Portete. 

PAXAROS, a point of land, on the coast of 
the province and corregimiento of Coquimbo, of 
the kingdom of Chile. 

PAXAROS, another, in the same province and 
kingdom ; distinct from the former ; between the 
point of Choros and that of Yervabuena. 

PAXAROS, three small lakes of tke province 



M 



82 PAY 

and government of Santa Marta in the Nuevo 
Reyno fee Granada, and of the district of the 
Rio del Hacha, situate on the shore of the Saco 
de Maracaibo. 

[PAXTON, UPPER and LOWER, two town 
ships in Dauphin county, Pennsylvania.] 

[PAXTON, a township of Massachusetts, situ 
ated in Worcester county, eight miles w. of Wor 
cester, and 44 w. of Boston. It was incorporated 
in 1765, and contains 558 inhabitants.] 

PAY, LA. See NUESTRA SENORA BE. 

PAYA, a settlement of the jurisdiction and 
district of the city of Santiago de la Atalaya, 
and government of San Juan de Los Llanos in 
the Nuevo Reyno de Granada : situate at the 
foot of the mountains of Bogota on the e. and 
at the entrance of the Llanos of Gazanare and 
Meta. It is of an hot temperature, abounding 
in neat cattle, as also in cotton, maize, yucas, 
and plantains. The natives, who should amount 
to about 150 Indians, fabricate much linen and 
woven stuffs of cotton in a very nice manner ; 
and of this consists their commerce : 68 miles 
e. n. e. of Tunja. 

PAYA, a river of the province and government 
of the kingdom of Tierra Firme : which rises 
in the interior, runs w. and enters the Grande of 
Tuira just after the source of this. 

PAYAGUAS, a barbarous and cruel nation 
of Indians of Paraguay, who dwell to the n. and 
to the w. of the city of La Asuncion. They are 
pirates, and infest the rivers Paraguay and Pa 
rana in canoes and small barks. Their arms are 
bows and arrows, and clubs of a very heavy 
wood. 

PAYAGUAS, a settlement in the province and 
country of Las Amazonas of Indians of the afore 
said nation : situate on the shore of the river 
Marauon. 

PAYAGUAS, a river of the same province, 
which rises in the territory of the aforesaid In 
dians, runs s. and enters the Maranon. 

PAYAMINO, a river of the province and go 
vernment of Quixos and Macas in the kingdom 
of Quito ; which runs s. and receives the waters 
of the Tutapisco, Pauxi-yacu, Puninu, and others 
of less note , rises in the mountains called La 
Galera, runs 60 miles, and enters by the n. into 
the Napo, in lat. 12 X s. 

PAYANA, a river of the province and corre- 
gimiento of Piura in Peru, which runs w. and 
enters the sea in the bay of Machala. 

PAYANA, other two rivers, of the same name, 
in this province and kingdom, which run near 
to the above, and are distinguished by the titles 
of Second and Third. 



P A Z 

PAYANSOS, a barbarous nation of Indians, 
who dwell to the n. of the city of Guanuco, in 
the mountains of the Andes : bounded by the na 
tion of the barbarian Panataguas, and occupying 
a beautiful llanura^ surrounded by mountains, 
upwards of five leagues in extent. It is nume 
rous and warlike ; and their conversion was be 
gun in 1644 by the religious observers of San 
Francisco de Lima, who formed some settlements 
of them. 

PAYEL, a river of the province and govern 
ment of Yucatan, which enters the sea between 
the Niseco and the bay of Asension. 

PA YEN, a settlement of the kingdom of Chile, 
situate on the mountains, between the city of La 
Concepcion and Santiago. It is celebrated for 
an excellent mine of copper, from whence some 
pieces have been extracted of 50 to 100 quintals 
weight; but it is little worked, from the scarcity of 
hands ; [as also in consequence of the opposition 
of the Puelches, who inhabit that district. As 
fine a mine lias been since discovered at Curico.] 

[PAY JAN, a small town in the jurisdiction 
of rruxillo, in Peru, eight leagues s. of St. Pe 
dro.] 

[PAYRABA, a town and captainship in the n. 
division of Brazil.] 

[PAYTA. See PAITA.] 

PAYURUYAY, a river of the province and 
government of Mainas, in the kingdom of Quito; 
which rises s. of the lake Pachina, runs s. and 
enters the Maranon between the settlements of 
Yameos and Amaguas. 

PAZ, NUESTRA SENORA DE LA, or CHUQUI- 
AVO ; called also Pueblo Nuevo, a city of the 
kingdom of Peru : founded by Alonzo de Men- 
doza in 1548, and not in 1558, as some assert, in 
the ancient province of Pacajes, and in a beauti 
ful llanura, called Chuquiavo, by order of the 
licentiate Pedro de la Gasca, gov ernor of Peru : 
who gave it this name in memory of the pacifi 
cation of that kingdom from the civil wars it had 
experienced. 

It is the head of a bishopric, erected in 1605 
by the pontiff Paul V. It has a beautiful cathe 
dral-church, in which is venerated an image of 
Nuestra Senora del Pelar of Zaragoza, the gift 
of the emperor Charles V. ; four parishes, which 
are, El Sagrario, in which is reverenced a very 
small image of Jesus Nazarens, which, in 1622, 
underwent a miraculous sweat for several times, 
and to the evidence of the people ; Santa Bar 
bara; San Sebastian and San Pedro: five con 
vents of the religious orders of San Francisco ; 
Santo Domingo ; San Agustin ; La Merced ; 
San Juan de Dios, with an hospital; and a col- 



PAZ 



-e, which belonged to the Jesuits ; two monas 
teries of nuns, one of La Conception, another 
of barefooted Carmelites : a seminary college, 
with the dedicatory title of San Geronimo, for 
the instruction of youth, under the care of the 
Jesuits : and a house for recluse women. 

The territory of its situation is rough and un 
even, and its temperature cold, as bearing only 
three leagues from the cordillera. From this 
flows down a stream which intersects the town, 
and over which is thrown three stone bridges of 
one arch each. By this stream are frequently 
found washed up bits of gold of the finest quality; 
and, in 1730, a bit was found of the value of 
12,000 dollars, which was sent to the king. In 
the middle of the chief square is a beautiful 
fountain sprouting from three bodies of white 
stone. The country is fertile, pleasant, and 
abundant, in barley, papas, and coca. The word 
Chuquiavo is corrupted from Choqueyapu, which, 
in the Aimaran language, which is that of the 
natives, signifies an inheritance of gold. 

The bishop is suffragan to the archbishopric of 
Charcas, and not of Lima, as Mr. Martiniere as 
serts. The arms of this city, which were granted 
by the emperor Charles V., are a shield, and in 
the highest part of it an helmet and a dove with 
a branch of olive in its beak ; in the centre a 
crown ; below this, on one side, a lion, and on 
the other a lamb, both standing under a river, 
the motto being as follows : 

" Los discordes encontrados 
En paz y amor sejuntaron ; 
Y Pueblo de Paz fundaron 
Para perpetua. memorial 

The discordances, met together, 
United themselves in peace and love: 
And founded a settlement of peace 
In perpetual remembrance. 

It is 288 miles s. s. e. from Cuzco, 218 s. e. from 
Arequipa, 612 s. e. from Lima, and 234 w. of 
Sta. Cruz de la Sierra, and in lat. 17 30 s. long. 

68 25 a). 

Bishops who have presided in La Paz. 

1. Don Fr. Domingo deValderrama, of the order 
of Santo Domingo, native of Quito, a celebrated 
preacher and professor in the university of Lima: 
promoted from the archbishopric of Santo Do 
mingo to be first bishop of La Paz in 1606. He 
died in 1615. 

2. Don Pedro de Valencia, native of Lima; in 
which university he studied civil law and canons. 



and in both graduated as doctor : was chanter of 
that holy metropolitan church ; elected bishop of 
La Paz in 1616. After a most laudable zeal in 
the discharge of his duty, he died at 80 years of 
age in 1631. 

3. Don Feliciano de la Vega, native of Lima ; 
a man of extraordinary literature and talent : he 
was canon in his native place, chanter and pro- 
visor of the archbishop Don Bartolome Lobo 
Guerrero, and made governor of the archbishopric 
by Don Fernando Arias de Ugarte, commissary 
of crusade and of the inquisition, morning pro 
fessor of canons in that university ; and so pro 
found a lawyer, that Fr. Buenaventura de Salinas 
asserts, that of the four thousand sentences which 
he gave, civil or criminal, not one w r as ever re 
voked. He was elected bishop of Popayan, and 
from thence translated to the see of La Paz in 
1639, and promoted in the same year to the arch 
bishopric of Mexico. 

4. Don Alonso Franco de Luna, native of Ma 
drid ; collegiate in the chief college of San Ilde- 
fonso de Alcala, curate of the parish of San An 
dres in his native place, bishop of Nueva Viz- 
caya, and promoted to La Paz, where he died in 
1644. 

5. Don Fr. Francisco de la Sena, of the order 
of San Agustin, native of the city of Leon de 
Guanuco in Peru : he studied and read arts and 
theology, was master of studies, and in the uni 
versity of Lima noon and evening lecturer ; twice 
provincial in his religion and cdificador of the 
holy office ; presented to the bishopric of La Paz 
in 1645. He died before he took possession. 

6. Don Antonio de Castro y Castillo, native 
of Castro Xeris in the archbishopric of Burgos : 
he commenced his studies in the university of 
Alcala, and finished them at Salamanca, where 
he graduated as bachelor; also in Lima as licen 
tiate : he was curate of the grand church of Po- 
tosi, inquisitor of Lima for 20 years ; presented 
to the bishopric of Guamanga, which he re 
nounced, and afterwards to that of La Paz in 
1648. 

7. Don Fr. Francisco de Gamboa, of the order 
of San Agustin, evening theological lecturer; 
presented to the bishopric, but refused it. 

8. Don Martin de Velasco y Molina, native of 
the town of this name in Aragon; canon of Trux- 
illo, dean of Arequipa, penitentiary canon and 
chanter in the holy church of Lima ; morning 
lecturer in its university, provisor of the archbi 
shop Don Pedro de Villagomez; presented to 
the bishopric of Santa Marta, but which he did not 
accept, although he did of that of La Paz, in 1654, 

M 2 



84 



PAZ 



PAZ 



9. Don Fr. Bernardino de Cardenas, of whom 
we have spoken in the catalogue of the bishops 
of Paraguay ; and although it is there observed, 
that he was promoted to the church of Santa 
Cruz de la Sierra ; yet was he removed to that 
of La Paz in the same year of 1666, where he 
enjoyed greater quietude than he did in the 
former, and where he died. 

10. Don Fr. Gabriel de Guillistegui, also of 
the order of San Francisco, and bishop of Para 
guay ; promoted to the bishopric of La Paz in 
1671 : he died in 1675. 

11. Don. Fr. Bernardo Carrasco, of the order 
of S. Domingo, native of Lima, and provincial of 
his order ; presented to the bishopric of this dio- 
cess from that of La Paz in 1676. 

12. Don Fr. Diego Morcillo, of the order of 
La Santisima Trinidad Calzada, native of Rob- 
ledo in La Mancha, provincial of his religion ; 
elected bishop of Nicaragua, removed to that of 
La Paz in 1708, and promoted to the archbishop 
ric of Charcas in 1711. 

13. Don Mateo Villafane, of whom mention is 
made in the bishops of Popayan : he passed 
promoted from that church to this of La Paz 
in 1711. 

14. Don Agustin Rodrigueze Delgado ; pro 
moted from the bishopric of Panama in 1731. 

15. Don Salvador Bermudez ; promoted from 
the archbishopric of Charcas in 1746. 

16. Don Fr. Joseph de Peralta, of the order 
of St. Domingo ; promoted from the bishopric 
of Buenos Ayres in the aforesaid year, 1746, and 
died in the following. 

17. Don Matias de Ibanez, elected in 1748 : 
he died in 1752. 

18. Don Diego Antonio de Parada, canon of 
the cathedral of Astorga, many years pro visor of 
its bishopric ; elected to this of La Paz in 1752, 
and promoted to the metropolitan see of the 
archbishopric of Lima in 1761. 

19. Don Gregorio Francisco de Campos, 
elected in 1762, and who was actually govern 
ing in 1788. 

PAZ, SAN Luis DE LA, an alcaldia mayor and 
district of the kingdom and bishopric of Mechoa- 
can ; bounded s. e. by the jurisdiction of the town 
of Cadereita, w. by that of San Miguel el Grande, 
s. by that of Queretaro, and n. by that of San 
Luis de Potosi. It is very fertile, and abounds 
in vegetable productions, especially in vines, of 
which much wine and brandy are made, consti 
tuting the principal branches of the commerce of 
its limited jurisdiction ; this consisting of only 
the following settlements : 



Real de Pozos, 

San Francisco de los 

Amues, 

Real de Targea, 
PAZ, the capital of 



San Juan Baptista 

Tzichu, 
San Tomas Tierra 

Blanca. 
the same name, was 



founded by the Jesuits for the conversion of the 
infidels, and had in it a very good college. Its 
population is composed of 42 families of Spa 
niards, 68 of Mustees and Mulattoes, and 614 
of Indians, applied to the cultivation of maize ? 
which the territory produces in abundance ; as 
also of vines, from which they make great quan 
tities of wine and brandy, much esteemed through 
out the kingdom. It is 120 miles n. with an in 
clination to n.w. of Mexico, iu lat. 20 J 59 / n. 
long. 10028 / aj. 

PAZ, a settlement, with the dedicatory title of 
San Nicholas, in the province and government 
of Cartagena and Nuevo Reyno de Granada. It 
is of the district of the town of Sinii, and one of 
those new settlements founded by the governor 
Don Francisco Pimienta in 1776. 

PAZ, another, of the missions which were held 
by the Jesuits in California ; situate on the shore 
of the bay of the same name, at a small distance 
from the inner coast of the gulf. 

PAZ, another, with a good port, which is a 
parish of the French, in the part which they pos 
sess in the island St. Domingo : on the n. coast, 
between the bay of Mosquito and the settlement 
of San Luis. 

PAZCA. See PASCA. 

PAZCALA, a settlement of the head settle 
ment of the district of Clanapa, and alcaldia 
mayor of Tlapa in Nueva Espana. It contains 
38 families of Indians, who live by cultivating 
and trading iu grain. Six leagues from its head 
settlement. 

[PAZQUARO, a lake in Mexico or New 



PA2UELOS, a settlement of the province 
and government of Cumana or Nueva Anda- 
lucia; situate on the coast, at the mouth of the 
river Nervi, and e. of the city of Barcelona. 

PAZULCO, a settlement of the head settle 
ment of the district of Tepoxtlan, and alcaldia 
mayor of Cuernavaca in Nueva Espana. It con 
tains 130 families of Indians, is annexed to the 
curacy of Ayacapixtla, and is situate on an en 
tirely barren plain, so that it is without all com 
merce, and supported by the mere labour of the 
inhabitants. It has been in a state of great dila 
pidation, or nearly depopulated since the year 
1744, when on one of the nights of Shrove-tide 
were murdered there of the ministers of justice 






P E B 

of the district of Ayotapec, who came in an un 
timely manner amongst the people whilst they 
were enjoying themselves. 

[PEACE, an island on the coast of Nova 
Scotia, a little to the s. of Mirachi point] 

[PEACE River, in N. America, was visited by 
Mackenzie in the year 1789 ; he ascended it to 
its source, and thence to the Pacific ocean, mak 
ing many discoveries, which he judiciously nar 
rated in his journal. Previously to this voyage 
this celebrated traveller had embarked from fort 
Chepewyan, in lat. 58 n. long. 110 w. from 
Greenwich, and with the greatest fortitude, un 
der embarrassing and perilous circumstances, ex 
plored with assiduity the n. region to nearly lat. 
70 n. where obstruction by ice compelled him 
to return to fort Chepewyan.] 

[PEACHAM, a township in Caledonia county, 
Vermont ; lies w. of Barnet on Connecticut river. 
It contains 365 inhabitants.] 

[PEACOCK, a township in Buck s county, 
Pennsylvania.] 

PEAD, a settlement of the island of Barba- 
does, in the s. part near the coast. 

[PEAKS OF OTTER, are thought to be the 
highest part of the Blue Ridge, or any other of 
that part of N.America, measuring from their 
base. The height is 4000 feet ; which, however, 
is not one-fifth of the height of the mountains of 
S. America.] 

[PEARL, an island in the &amp;gt;-ulf of Mexico, 
towards the mouth of the Mississippi, a few 
leagues from Dauphin island ; about six or seven 
miles in length, and four in breadth.] 

[PEARL, a river which rises in the Chactaw 
country, in the w. part of Georgia, has a s. 
course to the gulf of Mexico, and is navigable 
upwards of 150 miles. Its principal mouths are 
near the entrance at the e. end of the Regolets, 
through which is the passage to lake Ponchar- 
train. It has seven feet at its entrance, and deep 
water afterwards. In 1769 there were some set 
tlements on this river, where they raised tobacco, 
indigo, cotton, rice, Indian command all sorts of 
vegetables. The land produces a variety of tim 
ber, fit for pipe and hogshead staves, masts, 
yards, and all kinds of plank for ship-building.] 

[PEARN S Point, on the w. side of the island 
of Antigua, and the w. side of Mosquito cove. 
Off it are the Five Islands.] 

PEBAS Y CAUMARES, SAN IGNACIO DE, 
a settlement of the province and government of 
Mainas in the kingdom of Quito ; situate at the 
mouth of the river Shiquita, at its entrance into 
the Maraiion. 



FED 



85 



PEBOKE, a small river of Nova Scotia or 
Acadia in N. America, which runs e. between 
the coast and the bay of Fundy, and enters the 
Cheben. 

PECA, a settlement of the province and go 
vernment of Jaen de Bracamoros in the kingdom 
of Quito. 

PECHE, ANCE DE LA, a bay on the e. coast 
of lake Superior in N. America. 

PECHELIN, a river of the province and go 
vernment of Cartagena in the Nuevo Reyno de 
Granada. It rises close to the town of Maria, 
runs w. and enters the sea near the town of San 
tiago de Tolu. 

PECHERA, a settlement of the missions which 
were held by the Jesuits, in the province of Ta- 
raumara and kingdom of Nueva Vizcaya. Thirty- 
two leagues w. s. w. one quarter s. of the town 
and real of mines of San Felipe Chiguagua. 

PECHEURS, an island of the N. Sea, near 
the coast of Guayana, in the part possessed by 
the French ; situate at the mouth of the river 
Aprovak. It is half a league long, but is very 
narrow, covered with trees, and having a sand 
bank, which extends another half league to the 
n. and forms two channels, of which that to the 
left is the best, as it has three fathoms depth of 
water, whereas the other has only two. 

PECKS, a small island of the N. Sea, near the 
coast of New Jersey ; between port Great Egg 
and the island of Sudley. 

[PECWALKET, an ancient Indian village, 
now called Fryburg. Sixty miles from the sea.] 
PECLLAN SIMIQUIES, a barbarous nation 
of Indians, descendants of the Mautas, who used 
to occupy the country of the coast in the pro 
vince called, at the present day, Puerto Viejo, 
in the government of Guayaquil ; subjected by 
the emperor Hayna Capac, thirteenth monarch 
of Peru. It is at present entirely extinguished. 

PECOIQUEN, a river of the island of La 
Laxa in the kingdom of Chile, which runs zp. and 
enters the Vergara. 

PECOMPTUCK, an abundant river of the 
province and colony of New England in N, 
America. 

PECOS, a settlement of the kingdom of 
Nuevo Mexico in N. America; situate at the 
source of a river which enters the Grande del 
Norte, between the settlements of Tesuque and 
Santa Fe, 

PECURIES, a settlement of the missions which 
are held by the religious of San Franciso in the 
kingdom of Nuevo Mexico. 

[PEDEE, a river which rises in N. Carolina, 



86 



FED 



where it is called Yadkin river. In S. Carolina 
it takes the name of Pedee ; and receiving the 
waters of Lynche s creek, Little Pedee, and 
Black river, it joins the Wakkamaw river near 
Georgetown. These united streams, with the 
accession of a small creek on which George 
town stands, from Winyaw bay, which, about 
12 miles below, communicates with the ocean.] 

PEDERNALES, a small river of the island 
St. Domingo, which rises in the sierras of Ba- 
ruco, runs w. through a long strip of land of 
the s. coast, and enters the sea between cape 
Colorado and the bay of Puer. 

PEDERNALES, another river, of this name, in 
the province and government of Florida, which 
runs s. and enters the sea between the Apalachi- 
cola and the point of Perro. 

PEDERNALES, a point of land or extremity of 
the coast, which looks to the e. of the island of 
Cuba. 

PEDERNALES, another, of the s. coast of the 
same island, close to that of Maisi. 

PEDI, an abundant river of S. Carolina, 
which runs s. e. for many leagues, and enters the 
sea by different mouths. 

PEDI, another, a small river in the same pro 
vince, which runs s. and unites itself with the 
Petite to enter the Pedi. 

[PEDRA Shoals, in the W. Indies, to the s. 
of Jamaica, extend from lat. 16 45 to 17 30 n. 
and from long. 76 28 to 78 W w.~] 

PEDRAL, S. JOSEPH DEL, otherwise called 
CHAMPAN, a settlement of the government of 
San Juan Jiron in the Nuevo Reyno de Gra 
nada, on the shore of the river Grande la Mag 
dalena, 16 leagues below the port of Carare, and 
eight above the fort of Morales, and 24 from its 
capital. It is of an hot and sickly temperature, 
but abounding in cacao, of which the inhabi 
tants, amounting to about 100, reap a great crop. 

[PEDRAS Point, on the coast of Brazil, is 
seven leagues e. s. e. from the strait of St. John s 
island, and 75 from cape North. Also a point 
on the same coast 10 leagues zo.n.w. of Bran- 
dihi bay.] 

[PEDRAS, a river on the n. w. side of Punta 
des Pedras, at the s. extremity of Amazon river.] 
PEDRAZA, a small city of the province and 
government of Maracaibo in the Nuevo Reyno 
de Granada ; founded by Gonzalo Liduena, in 
1591, who gave it the name in honour of his na 
tive place in Estremadura. The infidel Indians 
destroyed it in 1614, and it was afterwards re 
built by Captain Diego de Luna. It is in the 
district of the city of Merida ; situate amidst 



P E I) 

some lofty and craggy mountains, and is fertile 
in cacao, tobacco, maize, yucas, plantains, &amp;c. 
Its temperature is hot and very sickly, so that it 
was abandoned by the curate and the rest of the 
inhabitants, save by some 30 barbarian and un 
civilized Indians. 

PEDRAZA, a settlement of the province and 
government of Santa Marta in the same king 
dom, of the district of the Rio del Hacha ; si 
tuate on the shore of a river which enters the 
sea in the point of San Agustin. 

PEDREGAL, a small reduced settlement of 
the district of Tocaima, and government of Mari- 
quita in the Nuevo Reyno de Granada ; situate 
on the further shore of the river Bogota, which 
is passed there en tarn-vita. It is of an hot tem 
perature, but healthy ; abounding in sugar canes, 
maize, yucas, plantains, &amp;c. 

PEDREGAL, another, in the province and go 
vernment of Venezuela, of the same kingdom as 
the former ; situate s. one ciuarter w. of the citj 
of Coro, between the rivers seco and Tamayo. 

PEDREGAL, another, of the province and cor- 
regimiento of Tacunga in the kingdom of Quito ; 
situate e. of that of Alausi. 

PEDRERA, a settlement of the missions which 
are held by the Carmelite fathers of Portugal, in 
the province and country of Las Amazonas ; si 
tuate on the shore of the Rio Negro. 

PEDRERO, a settlement of the province and 
country of Las Amazonas in the territory of the 
Portuguese ; situate on the shore of the Negro, 
as is the former, opposite the mouth of the river 
Paravillanas. 

PEDRITO, a settlement of the province and 
government of Santa Marta in the Nuevo Reyno 
de Granada ; on the shore of the Rio Grande de 
la Magdalena. 

PEDRO, S. a settlement of the head settle 
ment of the district, and alcaldia mayor of Hue- 
jutla, in NuevaEspana; inhabited by 35 fami 
lies of Indians, who live by sowing maize, French 
beans, and cultivating many fruit trees. It is 
annexed to the curacy of its capital, from whence 
it lies eight leagues to the n. In its district are 
found 10 cultivated estates, in the which are In 
dians distributed in the following proportions ; 
in La Candelaria are 67, in La Herradura 24, 
in Tepozteco 20, in Tecal 12, in Tepanctlican 20, 
in Tuzantla 64, in Canchitlan 140, in Zitlan 25, 
in Los Romeros 43, and in San Felipe 45. In 
all these they make loaf-sugar, selling to the 
amount of lOOOcargas (loads) annually, this being 
their only commerce, owing to the drought and 
want of pastures. 



FED 

PEDRO, S. another settlement, of the pro 
vince and government of Santa Marta in the 
Nuevo Reyno de Granada ; situate on the shore 
of the river Grande de la Magdalena, e. of the 
town of Tamalameque. 

PEDRO, S. another, of the head settlement of 
the district of Amatepec, and alcaldia mayor of 
Zultepec in Nueva Esparla ; of a warm and moist 
temperature. It contains 11 families of Indians, 
who maintain themselves by breeding the larger 
cattle, and by sowing maize and some fruits. 
Five leagues s. of its head settlement. 

PEDRO, S. another of the head settlement of 
Quechula, and alcaldia mayor of Tepeaca in the 
same kingdom. It contains nine families of 
JWustces, and 18 of Indians ; and is very close to 
its head settlement. 

PEDRO, S. another, of the alcaldia mayor of 
Huamelula in the same kingdom ; situate on the 
top of a mountain. It is of a mild temperature, 
and has various streams of sweet water, which 
fertilize its district. It is inhabited by 25 fami 
lies of Indians, who trade in cochineal, in rosa 
ries, which they make of a fruit called tepexilote. 
Three leagues w. of Pochutla. 

PEDRO, S. another, of the head settlement of 
the district of Huehuetlan, and alcaldia mayor of 
Cuicatlan in the same kingdom : situate between 
two lofty mountains, with 97 families of Indians, 
employed in the cultivation and commerce of 
cochineal and cotton, of which they make woven 
stuffs. One league from its head settlement. 

PEDRO, S. another, of the head settlement of 
Zanguio, and alcaldia mayor of Zamora in the 
same kingdom ; situate on the skirt of a lofty 
and woody mountain, of a somewhat hot and 
moist temperature, and containing 22 families of 
Indians. Three leagues n. of its head settle 
ment. 

PEDRO, S. another, of the head settlement of 
Taximaroa, and alcaldia mayor of Maravatio in 
the same kingdom, and in the province and bi 
shopric of Mechoacan. It contains 46 families 
of Indians, and is a little more than three leagues 
s. of its head settlement. 

PEDRO, S. another, which is the head settle 
ment of the district of the alcaldia mayor of Vil- 
lalta in the same kingdom : of a cold tempera 
ture, containing 82 families of Indians, and being 
distant somewhat more than eight leagues s. of 
its capital. 

PEDRO, S. another, of the head settlement of 
Papalotipac, and alcaldia mayor of Cuicatlan in 
the same kingdom. It contains 15 families of 
Indians, occupied in the collecting and prepar- 



P E D 



87 



ing of saltpetre, cochineal, and cotton, of which 
they make various woven stuffs. 

PEDRO, S. another, of the head settlement of 
the alcaldia mayor of La Barca in the kingdom of 
Nueva Galicia. Three leagues e. of the capital, 
and in its district, are many opulent cultivated 
estates, occupying a space of 17 leagues to the e. 
as far as Tarimoro. 

PEDRO, S. another, with the surname of Apos- 
tol, of the head settlement of the town of the 
Marquiseate del Valle, and the alcaldia mayor of 
Quatro Villas. It has 82 families of Indians, 
employed in the cultivation and commerce of 
wheat, cochineal, maize, fruits, woods, coal, and 
lime. In its vicinity are various ranchos (tempo 
rary habitations) for labour, belonging to the 
different merchants of the city of Oaxaca. Two 
leagues s.e. of its capital. 

PEDRO, S. another, which is the head settle 
ment of the district of the alcaldia mayor of To- 
nala. It is of a cold temperature, contains 83 
families of Indians, who cultivate the seeds and 
fruits of the country, in which consists their com 
merce, and it is two leagues K&amp;gt;. of its capital. 

PEDRO, S. another, of the head settlement, 
and alcaldia mayor of Compostela in the king 
dom of Nueva Galicia : on the shore of the 
river Tepee, and 10 leagues from its capital. 

PEDRO, S. another, of the head settlement 
and alcaldia mayor of Barca in the same kingdom 
as the former, close to its capital to the w. 

PEDRO, S. another, of the head settlement 
and alcaldia mayor of Toluca in Nueva Espana, 
with 141 families of Indians; at a small distance 
w. of its capital. 

PEDRO, S. another, of the head settlement of 
Zumpahuacan, and alcaldia mayor of Marinalco 
in the same kingdom ; distant a short league 
from its capital. 

PEDRO, S. another, of the head settlement and 
alcaldia mayor of Tetela Xonotla in the same 
kingdom : a league and a half w. of the same 
head settlement. 

PEDRO, S. another, of the head settlement 
and alcaldia mayor of Tecali in the same king 
dom ; with 17 Indian families. 

PEDRO, S. another, of the alcaldia mayor of 
Nexapa in the same kingdom ; with 51 Indian 
families. 

PEDRO, S. another, of the province and cor- 
regimiento of Guanta in Peru ; annexed to the 
curacy of Tiellas. 

PEDRO, S. another, of the province and cor- 
regimiento ) of Lucanas in the same kingdom ; an 
nexed to the curacy of Pucquin, 



88 



FED 



PEDRO, S. another, of the province and cor- 
regimicnto of Tomina in the same kingdom ; an 
nexed to the curacy of Sopachui. 

PEDRO, S. another, a small settlement or ward 
of the district and jurisdiction of the city of Val- 
ladolid in the province and bishopric of Mecho- 
acan and kingdom of Nueva Espana. 

PEDRO, S. another, with the surname of Mar- 
tir, in the head settlement of Tepalcaltepec, and 
alcaldia mayor of Nejapa in Nueva Espana; si 
tuate on the plain of a deep glen, surrounded by 
many mountains of a great height, and on which 
the Indians, the inhabitants, plant their fig trees. 

PEDRO, S. another, of the province and go 
vernment of Popayan in the Nuevo Reyno de 
Granada : on the shore of the river Caquetii, 
near its source. 

PEDRO, S. another, of the island and govern 
ment of Margarita : on the s. coast, opposite the 
coast of Tierra Firme. 

PEDRO, S. another, of the province and go 
vernment of Sonora in Nueva Espana, in the 
country of the [Cocomaricopas Indians ; on the 
shore of the river Grande de Gila. 

PEDRO, S. another, of the province and alcaldia 
mayor of Vera Paz in the kingdom of Gua 
temala. 

PEDRO, S. another, of the province and cor- 
regimiento of Quillota in the kingdom of Chile ; 
on the shore of the river Quillota. 

PEDRO, S. another, of the province and go 
vernment of Tucuman in Peru ; of the jurisdic 
tion of the city of Cordoba ; on the shore of a 
river. 

PEDRO, S. another, of the province and go 
vernment of Buenos Ayres, in the same king 
dom as the former ; on the shore of the river 
Parana, and at the mouth where it enters the 
Sala. [This settlement constitues a parish, lying 
on the w. bank of the Parana, about 70 miles 
n.w. of Buenos Ayres. Lat. 33 39 / 47" s. Long. 
59 53 w.~\ 

[PEDRO, S. a settlement of Indians, of the pro 
vince and government of Buenos Ayres ; situate 
on a branch of the Parana, about 100 miles n. of 
Santa Fe. Lat. 29 57 s. Long. 60 17 a).] 

PEDRO, S. another, of the head settlement of 
the alcaldia mayor of Juchipila in Nueva Espana. 
Six leagues w. of its head settlement. 

PEDRO, S. another, a small settlement or ward 
of the head settlement of Texmelucan, and al 
caldia mayor of Guajozingo in the same kingdom. 

PEDRO, S. another, of the missions which were 
held by the Jesuits, in the province of Tepe- 
guana and kingdom of Nueva Vizcaya. 



FED 

PEDRO, S. another, which is a real of mines 
of silver, of the province of Taraumara and king 
dom of Nueva Vizcaya; on the shore of a river 
which enters the Conchos, and 120 leagues from 
the capital Guadiana, in about lat. 28 . 

PEDRO, S. another, of the missions which were 
held by the Jesuits in the province of Topia and 
kingdom of Nueva Vizcaya; in the midst of a 
sierra of that name, and on the shore of the 
river Piastla. 

PEDRO, S. another, of the province and go 
vernment of Venezuela in the Nuevo Reyno de 
Granada: founded in the sierra in the seven 
teenth century. 

PEDRO, S. another, of the province and go 
vernment of Quijos and Macas in the kingdom 
of Quito : one of the missions of the Sucumbios 
Indians, which were founded and held under the 
charge of the Jesuits. 

PEDRO, S. another, of the province and go 
vernment of Maracaibo in the Nuevo Reyno de 
Granada ; between the coast and the great lake. 

PEDRO, S. another, of the province and corre- 
{rimiento of Rancagua in the kingdom of Chile ; 
in the district of which, towards the coast, is a 
lake called de Santo Domingo, as it is between 
an estate which belongs to the convent of the re 
ligious of this order in the city of Santiago, and 
another called Bucalemu, where the Jesuits had 
a good college, and the rich and abundant gold 
mine which was discovered 50 years since. 

PEDRO, S. another, with the addition of No- 
lasco, of the missions which were held by the 
Carmelite fathers of Portugal, in the territory 
and country of Las Amazonas ; on the shore of 
this river. 

PEDRO, S. another, of the missions which were 
held by the Jesuits in the province and govern 
ment of Mainas and kingdom of Quito ; situate 
on the shore of the river Napo, and at the mouth 
where this is entered by the Aguarico. 

PEDRO, S. another, which is a real of silver 
mines, of the province and government of So- 
nora. 

PEDRO, S. another, of the province and go 
vernment of Santa Marta in the Nuevo Reyno 
de Granada ; on the shore of the river Canas, 
near the coast, in the country of the Taironas 
Indians. 

PEDRO, S. another, of the province and go 
vernment of Honduras in the kingdom of Gua 
temala. 

PEDRO, S. another, of the island of Guada- 
lupe, one of the Antilles ; situate at the n. head, 
with a good fort for its defence. 



FED 

PEDRO, S. another, of the island Martinique, 
where the French have a fort. 

PEDRO, S. another, of the missions which were 
held by the Jesuits in the province and govern 
ment of Mainas, of the kingdom of Quito ; si 
tuate on the shore of the Maranon, and distinct 
from the other of the same name, of which we 
have already spoken. It is near the settlement 
of San Pablo de los Omaguas. 

PEDRO, S. another, of the province and go 
vernment of Moxos in the same kingdom as the 
Ibrmer. It was the military rendezvous of the 
expedition unsuccessfully undertaken by briga 
dier Don Francisco Pestana in 1768. 

PEDRO, S. another, of the island of Curazao ; 
situate on the coast of a bay in the n. part. 

PEDRO, S. another, of the province and go 
vernment of Maracaibo ; on the shore of the lake 
of this name, and the river Cuervo to the s.. 

PEDRO, S. another, of the province and alcal- 
dia mayor of Zacapula in the kingdom of Gua 
temala. 

PEDRO, S. another, of the province and alcal- 
dia mayor of Chiapa in the same kingdom. 

PEDRO, S. another, of the province and alcal- 
dia mayor of Zacatopeques in the same kingdom. 

PEDRO, S. another, of the province and corre- 
gimiento of Vera Paz in the same kingdom. 

PEDRO, S. another, with the addition of Nuevo, 
in the province and captainship of Todos Santos 
and kingdom of Brazil ; situate on the shore of 
the river Paraguaca, near the bay. 

PEDRO, S. another, of the province and king 
dom of Guatemala. 

PEDRO, S. a large city in the province and 
captainship of Rey in Brazil ; at the mouth of the 
great lake of Los Patos. 

PEDRO, S. a town of the province and corre- 
gimicnto of Quillota in the kingdom of Chile. 

PEDRO, S. a large river of the province of Ta- 
raumara and kingdom of Nueva Vizcaya in N. 
America. It rises in lat. 28, runs nearly from 
e. to w. and enters the Grande del Norte on the 
confines of the province of Coaguila, where this 
province is divided from the kingdom of Nuevo 
Mexico. It is very pleasant, since its shores are 
covered with poplar trees, and as it has in one 
part an extensive pasture where neat cattle are 
bred. 

PEDRO, S. another river, of the province and 
government of Veragua in the kingdom ofTierra 
Firme. It rises in the part of the s. coast by the 
mountain of Tabaraba, and following its course 
to that rhumb, enters the Martin Grande just 
before this runs into the sea. 

VOL. IV. 



FED 



89 



PEDRO, S. another, of the province and king 
dom of Quito, which rises near the settlement of 
St. Domingo, and runs n. 

PEDRO, S. another, of the province and go 
vernment of Venezuela in the Nuevo Reyno de 
Granada. It rises in a mountain near the city 
of Nirua, runs nearly from n. to s. and unites it 
self with another to enter the Coxede. 

PEDRO, S. another, a large and abundant river 
of the kingdom of Brazil, formed from several 
which rise in the mountains of the country and 
territory of the Guaranis Indians in various di 
rections. It follows its course along the coast, 
and very close to it, resembling a large lake, 
until it enters the sea, close to the fort of San 
Pedro ; but detaching another arm to form the 
lake ImerK 

PEDRO, S. another, of the province and go 
vernment of Texas in Nueva Espaiia. 

PEDRO, S. another, of the kingdom of Nueva 
Vizcaya in N. America. 

PEDRO, S. another, of the name of San Pablo, 
in the province and alcaldia mayor of Tabasco, 
which at its source is called Lodazal. 

PEDRO, S. another, of the province and go 
vernment of Venezuela in the Nuevo Reyno de 
Granada. It rises in the sierra, runs n. and en 
ters the lake Maracaibo. 

PEDRO, S. another, of the province and go 
vernment of Florida, which runs w. and enters 
the sea between the fall of Anclote and those of 
St. Martin. 

PEDRO, S; another, called also De San Pablo, 
in the province and government of Vera Cruz, 
in the alcaldia mayor of Tabasco. It enters the 
sea close to the settlement of Almeria. 

PEDRO, S. a bay in the s. coast of the straits 
iof Magellan, close to the cape of La Perdicion. 
It is called also by some, De la Navidad. 

PEDRO, S. another, on. the c. coast of Florida-, 
without the channel of Bahama. , fc^ 

PEDRO, S. a port on the s: coast of the island 
of Cuba; between the Capilia.de Santiago and 
the river De Sevilla. 1 *T 

PEDRO, S. another bay, on! the s. coast of the 
island of Jamaica. e/[J 

PEDRO, S. a bay on the coast, which lies be 
tween the river La Plata and the straits of Ma 
gellan. It is in lat. 51 20 s. between the river 
of Los Gallegos and the bay Grande. 

PEDRO, S. a small island of the S. Sea, in 
the bay of Panama, of the province and king 
dom of Tierra Firme; opposite the gulf of San 
Miguel. 

PEDRO, S. another island, also small, of the 

N 



90 P E H 

gulf of California ; situate in the interior of the 
same, and close to the coast of Nueva Espana. 

PEDRO, S. a fort of the kingdom of Chile ; si 
tuate on the opposite side of the river Biobio, as 
a frontier to the Araucanos Indians, who burnt 
and destroyed it in 1599. 

PEDRO, S. a lake in the kingdom of Nueva 
Vizcaya, formed from the river Las Nasas. 

[PEDRO POINT, Great, is on the s. coast of 
the island of Jamaica. From Portland point to 
this point, the course iso&amp;gt;. by n. about 11 leagues. 
About s. three-quarters e. distance 14 leagues 
from point Pedro, lies the easternmost Pedro 
keyj 

[PEDRO POINT, Little, on the s. coast of the 
same island, lies e. of great Pedro point, within 
a shoal partly dry ; but has five fathoms within, 
and 10 on the outer edge of it.] 
[PEDRO. See PETER.] 

PEDROSA, a settlement of the province and 
captainship of San Vincente in Brazil ; situate be 
tween the settlements of Cubar and Escamel. 

PEE, Port, a settlement of the French, in the 
part they possess in the island St. Domingo. 
Fourteen leagues from Guarico. 

[PEEK S Kill, a small post-town in W. Ches 
ter county, New York ; on the e. side of Hud 
son s river, and n. side of the creek of its name, 
four miles from its mouth.- It is 14 miles s. of 
Fish Kill, and 40 n. of New York. In the winter 
of 1780, General Washington encamped on the 
strong grounds in this vicinity.] 

PEGEBSCUL, a fall of the river Amaris- 
coggin in the province of Continent, near its 
mouth. 

PEGUAS, a barbarous nation of Indians of 
the province and government of Quixos and 
Macas in the kingdom of Quito, who dwell 
between the rivers Chamangui to the e. and Pu- 
ninu to the w. It was anciently very numerous, 
and occupied nearly the whole of the province. 
The principal settlement had the name of the 
former of the two rivers aforesaid, as being si 
tuate on its s . shore. This nation is at present 
reduced to a few Indians, who wander about the 
woods in the vicinity of the river Napo, main 
taining themselves by fishing and the chase. 

[PEGUNNOCK, a n. w. branch of Passaik 
river in New Jersey, which rises in Sussex 
county. The town of its name lies between it 
and Rockaway, another branch 5. of this river, 
n. w. of Morristown.] 

[PEHUENCHES, a valley of the Andes, in 
habited by Indians of this name in lat. 34 40 s. 
in the kingdom of Chile, In it are 11 springs of 



PEL 

very clear and limpid water, which overflow 
the surface, and become crystalized into a salt 
as white as snow. This valley is about 15 miles 
in circumference, and is entirely covered, for the 
depth of six feet, with a crust of salt, which is 
collected by the inhabitants in large pieces, and 
used for all domestic purposes. 

For a description of the Indians inhabiting 
these parts, see Index to additional matter con 
cerning CHILE. Chap. IV.] 

PEINE, a settlement of the province and cor- 
regimiento of Atacama in Peru, and of the arch 
bishopric of Charcas ; annexed to the curacy of 
its capital. 

PEJENA, a small river of the province and 
government of Guayana or Nueva Andalucia. 
It runs w. and enters the Orinoco close to the 
settlement and torrent of the Carichana. 

PEJ ENDING, a settlement of the province 
and government of Popayan in the kingdom of 
Quito ; belonging to the district of the town of 
Pasto. 

[PEJEPSCOT, or PEJIPSKAEG Falls, in An- 
droscoggin river. See KENNEBECK River, &amp;c.] 

PEL A DO, a settlement of the province and 
captainship of Rey in Brazil ; situate w. of the 
settlement of Porcos. 

PEL ADO, a very lofty mountain, destitute of 
tree or plant, in the province and government of 
Darien and kingdom of Tierra Firme, on the 
coast of the S. Sea, on the side of the point of 
Garachine ; which may be discovered at a great 
distance at sea. 

PELADO, a river, called Cano Pelado, of the 
province and captainship of Rey in Brazil. It 
runs s. s. e. and enters the great lake of Los 
Patos. 

PELAGATOS, CERRO DE, a lofty mountain 
of the province and corregimiento of Truxillo in 
Peru. 

PELAN, a small river of the island St. Chris 
topher, one of the Antilles. It enters the sea on 
the s. w. coast, between the great road and the 
point of Palmites. 

PELAYO, S. a settlement of the province and 
government of Cartagena in the Nuevo Reyno 
de Granada, and of the district of the town of 
Tolu ; founded in 1776 by the governor D. Fran 
cisco Pimienta. 

(TELDEHUES, a mine of the kingdom of 
Chile, near Santiago. It produced daily upwards 
of 1500 pounds weight of gold, but being sud 
denly inundated the workmen were compelled 
to abandon it.] 

PELECAHUIN, a settlement of the govern- 



PEL 

uient of Valdivia in the kingdom of Chile ; 
situate on the shore and at the source of the 
river Valdivia. 

PELE, PELER or PELADA, a remarkable point 
of the . coast of lake Erie in Canada. 

PELE, also an island near the same point in 
the above lake. 

PELECHUCO, a settlement of the province 
and corre%imiento of Larecaja in Peru. 

PELEHUE, a settlement of Indians of the 
kingdom of Chile : near the sea coast, and on the 
shore of the river Tolten. 

PELEHUE, another settlement, of the same 
kingdom, in the island of Laxa ; on the shore of 
the river of Los Sauces. 

PELEPELQUA, a creek on the coast of the 
straits of Magellan, on the side of the river of 
the Pasage. 

PELES, a settlement of the province of Pen- 
sylvania in N. America, where the English have 
built a fort for the defence of the establishment 
which they founded there ; e. of the fort of Quene 
of the French, and not far from the river Ohio. 

[PELESON, a name sometimes applied to 
Clinch River ; which see.] 

[PELHAM, a township of Massachusetts, in 
Hampshire county, 1 1 miles n. e. of Northampton, 
and 78 w. of Boston. It was incorporated in 
1742, and contains 1040 inhabitants.] 

[PELHAM, a township of Rockingham county, 
New Hampshire, situate on the s. state line, 
which separates it from Dracut in Massachusetts. 
It lies on the e. side of Beaver river, 25 miles s. 
w. of Exeter, and 27 n. of Boston. It was incor 
porated in 1746, and contains 791 inhabitants.] 

[PELHAM, a township of New York, situate in 
W. Chester county, bounded s. and e. by the 
Sound, n. by the n. bounds of the manor of Pel- 
ham, including New City, Hart, and Applesby s 
islands. It contains 199 inhabitants ; of whom 
27 are electors, and 38 slaves.] 

[PELICAN, GREAT, an island a mile long and 
very narrow, e. of the bay of Mobile in the gulf 
of Mexico. Its concave side is towards the e. 
end of Dauphin island. Hawk s bay lies between 
these two islands. Little Pelican island is a 
small sand key, s. e. of great Pelican. Its e. curve 
meets a large shoal extending from Mobile Point.] 

[PELICAN, ISLANDS, on the s. coast of the island 
of Jamaica, are situate off the point so called, 
o. of Port Royal harbour.] 

[PELICAN, a small island at the s. w. point of 
the island of Antigua.] 

[PELICAN ROCKS, lie in Runaway bay, on the 
w. side of the island of Antigua, towards the 



P E M 



91 



n. a), they lie under water, and are very dan 
gerous.] 

[PELICAN SHOALS, small patches of sand banks 
about half a mile from the shore of the s. w. coast 
of the island of Barbadoes.] 

PELILEO, a settlement of the province and 
corre&amp;lt;rimiento of Riobamba, in the district and 
jurisdiction of Ambato of the kingdom of Quito; 
celebrated for the ability and ingenuity of the 
natives in carpenters work ; articles being made 
by them which vie in elegance with those of 
European manufacture. The climate here is 
benign and healthy. Its parish church is one of 
the best in the kingdom ; 10 miles 5. e of Ambato, 
and three w. of Palate, in lat. 1 21 s. 

PELINGARA, a river of the province and 
corregimiento of Piura in Peru. It runs w. and 
passes opposite the settlement to which it gives 
its name, and which is situate on its shore, and 
enters the Catamayu, opposite the settlement of 
Quirocotillo by the s. part, in lat. 4 44 *. 

PELISIPE, a river of N. Carolina, which runs 
s. s. w. and enters the Cherakees. 

PELOTAS, a settlement of the province and 
captainship of Rey in Brazil, near the coast, and 
at the source of the river Uruguay. 

PELOTAS, a river of the above province and 
kingdom ; which runs s. s. e. and enters the 
great lake of Los Patos. 

[PEMAGON, a settlement of the district of 
Maine, seven miles from Denney s river, and 14 
from Moose island.] 

[PEMAQUID, a bay on the sea-coast of Lin 
coln county, district of Maine. It lies e. of 
Sheepscot river, and contains a number of islands, 
many of which are under cultivation.] 

[PEMAQUID POINT, on the w. side of the above 
bay, lies two miles e. of Booth bay, and about 
four leagues n. w. of Menhegan island. Lat. 43 
48 n. Long. 69 27 a&amp;gt;.] 

[PEMBROKE, a township of Massachusetts, 
in Plymouth county, 31 miles s. by e. of Boston- 
It was incorporated in 1712, and contains 1954 
inhabitants. It lies IS miJtea.fihpm the mouth of 
the North river, and vessels? pf 300 tons have 
been built here. See NORTH RIVER.] 

[PEMBROKE, the Suncook of the Indians, a 
township of New Hampshire, in Rockingham 
county, on the e. side of Merrimack river, four 
miles s. e. of Concord. It lies upon two small 
rivers, Bowcook and Suncook, which run a s. by 
w. course into Merrimack river. In 1728, it was 
settled, and called Lovewell s town. It was incor 
porated in 1759, and contains 956 inhabitants.] 

[PEMIGEWASSET, a river of New Hamp- 



02 PEN 

shire, which springs from the e. part of the ridge 
called the Height of Land. Moose-hillock 
Mountain gives it one branch ; another comes 
from the s. w. extremity of the White Mountains, 
and a third comes from the township of Fran- 
conia. Its length is about 50 miles ; its course 
generally s. and it receives from both sides a 
number of streams. Winnipiseogee river, comes 
from the lake of that name, and unites its waters 
with the Pemigewasset at the lower end of San- 
born town. From this junction, the confluent 
stream bears the name of Merrimack, to the sea. 
See MERRIMACK.] 

PEMBERRY, a river of the province of 
Pennsylvania, in N. America. 

PEMAPECKA, a river of the same province 
as the former. 

PEMNAQUID, a river of the province of 
New England in N. America. 

PENA, LA, a settlement of the jurisdiction of 
the city of La Palma, in the corregimiento of 
Tunja in the Nuevo Reyno de Granada ; situate 
in a country rough and mountainous, and full of 
swamps. It produces cotton, tobacco, maize, 
sugar cane, plantains and yucas, and breeds much 
swine cattle : this being its principal commerce. 
It contains 300 housekeepers and a few Indians. 

PENA, BLANCA, another settlement, of the 
province and corregimiento of Coquimbo in the 
kingdom of Chile. 

PENA, another, with the surname of Oradada, 
in the coast of the province and corregimiento of 
Oercado in Peru, opposite the island of Fronton. 

PENA, another, called Rancho de la Pena, in 
the missions which are held by the religious of 
San Francisco of Nuevo Mexico. 

PENA, a cape or point of land on the n. coast 
of the island St. Domingo, between the bay of 
Balsamo and cape Frances the old. 

PENA, another point, on the coast of the pro 
vince and captainship of Seara in Brazil, between 
the coast of Porcelados and the bay of Iguape. 

PENACHI, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Piura in the kingdom of Quito. 

PENAGARA, a very lofty mountain of the 
province and country of Guayana, towards the w. 
It is celebrated for the brilliant appearance of its 
sides, which gave rise to the fable of its being 
entirely of gold and precious stones. The fact is, 
that it abounds in the metal called marcasite, and 
that from this arises the glitter which is so uni 
versal on every part of it. 

PENALOLEN, a settlement of the kingdom 
of Chile ; situate in the llano, or plain of Tango. 

PENAS, CABO DE, a point of land on the 



coast of the island of Fuego, between the points 
of Arenas and Santa Ines. 

PEN AS, a settlement of the province and corre-&amp;gt; 
gimiento of Paria in Peru ; e. of the capital. 

PENAS, NUESTRA SENORA DE LAS, a cele 
brated sanctuary of the province and corregimi 
ento of Omasuyos in Peru ; annexed, as a chapel 
of ease, to the curacy of Huariiia. 

PENAS, a very lofty mountain of the province 
and country of Chaco in Peru; on the shore of 
the channel of Galban. 

PENASCO, SAN MATEO DEL, a settlement 
and head settlement of the district, and alcaldia 
mayor of Tepozcolula, in Nueva Espana. It 
contains 600 families of Indians, with those of 
the wards of its district, who are employed in 
cultivating wheat and cochineal; five leagues 
s. of its capital. 

PENASCO, a small river of the district of Re- 
pocura in the kingdom of Chile. 

PENCO. See CONCEPCION DE CHILE. 

PENDELEC, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Cuenca in the kingdom of Quito, 
in the district of which are the estates of Lluglul 
and Quinaloma. 

[PENDLETON, a country of Virginia, bound 
ed n. w. by Randolph, and s. by Rockingharn 
countries ; watered by the s. branch of the Pa- 
towmack. It contains 2452 inhabitants, includ 
ing 73 slaves. Chief town, Frankford.J 

[PENDLETON, a country of Washington district, 
S. Carolina, on Keowee and Savannah rivers. It 
contained, in 1795, 9568 inhabitants, of whom 
834 are slaves ; and sends three representatives 
and one senator to the state legislature. The 
court-house in this county is 22 miles n. n. e. of 
Franklin court-house in Georgia, and 45 w. of 
Cambridge. A post-office is kept at this court 
house.] 

PENE, a cape on the s. coast of the island of 
Newfoundland ; one of those which form the 
bay of Trespasses. 

PENEDO, a large settlement of the province 
and captainship of Perambuco in Brazil ; situate 
on the shore of the river Grande S. Francisco, 
19 miles from its entrance into the sea ; and 
here the Portuguese have the fort of S. Mauricio 
to defend the pass of the river. 

PENEHUE, or PENHUE, a settlement of In 
dians of the district of Boroa in the kingdom of 
Chile ; on the shore of the river Tolten. 

PENENIO, a river of the province and govern 
ment of Quixos and Macas in the kingdom of 
Quito ; it enters the Putumayo just after its 
source. 



PENNSYLVANIA. 



[PENGUIN, an island in the Atlantic Ocean, 
about 10 miles w. e. of the coast of Newfoundland. 
It has this name from the multitude of birds of 
that name which frequent it. Lat. 50 5 X . n. 
Long. 50 30 X w. There is also an island of the 
same name, on the coast of Patagonia, in the S. 
Atlantic Ocean, three leagues s .e. of Port Desire. 
It is an uninhabited rock, high at the ends and 
low in the middle, and is the largest and outer 
most of a number of small isles or rocks, and is 
about a musket shot from the main land. It 
abounds in an extraordinary manner with pen 
guins and seals. It is three-fourths of a mile in 
length, and half a mile in breadth from e. to w.~] 

PENGUIN, some islands near the s. coast of 
Newfoundland, close to point Hune. 

PENIPE, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Riobamba in the kingdom of 
Quito, near the river Achambo, which it has to 
the w. and to the n. the river of its name. It is of 
a small population, but delightful and healthy cli 
mate ; five leagues n. e. of Riobamba, and in lat. 
1 35 s. 

PENITENCIA, an island of the N. Sea, at 
the mouth of the river of Las Amazonas, between 
the coast of Guayana and the great island of 
Joanes or Marajo. 

PEN JAMO, a settlement and head settlement 
of the district of the ulcaldia mayor of the town 
of Leon in Nueva Espana, and province and 
bishopric of Mechoacan. It contains 58 families 
oflndians. 

PENJAMILLO, a settlement of the head 
settlement of the district and alcaldia mayor of 
Tlazasalca in Nueva Espana. It contains 10 
families of Spaniards and Mustees, and 63 of 
Indians, in some ranches (temporary habitations 
for labourers) in its district ; also 133 of Spa 
niards, Mustees, and Mulatoes, who trade in 
maize, French beans, and other seeds, which, 
together with some horse-cattle, are produced 
here in abundance, five leagues n. of its capital. 

PENNSYLVANIA, a province of N. Ame 
rica, one of those which compose the United 
States ; situate between New York to the n. 
New Jersey to the e. Virginia and Ohio to the w. 
and Maryland, Virginia, and Delaware to the s. 
It is about 265 miles long, and 158 wide ; between 
lat. 39 43 and 42 20 n. and long. 74 47 and 
80 37 X o&amp;gt;. This province is watered by several 
rivers, amongst the most considerable of which 
are the Delaware, Susquehannah, and Schuilkill. 
The first of these rises to the n. in the country of 
the Iroquees Indians, and of Bristol. The other 



two rivers have their origin in the same country, 
and are navigable to a greater extent, facilitating 
the internal commerce. This province is divided 
into the following counties : 

Philadelphia, Bucks, 

Northampton, York, 

Chester, Berks, 

Lancaster, Cumberland ; 

and the other part of the river Delaware into the 
counties of Newcastle, Kent, and Sussex. It was 
granted to the celebrated William Penn, son of 
the great admiral of the same name, in the time 
of the protector Cromwell and of king Charles 
II. of England, in 1680. It was first ceded to the 
admiral in reward for his services, but he dying, 
the son did not solicit the title, until the persecu 
tion of the Quakers in England had become 
general ; and he then set out for America, and 
bought this territory of the Indians at a very low 
rate. He afterwards entered into commercial 
dealings to a small extent with these natives, and 
impressed them with very favourable ideas of 
him ; and under such auspicious beginnings, he 
proceeded in peopling the country thus newly ac 
quired ; the disgust which the Quakers began to 
feel to their native home, and their consequent 
emigration, greatly conducing to this end. The 
territory was, to be sure, uncultivated, and the 
climate strange and unknown to them, but Penn 
did not cease to animate and increase his new 
colonists. He spent large sums of money in 
transporting and providing them with every 
necessary ; and, not aspiring to enrich himself 
suddenly, he sold at a fair price a piece of terri 
tory to each ; with the which, and by the letter of 
privilege which he gave them, he transformed 
the country from a forest into a garden. Thus 
it has been, and is, one of the most flourishing 
colonies of the New World, and where the name 
of Penn is held in grateful remembrance. 

The climate of Pennsylvania is very delightful, 
and the air soft and mild. The autumn begins 
here on the 20th of October, and lasts till the be 
ginning of December, when the winter commences. 
The cold and frosts are considerable, so that the 
river Delaware, although very wide, is frequently 
frozen, but the air is dry and healthy. The 
spring lasts from March till June, and then the 
weather is more fickle than at other times. The 
heat in the months of July, August, and Sep 
tember, is very great, but it is much mitigated by 
the cool refreshing breezes. The 5. w. wind 
lasts the greater part of the summer, and the n. 
and n. w. blow in the winter and spring ; and 



PENNSYLVANIA. 



these, passing 1 over the lakes which are frozen, 
and through the snowy mountains of Canada, 
are the cause of the coldness in those seasons. 

The soil is, in some parts, of a yellow or black 
sand, and in some of a kind of light earth, and in 
others of a clay, similar to that of the valleys in 
England ; and which is found here more particu 
larly near the sources of the shores of the rivers 
which irrigate the country. The land is fertile, 
rich, and easily cultivated, and the roots of the 
trees shoot down to a very small depth. 

Pennsylvania is watered by many rivers, and 
produces in the greatest abundance whatever con 
tributes to the convenience or luxury of life. In 
a word there is not a part of N. America so flour 
ishing, nor where, in a few years, the population 
has experienced so rapid an increase. In 1729 
no less than 6208 persons, four or five hundred of 
whom were Irish, came to establish themselves 
here ; and it is not wonderful that since the time of 
Penn, the value of lands has greatly risen. It 
contains 35,000 inhabitants, including the county 
of Delaware. There is no established religion ; 
and with the mixture of Germans, Swiss, Dutch 
and English, we find here, besides Catholics, 
Quakers, Calvinists, Lutherans, Methodists, 
Menists, Moravians, Independents, Anabaptists, 
and Shakers ; this being a sect of German origin, 
who live in religious society, and wear the habit 
of friars. Nor is it unworthy of our admiration 
to see how, in such a diversity of nations, tongues, 
and faiths, so great and universal harmony pre 
vails ; and notwithstanding that each is aware, 
in his own mind, of the other s error, and even 
some times endeavours to convince him of it, yet 
does not this even endanger, if not that Christian 
unity of faith, that religious fraternity which is 
observed to prevail. Again, the Quakers, the 
founders of this colony, have never been seen to 
exercise any conspicuous authority, save in the 
case of one William Keith, whom they seized and 
banished from the province as a disturber of the 
peace : but he, who was before a minister of the 
protestant church, turned Quaker, and then re 
turned to his former ministry, making such 
innovations with regard to the Quakers -creed 
as to have given rise to great domestic troubles. 
The fertility of this province is such as to 
afford naturally, and with very little cultivation, 
an infinite variety of trees, flowers, plants, and 
fruits. It also abounds greatly in cattle, and the 
rivers are stocked with fish. Before the distur 
bances with England, and the war which gave 
rise to its independence, 25 vessels were built 



here annually for the export of its productions, 
namely, skins, iron, fruits, &amp;c. to the amount of 
750,000 ; and there were goods imported from 
England to the amount of 611,000. The 
capital is Philadelphia. 

[The revolution which affected the whole of the 
United States, seems to have been felt by none 
of them more strongly than Pennsylvania. The 
above information we believe to be a correct 
view of its situation at the time described by our 
author, but its whole political and physical ener 
gies have been within the last 30 years so com 
pletely enlarged, that we shall not fear entering 
into some degree of repetition by endeavouring 
to afford a true picture of its present state. 

Pennsylvania (except the purchase mentioned 
below) lies in the form of a parallelogram. The 
n. w. corner of this state, containing about 202,000 
acres, was lately purchased of Congress by this 
state. Pennsylvania at present contains 44,900 
square miles, and is divided into 23 counties, viz. 
Philadelphia, Northumberland, 

Chester, Franklin, 

Delaware, Bedford, 

Bucks, Huntingdon, 

Montgomery, Mifflin, 

Berks, Westmoreland, 

Lancaster, Somerset, 

Dauphin, Fayette, 

Northampton, Washington, 

Luzerne, Alleghany, 

York, Lycoming. 

Cumberland, 

These are subdivided into townships, not by 
any special law of the legislature, but on applica 
tion of a sufficient number of the citizens, in any 
neighbourhood, to the judges of the court of Com 
mon Pleas and general quarter sessions of the 
county. In each township the citizens have the 
privilege of assembling once a year, to choose two 
overseers of the poor, two assessors, a collector of 
taxes, two supervisors of the roads, and a consta 
ble. The number of inhabitants, according to 
the census of 1790, was 434,373, including 3737 
slaves, and by that of 1810, the total population 
amounted to 810,163 souls. But the emigration 
of foreigners has ever been, and continues to be, 
so considerable, that the number will always- be 
far greater than could be expected from the na 
tural increase of population. 

There are six considerable rivers, which, with 
their numerous branches, peninsulate the whole 
state, viz. The Delaware, Schuilkill, Susque- 
hannah, Youghiogany, Monongahela, andAlleg-] 



PENNSYLVANIA. 



[hany. The bay and river Delaware are naviga 
ble up to the Great or Lower Falls at Trenton, 
155 miles from the sea, and a ship of the line can 
ascend to Philadelphia, the metropolis, 120 miles 
from the sea, by the ship channel of the Del 
aware. 

A considerable part of the state may be called 
mountainous ; particularly the countries of Bed 
ford, Huntingdon, Cumberland, part of Franklin, 
Dauphin, and part of Bucks and Northampton, 
through which pass, under various names, the 
numerous ridges and spurs which collectively 
form the great range of Alleghany mountains. 
The principal ridges here are the Kittatinny, or 
Blue mountains, which pass n. of Nazareth in 
Northampton county, and pursue a s. w. course 
across the Lehigh, through Dauphin county, just 
above Harisburg, thence on the w. side of the 
Susquehannah, through Cumberland and Franklin 
counties. Back of these, and nearly parallel 
with them, are Peter s, Tuscarora, and Nescopek 
mountains, on the e. side of the Susquehannah ; 
and on the w. 9 Shareman s hills, Sideling hills, 
Ragged, Great Warriors, Evits and Wills moun 
tains ; then the great Alleghany ridge ; w. of this 
are the Chesnut ridges. Between the Juniatta 
and the w. branch of the Susquehannah are Jack s, 
Tussy s, Nitting, and Bald-Eagle mountains. 
The vales between these mountains are generally 
of a rich, black soil, suited to the various kinds 
of grain and grass. Some of the mountains will 
admit of cultivation almost to their tops. The 
other parts of the state are generally level, or 
agreeably variegated with hills and valleys. 

The soil of Pennsylvania is of various kinds ; 
in some parts it is barren, but a great proportion 
of the state is good land ; and no inconsiderable 
part of it is very good. The richest track that is 
settled, is Lancaster county, and the valley 
through Cumberland, York, and Franklin. The 
richest that is unsettled, is between Alleghany ri 
ver and lake Erie, in the n, w. part of the state, and 
in the country on the heads of the e. branches of 
the Alleghany. Pennsylvania includes the greater 
part of the kinds of trees, shrubs, and plants, that 
grow within the United States. Oaks, of several 
species, form the bulk of the wood. Hickory 
and walnut make a greater proportion than in 
the . tates. Sassafras, mulberry, tulip-tree, and 
cedar, are common, and grow to perfection. 
The magnolia glauca, or swamp-sassafras, are 
found in low grounds ; the twigs and roots are 
used both in bath and decoction for removing the 
rheumatism . The magnolia acuminata, or cucum 



ber-tree, grows very tall about the w. mountains. 
The magnolia tripetala, or umbrella-tree, is found 
in some parts 16 or 20 feet high. The bark is 
smooth, and the leaves sometimes exceed 12 or 
15 inches in length, and five or six in breadth, 
terminating in a point at each extremity. The 
leaves are placed at the ends of the branches, in 
a circular form, resembling an umbrella ; hence 
the name. The bark of the tulip-tree is esteemed 
a tolerable substitute for the Peruvian bark ; 
but the cornus Jlorida, or dog-wood, which is fre 
quent in the state, is preferred. Besides many 
other valuable trees and shrubs, are the several 
species of maple ; of these the scarlet-flowered 
and sugar maple are the most useful ; they are 
common in the n. and w. parts of the state, and 
are larger than the other species, growing from 
50 to 60 feet high, and yiela abundance of sap for 
the making of sugar. The ash-leaved tooth-ach 
tree, is found here and in Maryland. The bark 
and capsules have an acid taste, and are used in 
relieving the tooth-ach, whence it has got its 
name. The shrubby bithwort grows near Fort 
Pitt. It thrives in the shade, in a rich soil ; 
grows about 30 feet high, and sends off many 
twining branches. The roots have a lively 
aromatic taste, and are thought to have equal 
medicinal virtue to the small Virginia snake-root. 
The sambucus canadensis, or red-berried elder, is 
found here. Among the Indians it is called 
fever-bush ; and a decoction of its wood and 
buds is highly esteemed by them. Ct would be 
endless to describe the beautiful flowering shrubs, 
and useful as also ornamental plants in this state. 
Grapes of several sorts are common : the late 
kind, when mellowed by frost, make, with the 
addition of sugar, good wine. At present, the 
cultivation of the vine is much in vogue in Penn* 
sylvania, and good wine has been already made. 

Iron ore abounds in this state : copper, lead, 
and alum appear in some places. Lime-stone 
is common, as also several kinds of marble. In 
the middle and w. country is abundance of coal. 
At the head of the w. branch of Susquehannah 
is an extensive bed, which stretches over the 
country s. w. so as to be found in the greatest 
plenty about Pittsburg. There are also consider 
able bodies on the head waters of the Schuilkill 
and Lehigh ; and at Wyoming there is a bed 
open, which gives very intense heat. 

Useftil quadrupeds, in the new districts, are 
deer, in great numbers, beavers, otters, racoons, 
and martins. Buffaloes rarely cross the Ohio, 
and elks seldom advance from the n. Panthers,"] 



PENNSYLVANIA. 



[wild cats, bears, foxes, and wolves are not rare ; 
the last do most mischief, especially in the 
winter ; but the fur and skins of all are valuable. 
In the thick settlements, rabbits and squirrels are 
frequent ; also minks and musk-rats in marshes : 
partridges are yet numerous, though the late 
hard winters have destroyed many, and wild 
turkeys in the new settlements ; pheasants and 
grouse are become scarce ; pigeons, ducks, and 
wild geese are generally found in plenty in their 
proper seasons. Here are a great number of 
singing birds, as many migrate to the state from 
n. and s. in certain seasons. 

Trout are common in the rivulets, in length 
seldom above a foot. In the e. rivers, the prin 
cipal fish are rock and sheep s-head, with shad 
and herring, which in the spring come up from 
the sea in great shoals. These are not found in 
the w. waters, which are said to have their own 
valuable kinds, especially a species of cat-fish, 
weighing from 50 to 100 pounds ; yellow perch 
and pike are also in them mucl^ larger and more 
numerous. 

The s. side of Pennsylvania is the best settled 
throughout, owing entirely to the circumstance 
of the w. road having been run by the armies, 
prior to 1762, through the towns of Lancaster, 
Carlisle and Bedford, and thence to Pittsburg. 
For the purpose of turning the tide of settlers 
from this old channel into the unsettled parts of 
the state, the government and landed interest of 
Pennsylvania have been, and are still, busy in 
cutting convenient roads. During the summer 
of 1788, they laid out a road n. from the former 
roads beyond Bethlehem, to the n. portage 
between Delaware and Susquehannah ; and 
thence n. 80 w. to the mouth of the Tioga, the for 
mer 70 miles, and the latter above 60. It has 
been in contemplation to cut a road from Sun 
bury, at the forks of the e. and w. branches of 
Susquehannah, w. 150 miles, to the mouth of 
goby s Creek, which empties into the Alleghany 
from the e. but we are not enabled to say whether 
the plan may have taken effect. A road is also 
cut from the mouth of the Tioga, s. to the 
mouth of Loyal, which empties into the a;, branch 
of Susquehannah. Another road is cut from 
Huntingdon town, on Frank s town branch of 
the Juniatta, w. 30 miles to Conemagh, a navi 
gable branch of the Alleghany. A turnpike road 
has been lately completed from Philadelphia to 
Lancaster, which shortens the distance between 
these places eight miles ; and others are in con 
templation. From Swetara to the Tulpehoken 



branch of the Schnilkill, a canal and lock navi 
gation is undertaken, and the works commenced, 
by an incorporated company, whose capital is 
400,000 dollars. This leads" through the Schuil- 
kill to Philadelphia. By this means, it was pro 
posed to open a passage to Philadelphia from 
the Juniatta, the Tioga, and the e. and w. bran 
ches of the Susquehannah, which water at least 
15.000,000 of acres. From this junction, the 
general course of the Susquehannah is about s. e. 
until it falls into the head of Chesapeak Bay at 
Havre de Grace. See TIOGA RIVER. On the 
completion of the present plans, the state will be 
as conveniently intersected by roads as any other 
of its size in the Union, which will greatly faci 
litate the settlement of its new lands. A slight 
view of the map of Pennsylvania will best show 
how finely this state is situated for inland naviga 
tion. Nature has done so much for inland land- 
carriage, that although Philadelphia and lake 
Erie are distant from each other above 300 miles, 
there is no doubt but that the rivers of the state 
may be so improved, as to reduce the land car 
riage between them nine-tenths. In the same 
way the navigation to Pittsburg, after due im 
provement, may be used instead of land-carriage 
for the whole distance, except 23 miles. By 
these routes it is clear, that a large proportion of 
the foreign articles used on the w. waters must 
be transported, and their furs, skins, ginseng, 
hemp, flax, pot-ash, and other commodities 
brought to Philadelphia. 

Pennsylvania has the various kinds of grain, 
&amp;c. common to the neighbouring states, but wheat 
is the principal grain of very general cultivation. 
In the year 1786, the exports of flour were 150,000 
barrels ; in 1789 369,618 barrels ; and much 
greater quantities in years since. 

The manufactures of this state are of numer 
ous kinds. Iron works are. of long standing, and 
their products increase in quantity, and improve 
in quality. The furnaces are 16, and the forges 
37. There are 18 rolling and slitting mills, 
which are said to cut and roll 150 tons a year. 
The forges will, it is thought, if properly con 
ducted, manufacture each 170 tons of bar iron a 
year-^total 6290 tons. Beside pigs cast at the 
furnaces, there are pots, kettles, pans, ovens, 
ladles, tongs, shovels, and irons, plough-irons, 
spades, hoes&amp;gt; sheet-iron, hoops ; iron and steel 
work for pleasure and working carriages, nails, 
bolts, spikes ; various iron-work for ships, mills 
and buildings, cannon-balls, and some muskets ; 
scythes, sickles, axes, drawing-knives, some saws] 



PENNSYLVANIA. 



j and planes, and other tools. The other extensive 
manufactures are numerous, viz. those of leather, 
skins and fur, wood, paper, gunpowder, bricks, 
earthen-ware, copper, lead, tin-wares, pewter, 
cotton, sugar, molasses, tobacco, &amp;c. &amp;c. There 
are 52 paper-mills in the state ; and their annual 
product is computed at 25,000 dollars. Since 
the year 1770, 25 gunpowder mills have been 
erected. There are about 300,000 wool and fur 
hats manufactured annually in the state ; nearly 
one half of which are of fur. In the manufacture 
of iron, paper, pleasure carriages, and cabinet 
work, Pennsylvania exceeds not only New York, 
but all her sister states. Much cotton is worked 
up in families ; and imported linen is now printed, 
in an increasing degree. The manufactures of 
Pennsylvania have greatly increased within a few 
years, as well by master workmen and journey 
men from abroad, as by the skill and industry of 
the natives. Some persons have begun to press 
oil from hickory nuts. The Messrs. Marshalls 
of Philadelphia have commenced the making of 
Glauber s salt, sal ammoniac, and volatile salts ; 
they already supply the whole Union with the 
first article, and export a part of the others. A 
mill of Rumsay s (the improvement of Barker s) 
near that city, grinds, by water, flour, chocolate, 
snufY, hair-powder, and mustard ; shells choco 
late nuts ; presses tobacco for chewing and 
smoaking ; and bolts meal. The water-works 
near the falls of Trenton, which grind grain, roll 
and slit iron, and pound plaster of Paris, ex 
hibit great mechanism. Card manufactories are 
lately set up. The hand machines for carding 
and spinning cotton have been introduced and 
improved. Sir Richard Arkwright s famous 
water-mill for spinning cotton yarn has been ob 
tained ; also the machinery to sliver, rove, and 
spin flax and hemp into thread, fit for linen of 30 
cuts to the pound ; which will also serve for the 
roving and spinning combed wool into worsted 
varn. Screws for paper-mills are now cut from 
solid cast iron. Lanterns for light-houses are 
made by Mr. Wheeler of Philadelphia ; who 
also executes work for sugar-mills in the W. 
Indies : during the war he made cannon from 
wrought iron. 

The commerce of Pennsylvania with the e. and 
s. states is, in great part, an exchange of staple 
commodities. Wheat flour and bar-iron are ex 
ported to New England for whale oil and bone, 
spermaceti, seal-skins, mackerel, cod fish, and sal 
mon ; to Rhode Island and Connecticut, cheese ; 
to S. Carolina and Georgia for live-oak, cedar, 

VOL. IY. 



cotton, rice, and indigo; to N. Carolina for tar, 
pitch, turpentine, and lumber. Much of the 
trade with the S. states arises from the superiority 
of Pennsylvania in manufactures and commerce. 
Great quantities of deer-skins, with those of 
otters, racoons, foxes, musk-rats, and beavers, 
are imported from the back country. Virginia 
sends a great deal of wheat and unmanufactured 
tobacco. In return, she receives many articles of 
clothing, furniture, farming utensils, equipage; 
some E. India and European goods ; and even 
W. India produce ; of all these, more or less, 
according to the local improvement and situation. 
Hats, saddlery, shoes, Windsor chairs, carriages, 
hewn stones, iron castings for domestic use, 
wheel tire, spades, hoes, axes, paper, books, tin 
ware, and brushes, constitute a great proportion 
of the exports to the s-. Numerous droves of 
lean cattle come from the w. parts of these states, 
where they have a wide range, but want mea 
dow. Virginia sends of late a considerable deal 
of coal, some lead, and peach brandy. This 
liquor also comes from Maryland ; but from both 
in quantity very small, considering the profit, 
and the facility of raising the fruit. The e. shore 
of Maryland sends to Philadelphia considerable 
quantities of wheat and Indian corn : from the 
w. comes the kite-foot tobacco. This state has 
also some trade with the s. of Pennsylvania, by 
the way of Chesapeak Bay ; some parts of it 
receive the same commodities as Virginia, espe 
cially pleasure carriages. The trade with New 
York depends chiefly on the fluctuation of the 
market ; American and foreign goods, of the 
same kinds, are carried between the two capital 
cities, as their prices fall and rise. Albany peas 
and craw-fish are, however, articles in regular 
demand from New York. Great part of New 
Jersey and Delaware state have, as neighbours, 
much intercourse with Pennsylvania. The first 
supports in a great measure the market of Phila 
delphia, furnishes rye-meal, much Indian corn 
and lumber, and some iron bloomery : the other 
sends great quantities of excellent flour from 
the mills of Brandy wine, lumber from the district 
on the bay, and fat cattle from the pastures ad 
joining Delaware. Many of these, and of those 
fattened in the vicinity of Philadelphia, are 
brought from the s. ; and also from the countries 
on the n. and Connecticut Rivers, as far as Ver 
mont and Massachusetts. 

The commerce of Pennsylvania, in the w* is by 
the Ohio with the Spanish, and by the lakes with 
the British, dominions ; and both ways with the] 



98 



PENNSYLVANIA. 



[Indian tribes. This trade mil probably be 
considerable, since commercial stipulations are 
formed with those powers, and peace is concluded 
with the Indians. At present nearly the whole 
foreign commerce is carried on by the port of Phi 
ladelphia. Its distance from the sea, and its 
closing by ice in the winter, are disadvantageous ; 
but the first is lessened by improved pilotage ; 
the other by the construction of the piers below, 
and by the occasional thaws which permit vessels 
to clear their way during the winter. In com 
mon seasons the navigation is obstructed six 
weeks ; a shorter period is as probable as a 
longer ; though, in the late hard winters, loads 
of wood have passed the river, near the city, in 
the first days of March. 

The population of this state has been already 
mentioned ; it is nearly 20 for every square 
mile. The number of militia is estimated at 
upwards of 90,000, between 18 and 53 years of 
age. The inhabitants are principally the de 
scendants of English, Irish, and Germans, with 
some Scotch, Welsh, Swedes, and a few Dutch. 
There are also many of the Irish and Germans 
who emigrated when young or middle aged. 
The Friends and Episcopalians are chiefly of 
English extraction, and compose about one-third 
of the inhabitants. They live chiefly in the me 
tropolis, and in the counties of Chester, Phila 
delphia, Bucks, and Montgomery. The Irish arc 
mostly Presbyterians, but some are Roman Ca 
tholics : their ancestors came from the n. of 
Ireland, which was latterly settled from Scotland; 
hence they have been sometimes called Scotch 
Irish, to denote their double descent. They in 
habit the w. and frontier countries, and are nu 
merous. The Germans composed about one 
quarter of the inhabitants of Pennsylvania. They 
are most numerous in the n. parts of the metro 
polis, and the counties of Philadelphia, Montgo 
mery, Bucks, Dauphin, Lancaster, York, and Nor 
thampton ; mostly in the four last, and are spread 
ing in other parts. They consist of Lutherans 
(who are the most numerous sect), Calvinists, or 
Reformed Church, Moravians, Roman Catholics, 
Mennonists, Tunkers, and Zwingfelters, who are 
a species of Quakers. These are all distin 
guished for their temperance, industry, and 
economy. The Baptists, except the Mennonists 
and Tunker Baptists, who are Germans, are 
chiefly descended of emigrants from Wales, and 
are not numerous. A proportionate assemblage 
of the national prejudices, the manners, customs, 
religions, and political sentiments of all these, 
will form the Pennsylvanian character. 



The number of congregations in the state is as 
follows : Presbyterians, 86 ; German Calvinists, 
84 ; nearly 84 of German Lutherans ; Friends or 
Quakers, 54 ; Episcopalians, 26 ; Baptists, 15 ; 
Roman Catholics, 11; Scotch Presbyterians, 8 ; 
Moravians, 8 ; Free Quakers, 1 ; Universalists, 
1 ; Covenanters, 1 ; Methodists, 3 or 4 ; and a 
Jewish Synagogue ; the whole amounting to 
384. The literary, humane, and other useful 
societies, are more numerous and flourishing in 
Pennsylvania than in any of the 16 states. The 
seminaries of learning are respectable. There is 
an university at Philadelphia, and colleges at 
Carlisle and Lancaster. The Episcopalians have 
an academy at Yorktown in York county. There 
are also academies at Germantown, at Pittsburg-, 
at Washington, at Allen s-Town, and other 
places ; these are endowed by donations from 
the legislature, and by liberal contributions of in 
dividuals. The legislature have also reserved 
60,000 acres of the public lands for the public 
schools. The United Brethren, or Moravians, 
have academies at Bethlehem and Nazareth, on 
the best establishment of any schools perhaps in 
America. Besides Philadelphia, the metropolis, 
the chief towns are Lancaster, the largest inland 
town of the United States, Carlisle, Pittsburg, 
Sunbury, Bethlehem, Reading, Yorktown, Har- 
risburg, Washington, &amp;c. 

The first frame of government for Pennsylvania 
is dated in 1682. By this form, all legislative 
powers were vested in the governor and free 
men of the province, in the provincial council, 
and a general assembly. The council was to 
consist of 72 members, chosen by the freemen ; 
of which the governor, or his deputy, was per 
petual president, with a treble vote. One third 
of this council went out of office every year, and 
their seats were supplied by new elections. 

The general assembly was at first to consist 
of all the freemen, afterwards of 200, and never 
to exceed 500. 

In 1683 Mr. Penn offered another frame of 
government, in which the number of represen 
tatives was reduced, and the governor vested with 
a negative upon all bills passed in assembly. By 
several specious arguments the people were per 
suaded to accept this frame of government. 

Not long after, a dispute between Mr. Penn 
and Lord Baltimore required the former to go to 
England, and he committed the administration of 
government to five commissioners taken from the 
council. In 1686 Mr. Penn required the com 
missioners to dissolve the frame of government ; 
but not being able to effect his purpose, he, inj 



PENNSYLVANIA. 



("1688, appointed Captain John Blackwell his de 
puty. From this period the proprietors usually 
resided in England, and administered the govern 
ment by deputies, who were devoted to their 
interest. Jealousies arose between the people 
and their governors, which never ceased till the 
late revolution. The primary cause of these jea 
lousies was an attempt of the proprietary to ex 
tend his own power, and abridge that of the 
assembly ; and the consequence was, incessant 
disputes and dissensions in the legislature. 

In 1689, Governor Blackwell, finding himself 
opposed in his views, had recourse to artifice, 
and prevailed on certain members of the council 
to withdraw themselves from the house ; thus 
defeating the measures of the legislature. Two 
instances of a secession of members from the 
assembly, with similar views, have taken place 
since the revolution, and seem to have been 
copied from the example in 1689. 

In 1693, the king and queen assumed the 
government into their own hands. Colonel 
Fletcher was appointed governor of New York 
and Pennsylvania by one and the same commis 
sion, with equal powers in both provinces. By 
this commission, the number of counsellors in 
Pennsylvania was reduced. 

Under the administration of Governor Mark- 
ham in 1696, a new form of government was 
established in Pennsylvania. The election of the 
council and assembly now became annual, and 
the legislature, with their powers and forms of 
proceeding, was new modelled. 

In 1699, the proprietary arrived from England, 
and assumed the reins of government. While he 
remained in Pennsylvania, the last charter of 
privileges, or frame of government, which con 
tinued till the revolution, was agreed upon and 
established. This was completed and delivered 
to the people by the proprietary, October 28, 
1701, just on his embarking for England. The 
inhabitants of the Territory, as it was then called, 
or the lower counties, refused to accept this 
charter, and thus separated themselves from the 
province of Pennsylvania. They afterwards had 
their own assembly, in which the governor of 
Pennsylvania used to preside. 

In September 1700, the Susquehannah Indians 
granted to Mr. Penn all their lands on both sides 
the river. The Susquehannah, Shawanese, and 
Patomak Indians, however, entered into articles 
of agreement with Mr. Penn, by which, on 
certain conditions of peaceable and friendly be 
haviour, they were permitted to settle about the 



head of Patomak, in the province of Pennsylvania. 
The Conostoga chiefs also in 1701 ratified the 
grant of the Susquehannah Indians made the 
preceding year. 

In 1708, Mr. Penn obtained from the Sachems 
of the country, a confirmation of the grants made 
by former Indians, of all the lands from Duck 
Creek to the mountains, and from the Delaware 
to the Susquehannah. In this deed, the Sachems 
declared that " they had seen and heard read 
divers prior deeds, which had been given to Mr. 
Penn by former chiefs." 

While Mr. Penn was in America, he erected 
Philadelphia into a corporation. The charter 
was dated October 25, 1701, by which the police 
of the city was vested in a mayor, recorder, alder 
men, and common council, with power to inquire 
into treasons, murders, and other felonies ; and 
to inquire into and punish smaller crimes. The 
corporation had also extensive civil jurisdiction ; 
but it was dissolved at the late revolution, and 
Philadelphia was governed like other counties in 
the state, till 1789, when it was again incorpo 
rated. 

By the favourable terms which Mr. Penn 
offered to settlers, and an unlimited toleration of 
all religious denominations, the population of the 
province was extremely rapid. Notwithstanding 
the attempts of the proprietary or his governors 
to extend his own power, and accumulate pro 
perty by procuring grants from the people, and 
exempting his lands from taxation, the govern 
ment was generally mild, and the burdens of the 
people by no means oppressive. The selfish 
designs of the proprietaries were vigorously and 
constantly opposed by the assembly, whose 
firmness preserved the charter rights of the pro 
vince. 

At the revolution, the government was abo 
lished. The proprietaries were absent, and the 
people, by their representatives, formed a new 
constitution on republican principles. The pro 
prietaries were excluded from all share in the 
government, and the legislature offered them 
130,000 in lieu of all quit-rents, which was 
finally accepted. The proprietaries, however, 
still possess in Pennsylvania many large tracts of 
excellent land. 

It is to be regretted, that among all the able 
writers in this important state, none has yet 
gratified the public with its interesting histoiy. 

The present constitution of this state was ra 
tified June 12th, 1792. A convention, to amend 
the constitution, may be called where the ma-] 






V^rri^tfl^ 



PENNSYLVANIA. 



Hority of the people shall signify their wish for it. 
The expense of the government of this state 
amounts to ^22,280 annually. For an account 



of Exports and Imports of the state, see PHI 

LADELPHIA.] 



A LIST of the several PROPRIETORS, GOVERNORS, LIEUTENANT-GOVERNORS, and PRESIDENTS 
of the PROVINCE, with the times of their respective Administration. 

Proprietors. 

The Honourable William Penn, born 1644, died 1718. 
f Thomas Penn, and 
1 Richard Penn, died 1771. 

f John Penn, sen. and 
( John Penn, jun. 



Lieutenant Governor, 

Pesident, 

Deputy Lieutenant Gov. 
President and Gouncil, - 
Deputy Governor, - - 
Lieutenant Governor, - 
Lieutenant Governor, - 
Deputy Lieutenant Gov. 
President and Council, -- 
Deputy Lieutenant Gov. 



President, - - - - 
Deputy Lieutenant Gov. 



Governors, &amp;lt; 

William Penn, Proprietor, 

Thomas Lloyd, - - - 

John Blackwell, - - - 

governed, 

Benjamin Fletcher, - - 
William Markham, 
William Penn, Proprietor, 
Andrew Hamilton, 

governed, - - - - - 
John Evans, ----- 

Charles Gookin, - - - 

Sir William Keith, Bart. - 

Patrick Gordon, - - - 

George Thomas, - - - 

Anthony Palmer, - - - 

James Hamilton, - - - 

Robert Hunter Morris, - 

William Denny, - - - 

James Hamilton, - - 

John Penn, - - - - - 

President, .... James Hamilton, - - ^ 

Lieutenant Gov. - - - Richard Penn, - * - - 

( Thomas Wharton, - - - 

President of the Supreme! Joseph Reed, - - - - 

Executive Council of) William Moore, - - - 

the state of Pennsyl- ] John Dickinson, - - 

"vania, f Benjamin Franklin, ^ - * 

^Thomas Mifflin, - - - 

Governor, Thomas Mifflin, - - - 

[PENN Fort, stands at the mouth of a small 
creek, on the w. side of Delaware river, in North 
ampton county, about 20 miles n. of the town of 
Easton, and near 65 n. of Philadelphia. Lat. 



from October 1682, to August 1684 
from August 1684, to December 1688 
from December 1688, to February 1689-90 
from February 1689-90, to April 26, 1693 
from 26 April 1693, to 3 June 1693 
from 3 June 1693, to December 1699 
from 3 December 1699, to 1 November 1701 
from 1 November 1701, to February 1702-3 
from February 1702-3, to February 1703-4 
from February 1703-4, to February 1708-9 
from March 1708-9, to February 1717 
from March 1717, to June 1726 
from June 1726, to June 1736 
from June 1738, to June 1747 
from June 1747, to June 1748 
from June 1748, to October 1754 
from October 1754, to 19 August 1756 
from 19 August 1756, to 17 November 1759 
from 17 November 1759, to 21 October 1763 
from 31 October 1733, to 6 May 1771 
from 6 May 1771, to 16 October 1771 
from 16 October 1771 
from March 1777, to April 1778 
from October 1778, to October 1781 
from November 1781, to November 1782 
from November 1782, to October 1785 
from October 1785, to October 1788 
from October 1788 to October 1790 
from October 1790.] 



40 59 . n. long. 75 12 w. The road from Phi 
ladelphia to Tioga Point passes through the 
opening in the Blue Mountains, called Wind Gap, 
about nine miles s. w, of this fort.] 



PEN 

{PENN, Port, in Newcastle county, Delaware, 
is situated on the w. bank of Delaware river, op 
posite to Reedy Island.] 

{TENN S, a township of Pennsylvania, on Sus- 
quehannah river. See Northumberland.] 

[PENN S Neck, in Salem county, New Jersey, 
lies on Old Man s Creek, which is part of the 
boundary between Salem and Gloucester coun 
ties. It is 12 miles n. e. by n. of Salem, 3y miles 
from the Delaware, and five below Swedesbo- 
rough.] 

[PENN S Neck, the name of a range of farms 
of excellent soil, situated about 1| miles s. e. of 
Princeton in New Jersey, on a point of land 
formed by Millstone river and stony brook. It 
derived its name from the celebrated legislator, 
William Penn, who formerly owned this tract.] 

[PENN S Rocks, three clusters of islands in 
the broadest and s. w. part of Hudson s Bay, N. 
America ; distinguished by the names of E. W. 
and Middle Penns.] 

[PENNINGTON, or PENN YTOWN, a pleasant 
and flourishing village in Hunterdon county, 
New Jersey, six miles w. of Princeton, and 27 
-n. e. by n. of Philadelphia. It contains a church 
for public worship, and about 40 houses.] 

[PENNSBOROUGH, E. and W. two town- 
ships in Cumberland county, Pennsylvania. 
There is also a township of this name in Chester 
county, Pennsylvania.] 

[P&amp;NNSBURY, a small town of Pennsylva 
nia, in Buck s county, on a small creek of Dela 
ware river. It was a manor which the celebrated 
Mr. Penn reserved for himself. Here he built a 
house, and planted gardens and orchards ; which, 
with many additional buildings and improve 
ments, still continue.] 

PENNYCOOK, a river of the province of 
Hampshire, one of the four of New England. 
It rises in the White Mountain, runs s. then turns 
. and enters the sea opposite the bank of Jeffrey. 

[PENNYTOWN. See PENNINGTON.] 

PENOBSCOT, or PENTAGUET, a river of 
the province of Sagadahock in N. America ; it 
rises from various lakes, runs s. w. and enters 
the sea in the bay of its name. 

[The noble river which empties its waters into 
that bay, is the most considerable in the district 
of Maine, and rises by two branches in the high 
lands. The e. branch passes through several 
smaller lakes. From the Forks, as they are 
called, the Penobscot Indians pass to Canada, up 
either branch, principally the w. the source of 
which, they say, is not more than 20 miles from 



PEN 



101 



the waters which empty into the St. Lawrence. 
At the Forks is a remarkable high mountain : 
from thence down to Indian Old Town, situated 
on an island in this river, is about 60 miles (that 
is to say, by water), 40 of which the water flows 
in a still smooth stream, and in the whole dis 
tance there are no falls to interrupt the passage 
of boats : in this distance the river widens, and 
embraces a great number of islands. About 60 
rods below Indian Old Town are the Great Falls, 
where is a carrying-place of about 20 rods ; 
thence 12 miles to the head of the tide there are 
no falls to obstruct boats. Vessels of 30 tons 
come within a mile of the head of the tide. 
Thence 35 miles to the head of the bay, to the 
scite of Old Fort Povvnal, the river flows in a 
pretty straight course, and is easily navigated. 
Passing by Majabagaduse on the e. 7 miles, and 
Owl s Head 20 miles further, on the w. you en 
ter the ocean. It is high water here, at full and 
change, 43 minutes past 10. At the entrance of 
the river is 10 fathoms water. The Indians have 
a communication from this river to Scoodick ri 
ver by a portage of three miles. This river was 
the w. limits of Nova Scotia or Acadia, by the 
treaty of Utrecht.] 

PENOBSCOT. This bay is large, handsome, and 
convenient, and full of islands. [It lies on the 
coast of Hancock county, district of Maine, and 
was called Norombega by the first discoverer; is 
about 16 leagues wide from Naskeag Point and 
Burnt Coal Island, on the e. to the point near 
Musket s Island, on the w. side of the bay. The 
chief islands it encloses are Fox, Haut, Long, 
and Deer Islands, besides a number of small 
isles, rocks, and ledges. Through this bay to 
the mouth of the river of its name, the to. channel 
goes up by a head-land on the zv. called Owl s 
Head, and between Long^ Island on the w. and 
Cape Rosier on the e. to Bagaduce Point. The 
e. channel is between Haut Island on the w. and 
Burnt Coal Island on the e. and through a reach, 
called Long Reach, formed by the shores of 
Naskeag, or Sedwick, on the c. or n. e. and Deer 
Islands on the w. or s. w. till it unites with the 
other channel, between Point Rosier and Long 
Island. On a fine peninsula on the e. side of 
the bay the British built a fort, and made a set 
tlement, which is now the shire-town of the 
county of Hancock, and is a commodious place 
for the lumber trade. Haut Island, or Isle of 
Holt, lies in lat. 44 n. and long. 68 28 / w. and 
is the southernmost of the large isles.] 

[PENOBSCOT, a post-town of the district of 



102 



PEN 



PEN 



Maine, on the e. side of the bay of its name, situ 
ated in lat. 44 27 n. eight miles n. by w. of Blue 
Hill, 88 n. e. of Portland, 169 n. by e. of Boston, 
and 402 from Philadelphia. It is a port of en 
try, and carries on a small trade in fish and lum 
ber. The exports in 1794, ending- September 30, 
amounted to 5825 dollars. This township con 
tained, in 1790, 1048 inhabitants. In February, 
1796, it was divided into two towns ; the one re 
taining the name Penobscot ; the other, named 
Castine, was made the shire-town, is a port of 
entry, and contains the post-office.] 

fPENOBscox, a small tribe of Indians who live 
in Indian Old Town, on an island in Penobscot 
River. They aver, that they have possessed the 
island, on which their town stands, 500 years. 
It stands just above the Great Falls, and con 
sists of about 200 acres of land. See INDIAN 
OLD TOWN. In a former war this tribe lost their 
lands ; but at the commencement of the last war, 
the Provincial Congress forbad any person set 
tling on the lands from the head of the tide on 
Penobscot river, included in lines drawn six 
miles from the river on each side ; that is, a tract 
12 miles wide, intersected by the middle of the 
river. They, however, consider that they have 
a right to hunt and fish as far as the mouth of 
the Bay of Penobscot extends. This was their 
original right, in opposition to any other tribe, 
and they now occupy it.] 

PENOL, a city of Nuevo Mexico in N. Ame 
rica ; founded by the Indians in a situation so 
strong and singular, as to be without its equal. 
It formerly had 2000 houses so strong and large, 
that they were said to be inhabited by upwards 
of 7000 inhabitants. It stands in the middle of 
some extensive llanuras^ which extend upwards 
of 15 leagues in length, on the top of a rock, 
from whence it takes its name, and which is of 
such an extraordinary height as to be reckoned 
at a thousand fathoms, and is a league in length, 
entirely of rock, and with no other ascent than 
what is artificial, and where one person only can 
pass at a time, with some niches that one may 
retire should two happen to meet. At the top 
are several cisterns for catching water, and be 
low, in the plain, are the crops of corn and seeds. 

PENOL DEL MARQUES, an island of the lake 
of Mexico, situate in the middle of the lake, 
and s. of the capital. Here is a mountain, on 
which Herman Cortes, Marquis del Valle, or 
dered some baths to be constructed. 

PENOLES, an alcaldia mayor of the province 
nnd bishopric of Oaxaca, in the Nueva Espana. 



The whole of its territory is rough, cold, moun 
tainous, and barren ; so much so, that the na 
tives have no other commerce, save that of which 
arises from a little maize, and the cutting of tim 
ber in its serraniaS) which are covered with large 
firs and other trees, by which the neighbouring 
provinces are supplied. This consists, besides 
the capital, which is Ixquintepec, of the follow- 



S. Pedro Chilapa, 
S. Mateo Tepautepec, 
S. Pedro Totoma- 
chapa. 



ing settlements : 

S. Juan Elotepec, 

Santa Maria Hui tepee, 

Santiago Gajo otipac, 

Sta. Catarina Estella, 

Santiago Ilazoyaltepec, 

PENOLES, an unpeopled track of the province 
of Tepeguana and kingdom of Nueva Vizcava, 
in the direct road to the garrisons. At the dis 
tance of eight leagues to the n. w. is an estate 
called Sarca, very abundant in fowl and cattle ; 
23 leagues from the garrison and settlement of 
Mapimi. 

PENON, a settlement of the province and 
government of Cartagena in the Nuevo Reyno 
de Granada : situate on the shore of the river 
Grande de la Magdalena, opposite the mouth of 
the river Cesare. 

PENON, another settlement of the province 
and government of Venezuela, in the same king 
dom as the former ; on the coast near the port of 
Cabello. 

PENONES SIETE, a settlement of the pro 
vince and government of Antioquia in the Nuevo 
Reyno de Granada, on the shore of the river 
Grande de la Magdalena. 

PENONOME, a settlement of the district and 
alcaldia mayor of Nata in the province and king 
dom of Tierra Firme; thus called from the name 
of a cacique, the master of that district. It is 
situate in a pleasant valley surrounded bv moun 
tains, and on the shore of the river Sara{i, which 
renders it fertile and delightful, abounding in 
maize, plantains, pulse, pigs, and tame fowl ; 
with all of which it supplies the city of Panama, 
the capital of the kingdom ; from whence it lies 
62 miles to the w, s. w. in lat. 8 42 n. 

PENONOME, a river of this province and kino-- 
dom, which rises in the mountains of the s. part, 
and, running n. enters the Cocle. Here there is 
nearly a communication between the N. and S. 
Seas, an isthmus of five leagues only inter 
vening ; and it was by this part that the contra 
band traders passed with their effects that they 
had bought of some foreigners in the N. Sea, and 
at the mouth of the Cocle. 



PEP 

PENSBURY. See PENNSBURY. 

[PENSACOLA, Harbour and Town. The 
harbour is on then, shore of the Gulf of Mexico, 
11 leagues e. of Port Lewis and Mobile. It is 
large, safe from all winds, and has four fathoms 
water at its entrance, deepening gradually to 
seven or eight. The bar lies in lat. 30 15 . 
and long. 87 14 w. The town of Pensacola, the 
capital of W. Florida, lies along the beach of 
the bay, is of an oblong form, about a mile in 
length, and a quarter of a mile in breadth. It 
contains several hundred habitations, and many 
of the public buildings and houses are spacious 
and elegant. The governor s palace is a large 
stone building, ornamented w ith a tower, built 
by the Spaniards. It is defended by a small fort, 
called St. Mary de Galve. The exports from 
this town, consisting of skins, logwood, dying- 
stufF, and silver dollars, amounted, while in the 
possession of the British, to ^63,000 annually. 
The average value of imports, for three years, 
from Great Britain, was 97,000. The town 
and fort of Pensacola surrendered to the arms of 
Spain in the year 1781, and with them the whole 
province. Escambria river, or Shambe, is the 
large stream which falls into Pensacola Bay. It 
admits shallops some miles up, and boats up 
wards of 50 miles.] 

PENTAGUET. See PENOBSCOT. 

[PENTECOST, an island in the Archipelago 
of the Great Cyclades, which see. It was dis 
covered by Bougainville, May 22, 1768, and 
named from the day, being the day of Pentecost. 
It is two leagues distant from Aurora Island, 
which is in lat. 15 8 $. and long. 165 58 e. from 
Paris.] 

PENTECOSTE, a river of the island St. 
Christopher, one of the Antilles ; it runs from 
. to s. and served as the limits on the coast of 
this rhumb, when the island was divided between 
the English and the French. It enters the sea 
between the point of Palmistes and the bay of 
Marigot. 

PENTUSOK, a city of the county of Hamp 
shire, in the province of Massachusetts of N. 
America, in the most w. part of the province ; 
on the arm of the river Housotouk, w r hich enters 
the strait of Long Island. 

[PENUCO, a province of Mexico ; separated 
from that of Angelos, or Tlascala, on the n. by 
Tuspa river.] 

PEOMO, a settlement of the province and 
corregimicnto of Rancagua, in the kingdom of 
Chile. 

[PEPCHIDIACHICH, a point or head-land, 



P E Q 



103 



on the s. shore of the Great Bay of Chaleurs 
near the n. e. extremity of the province of New 
Brunswick. It is also called Pepchidichi, and 
lies w. s. w. of Port David.] 

PEPETA, ESTERO DE, a lake in the same pro 
vince and kingdom as the former settlement, 
near the town of Alhuc. 

PEPIN, a lake of the province and govern 
ment of Louisiana, formed from the river Santa 
Cruz, before this enters the Mississippi. 

[PEPIN, a lake, or rather a dilatation of the 
river Mississippi, near where it receives the river 
Chippeway from the w. e. in lat. 43 43 n. and 
long. 91 48 w. below the Falls of St. Anthonv.] 

PEPIRI-GUAZU, a river of the province 
and government of Paraguay, which runs 5. and 
enters the Uruguay. 

PEPIRI-MINI, a river of the same province 
and government as the former, which runs s. s. w. 
and enters also the Uruguay. 

[PEPPERELL, a township of Massachusetts, 
on the e. branch of Nashaway river, and on the 
n. line of Middlesex county. It joins Groton on 
the s. e. and is 40 miles n. by w. of Boston. It 
was incorporated in 1753, and contains 1132 in 
habitants.*] 

[PEPPERELBORqUGH,atownshipinYork 
county, district of Maine, on the n. e. side of 
Saco river, near the mouth, and which separates 
it from Biddeford to the s. It is about 12 miles 
s. w. of Portland, and 80 n. of Boston. It was 
incorporated in 1772, and contains 1352 inhabi 
tants.] 

[PEPSIGUIACH Point, on the n. side of 
Chaleur Bay, now called Paspibiac Point, is about 
three leagues w. n. w. of East Nouville. It is a 
barren plain that is nearly a league in length. 
A very extensive fishery is carried on here, for 
such a small place.] 

[PEPSIGUIACHE, now called New Carlisle, 
is about three leagues from Paspibiac, on the n. 
side of Chaleur Bay.] 

[PEPY S Islands, the same with Falkland 
Islands. Pepy s Island, described in Commodore 
Anson s voyage, lies in lat. 47 s. eight leagues e. 
of Cape Blanco, on the coast of Patagonia, and 
was discovered by Captain Cowley in 1680, who 
represents it to be commodious for taking in 
wood and water, and provided with a harbour 
capable of holding 1000 sail of ships; abounding 
with fowls, and promising great plenty offish.] 

[PEQUANACK, a township of Morris county, 
New Jersev ; perhaps the same as in some maps 
is called regunnock, which is separated from 
Bergen county northward by Pegunnock river.] 



104 



P E Q 



[PEQUANNOCK Point and River. The ri 
ver is a small stream which runs s. through the 
towns of Huntington and Stratford, in Fairfield 
county, Connecticut, and empties into a bay in 
the Sound where vessels may anchor. The point 
forms the w. extremity of the bay, near which 
are some rocks ; from thence the outer bar ex 
tends n. by n. e. The point is five miles s. w. of 
Stratford River.] 

PEQUE, a small river of the province of 
Pennsylvania in N. America, which runs s. w. and 
enters the Susquehannah. 

PEQUENA, a bay on the e. coast of the island 
Jamaica, between those of Manchancel and Larga. 

PEQUENCHES, a barbarous nation of In 
dians of the kingdom of Chile, who dwell in the 
mountains of the Andes to the e. of the city of 
La Concepcion : it is ve/y numerous, robust, and 
warlike, but cruel and treacherous. It has been 
at various times attempted to reduce some of 
these Indians to the Catholic faith, and to a civi 
lized life, but always in vain. 

PEQUENI, an abundant river of the province 
and government of Tierra Firme in the kingdom 
of this name. It rises in the mountains of Man- 
dinga, near the point of S. Bias, and runs w. for 
many leagues till it enters the Chagre, increas 
ing its stream by several smaller rivers. 

PEQUENI, a small settlement of this province 
and kingdom, on the shore of the former river. 

PEQUENO, a river of the island of St. Do 
mingo, in the part possessed by the French ; it 
enters the sea on the n. coast, near the town of 
Leogan, between this town and the river Grande ; 
this name being given to the river to distinguish 
it from that of which we are treating. 

PEQUENO, another river, in the province and 
captainship of S. Vicente in Brazil ; it runs s. s. w. 
and enters the sea in the channel formed by the 
island of Nuestra Senora. 

PEQUENO, another river, of the province and 
captainship of Los Ilhers in the same kingdom ; 
it runs s. and enters the Tucombira. 

PEQUENO, a port of the French in the island 
St. Domingo, in the part which they possess on 
the s. coast, between the Bay of Peur aud the 
Trou Sal ado. 

PEQUERI, or ITAZU, a river of the province 
of Gaira, in the government of Paraguay; which 
runs w. for many leagues, and enters the Parana, 
in the part where it gives the great fall. 

PEQUI, a settlement of the province and go 
vernment of Antioquia, in the Nuevo Reyno de 
Granada. 

PEQUICAS, a barbarous nation of Indians 



PER 

of Peru, who dwell e. of the nation of the Chi- 
quitos, and w. of the river Paraguay : it is very 
numerous, and began to be reduced to the faith 
in 1701. 

PEQUIMA, a district and jurisdiction of the 
province and colony of Virginia, on the shore of 
the strait of Albemarle. 

PEQUIN, a small river of the province and 
government of Paraguay ; which rises in some 
mountains bounding the kingdom of Brazil, be 
tween the rivers Curituba and Uruguay, runs 5. 
and enters the latter. 

PERALILLO, a settlement of the province 
and corregimiento of Maule, in the kingdom of 
Chile ; situate on the shore of the river Mata- 
quino. 

[PERAMUS, or PER AMES, in Bergen county, 
New Jersey, lies on the point of land formed by 
the branches of Saddle river, a north water of 
Passaik ; about 18 miles n. of Bergen, 10 w. of 
Tappan, and 21 n. w. by n. of New York city.] 

PERAS, SAN MARTIN DE LAS, a settlement 
of the head settlement of the district and alcaldia 
mayor of Quatro Villas, in Nueva Espaiia. It 
contains 72 families of Indians, employed in the 
cultivation and commerce of coehineal, seeds, 
fruits, and coal, and in cutting of wood : a little 
more than seven leagues s. zo. of its head settle 
ment. 

PERAS, SAN PABLO DE, another settlement 
of this alcaldia mayor and kingdom ; inhabited 
by 22 families of Indians, employed in the same 
manner as the above ; and this is at a somewhat 
shorter distance from its head settlement. 

PERAY, an abundant river of Canada; which 
rises from lake Nepigon, runs e. and, turning n. 
enters Hudson s Bay, being very wide at its 
mouth. 

PERCA-HUMO, a settlement of the province 
and captainship of Para in Brazil, situate on the 
coast, between this and the river Caita-pera. 

[PERCEE, L IsLE, a small but remarkable 
island on the w. side of the gulf of St. Law 
rence, being a perpendicular rock, pierced with 
two natural arches, through which the sea flows. 
One of these arches is sufficiently high to admit 
a large boat to pass freely through it. It is 15 
miles s. of Cape Gaspee. It is asserted, that it 
was formerly joined to mount Joli, which lies, op 
posite to it on the continent. 

PERCEE, a point on the n. coast of the islancj 
St. Domingo, in the part possessed by the French, 
between the bay of Petit Goave and the isle oC 
Miraguana ; opposite the s. coast of the island 
Goanava. 



PER 

PERCIA, a large settlement of the province 
and government of San Juan de Los Llanos in 
the Nuevo Reyno de Granada ; situate near the 
river Sinaruco. It was of the Indians of the 
Saliva nation, and in 1684 was taken and burnt 
by the Caribes. 

[PERCIPANY, a village in Morris county, 
New Jersey, situated on a branch of Passaik ri 
ver, and six miles n. of Morristown.] 

[PERCY, an extensive township in Grafton 
county, New Hampshire, watered by the several 
branches of Upper Amonoosuck river, bounded 
w. by Northumberland, on Connecticut river. It 
was incorporated in 1774, and contains only 48 
inhabitants.] 

PERDAMO, a small river of the province and 
corregimiento of Cuenca, in the kingdom of Quito ; 
which rises w. of the capital, runs to that rhumb, 
and enters the S. Sea in the gulf of Guayaquil. 

PERDICION, a cape on the s. coast of the 
strait of Magellan : one of those of the island of 
Luis el Grande, which looks to the w. 

PERDICES, Creek of the, on the n. coast of 
the island of Cuba. 

PERDIDO, a river of the province and govern 
ment of Florida, which runs s. and enters the sea 
between Pensacola and Mobile. 

[There is a bay on the coast of W. Florida, 
of the same name as the river. The mouth of 
the river is about 10 leagues e. of Mobile Point, 
and four w. of the bar of Pensacola. The en 
trance is narrow, with a bar of six feet, but 
afterwards it widens considerably. This was for 
merly the boundary between Florida and Lou 
isiana, dividing the French and Spanish domi 
nions. The river stretches in one place n. e. 
where it goes within a mile of the great lagoon w. 
of the entrance of Pensacola harbour.] 

PERDOMO, a river of the province and go 
vernment of Guayaquil, in the kingdom of Quito 
and district of Machala ; it runs w. and enters 
the sea in the Gulf of Guayaquil in lat. 3 s. 

PERDOMO, some banks of sand which have 
been formed at its entrance by the wind, and 
which often, in some degree, shift their situation. 

PERE, LE, a small island near the coast of 
the province and government of Guayana. 

PEREBERA, a large river of the province 
and government of the Rio del Hacha in the 
Nuevo Reyno de Granada. It runs from s. to n. 
and laves on the n. the settlement of Ramada ; 
and then runs into the N. Sea, forming a great 
bay, but which is exposed and shallow : its mouth 
is in lat. 11 16 n. 

PEIiECIPE, a small river of the province 

VOL. IV. 



PER 



105 



and captainship of Portoseguro in Brazil : it rises 
near the coast, runs e. and enters the sea between 
the Querurupa and Paruipa. 

PpREDO, a point on the s. coast of the island 
of Jamaica. 

PEREGRIN A, a settlement and asiento of 
silver mines of the alcaldia mayor of Guanajuato, 
in the province and bishopric of Mechoacan and 
kingdom of Nueva Espana. 

PEREIRA, a settlement of the province and 
captainship of Paraiba in Brazil, on the shore of 
the river Aracai, near the coast. 

PEREIRAS, a bar of the coast of the pro 
vince and captainship of Maranan and kingdom 
of Brazil. It is close to the island Santa Ana, 
one of those at the mouth of the river Mara- 
ilon. 

PEREJA, a small river of the province and 
captainship of Maranan in Brazil ; which rises in 
the mountains near the coast, runs n. between 
the rivers Tapicuru and Canchug, and enters the 
sea in the bay of Maranon. 

PEREQUETE, a river of the jurisdiction and 
alcaldia mayor of Peronome, in the province and 
kingdom of Tierra Firme ; it rises in the moun 
tains of the settlement of Capira, and enters the 
S. Sea in the Bay and Gulf of Panama, opposite 
the island Taboga. 

PERES, River of the, in the island of Mar 
tinique, one pf the Antilles ; it rises at the foot 
of the great mountain of La Calebasse, runs from 
n. e. to s. w. and enters the sea between the river 
Blanches and fort S. Pierre. 

[PERES Island, or CONST ANTINE PERES, on the 
coast of Chile, S. America. It is opposite to 
Port Coral. On this island is a fort called Man- 
sera, and on the back of the island there is an 
entrance for boats into the harbour of Baldivia.] 

PEREZ, or CAYOS DE DIEGO, some shoals 
near the s. coast of the island of Cuba, opposite 
the bay of Cochinos. 

[PE RGAMINO, a town of the province and 
government of Buenos Ayrcs, situate on the road 
from Buenos Ayres to Cordova, and about 100 
miles from the former. Lat. 33 53 28", long. 
60 43 5".] 

PERGAMINO, a fortress of the province and 
government of Buenos Ayres. It is small and 
of wood, but having a good ditch and draw 
bridge, with four pieces of cannon, and a suffi 
cient number of arms to withstand the Pampas 
Indians of the frontier. Here resides an officer 
with four detachments from the capital, from 
whence the fortress is 44 leagues distant : in the 
road which leads to Lima. 



10(3 



PER 



PERGUICOS, a small river of the province 
and captainship of Maranan in Brazil ~, it rises 
near the coast, runs n. between the rivers Cai- 
mindey and Maripe, and enters the sea. 

PERIBAN, a settlement and capital of the 
nkaldia mayor of Xiquilpa in the province and 
bishopric of Mechoacan and kingdom of Nueva 
Espana ; it is of an hot temperature, and con 
tains a convent of the religious of San Fran 
cisco, with one of the best temples in that 
kingdom. The population is composed of 100 
families of Spaniards, Mitstees, and Mulattoes, 
and 66 of Tarascos Indians, who make many 
cups of pumpkins, in which the place abounds ; 
and these they paint in a very beautiful manner, 
so that they are greatly esteemed, and form the 
principal branch of the commerce of the place : 
80 leagues a&amp;gt;. of Mexico, in long. 270 30 , lat. 
21 15 . 

PERIBOACK, a small river of Canada in N. 
America, which rises from a small lake, runs s. 
and enters the lake San Juan. 

PERICO, a settlement of the province and 
government of Jaen de Bracamoros in the king 
dom of Quito. 

PERICO, another settlement, in the province 
and government of Tucuman, of the district of 
the city of Jujui, on the shore of the river of the 
same name. 

PERICO, some islands of the S. Sea in the 
Gulf of Panama, which forms a capacious port 
fit for smaller vessels, and well sheltered from 
the winds ; but these vessels cannot ride up to 
the road of the city, since the port is dry at low 
water. These islands are two leagues s. of the 
city, in lat. 8 56 n. 

PERICO, the aforesaid river, of the province 
and government of Tucuman, in the district and 
jurisdiction of the city of Jujui; from whence it 
is three leagues distant ; in the road which leads 
to Lima. At this river many accidents have oc 
curred in crossing it when much swollen. 

PERICO, another, a small river of the province 
of Gaira in the government of Paraguay. It 
runs n. and enters the Ibay. 

PERIJA, a city of the province and govern 
ment of Maracaibo in the Nuevo Reyno de Gra 
nada, founded on the n. shore of the river of its 
name, 25 miles from the lake of Maracaibo, at 
the entrance, in the n. coast. 

PERIJA, the aforesaid river, rises in the sierra 
of the Pintados Indians of the province of Santa 
Marta, runs e. irrigating a large valley to which 
it gives its name, and empties itself in the lake 
of Maracaibo by the w. side. 



PER 

PERITIBA, a river of the province and go 
vernment of Paraguay, which runs w. and enters 
the great river Curitiva. 

PERITIBI, a lake of Canada, in the limits 
dividing this territory from the land of Labra 
dor. 

PERITO, or PIRITU, [in Morse called PERI- 
TAS ISLANDS,] some small isles near the coast of 
the province and government of Cumana, be 
tween Unare and Cumanagoto. 

PERITOES, a warlike nation of Indians of 
Nueva Andaluciato the ^.bounded e. by the na 
tion of the Palenques and by the territory of the 
jurisdiction of Cumana. 

PERKINS, a settlement of the island of Bar- 
badoes, in the parish and district of Santiago, 
situate near the w. coast. 

[PERKINS, Port, lies on the s. &amp;. of Washing 
ton s Isle, on the n. w. coast of N. America, See 
MAGEE S SOUND.] 

[PERKIOMY, a township of Pennsylvania, in 
Montgomery county.] 

PERLA, LA, a small isle of the N. Sea, situate 
near the coast of the island Martinique, in the 
w. part, between the islands of Predicador and 
La Capilla de Santa Cruz. 

PERLA, a river of the island of Guadaloupe, 
which rises in the mountains, runs n. w. and en 
ters the sea in the Grand Ance at the back of the 
Gros Morne. 

PERLAS, some islands of the N. Sea, and 
in the Bay and Gulf of Panama, of the province 
and kingdom of Tierra Firme. They are many, 
and in them are established a certain portion of 
Negro slaves belonging to the inhabitants of that 
capital, employed in the fisheries for pearl, which 
are found in great abundance, and are of a great 
size and fine quality. In these islands are found 
much maize, plantains, yucas, fish, and game ; 
on all of which the Negroes feed. They are about 
45 miles from the city of Panama. 

PERLAS, some other islands, near the coast of 
the province and government of Honduras, in N. 
America. They are many, but all small, and 
situate near those of the Indians and Zambos, 
the Mosquitoes, and those of the Manglares, 
situate in about lat. 12 44 n. long. 82 30 w. 

PERLAS, a bay, situate about 35 miles w. from 
the above islands. 

PERLAS, a point of land, or cape of the coast, 
in the province and government of Nicaragua 
and kingdom of Guatemala. It has this name, 
since anciently in that pearls were found, though 
this be not the case at the present day. 

PERLAS, a bay on the coast of the ze. bead 



PER 

and extremity of Hispaniola, in that part pos 
sessed by the French, between the Cape of Los 
Locos and the Plata Forma. 

PERL, AS, a river of the province and govern 
ment of Louisiana in N. America, which runs 
s.s. w. then turns s. and enters the Lake Pont- 
chartrain. 

[PERLICAN, OLD, an indifferent ship-road, 
with rocky ground on the e. coast of Newfound 
land Island, two leagues s. w. by s. of Break- 
heart Point. Sherwick is the name of its n. 
point.] 

[PERLICAN, NEW, a noted harbour on the e. 
coast of Newfoundland Island, eight leagues 
w. s. w. of Old Perlican, and five leagues from 
Random Head. It has a wide and safe entrance, 
and ships may ride in it landlocked from all winds 
in from 10 to 5 fathoms water.] 

PERNAMBUCO, a province and captainship 
of the kingdom of Brazil ; bounded n. and e. by 
the sea, 5. by the captainship of Bahia, and w. by 
the province and government of Piauh. This 
captainship-general of Pernambuco is about 470 
miles in extent from n. to s. and about 370 from 
e. to zc. and is irrigated by the rivers Tapados, 
Bibiribe, Camuri, Cenebi, Periperi, S. Miguel, 
Cururui, Vazabazas, S. Francisco, Inaya, Galiole, 
Parachuy, Parapinzingua, Poyuca, and many 
others. 

It abounds greatly in sugar-cane, cotton, and 
Brazil-wood, in the which its chief commerce 
consists ; as also in sugar, which it manufactures 
in great quantities, and sends to Portugal. The 
climate of this province is for the most part hot, 
and in the interior of the country moist, on ac 
count of the waters which become stagnant, as 
unable to pass through the thickness of the 
woods. 

The king, Don Juan III. of Portugal, gave 
this territory as a property to Don Duarte Coello 
Pereyra, third son of Gonzalo Pirez Coello, 
Lord of Filgueiras, for the great services he had 
performed in India. He arrived here accompa 
nied with many noble families, with a great store 
of arms, provisions, and necessaries ; but finding 
an extraordinary resistance on the part of the 
barbarian Cahetes Indians, who had the domi 
nion of that whole country as far as the river 
of S. Francisco, being aided by some French, 
he was forced to dispute that ground inch by 
inch which had been granted to him by leagues ; 
and in one of the encounters he was badly 
wounded : but he, nevertheless, kept on acquiring 
greater portions of territory by degrees, and 
founded different settlements; whither, allured 



PER 



107 



by his generosity and the fertility of the country, 
many Portugueze of noble and opulent families 
came to establish themselves : and who have left 
descendants who shed a lustre on their fore 
fathers. 

The Dutch invaded and took possession of this 
province in 1630, keeping it till 1632, when it 
was recovered by the Portugueze. The male 
line of its first possessor having been extinct, 
this province was added to the crown. The ca 
pital is the city of Olinda, which has also the 
name of Pernambuco ; and the other settlements 
of which it is composed are the towns of 
S. Cosme and S. Da- Alagoas del Norte, 

mian, or Igarazu, S. Antonio, 
Serinhaem, or Villa- S. Miguel, 

hermosa, Alagoas del Sur, 

Puerto Calvo, Penedo. 

[Pernambuco (says Mr. Grant) formerly con 
tained above a hundred sugar plantations, exten 
sive forests, well-cultivated fields, and a great 
profusion of the most delicious fruits. It for 
merly produced, at every return, more than 
15,000 chests of sugar, but at present it scarcely 
furnishes 4000. 

The population of this province was, several 
years ago, including Negroes, people of colour, 
and Indians, estimated at about 90,000 ; but 
since this period many families have emigrated 
to Paraguay, Peru, and Chile. This emigration 
has principally arisen from the embarrassments 
occasioned by the debts with which this province 
is loaded. The settlement of Penedo, situate on 
the n. shore of the river St. Francis, terminates 
this province to the s. as the island of Tamaraca 
terminates it on the . The entrance into the sea 
by the said river St. Francis, is well defended by 
the fort of S. Mauricius, which the Portuguese 
have had the precaution to build in the vicinity. 
The island of Fernando de Noronha, which 
lies at the distance of 50 leagues from the coast 
of Pernambuco, is nevertheless included under 
the jurisdiction of this captainship. The Portu 
gueze, after having for many years deserted this 
island, returned to it in 1738 ; and, under the 
persuasion that the French East India Company 
intended to take possession of it, erected seven 
strong forts for its defence. These forts are pro 
vided with artillery, and garrisoned with regular 
troops, which are relieved every six months. 

A few exiles, a small number of indigent Mus- 
tecs, and the Indians employed on the public 
works, compose the whole of the inhabitants of 
this island. No kind of plantations hav e ever 
succeeded, though the soil is good, on account 
p 2 



103 



PER 



of the dryness of the climate ; whole years fre 
quently elapsing without any rain. 

From December till April turtles constitute 
the only food of the inhabitants; after this period 
they disappear, and leave them solely dependent 
on the provisions sent from the continent. 

There are two very good harbours in the island, 
where ships of any size may ride in safety, ex 
cept during the prevalence of n. and w. winds. 
See Index to additional matter respecting the 
history of Brazil, cap. i.J 

PERNAMBUCO, the capital of the above cap 
tainship. 

[PERNAMBUCO, another captainship, included 
in that above described.] 

PERO, a small river of the province of Nova 
Scotia, or Acadia, in N. America. It runs e. and 
enters the Bassin des Mines of the bay of Fundy. 
In its vicinity a silver mine has been discovered. 

PEROCHICO, a settlement and head settle 
ment of the district of the alcadia mayor of Gui- 
meo in Nueva Espafia; it contains HO families 
of Indians, including those of the wards of its 
district, and is w. of its capital. 

PEROHIBE, a settlement of the province and 
captainship of S. Vicente in Brazil, on the shore 
of the river Itaman, near the sea-coast. 

PEROQUET, a small island near the coast 
of the river St. Lawrence, in the country and 
land of Labrador, opposite the island of Anti- 
costi. 

PEROTE, a head settlement of the district 
of the alcadia mayor of Xicayan in Nueva Espana. 
It is of a cold and dry temperature, from the 
soil being sandy, but enjoys a pleasant and salu 
tary air : although this is hindered from blowing 
from the s. e. by the great mountain, called Cofre 
de Perote, one of the loftiest in that kingdom, 
and which is discovered more than 20 leagues at 
sea, being nearly of the same height with the 
volcano of Orizaba, and both of them serving as 
a landmark to make the port of Vcra Cruz. The 
expansion of its skirts are equal to its height ; 
since it extends from n. to s. for upwards of six 
leagues, all of which are of serranias^ and from 
which flow down many streams, forming at some 
of the tops various lakes, which remain the whole 
year round. 

This mountain is covered with firs and other 
trees of immense size, and principally with sa- 
bins, from which they cut very large and thick 
planks. But the greatest advantage made of 
this tree is when they distil it over a fire and 
extract a great quantity of tar, which is carried 
to Vera Cruz for careening vessels. On the 



PER 

skirts of this mountain graze infinite numbers 
of large and small cattle ; since it is, in every 
part, fertile, pleasant, and abounding in pasture. 

The population of the settlement is composed 
of 86 families of Spaniards, 46 of Musices, 30 
of Mulattoes, and 27 of Indians, who speak the 
Castillian idiom with the same perfection as the 
Spaniards. It has a convent of the religious of 
the order of La Caridad, with the dedicatory title 
of San Hipolito. These are dedicated to give 
hospitality to poor Europeans who arrive in the 
fleets which pass by here ; curing such as are 
sick, and exercising themselves in works of piety. 
The expense of this laudable establishment is 
defrayed by five cultivated estates, and 1 1 ran- 
c/ios in its district. Ten leagues n. of its ca 
pital. 

[PEROTE, (the ancient Pinahuizapan). The 
small fortress of San Carlos de Pcrote is situate 
in the intendancy of Vera Cruz, and to the n. 
of the town of Perote. It is rather an armed 
station fhan a fortress. The surrounding plains 
are very barren, and covered with pumice-stone. 
There are no trees, with the exception of a few 
solitary trunks of cypress and molina. Height 
of Perote 2353 metres, or 7719 feet.] 

[PERPETUA, Cape, on the n.w. coast of 
N.America. Lat. 44 26 n. Long. 124 8 w. 
Variation of the compass in the year 1779. 
17 50 c J 

PERPURA, a river of the province and cap 
tainship of Seara in Brazil, which enters the sea 
between the rivers Yaguaribe and Guarahu. 

PERQUILABQU^N, a river of the king 
dom of Chile, which runs w. and unites itself 
with that of Castillo to enter the Longomilla. 

[PERQUIMONS, a county of Edenton dis 
trict, N.Carolina, bounded w. by Chowan county, 
and e. by Pasquotank, from which last it is sepa 
rated by the river Pasquotank, a water of Albe- 
marle Sound. It contains 5440 inhabitants, of 
whom 1878 are slaves.] 

PERQUIMONS, a maritime county of the dis 
trict of Edenton in N. Carolina. 

PERQUIMONS, a river which enters the sea in 
the strait of Albernarle. 

PERRO-PUNTA, or DOG-POINT, is on the 
coast of the province and government of Flo 
rida. 

PERRO, CABEZA DEL, a point of land of the 
island of Tortuga, on the side of that called Del 
Leste. 

PERRO, BOCA DEL, a settlement of the island 
of Cuba; on the n. coast. 

PERRO, a river of the province and govern- 



PER 



PER 



109 



ment of Merida in the Nuevo Reyno de Granada. 
It runs e. and enters the Apure. 

PERROQUETS, Islands of the, in the N. 
Sea, near the coast of the province and govern 
ment of Guayana, in the part possessed by the 
French, at the entrance of the river Oyapoco. 

PERROS, or DOG Islands, on the coast of 
the province and government of Florida ; oppo 
site the river Apalachicola. Between them and 
the coast is a narrow channel called Of Barks, 
lit only for the navigation of small vessels. 

PERSI, a river of the province and captain 
ship of Brazil, which enters the sea between the 
Manetuba and the point of Vul. 

[PERSON, a new county in Hillsborough 
district, N. Carolina. The court-house, where a 
post-office is kept, is 19 miles n. of Hillsborough, 
and 15. e, of Caswell new court-house.] 

PERTH-AMBOY, a city, the capital of the 
county of Middlesex in the province of New 
Jersey of N. America, thus called by Jacob 
Drumond, Count of Perth, and one of the an 
cient proprietors. It is in a most beautiful si 
tuation, namely, at the mouth of the river Ra- 
ritan, which here forms at its entrance into the 
sea a large and handsome bay, capable of con 
taining 500 vessels. But with all these advan 
tages the town has flourished but moderately, 
since it consists of only 40 small houses besides 
the governor s . The plan which was formed by 
the Scotch was very grand, and they laid out 
1070 acres of ground, divided into equal parts 
for purchasers to build on, reserving four acres 
for a public market, and three for store-houses, 
which, if they had been finished, according to the 
projection, Mould have vied with any of the 
finest cities in N. America. 

[This city lies open to Sandy Hook, and has 
one of the best harbours on the continent. Ves 
sels from sea may enter it on one side, in almost 
any weather. It is a port of entry and post- 
town ; but although it is admirably situated for 
trade, and the legislature has given every en 
couragement to induce merchants to settle here, 
it is far from being in a flourishing state. It 
now contains about 60 houses, and carries on a 
small trade to the W. Indies. Its exports for a 
year, ending September 30, 1794, were to the 
value of ,58, 159 dollars. It is 20 miles s.w. of 
New York, and 53 n. e. of Philadelphia. Lat. 
40 3V n. Long. 74 20 30" a&amp;gt;.] 

PERTIGALETE, a river of the province 
and government of Cumana in Nueva Anda- 
Jacia. 



PERTUIS, a bay on the s. coast of the island 
Jamaica. 

PERU, an extensive kingdom or empire of 
S. America, anciently governed by its own sove 
reigns, and now subject to the king of Spain, who 
sends thither a viceroy. It was discovered by 
Francisco Pizarro, Marquis of Los Charcas and 
Atavillos, in 1526, in the reign of the emperor 
Atahuallpa, whom some improperly called Ata- 
baliba. This same discoverer began its conquest 
in 1531. It was formerly called Biru, from the 
name of a cacique^ or prince, of one of its states 
on the coast of the Pacific. Some assert that the 
word Peru comes from Beru, a river which en 
ters itself into that sea, and which was the first 
passed by the same Pizarro. Others give its 
origin from a promontory of. the same coast, 
which at that time was called Pelu. 

The limits of this kingdom have been various, 
according to the difference of the governments. 
At present its jurisdiction extends to the three 
audiences of Lima, Charcas, and Chile ; separat 
ing that of Quito, which is dependent upon the 
government of the viceroyalty of Santa Fe de 
Bogota, both in ecclesiastical and temporal con 
cerns. The government of Peru begins from the 
Gulf of Guayaquil to the s., that is, at Cape 
Blanco, and from the corrcgimiento of Truxillo, 
which extends as far as Tumbez, in lat. 325 / s. 
as far as the Desert of Atacama, the n. boundary 
of the kingdom of Chile. It is thus 432 leagues 
in length from n. to s. and comprehending the 
kingdom of Chile as far as the lands of Magellan, 
that is, as far as lat. 57 s. Its measure from 
pole to pole is upwards of 1069 leagues. It has 
for limits on the e. the mountains which divide it 
from the kingdom of Brazil, on the celebrated 
line called Of Demarcation, or Alexandrian, 
drawn by Pope Alexander VI., determining the 
extent of the empire between the Spaniards and 
Portuguese of the new world. It is bounded 
w. by the Pacific or S. Sea, and its greatest ex 
tent here is 558 leagues. 

The ancient Indians called this country Ta- 
vantin-suyu, which signifies, the four parts. 
That of the e. in which is the imperial city of 
Cuzco, they called Colla-suyu, or eastern part of 
the empire ; that of the &amp;. Chinchay-suyu ; that 
of the n. Anti-suyu ; and that of the s. Conti- 
suyu. This great country is divided into 96 pro 
vinces, in the district of the three aforefaid audi 
ences ; and as to its spiritual and ecclesiastical 
concerns into an archbishopric and 11 bishoprics. 
The proper language of the natives is the Que- 



110 



PERU. 



chuan or Quichuan ; but this is divided into 
many dialects, and is commonly known by the 
name of the Inca tongue, and is spoken by all 
the Indians, and many of the Spaniards. The 
greater part also of the places, rivers, and moun 
tains, keep the old names given them by the 
natives, and retain the same signification ; as 
will be observed in the following Catalogue, to 
which the corresponding Spanish titles are an 
nexed : 



Angas-mayiij 

Ango-yacu, 

Cachi-mayu, 

Cara, 

Chaqui, - 

Chaqui-yacu, - 

Chingacuchuscas, ~ 

Chita, 

Chumbe, - &amp;lt; 

Chupas, - - * 

Chuqui-mayu, - 

Cocha-Pampa, - * 

Cuy-cocha, - * 

Guaira, - - 

Guano, 

Guarco, - - * 

Guascar, - 

Hambato, - - 
Hambi, - 
Hatun-colla, 

Hatun-rucana, - 

Huaca, - - 

H uallahuangahuaicu, 

Huambra, - l 

Huarmi-cocha, - 

Laxa, - - - 

Llatacunga, - - 

Llulla, - 

Loro-cocha, 

Manta, 

Mayu, - - 

Muyumuyu, 

Muyu-pampa, - 

Papallacta, 

Parihuana-cocha, 

Paya, - - 

Pisco, - - 

Pisco-pampa, 

Piti, - 

Pucuna, - 

Puraa-cocha, - 



Rio Verde. 

Aqua Glutinosa. 

Rio de Sal. 

Piel. 

Lugar de Piedra. 

Agua de Pie. 

Los que tienen la Na- 
riz partida. 

Cabra. 

Frente. 

Cola. 

Rio Triste. 

Llanura de Lago. 

Lago de Conejos. 

Viento. 

Estiercol. 

Peso. 

Cuerda. 

Bota. 

Remedio. 

Altura Grande. 

Vejez Grande, Dedo 
Grande. 

Sepulcro. 

Profundidad de Cuer 
vos. 

Nino. 

Lago de Mugeres. 

Piedra. 

Cuello Desnudo. 

Mentira. 

Lago del Papagayo. 

Cobertura. 

Rio. 

Alreedor. 

Lllanura Sembrada. 

Tierra de Papas. 

Lago de Paros. 

Vieja. 

Aves. 

Llanura de Paxaros. 

Pedazo. 

Loco. 

Lago de Leones. 



Puma-llacta, 
Puma-tampti, - 
Puyuc-yacu, 
Quero, 
Quilca, * 
Quillasinga, 
Quispiquanchi, 
Rucana, 

Ruminavi, x? 
Rumi-pampa, - 
Runa-huanac, - 
Sara-yacu, 
Simi-jaca, 

Sinarucu, &amp;lt; 

Sullana, _:* ; . &amp;gt;* 

Sungu, : 

Tapu, 

Taucas, *. 

Tihuanacu, 

Titi-caca, 

Tungurahua, 

Turu-pampa, - 

Tuta-pisco, 

Ucuntaya, 

Ucu-pampa, *- 

Uramarca, 

Urcu-pampa, - 

Utspa-llacta, 

Villca-pampa, 

Yaguar-cocha, - 

Yaguar-singu, - 

Yanacunas, 

Yapuis, - 

Yura, 



- Tierra de Leones. 

- Mansion de Leones. 

- Agua de Nieves. 

- Leno. 

- Carta. 

- Nariz de la Luna. 

- Fuga. 

- Vejez, Dedo. 

- Ojo de Piedra. 

- Llanura de Piedras. 

- Cauto del Peligro. 

- Ao-ua de Maiz. 

- Piedra con Boca Abi- 

erta. 

- Como Viejo. 

- Aborto. 

- Corazon. 
Preguntador. 

- Monton. 

- Sentados Juntos. 

- Monte de Plomo. 

- Cuello Alto. 

- Llanura de Lodo. 

- Ave Matutina. 

- Pais Interior. 

- Campo Profundo. 

- Pais Inferior. 

- Campo de Montes. 

- Tierra de Cenizas. 

- Llanura Cavernosa. 

- Lago de Sangre. 

- Corazon de Sangre. 

- Criados. 

- Arador. 

- Arbol. 



The ancient religion of Peru was the idola 
trous worship of the sun, from which they thought 
that their emperors, the Incas, were descended. 
They acknowledged and adored an invisible and 
supreme being, whom they called Pachacamac, 
that is, creator and preserver of the universe. 
The founder of the monarchy of Peru was 
Manco Capac, in company with Mama Ocllo 
his sister ; and this empire remained for a series 
of 17 Incas monarchs, until the reign of Sayri- 
Tupac, who was the last ; and renounced the 
throne to the king of Spain, embracing the Ca 
tholic religion, and taking the name of Diego 
Sayri-Tupac-Inca. 

This empire is peopled with many barbarous 
nations, who live in the woods and on the moun 
tains like wild beasts. Many of them have em 
braced the Catholic faith, and have become re 
duced to a civilized state of life in the cities and 



PERU. 



Ill 



settlements which have been founded by the 
Spaniards. They are robust, pacific, and kind : 
their predominant vice is drunkenness ; but they 
are ingenious and easily imitate whatever they 
see. Since the conquest, the Spaniards have been 
established amongst them, and the descendants 
of these they call Creoles and Peruleros, a race 
at once clever, valorous, and docile, of fine 
temper, excellent understanding, and greatly at 
tached to strangers : but they have been without 
instruction or reward; or they would otherwise 
have made the greatest progress in literature, and 
carried the arts in this country to the highest 
pitch ; since, under all their disadvantages, there 
have not been wanting amongst them, men who 
have excelled in arms and letters. 

The European Spaniards are called Chape- 
tones, and are nearly all devoted to commercial 
pursuits. Some established themselves here, and 
formed new families : whilst others, after having 
made their fortunes, with great fatigues and pe 
rils by land and sea, returned to Europe. The 
English, French, and Dutch, have attempted 
several times to establish themselves in Peru; 
but their views have always been defeated by the 
Spanish government, who were aware of the im 
mense treasures they derived from it in gold, 
silver, jewels, quicksilver, copper, dyes, woods, 
balsams, spices, zarzaparilla, bai/nUla, bark, cacao, 
and a thousand other drugs and productions, 
not to mention animals, fruits, birds, and fish, in 
which a regular account will be given in each of 
the articles of the 98 provinces and corregimientos 
or governments into which this kingdom is di 
vided, and which are as follows : 

Provinces of Peru in the district of the audience 
of Lima. 



Cercado, 

Chancay, 

Santa, 

Truxillo, ,:: 

Sana, 

Piura, 

Caxamarca, 

Luya and Chillaos, 

Guamachuco, 

Chachapoyas, 

Pataz, 

Huamalies, 

Conchucos, 

Parinacochas, 

Abancay, 

Cuzco, 

Paucartambo, 



Huailas, 

Caxatambo, 

Huanuco, 

Tarma, 

Canta, 

Guarochiri, 

Yauyos, 

Xauxa, 

Canete, 

lea, 

Castro Virreyna, 

Angaraes, 

Guancavelica, 

Quispicanche, 

Canes and Caliches, 

A imaraez, 

Urubamba, 



Huanta, 
Lucanas, 
Camana, 
Arequipa, 
Moquelma, 
Arica, 

Collahuas,orCailloma, 
Condesuyos de Are 
quipa, 

The above amount to 50, reckoning as a pro 
vince the jurisdiction of Cercado of Lima and the 
city of Cuzco, which have corregidors. 

In the district of the audience of Charcas, 



Guamanga, 
Andahuailas, 
Vilcashuaman, 
Cotabamba, 
Calca and Lares, 
Chilques and Mas 
ques, 
Chumbivilcas. 



Lampa, 

Carabaya, 

Asangaro, 

Chucuito, 

Paucar-colla, 

Pacajes, or Veren- 

guela, 
Omasuyos, 
Larecaja, 
La Paz, 
Sicasica, 
Oruro, 
Paria, 
Carangas, 
Porco, 
Potosi, 



Chayanta, or Charcas, 
Pilaya, or Paspaya, 
Cochabamba, 
Pumabamba, 
Tomina, 
Atacama, 
Lipes, 
Yamparaes, 
Paraguay, 
Tucuman, 
Buenos Ayres, 
Apolabamba, 
Mizque, 

Santa Cruz de la Si 
erra, 
Tarija. 



These amount to 30. 

In the district of the audience of Santiago of 
Chile. 



Cuyp, 

Copiapo, 

Serena, or Coquimbo, 

Quillota, 

Aconcagua, 

Santiago, 

Melipilla, 

Rancagua, 

Colcagua, 

Maule, 



Itata, 

Chilian, 

Rede, or Estancia del 
Rey, 

Puchacay, 

La Concepcion, 

Valdivia, 

Chiloe, or Castro, 

Las Islas de Juan Fer 
nandez. 



Besides the above, this kingdom includes the 
immense countries and provinces of Chaco, the 
Moxos, Chiquitos, Baures, Chunchos, Lamas, 
and Araucanos Indians, amongst whom the Je 
suits had established and held very flourishing 
missions. 

The first bishops in Peru were Fernando de 
Luque and Olivera, native of Andalucia, with 
title of bishop of Tumbez in 1531, and Fr. Vi 
cente de Valverde, a Dominican, native of Oro- 



.112 



PERU. 



pesa, with title of bishop of Cuzco, in 1538 ; and 
who was put to death by the Indians of La Puna. 
The archbishopric of Lima has for suffragan the 
bishops of Cuzco, Santiago de Chile, Concepcion 
de Chile, Guamanca, Arequipa, Truxillo, Quito, 
and Panama : and the archbishopric of La Plata 
those of La Paz, Santa Cruz de la Sierra, Buenos 
Ayres, Tucuman, and Paraguay. This vast em 
pire is governed by a viceroy, who resides at 
Lima, this being the capital and metropolis. He 
has the title of governor and captain-general of 
all the kingdoms and provinces of Peru, and is 
president of the royal audience and chancery of 
Lima ; this being the authority on which depend 
the other magistracies and tribunals, civil and 
criminal. The provinces are governed, some by 
governors, and others by corregidors nominated 
by the king, and in some settlements there 
remain the old caciques, or Indian governors, 
though under subordination to the former powers. 
The Indians pay an annual tribute to the king, 
the which is more moderate with regard to such 
as voluntarily acknowledged their obedience, and 
proportionably larger to those who were sub 
jected by force of arms : and, again, there are 
some entirely free from this exaction, namely, 
those who are descendants of the first allies of 
the Spaniards, and who assisted them in their 
conquests. 

Catalogue of the barbarous nations and principal 
places of Peru. 



Cities. 
Almagro, 
Arequipa, 
Arica, 
Bella Vista, 
Carrion, 

Castro- Virreyna, 
Caxamarca, 
Chachapoyas, 
Chuquisaca, or La 
Plata, or Charcas, 
Cuzco, 
Guamanga, 
Guancabelica, 
Guanuco, 
lea, 
Lamas, 
Lima, 
Mizque, 
Moquehua, 
Moyobamba, 
Nasca, 
Oropesa, 



Paz, 

Pisco, 

Piura, 

Poto, 

Potosi, 

Puno, 

Sana, 

S. Juan del Oro, 

Santa, 

Tarija, 

Tarma, 

Truxillo, 

Victoria. 

Barbarous Nations. 
Abiticas, 
Acos, 
Achives, 
Amamazos, 
Ancas, or Angas, 
Angaraes, 
Aruporecas, 
Asapupenas, 



Atavillos, 


Quechuas, 


Aullagas. 


Raches, 


Autis, 


Taucas, 


Ayahuacas, 


Xamoros, 


Ayaviris, 


Zepatos. 


Aimaraes, 




Borillos, 


Rivers. 


Boros, 


Amarumayu, 


Calca and Lares, 


Apere, 


Callisecas, 


Apiochana, 


Calluas, 


Apurimac, 


Canisienes, 


Boca de Pan, 


Cavinas, 


Cabirecu, 


Cabos, 


Cachi-mayu, 


Cenomonas, 


Calla-huaya, 


Charcas, 


Caravaillo, 


Chinataguas, 


Castela, 


Chiquiguanitas, 


Caica-mayu, 


Chiriguanos, 


Chila, 


Chiucas, 
Choromoros, 


Chuqui-mayu, 
Coroico, 


Chucunas, 


Corurula, 


Chunanas, 


De la Sal, 


Chunchos, 


Desaquadero, 


Chupachos, 


Enin, 


Chuscos, 


Guazumiri, 


Ciriones, 


Guaura, 


Cocmonomas, 


Huambra, 


Coniguas, 


Iraibi, 


Coscaocoas, 


Itenes, 


Coseremonianos, 


Lircay, 


Fimayos, 


Mages, 


Guatahuahuas, 


Mala, 


Guatinguapas, 


Manica, 


Guailas, 


Pacas-mayu, 


Hancohualluas, 


Paravari, 


Huancas, 


Paria, 


Huaras, 


Pilco-mayu* 


Hubinas, 


Pocona,. 


Ibitas, 


Rimac, 


Ipillos, 


Sama, 


Lamas, 


Tambo, 


Matupeyapes, 


Ucupampa, 


Masques, 


Xauxa, 


Masteles, 


Yetau. 


Mailonas, 




Mogolves, 


Lakes. 


Motilones, 


Aullaga, 


Moxos, 


Cayubabas, 


Mures, 


Chihuata, 


Nindasos, 


Chinchaicocha, 


Pacajes, 


Cullue, 


Panataguas, 


Huaichao, 


Payansos, 


Huaillaruiij 


Purasicas, 


Jacabamba, 



PERU. 



113 



Lauri-cocha, 


Chule, 


Loro-cocha, 


Guacho, 


Paria, 


Guanchoco, 


Parina-cocha, 


Guarco, 


Patan-cocha, 


Hilo, 


Punrun, 


Huanape, 


Puma-cocha, 


Ilai, 


Tiella-cocha, 


Iqueique, 


Titicaca, 


Malabrigo, 


Vilafro. 


Paita, 




Pisagua, 


Mountains, 


Quemado, 


Abitanis, 


Tarapaya, 


Acacuna, 


Tongora, 


Acochala, 


Tumbez. 


Ananea, 




Andes, 


Promontories. 


Aporoma. 


Acari, 


Arauro, 


Acaquini, 


Arcota, 


Atico, 


Arirahua, 


Blanco, 


Aupillan, 


Chao, 


Cara-huagra, 


Corrientes, 


Carangas, 


Del Ago, 


Chocaja, 


Ferol, 


Chumbilla, 


Hilo, 


Condonoma, 


Moreno, 


Huantajaya, 


Negrillos, 


Huatiapa, 


Paita, 


Huayana-putina, 


Piedra, 


Julcamarca, 


Quemado, 


Laicacota, 


S. Antonio, 


Ornate, 


S. Jorge, 


Oruro, 


S. Nicolas, 


Popo, 


Tarapaca. 


Porco, 




Poto, 


Islands. 


Potosi, 


Asia, 


Sahuancuca, 


Cocos, 


Santa?Juana, 


Dogs Island, 


Sunchull, 


Guano, 


Tampaya, 


Guara, 


Ucuntaya. 


Huanape, 




Iqueique, 


Ports. 


Lobos, 


Acari, 


Mancera, 


Arantac, 


Nonura, 


Atacama, 


S. Lorenzo, 


Callao, 


S. Martin. 


Casma, 




Chancay, 


Forts. 


Chancallo, 


S.Fernando, 


Cherrepe, 


Guarochiri. 



VOL. IV. 



[For the chronological series of the Inca Em 
perors of Peru, given by A^edo ; see the end of 
the following additional matter. 

ADDITIONAL INFORMATION RESPECTING THE 
KINGDOM OF PERU. 

1. Climate, Soil, and Productions. 2. Mines, 
Exports, and Imports. 3. Population. 4. 
Revolutions. 5. Traits of the Religion of the 
Aborigines. 6. Table of Longitudes and La 
titudes. 

1. Climate, Soil, and Productions. From the 
situation of this country, which is within the tor 
rid zone, it is natural to suppose that it would 
be almost uninhabitable ; but the Andes Moun 
tains being on the one side, and the S. Sea on 
the other, it is not so hot as tropical countries in 
general are ; and in some parts it is disagreeably 
cold. In one part are mountains of a stupendous 
height and magnitude, having their summits co 
vered with snow ; on the other, volcanoes flam 
ing within, while their summits, chasms, and 
apertures, are involved in ice. The plains are 
temperate, the beaches and vallies hot; and 
lastly, according to the diposition of the country, 
its high or low situation, we find all the variety 
of gradations of temperature between the two 
extremes of heat and cold. It is remarkable that 
in some places it never rains, which defect is sup 
plied by a dew that falls every night and suffici 
ently refreshes the vegetable creation ; but in 
Quito they have prodigious rains, attended by 
dreadful storms of thunder and lightning. In 
the inland parts of Peru, and by the banks of the 
rivers, the soil is usually very fertile ; but along 
the sea-coast it is a barren sand. Vast numbers 
of cattle were imported by the Spaniards into 
Peru, when they took possession of that country; 
these are now so increased that they run wild, 
and are hunted like game. This country pro 
duces fruits peculiar to the climate, and most 
of those in Europe. The culture of maize, of 
pimento, and of cotton, which was found esta 
blished there, has not been neglected ; and that 
of wheat, barley, cassava, potatoes, sugar, and of 
the olive and vine is attended to. The goat has 
thriven very well ; but the sheep have degene 
rated, and their wool is become extremely coarse. 

There are certain waters in this country which 
in their course turn into stone ; and fountains of 
liquid matter, called coppey, resembling pitch 
and tar, and used by seamen for the same pur 
pose. On the coast of Guayaquil and Guate- 
Q 



14 



PERU. 



, and this at first gave rise 
more than a 



mala are found a certain species of snails, which 
yield the purple dye so celebrated by the an 
cients, and which the moderns have supposed 
to have been lost. The shell that contains them 
is fixed to rocks watered by the sea. It is of 
the size of a large nut. Various methods are 
used to extract the purple matter from the ani 
mal. There is no colour that can be compared 
to this, either in lustre or permanence. 

Here is also found a new substance, called 
the platina, and which may be considered as an 
eighth metal. In its native state it is mixed 
with gold and iron 
to a suspicion that it was nothin^ 
combination of these two metals ; but late expe 
riments of chemists fully prove, that it is a pure 
and simple metal, with properties peculiar to it 
self. It cannot be affected by any simple acid, 
or by any known solvent, except the aqua regia; 
it will not tarnish in the air, neither will it rust ; 
it unites to the fixedness of gold, and to the pro 
perty it has of not being susceptible of destruc 
tion, a hardness almost equal to that of iron, 
and a much greater difficulty of fusion. It is of 
an intermediate colour between that of iron and 
silver ; it can be forged and extended into thin 
plates ; and when dissolved in aqua regia, it 
may be made to assume, by precipitation, an 
infinite diversity of colours ; and Count Milby 
has succeeded in varying these precipitates so 
much, that he has a picture painted, in the 
colouring of which there is scarce any thing 
but platina made use of. Upon the whole, 
from considering the advantages of the platina, 
we cannot but conclude that this metal deserves, 
at least, from its superiority to all others, to 
share the title of king of metals., of which gold 
has so long been in possession. 

The Peruvian bark, so famous at present for 
curing intermittent fevers, is likewise found here. 
The tree from which it is taken grows upon the 
slope of mountains, and is about the size of a 
common cherry tree. It is distinguished into 
three kinds ; the red, yellow, and the white ; 
but the red is found to be the best and most effi 
cacious. The Jesuits carried this bark to Rome 
as early as 1639 ; but the natives are supposed 
to have been acquainted with its medicinal quali 
ties many ages before. 

2. Mines , Exports and Imports In the n. parts 
of Peru are several gold mines ; but those of 
silver are found all over the country, particularly 
in the neighbourhood of Potosi. Nature never 
afforded to the avidity of mankind, in any country 



on the globe, such rich mines as those of Potosi. 
These famous mines were accidentally discovered 
in the year 1545, in this manner. An Indian, 
named Hualpa, one day following some deer, 
which made directly up the hill of Potosi, came 
to a steep craggy part of the hill, and the better 
to enable him to climb up, laid hold of a shrub, 
which came up by the roots, and laid open a mass 
of silver ore. He for some time kept it a secret, 
but afterwards revealed it to his friend Guanca, 
who, because he would not discover to him the 
method of refining it, acquainted the Spaniard 
his master, named Valaroel, with the discovery. 
Valaroel registered the mine in 1545 ; and from 
that time till 1638 these mines of Potosi had 
yielded 95,619,000 pieces of eight, which is about 
4,255,000 pieces a year. 

But the annual sum derived from these mines, 
according to the latest accounts, and as calculated 
from the produce of the royal duties, and therefore 
considerably under the truth, amounts to 3,400 
Spanish marks of pure gold, and 513,000 ditto 
of pure silver. The value in dollars of both is 
5,317,988 ; the gold being estimated at 145 *, 
dollars, and the silver at 9 -^ dollars the Spanish 
mark. Besides this, we must add for contraband 
922,012 dollars ; and the total produce will then 
be 6,240,000. 

The following comparison of the value of the 
exports of that kingdom to Europe, at different 
periods of the last century, will show the growth 
and improvement of its commerce. 

DOLLARS. 

Annual exports of Peru to Europe for 
1714 to 1739, while the system of 
the Galleons continued - - - - 2,125,000 

.from 1748 to 1778, 

while the trade was carried on by 

register ships ------- 4,260,479 



from 1785 to 1794, 



since the establishment of the sys 
tem of free trade. 6,686,884 

According to Humboldt, the dollars imported 
into Peru and Chile in 1803, amounted to 
11,500,000, and the exports consisted of pro 
duce to the value of 4,000,000 dollars, besides 
8,000,000 dollars in specie. 

3. Population. The population of Peru, in 
1796, appears from the Viagero Universal and 
Alvear y Ponce, to amount in 1796, to 1,445,000 
souls, and that of Chile to 720,000, in 1806. But 
Mr. Walton greatly exceeds this estimate, for he 
states the number of inhabitants in this viceroy - 
alty, in the year 1812, as follows : 



PERU. 



115 



Indians, men, women and children - 2,846,351 

Mulattoes, Mestizos, Sambos, Qua 
droons, Negroes, men women, and 
children 1,227,040 

Creoles born in Peru, descendants of 
Spaniards 476,593 

Spaniards born in Old Spain, residents 

in Peru * ^*&amp;gt; fcri* vrnw*- - - 294,412 



Inhabitants in Peru 
Inhabitants in Mexico 



- 4,844,396 

- 4,798,479 



In Mexico and Peru, subjects to Spain 9,642,875 

Among all the inhabitants of Peru, pride and 
laziness are said to be the most predominant 
passions. Avarice may likewise be attributed to 
some of them with a great deal of propriety. 
There is very little commerce in this fine coun 
try, except in the cities and large towns, which 
are described under their respective names. The 
chief manufactures are carried on by the Indians ; 
these consist chiefly of leather, woollen and 
cotton stuffs, and earthen ware ; in the fabrication 
of which they are said to be peculiarly ingenious. 
The Indians and Negroes are forbidden, under 
the severest penalties, to intermarry ; for divi 
sion between these two classes, is the greatest 
instrument, in which the Spaniards trust for the 
preservation of the colonies. Peru is governed 
by a viceroy, who is absolute ; but it being im 
possible for him to superintend the whole extent 
of his government, he delegates a part of his 
authority to the several audiences and courts, 
established at different places throughout his terri 
tories. At Lima there is a treasury court for 
receiving a fifth of the mines, and certain taxes 
paid by the Indians, which belong to the king of 
Spain. 

4. Revolutions. About the year 1781, and the 
same period in which happened the revolution in 
Santa Fe ; an insurrection took place in this 
kingdom, under the direction of Tupac-Amaru, 
but which failed from the circumstance of this 
chief being so enraged against the Spaniards, 
and desirous of revenging his ancestors, as to 
have promulgated his resolution of extirpating 
every other race but the original one of the 
country ; when the Mustees, Mulattoes, and 
Creoles being more numerous and better in 
formed than the Indians, united against them, 
and rendered the attempt abortive. 

But the seeds of revolution that have germi 
nated in Mexico, Venezula and La Plata, have 
struck their roots deep in this kingdom, and 



although we have not as yet seen the spirit of 
rebellion which has spread as it were by an 
electric impulse through the former dominions, 
manifest itself so frequently and with such vio 
lence in Peru, we are, nevertheless, not without 
sufficient documents to prove that the old govern 
ment has need of all its energies, and even of 
submitting to some sacrifices to secure its power. 

On this subject the Buenos Ayres Gazette, of 
the 8th of May 1812, contains the following para 
graph : " It appears that the capital of the king 
dom of Peru, alive to the glorious example of the 
other American provinces, now exhibits some 
symptoms of rousing itself from the lethargy to 
which the influence of the despots and their satel 
lites had reduced it. In spite of the attempts to 
conceal from the Peruvians the desperate situation 
of the Peninsula, the truth begins to penetrate 
even into those remote countries ; and the day is 
not far distant when the people, undeceived, and 
no longer the subjects of delusion, will concur in 
supporting the great cause of the independence 
of the new world. On the 4th of March, 
Abascal, tired of striving against the current of 
our new system, offered at Lima to instal a 
junta, provided the presidency was secured to 
himself, and the expiring government of Cadiz 
recognized. This concession resulted from a 
commotion excited among the Mulatto militia, 
when they were ordered to march to the assist 
ance of Goyoneche. From the abov e Gazette, it 
appeared also, that Goyoneche was at the head of 
4000 men, and the province of Potosi, with the 
greater part of the country, still remained faith 
ful in their adherence to the mother country. 
But the province of Cochabamba continued its 
connections with the Junta of Buenos Ayres, and 
was said to have a military force of 4000 men. 
What was called the auxiliary army of the Junta 
in that country is commanded by one Pueyredon, 
but its amount is not stated. See LA PLATA. 

5. Traits of the Religion of the Aborigines. 
The chief god of the Peruvians was Wiracocha, 
by whom they understood the maker of all 
things ; next to him they worshipped the Sun, 
and after him, Thunder. The images of these 
three they never touched with their bare hands : 
they worshipped also the Stars, Earth, Sea, Rain 
bow, Rivers, Fountains, and Trees. They 
adored also wild beasts, that these might not hurt 
them ; and as marks of devotion, when they 
travelled, they left in the cross-ways, and dan- 

ferous places, old shoes and feathers, and if they 
ad nothing else, stones. They worshipped the 
Sun, by pulling off the hair from their eve-brows : 
Q2 



116 



PERU. 



when they were in fear, they would touch the 
Earth and look up to the Sun. They worshipped 
also the dead bodies of their Emperors, and in 
deed there was nothing so trifling, but it in some 
degree excited their fear and veneration. They 
have some glimmering knowledge of the begin 
ning of the world and of Noah s flood, and they be 
lieve in the end of the world, which they are ac 
customed to dread, whenever the sun is eclipsed ; 
and this luminary they take to be the moon s 
husband. Their Priests they held in such esteem, 
that no great matter was undertaken, either by 
prince or people, without their advice. 

None, except themselves, had access to the 
Idols, and then only when they were clothed in 
white, and then they would prostrate themselves 
on the ground. In sacrificing they abstained from 
women ; and some out of zeal would put out their 
own eyes. They used to consult with the devil, 
to whom they sacrificed men, and dedicated boys 
in their temples for sodomy. They had also 
their temples richly adorned with gold and silver, 
and their monasteries for priests and sorcerers. 
Their nuns were so strictly kept, that it was 
death to be defloured. After 14 years of age 
they were taken out of the monastery, either to 
serve their idols (and such must be virgins still) 
or else to serve as wives and concubines to the 
Inca, or Emperor. They are very frequent and 
strict in their confessions, and cheerfully under 
take what penance is enjoined them ; but the Inca 
used to confess only to the Sun ; after confession 
they all wash in baths, leaving their sins in the 
water. They used to sacrifice vegetables, animals, 
and men, chiefly children, for the health or pros 
perity of their Inca, and for victory in war. In 
some places they eat their men-sacrifices, in 
others they only dried and preserved them in 
silver coffins. They anointed with blood the 
faces of their idols, and doors of their temples, or 
rather slaughter-houses. See ACOSTA, CIEZA, 

GOMARA, &amp;C. 

Peruvians, their festival days. They had feasts 
and sacrifices every month of the year, in which 
were offered multitudes of sheep of different 
colours, which they burned. The Inca s children 
were dedicated in these feasts ; their ears were 
pierced, then they were wiped, and their faces 
anointed with blood, in sign that they should be 
true in their allegiance to their Inca. During 
the month of this latter festival, no stranger 
might remain in Cuzco, but at the end thereof 
they were admitted, and had a morsel of bread 
presented to each man, that they should by eating 
thereof testify their fidelity to the Inca. lu the 



second month, which is our January, (for Decem 
ber, in which the sun returns from Capricorn, was 
their first month) they flung the ashes of their 
sacrifices into the river, following the same six 
leagues, and praying the river to carry that 
present to Viracocha. In the three following 
months, they offered 100 sheep ; in the 6th they 
offered 100 sheep more, and celebrated a feast 
for their maize-harvest ; in the 7th they sacrificed 
to the sun ; in the 8th and 9th month, 200 sheep 
were offered ; in the 10th 100 more ; and to the 
honour of the moon they burned torches, washed 
themselves, and then were drunk four days 
together ; in the llth month they offered 100 
sheep more, and upon a black sheep poured much 
chica or wine of maize to procure rain; in the 12th 
month they sacrificed 100 sheep and kept a feast. 
They had indeed many fasts, when they Avould 
continue in mourning and sad procession two 
days, and the two days after would be spent in feast 
ing, dancing, and drinking. See Jos. ACOSTA. 

Peruvians., their belief of the departed souls T hey 
believed that the departed souls wandered up 
and down, and suffered hunger, thirst, and cold ; 
therefore they carried them meat, drink, and 
clothes. They used also to put gold and silver 
in their mouths, hands, and bosoms, and indeed 
much treasure has at times been dug out of their 
graves. They believed that the souls of good 
men were at rest in glory. The bodies were ho 
noured after death ; sacrifices and garments were 
offered to them; the best-beloved wife was slain, 
and attendants of all sorts. To the Inca s ghost 
young children were sacrificed, and if the father 
was sick, they would commonly slay the son, 
thinking this murder should satisfy death for the 
father. Concerning these and other their im 
pious ceremonies, see ACOSTA. 

6. Table of Longitudes and Latitudes. For 
this Table of the Longitudes and Latitudes of the 
most important places in this kingdom, see the 
end of the General Preface.] 

Chronological Series of the Inca-Emperors who 
have presided in Peru. 

1. Manco-Inca was the first who reduced the 
barbarous Indians to a civilized life in 1100, ac 
cording to Garcilaso de la Vega, and taught them 
arts and agriculture. He feigned himself to be 
son of the Sun, and sent from his father for the 
good of mankind ; in the establishing of which 
ideas, and also in the foundation of the monarchy 
itself, he was not a little aided by his sister and 
wife Mama Ocllo Huaco. The Indians received 
him as a deity, and gave him the nn.me of Capac, 



PERU. 



117 



which signifies, Rich in virtue ; and they esta 
blished the insignias of prince in his successors, 
giving him to wear a turban, which was folded 
three times round the head with a red arrow 
pending in front. He made many humane and 
wise laws ; condemning as capital crimes homi 
cide, adultery, and theft ; and he commanded 
that each should select his wife out of his own 
family, but never till he was 20 years of age. 
He proposed the adoration of the Sun as the 
first Divinity, and built to it a temple at Cuzco, 
and close to it a house for the virgins consecrated 
to that deity ; and these, it appears, should be 
of the royal blood, or descended of the Incas. 
His reign is thought to have lasted 40 years, and 
he left as his successor, 

2. Sinchi-Roca, first-born of Manco-Capac : 
he succeeded to the empire of those barbarians, 
who had been civilized by his father, (the appel 
lation Sinchi signifying Strong,) and he extended 
his dominion to the s. of Cuzco for more than 60 
miles, as far as the settlement called Chuncara, 
and e. as far as the shore of the river Culla- 
huaya, reducing all those nations to his obedi 
ence by mild and conciliatory measures. His 
wife s name was Mama-Cora; by her he had 
many children, and left the government, at his 
death, to his first-born, after a 29 years reign. 

3. Lloque- Yupanqui, which first name signifies 
Left-handed ; as he was accustomed to this fault, 
and the second signifying prognosticator, alluding 
to the victories he foretold. He was the first 
who embodied an army. He subjected the Canes 
Indians, then the Ayaviris, and built a fortress 
called Pucara. He afterwards subjected the pro 
vinces of Paucar-Colla and Hatun-Colla, together 
with other settlements, and extended the empire 
as far as the channel or waste-water of the lake 
Titicaca to the s. and as far as the cordillera of 
the mountains of the Andes to the w. His wife 
was Mama-Cava, who bare him no other male 
children than one, who succeeded him. He died 
at Cuzco, of age 93 years, of which he had reigned 
34 years and seven months. 

4. Maita-Capac, who took the reins of the 
monarchy, through the death of his father, at the 
age of 51. He subjected the province of Tia- 
Huanaca, where he caused fine edifices to be 
constructed, and obliged, through his fame and 
reputation in conquests, the settlements of the 
province of Coc-yaviri to acknowledge their al 
legiance ; as also, to follow their example, the 
Indians of the provinces of Cauquicura, Mallama, 
Huarina, Cuchuna, Laricaja, Sancavan, and Col- 
las, though not till he had routed them in a battle 



fought at the place called Huaichu. He thus 
extended his empire as far as Caracolla, and as 
the lake Paria to the s. and e. as far as the beau 
tiful llanuras of Chuqui-apu. He also included 
in his conquests to the w. the provinces of Chum- 
bivillca, Allca, Taurisma, Cota-huahu, Puma- 
tampu, and Parina-cocha, and to the e. those of 
Aruni and Collahua. He had by his wife Mama- 
Cuca many sons, and died at 91 years of age, 
leaving his empire to his first-born. 

5. Capac- Yupangui, who passed with his army 
the river Auprimac, subjected the nation of the 
Pitis, and afterwards that of the Aimaraes, in 
whose territory he caused the fortress of Patirca 
to be built. He was the first who entered Cuzco, 
the capital, in triumph. In another expedition 
he subjected the settlements called Quechuas in 
the province of Cotapampa and Catanera, and 
afterwards those of Amampallpa, Hacari, Ubina, 
Camana, Caravilli, Pieta, and Quelca. He then 
undertook other conquests, namely, those of the 
provinces of Tapac-ric and Cochapampa, Chay anta 
and Charcas, and, lastly, those of Curahuaci, 
Amancay, Sura, Apucara, Rucana and Hatun- 
Rucana ; and, towards the coast of the Pacific 
Sea, those of Nanasca, Mama and Curiyllpay. 
He reigned 41 years, and the crown, at his death, 
descended to his son. 

6. Inca-Roca, (this name signifying Prudent 
Prince). His first plans of conquest were against 
Chinchasuya; when he succeeded in rendering 
subject to him the nations of Tacmaras and Qui- 
nuallas, with the country of Cochacasa and Cu- 
rampa. He was equally victorious over the Chan- 
cas and the nations of Hancohuallo, Utunsulla, 
Uramarca, and Villca. His second expedition, 
under the direction of his son Yahuar-huacac, 
brought under his dominion the settlements of 
Challa-pampa, Pillcupata, Havisca, and Tunu. 
The third, which consisted of an army of 30,000 
men, made him master of the provinces of Chun- 
curi, Pucuna, Muyumuyu, Misqui, Sacaca, Ma- 
chaca, and Characara. This prince was the first 
who founded schools for the princes of the blood 
royal, where they were instructed in the Quipus, 
which was a certain number of cords of various 
colours, full of different kinds of knots, and 
which served as writing. The annalist, or his 
torian of the empire, who preserved them in 
the temple of the Sun, was called Quipucana. 
or Keeper of the Quipus. He reigned 51 years, 
was married to Mama-micay, and succeeded by 
his son, 

7. Yahuar-Huacac, (meaning one that weeps 
blood). He succeeded to Inca Ro.ca, and he had 



118 



PERU. 



this name from its being said of him, that he 
wept blood from his nose. He entrusted to his 
brother Inca-mota the command of the armies, and 
conquered Colla-suyu. Jealous of the ferocious 
and unquiet disposition of his eldest son, Inca- 
Rapac, he destined him to the employment of 
watching the cattle of the Temple of the Sun 
near Cuyco ; where it was that Viracocha-Inca, 
brother of Manco-Capac, had the famous vision, 
which revealed to him the rebellion which was 
engendered in the provinces of Chincha-suyu. 
One should think, that it was some diabolical 
phantom which had thus appeared to the prince, 
and he immediately gave all the information to 
his father, although the latter was backward in 
crediting what was told him. Be this as it may, 
it is certain, that three months afterwards an 
account was received of the insurrection ; when 
Yaguar-Huacac, being greatly terrified, aban 
doned the court, and fled with his sons and many 
chieftains into the woods. The son, Inca-Rapac, 
assembled some people, and, having formed a 
small but resolute army of 8000 men, went out 
to meet the rebels ; receiving in his march a 
numerous succour from Rimares and Quechuas ; 
and he thus attacked the enemy, and, after a 
battle of eight hours, entirely defeated them. He 
afterwards re-established the peace of the coun 
try, and, returning home, he was received witli 
great joy by his father; who honoured him with 
the llauto, or imperial crown, and ceded to him 
the kingdom ; retiring himself into a private life 
at Muina, where he lived seven years with his 
wife Mama Chic-ya, and died 85 years of age. 

8. Inca-Rapac, who, as soon as he began to 
reign, acquired the name of Vtracocha-Inca, 
through the vision of the brother of Manco Ca- 
pac. He caused to be built to him a temple at 
Caccha, 16 leagues distant from Cuzco to the s. 
He conquered, with an army of 30,000 men, the 
provinces of Caranca, Ullaca, Llipi, Chicha, 
Huaytata, Poc-ra, Asancaru, Parcu, Picuy, and 
Acos : also the Lord of Tucma, or Tucuman, 
came to Cuzco to render him obedience. The 
Indians have a tradition from their ancestors, 
that this prince foretold the entrance of the 
Spaniards into that kingdom, and that they 
would destroy the empire of the Incas. He had 
by his wife Mama-Runtu a son named Inca- 
LJrco, his first-born, and who succeeded him ; 
also another son, named Titu Manco-Capac, af 
terwards called Pachacutec. He lived 73 years, 
and reigned 36. 

9. Inca-Urco, who had scarcely come to the 
inheritance of his father s crown, when he was, 



in eleven days time, deposed by the grandees 
and princes of the blood, who could not endure 
his stupidity. He thus retired into private life, 
leaving the kiiiffdom in the hands of his brother 

O O 

Titu Manco-Capac. 

10. Pachacutec, thus called in memory of his 
having been established in the empire the first 
year after the government of his father ; and his 
name signifies literally, He that gives a new 
existence to the world. This prince extended 
the empire with the conquest of the provinces of 
Sausa or Xauxa, Tarma, Pumpu or Bombon, 
Ancara, Chucurpu, and Huailas. He after 
wards subjected Pincu, Huaras, Pisco-Pampa, 
Chunchucu, Huamachucu, Caxamarca, Yauyu, 
lea, Pisco, Chiacha, Runahuanac, Huarcu, Malla, 
Chillca, Pachacamac, Rimac, Chancay, Huaman, 
Parmunca, Huallmi, Santa, Huanape, and El 
Chimu. He was constantly occupied in the war 
in whicli he made these conquests, and acquired 
the glorious name of conqueror, and built great 
temples, baths, aqueducts, &amp;c. By his wife Marna- 
Huarcu he had a son named Inca-Yupanqui and 
several others ; and it is said that his concubines 
amounted to 300. He died at 103 years of age. 

11. Yupanqui, who followed the example of 
his father: for he subjected the Moxos atCopiaco 
and at Coquimbo, and stretched his route as far 
as the river Maule of Chile. He built the great 
fortress of Cuzco, and merited by his clemency 
the surname of Pious. He had by his wife Mama 
Chimpu-Ocllo, a son called Tupac-Yupanqui, 
who succeeded him to the throne. He died at 
the age of 79. 

12. Tupac-Yupanqui. The enterprizes of this 
prince attached to the conquests of the provinces 
of Huarachucu, Chachapuya, Muyu-pampa, Casa, 
Hayahuaca, Callua, Huanucu, now Guanuco, 
Tumi-Pampa, Alausi, Canaris, and Purwaes, as 
far as Mocha. He projected the conquest of the 
kingdom of Quito, but could not put it into ex 
ecution ; -and therefore sent his son, who suc 
ceeded in extending the empire towards the n. 
as far as the country of Pastu. He died, leaving 
as heir to the kingdom his first-born, borne to 
him with five other sons by his wife Mama-Ocllo. 

13. Huayna-CapaC) who prosecuted the con 
quests of his father, adding to the crown the 
countries of Chacma, Pacas-mayu, Sana, Collque, 
Tucmi, Sayanca, Mutupi, now Arnotape, Pichiu, 
Sullana, and Tumpiz, now called Tumbez : he 
also subjected the nations Chunana, Collonque, 
Cintuy, Yaquall, and the island of La Puna ; 
and afterwards reduced to his obedience the pro 
vinces of Manta, Apichiqui, Pichunsi, Sava, 



PERU. 



ill) 



Pecllansi-miqui, Pompalmachi, Saramissu, Pas- 
&amp;lt;ao : showing exemplary punishment against the 
rebellious Carangues; and commanding many 
soldiers to be beheaded on the lake which is now 
called Yaguar-cocha, or lake of blood. To this 
prince a son of the name of Inti-Gusi-Huallpa, 
or Huascar-Inca, was borne by his wife, the em 
press Rava-Ocllo ; and by his third wife, Mama- 
Ranta, a daughter of Augui-Amaru-Tupac-Inca, 
another son, named Manco-Inca, afterwards em 
peror. He had also by Sciri-paccha, the daugh 
ter of the king of Quito, and his concubine, 
Atahuallpa, whom some call Atalpa, others Ata- 
balipa and Atalipa, but improperly : and this son 
he was so fond of, that he made him king of 
Quito, but tributary to his brother Huascar-Inca. 
Whilst at his palace of Tumi-pampa, he received 
intelligence of the first Spaniards who had ar 
rived on the coast of his empire. He died at 
Quito, leaving this kingdom, as we have ob 
served, to Atahuallpa, and the monarchy to his 
first-born. 

14. Inti-Cusi-Huallpa, or Huascar-Inca. He 
entered into possession of the empire in the most 
lamentable times ; for Atahuallpa was aspiring 
to the crown, and was, at it were, openly attack 
ing the empire. The two brothers fought a des 
perate battle near Cuzco, in which the armies of 
the emperor suffered defeat ; and he was taken 
prisoner by the rebel, who treated him most 
barbarously, shutting him up in a very confined 
prison, and who, lastly, fearing that the Spa 
niards might restore him to the throne, caused 
him to be put to death at the age of 51. 

15. Atahuallpa^ an usurper of the empire, who 
put to death all those of the blood royal that fell 
into his hands. In his time Francisco Pizarro, 
with the Spaniards in his company, disembarked 
on the coast of Tumbez: and this person, after 
having proposed many treaties, whereby the 
reigning emperor should give up the reins in 
favour of his brother, at last made direct war 
against him : and, conquering him in a battle 
near to Caxamarca, took him prisoner, and 
caused him to be put to death privately in a pri 
son, he having been first converted to the faith, 
and received the baptism under the name of 
Juan. Thus he met with the same end that he 
caused to his brother, and he was, when he died, 
48 years old. 

16. Manco-Capac. There being no sons of 
Huascar-Inca, he was succeeded by his second 
brother of this name, whom Don Francisco Pi 
zarro, who passed with Diego de Almagro to 
Cuzco, permitted to be crowned. But this Inca 



soon found that he had but the shadow of a mo 
narchy, and, after ditferent treaties and negocia- 
tions, finding that Pizarro was bent upon the 
sovereignty, he resolved to shake himself off 
from his hospitality, and, accordingly, collecting 
an army of 300,000 men, he attacked Cuzco, 
where he found Fernando Pizarro, brother of 
Francisco, with 260 Spaniards ; and these, per 
ceiving that the enemy was already master of the 
city, retired to a fortress ; from whence they sal 
lied out by night, and made a terrible slaughter 
of the Indians ; obliging Manco-Capac to retire 
to the mountains of the province of Villca- 
pampa. Nothing further is heard of the family 
of this prince : but he is supposed to have died 
in 1553, leaving the crown to his eldest son by 
his wife Mama-Cusi. 

17. Sayri-Tupac, called Don Diego-Inca ; the 
last of the emperors of Peru. He was acknow 
ledged as sovereign of the provinces of Villca- 
pampa, Tarma, Muyu-pampa, and Chunchos. 
The viceroy of Peru, Don Andres Hurtardo de 
Mendoza, Marquis of Canete, through the me 
dium of the mother of that prince, her name 
being Beatrix, and w r ho was a convert, succeeded 
in persuading him to enter into a treaty of peace. 
Sairi-Tupac, of Villca-pampa, issued forth in great 
pomp and entered Lima, where he made a solemn 
renunciation into the hands of the viceroy of his 
imperial dignities and rights to the throne of 
Peru to Philip II. king of Spain, preserving, 
however, his royal honours and insignias, and, 
during his life, the absolute dominion of the pro 
vince of Yucay. He afterwards passed to Cuzco, 
and from thence to Yucay, where, after a short 
time, he was baptized, and named Don Diego 
Sayri-Tupac-Inca ; his mother also taking the 
name of Leonor Cusi-Huarcay. He lived but 
a short time after, and died at the age of 47, 
leaving an only daughter, who was married to 
Don Martin Garcia Oilez de Loyola, knight of 
the order of Santiago, from whom descends the 
family of the Marquises of Oropesa and Alca- 
iiices. 

Chronological Series of the Viceroys and Cap 
tains-General of Peru. 

1. Don Francisco Pizarro, marquis of Los 
Charcos and Atavillos, native of Truxillo in 
Estrernadura. He passed over to America with 
Alonso de Ojeda ; served in the conquest of Da- 
rien with much valour, and, finding himself at 
Panama, entered into company with Diego de 
Almagro and Hernando de Luque, lord of the 
island of Tabo^a and Maestre-Escuela of the 



120 



P E R U. 



church of that city, to the discovery and conquest 
of Peru. He left Panama in 1525, and arrived 
at Tumbez and Cape Blanco, of which he took 
possession in the name of the king of Spain, and 
the emperor granted him the title of adelantado 
mayor, and governor and captain -general of all 
the places he might conquer. He returned to 
these parts in 1529, founded the cities of Lima, 
S. Miguel de Piura, Truxillo, Guayaquil, and 
many others ; but certain dissensions having 
arisen between him and Almagro, since the re 
wards had not been equally divided between 
them, with respect to their shares of labours 
and expenses, they formed two parties, which 
caused great disturbances and tumults ; and thus 
it was that 13 persons of Almagro s party put to 
death Pizarro at 12 o clock in the open day, in 
the year 1541. 

2. The licentiate Christoval Vaca de Castro, 
of the royal council of Castilla. He was sent 
by the emperor Charles V. in the same year that 
his predecessor died, and to avenge the injury 
done to him ; and as he took out faculties em 
powering him to take the seat of government, in 
case it might be vacant, he did so ; and having 
commanded Diego de Almagro, the principal 
culprit, to appear, he not only did not obey the 
order, but, forming an army, went out in search 
of the governor, and finding him in the valley of 
Chupas, near Guamanga, with his army, a battle 
was fought, in which all the rebels were routed ; 
all those that were caught being made to undergo 
condign punishment, and among the rest his 
captive Almagro, who was decapitated in 1542. 
Thus all was rendered pacific, and the best esta 
blishment set on foot in those provinces ; and, 
notwithstanding the rectitude and good qualities 
of this governor, he did not want for calumnia 
tors ; and he was thus, when he had returned to 
Spain, made prisoner, though honourably ac 
quitted and restored to his office. 

3. Blasco Nunez Vela, knight of the order of 
Santiago, native of Avila, captain of the guards 
of the emperor Charles V. He was nominated 
for the viceroy of Peru, and was the first who 
enjoyed this title. He was charged with the 
establishment of new laws in the Indies, relative 
to the government of those countries, and the 
good treatment of the Indians. The royal au 
dience entered Lima in 1544, but the inflexibility 
and haughtiness of the viceroy s disposition turned 
into gall all the sweets of its wise institutions ; 
and some of the provinces having represented 
the difficulties they laboured under, and request 
ing that they might be made known to the king, 



instituting as prosecutor for that service Gonzalo 
Pizarro, brother of the marquis Francisco Pi- 
zarro ; he not only did not comply with their 
wishes, but began to use against them the most 
rigorous and absolute authority. In this state 
of things the audience seized the viceroy, and 
sent him to Spain ; but he, having obtained leave 
from the person who carried him over, to disem 
bark at Tumbez, united some people in arms to 
go in search of Gonzalo Pizarro with his army ; 
when, being himself pursued by the latter as far 
as the valley of Aiiaquito, the battle of this name 
was fought, and the viceroy lost his life in 1546. 

4. The Licentiate Pedro de la Gasca, native 
of Valladolid, of the supreme council of Inqui 
sition. Such was his literary and military repu 
tation, and the prudence and intelligence that 
he had manifested in the pacification of the tu 
mults of the Moors in the kingdom of Valencia, 
that no doubt was entertained of the fitness of 
his appointment to the viceroyalty of Peru ; nor 
did he in this capacity fail to show great skill and 
management from the year thathetook possession. 
Although he endeavoured,by all the mild measures 
possible, to bring round Gonzalo Pizarro to obe 
dience, he found himself, at last, under the ne 
cessity of taking up arms against this litigious 
person, and pursuing him with his army in 1548. 
In the plains of Sacxahuana a battle was fought, 
in which the greater part of the rebels deserted 
to the king s army ; the most obstinate of them 
taken prisoners, and, amongst the rest, Gonzalo 
Pizarro and his lieutenant-colonel Francisco de 
Carvajal ; who were afterwards beheaded in the 
plaza of Cuzco. Thus was the kingdom rendered 
pacific. This viceroy founded the city of La Paz, 
and returned to Spain, where, in 1551, as a re 
ward for his services, the emperor made him 
bishop of Palencia. 

5. Don Antonio de Mendoza, fourth son of the 
marquis of Mondejar, who had served many 
years as viceroy in Nueva Espana. He was or 
dered to pass to Peru, to put in practice that in 
tegrity and experience for which he was accre 
dited, and entered Lima in the same year, 1557 ; 
but his government lasted only a short time, for 
he died in the following year; and, notwith 
standing that, in that short time, he caused the 
visitation and description of those provinces to 
be made, the first description that the council 
ever was possessed of; he also took opportunity 
of founding the royal university of San Marcos, 
and the Guarda de Albarderos. At his decease 
the government fell to the charge of the au 
dience. 



PERT). 



13. Don Andres Hurtado de Mendoza, second 
Marquis of Caiiete, general of the city ofCuenca, 
and equerry to the king. After having served 
the emperor in the expedition in Germany and 
Flanders, he was nominated viceroy of Peru, and 
entered Lima in 1555 ; succeeded in completely 
quelling the disturbances, of which some were 
still remaining relative to Francisco Hernandez 
Giron ; established the company of lancemen 
of the viceroy s guard ; brought from the moun 
tains the Inca Sayri-Tupac, who embraced the 
catholic faith, and renounced his rights to 
the empire ; and governed with great address till 
1561, when he received intelligence of his suc 
cessor having landed at Paita. This had such 
an effect upon him, and so great was his mortifi 
cation, that he fell melancholy, and died even 
before he had resigned the government. 

7. Don Diego Lopez de Zuniga y Velasco, 
Count of Nieva. He made his entrance in the 
aforesaid year, 1561, and governed but a very 
short time, being found, in the following year, 
dead in his palace, with every circumstance war 
ranting a suspicion that he came to a violent end ; 
but the circumstance was, under the existing state 
of affairs, hushed up by the audience, as they 
dreaded the mischief which might occur from a 
different conduct. 

8. The Licentiate Lope Garcia de Castro, of 
the council of the Indies : elected president of 
the audience of Lima, governor, and captain- 
general of Peru. But he was immediately su 
perseded by the Licentiate Pedro de la Gasca, 
who was encharged to undertake the investiga 
tion of the affair of the death of the Count Nieva, 
and to bring the guilty to punishment. He en 
tered Lima in 1564, and beginning to put into 
execution the object of his mission, he received 
secret intelligence of the exact state of the case, 
which made it requisite for him to suspend all 
further proceedings, a circumstance which gave a 
deep stab to the honour of many noble indivi 
duals of that city. He continued to govern with 
a zeal and prudence which might have been ex 
pected from his learning and experience. In his 
time was established, in 1565, the audience of 
Quito, and Enrique Garces discovered the valu 
able quicksilver mine in Guancabelica in 1566. 
The president founded also the mint at Lima, 
and in the following year the Jesuits were intro 
duced into that capital. Events, all of which 
shed a lustre upon his government, and which 
terminated with the arrival of his successor, 

9. Don Francisco de Toledo, son of the Count 
of Oropesa, nominated viceroy of Peru, He 

VOL. IV. 



made his entry in 1569, and was during the first 
two years of his government employed with 
great ardour in the regulation of all public af 
fairs, and especially of the establishments of the 
mines ; where he laid down the law so expli 
citly and clearly as that there have never since 
been any question or litigations on the subject. 
He was resolved upon bringing down from the 
mountains of Villca-pampa the IncaTupac Amaru, 
brother of Sayri Tupac ; but, seeing that bribes 
and promises had no avail, he dispatched a troop 
under Martin Garcia de Loyola, to whom the 
Indian chief immediately surrendered; and, being 
brought to Cuzco, where the viceroy then was, 
he was put to trial, and beheaded, an event 
which caused an universal sentiment of sorrow 
from the known great qualities of this unfortu 
nate man. He met his death with firmness, and 
was first called Philip, being so baptized. In 
him terminated the legitimate line of the Incas. 
This was a stroke which tarnished all the glory 
this viceroy had acquired ; and it cast a shade 
over talents such as to place him amongst the 
most celebrated that ever governed. He re 
turned, however, to Spain in 1581, where he 
met a just reward for his barbarity, and a few 
days after his arrival put to death by command 
of Philip II. 

10. Don Martin Henriquez, son of the Mar 
quis of Alcanias. He was exercising the vice- 
royalty of Nueva Espaiia when he received a 
commission to pass to that of Peru. Here he ar 
rived in the aforesaid year, 1581, and gave signs 
of great talent, benignity, and skill, during the 
short time of his reign : for he died in 1583, 
when the authority devolved upon the royal 
audience. 

11. Don Fernando de Torres y Portugal, 
Count of Villar Don Pardo. He was elected 
viceroy in 1584, but did not arrive at Lima till 
1586 : he governed a little more than three 
years, leaving the government to his successor. 

12. Don Garcia Hurtado de Mendoza, fourth 
Marquis of Canete, who had been governor of 
Chile in the viceroyship of his father. He made 
his entrance in 1590 ; made arrangements for the 
discovery of the island of Salomon through Al- 
varo de Mendana, and formed an armament at 
the charge of his brother-in-law, Don Beltran de 
la Cueva, and Castro, against the pirate Richard 
Hawkins, who was taken prisoner, but defended 
from capital punishment by the said viceroy, in 
spite of the sentence of the audience of Lima, as 
he had surrendered upon conditions that his life 
should be spared ; and the king readily assented 

R 



122 



PERU. 



to the viceroy s discretion. He established the 
alcavalas in Peru, made various regulations for 
better government, and finished his reign in 1596, 
when he returned to Peru. 

13. Don Luis de Velasco, Marquis of Salinas. 
He was at the time viceroy of Nueva Espana, 
and was commissioned to pass to Peru to the 
same office. Here he arrived in 1596; was 
made fiscal and protector of the Indians in 
the audience of the abuses which had obtained 
against those miserable objects. In his time 
there was a new insurrection of the Arauca- 
nians in the kingdom of Chile ; when they de 
stroyed six cities, taking prisoners the inhabi 
tants, and putting to death the governor, Don 
Garcia Ones de Loyola. This viceroy was or 
dered to return to the government of Nueva Es 
pana, for which he embarked on the arrival of 
his successor, 

14. Don Gaspar de Zuniga y Acevedo, Count 
of Monterrey. He passed from Nueva Espana, 
where he was viceroy, to Peru in 1604. In his time 
was established the tribunal mayor of accounts, 
and the Southern lands were discovered by Pedro 
Fernandez de Quiros. He only governed two 
years, as he died in 1606, leaving the government 
in the hands of the royal audience until the 
arrival of his successor. 

15. Don Juan de Mendoza y Luna, third Mar 
quis of Montcs Claros, who also passed from the 
viceroy alty of Nueva Espana to that of Peru. 
He arrived in 1607 ; established the tribunal of 
the consulate of commerce; recommended to the 
king the freeing the Indians from personal ser 
vice, and this was put into effect ; commanded 
the grand bridge to be built, which communi 
cates the city with the suburb of San Lazaro, 
and reigned prudently for eight years, until the 
arrival in 1615 of 

16. Don Francisco de Borja y Aragon, Prince 
of Esquilache ; in whose time the strait was dis 
covered by Jacob le Maire, and which bears his 
name. This strait was also reconnoitred by the 
brothers, the Nodales. Immediately that he had 
fulfilled the term of six years, he, without waiting 
for a successor, embarked for Spain in 1621. 

17. Don Diego Fernandez de Cordoba, first 
Marquis of Guadalcasar. He also left the vice- 
royalty of Mexico for that of Peru, entered Lima 
in 1622, and immediately applied himself to the 
defence of the kingdom ; for about this time its 
safety was threatened by James Hermit Clerk, a 
pirate, who had entered the S. Sea by Cape Horn 
with a strong armament, and besieged Callao, 
sending into it a fire-ship. The active precau 



tions, however, of this viceroy annulled all his 
efforts. The pirate died of vexation, and his 
admiral abandoned the enterprise, leaving the 
character of the viceroy s prowess highly ex 
alted. In this reign were published the new 
laws concerning the collecting of the Indians ; 
and, having given full satisfaction, he returned 
to Spain, delivering up his office to his suc 
cessor, 

18. Don Geronimo Fernandez de Cabrera Bo- 
badilla y Mendoza, Count of Chinchon, of the 
councils of state and war. He entered Lima in 
1629, and governed near 10 years. In his time, 
in 1630, happened that terrible earthquake, which 
ruined the greater part of the city. He re 
signed his office to his successor, and returned to 
Europe. 

19. Don Pedro de Toledo y Leiba, Marquis of 
Mancera ; of the council of war. He made his 
entry into Lima in 1639, numbered the whole of 
the Indians of the kingdom, reformed the rates 
of tribute, fortified the port of Callao, furnishing 
it with very good artillery, for which he esta 
blished there a great foundery, and instituted and 
arranged the posts, with other useful dispensa 
tions, which perpetuate the remembrance of his 
government. This he resigned to 

20. Don Garcia Sarmiento de Sotomayor, 
Count of Salva Tierra, who, like many others, 
passed from the viceroyalty of Nueva Espana, 
where he was reigning, to Peru. He arrived in 
1648, erected the celebrated bronze ibuntain in 
the chief square, which has perpetuated his me 
mory, facilitated the establishment and conver 
sion of the Indians of the province of Mainas by 
the Jesuits, which has rendered such very great 
fruits to the church, and delivered the command 
to his successor in 1655. He was, however, de 
tained at Lima by the war, for more than three 
years and an half after ; and here he died in 1659. 

21. Don Luis Henriquez de Guzman, Count 
of Alva de Liste, grandee of Spain, and the first 
of this noble title. He passed over to Peru in 
the aforesaid year, 1655, from Nueva Espana, 
where he served as viceroy. His government 
was just and pacific, though not marked by any 
remarkable event, till his resigning it into the 
hands of his successor, when he returned to 
Spain. 

22. Don Diego de Benavides y de la Cueva, 
eighth Count of Santistevan, of the council of 
war, who had been viceroy of the kingdom of 
Navarra. He came to this of Peru in 1661, 
when there was an insurrection in the province 
of Chuquiavo, the principal instigators having 



PERU. 



been some Mustees : but these were made to suf 
fer condign punishment, and the insurrection was 
quelled by the corregidor Don Francisco Her- 
quiiiigo. Also in 1665 there was another insur 
rection in the province of Paucarcolla, between 
the Vascongaclos and Montaneses on one side, 
and the Andaluces and Creolles on the other ; the 
event of which was a bloody battle on the plain 
of Laycacota. Overcome by these calamities the 
viceroy died in the following year, 1666, leaving 
the government to the royal audience till the ar 
rival of the successor. 

23. Don Pedro Fernandez de Castro y An- 
drade, Count of Lemos, grandee of Spain, no 
minated viceroy of Peru ; where he arrived in 
1667, at the time that the tumults of Puno were 
at their highest pitch : and not having been able 
to quell them by the provisions he had made, 
and having now many prisoners in his hands, 
he caused them to be brought to trial, and sent 
Don Joseph de Salcedo captive to Lima, where 
he was sentenced to death without having been 
further concerned in those dissentions than be 
cause he was a man of great wealth. But heaven 
had directed that no advantage should be derived 
from the mine which had belonged to him, for at 
his death it filled with water, so that it never 
since could be worked. This viceroy settled the 
building of the Bethlemite hospitals in the seve 
ral cities of Peru, established a head-quarters be 
tween Lima and Panama, in order to assist the 
garrison of the latter, which was pillaged and 
burnt in 1670 by the English pirate John Mor 
gan, and died in 1672 ; the royal audience taking 
the government during the interregnum. 

24. Don Baltasar de la Cueva Henriquez y 
Saavedra, Count of Castellar, Marquis of Mala- 
gon, of the council of the Indies. He made his 
entry into Lima in 1674, and his government 
was of shorter duration than it should have 
been : for having been charged with an illicit 
introduction of China manufactures, he was or 
dered to resign his office to the archbishop of 
Lima, which he did in 1678 ; but his integrity 
being made evident, he was restored to his ho 
nours, and readmitted to the council. 

25. Don Melchor de Linan y Cisneros, arch 
bishop of the holy church of Los Reyes, pro 
visional viceroy. He governed from the afore 
said year, 1681, and without any thing extra 
ordinary happening, save that the S. Sea was 
again infested with pirates, who, commanded 
by Juan Guarlen, Edward Bohnen, and Bar- 
tolome Charps, had proceeded through the nar 
row pass of the Isthmus of Panama, and having 



in its port taken possession of two frigates, in 
fested the coasts of Peru : but they were driven 
away by the active precautions of the archbishop, 
and two of their captains were taken and put to 
death, the rest of the crews escaping to Eu 
rope by Cape Horn. Shortly after which event 
the successor arrived. 

26. Don Melchon de Navarra y Rocafall, Duke 
of Palata, Prince of Masa, and of the councils of 
state and war, a man of the most brilliant talent 
that ever visited America. He commanded the 
brick wall to be built which surrounds the city of 
Lima, and having finished it, he had the mortifi 
cation of seeing the city destroyed by those ter 
rible earthquakes which happened in 1687. He 
had great litigations with the archbishop Linan, 
respecting the correction of the proceedings of 
the doctrinal curacies of which the Indians were 
continually complaining. About this time too 
the English pirate, Edward David, had entered 
the S. Sea with a squadron of 10 vessels, which 
were attacked and conquered near to Panama by 
Don Beltran de la Cueva, brother-in-law to this 
viceroy, whose appointment had just now ended, 
and who, delivering his office to his successor, 
returned to Spain, and died in the city of Por- 
tobello. 

27. Don Melchor Portocarrero Laso de la 
Vega, Count ofMonclova, commendador of Zarza 
in the order of Alcantara, of the council of war, 
and viceroy of Nueva Espafia ; from whence, 
after two years government, he was ordered to 
proceed to Peru, where he entered in 1689, and 
where for the space of 15 years and four months 
he was constantly and busily employed in the 
war of succession, arising through the death of 
Charles II. and the question of right of the Sr. 
Duke of Anjou, with the name of Philip V. to 
the crown of Spain, so that the allied nations 
were in a state of insurrection. Thus he was 
engaged till his death, which occurred in 1706, 
leaving the government in charge of the royal 
audience, until the arrival of a successor nomi 
nated by the king. 

28. Don Manuel Oms de Santa Pau Olim de 
Semanat y de Lanuza, Marquis of Castel dos 
Rius, grandee of Spain, ambassador at the court 
of France when Philip V. inherited the crown ; 
and formerly ambassador at the court of Lisbon ; 
nominated by the viceroy of Peru before that 
the death of the predecessor was known. He 
did not enter Lima till 1707, and he governed 
till 1710, when he died. 

29. Don Diego Ladron de Guevara, bishop 
of Quito, and formerly bishop of Panama. He 

R 2 



124 



PERU. 



entered Lima, and took possession in 1710; and 
in 1713 he established the depot of Negroes with 
the English company for labour in America : but 
the king being informed of the frankness with 
which the bishop had permitted the commerce of 
French ships which had passed to the S. Sea, 
and of the little exertions which he manifested 
for the good of the government, gave him a 
permission to return to Spain, rather than allow 
him the disgrace of filling a lower office at 
Quito. The bishop, in consequence, set sail 
for Acapulco, and from thence to Mexico ; and 
in this citj he died in 1718. 

30. Don Fr. Diego Morcillo Rubio de Aunon, 
archbishop of the holy metropolitan church of 
La Plata, and who had formerly been bishop 
of those of Nicaragua and La Paz. Agreeably 
to advices from the audience, he put himself on 
the journey, and arrived at Lima in 1716. His 
government lasted but 50 days, for at that pe 
riod the proper successor arrived, appointed by 
the king. 

31. Don Carmine Nicholas Caracciolo, prince 
of Santo Bono, grandee of Spain, and formerly 
ambassador to the republic of Venice. He en 
tered Lima in 1716, and devoted his three years 
of government to the wisest dispensations, and 
succeeded in abolishing the trade of the French 
in the S. Sea. At this period he was permitted 
by his majesty to return to Europe, delivering 
tne government to the archbishop of La Plata 
in 1720 ; and embarking for Acapulco, and by 
way of Mexico, he reached Spain the following 
year. 

32. Don Fr. Diego Morcillo Rubio de Aunon, 
archbishop of La Plata, who had already been 
provisional viceroy between Don Diego Ladron 
de Guevara and his predecessor. He returned 
to the same functions for three years, giving his 
utmost attention to the defence of the coasts, 
against the mischief constantly threatened by 
the pirate John Cliperton : him he succeeded in 
overcoming ; and, whilst engaged in the lament 
able war against the Araucanos Indians, he was 
succeeded in 1724 by, 

33. Don Joseph de Armendariz, Marquis of 
Castel-fuerte, comendador of Montezon and Chi- 
clana in the order of Santiago, lieutenant-colonel 
of the regiment of the royal Spanish guards, 
lieutenant-general of the royal armies, who was 
exercising the commandancy-general of the pro 
vince of Guipuzcoa. Immediately that he re 
ceived the nomination of viceroy he embarked 
and arrived at Lima in the aforesaid year, 1724. 
At his entrance he pacificated Chile. He ap 



plied himself to the abolition of illicit commerce^ 
and to some new arrangements in behalf of the 
province of Paraguay, causing to be put to death 
Don Joseph de Antequera, of the order of Al 
cantara, focal, protector of the Indians of the 
audience of Charcas, and nominated by that tri 
bunal to make the visitation of the settlements of 
the missions of the Jesuits which were held 
there ; those missions which caused such great 
disturbances in the kingdom. He hindered the 
Portuguese from establishing themselves at the 
mouth of the river Aguarico ; and, having go 
verned with integrity and rectitude till 1736, he 
delivered the command to the successor and em 
barked for Acapulco, and arrived by Mexico and 
Vera Cruz at Valladolid. He then proceeded to 
court, where the king, in reward of his merits, 
promoted him to the rank of captain-general of 
the army, and to the golden collar. 

34. I)on Antonio Joseph de Mendoza Camano 
y Sotomayor, Marquis of Villagarcia, Count of 
Ban-antes, Lord of the towns of Rubianes, La 
mas, and Villa Nueva, mayor-domo of Semana, 
and chamberlain to his Majesty. He entered 
Lima in 1736, and, notwithstanding his pacific 
nature, found himself engaged in the wars with 
the English, whose object it was to make them 
selves masters of the Isthmus of Panama, and to 
which end their admiral, Vernon, had already 
made himself master of Portobello, he being as 
sisted by George Anson, who had entered the 
S. Sea. But this did not take effect, from an op 
portunity which was seized by the viceroy of 
sending a squadron with succour of men, arms, 
money, and ammunition, to Panama. Besidea 
all this he had to attend to the war of the 
Chunchos Indians, who had rose against him. 
He caused an equestrian statue of Philip V. 
to be made, and to be placed over an arch on 
the bridge at Lima; increased the fortifications 
of the garrison and port of Callao ; and, having 
resigned his government to the successor, em 
barked by Cape Hornos in the ship Hector, and 
died in his voyage. 

35. Don Joseph Manso deVelasco, first Count 
of Superunda, knight of the order of Santiago, 
lieutenant-colonel of the royal armies, being at 
the time president of Chile, governor and cap 
tain-general ; he received orders to come to 
Peru, notwithstanding that the king had nomi 
nated the viceroy of the Nuevo Reyno de Gra 
nada, Don Sebastian de Eslava, to this office, to 
undertake it, as he did in 1745, under the critical 
circumstances of the English war and the insur 
rection of the Chunchos Indians, to quell which 



PER 

he had sent the field-marshal Don Joseph de Lla 
mas, Marquis of Menahermosa, general of Callao. 
On the 28th of October 1746, happened that ter 
rible earthquake which entirely devastated the 
city, at the same time that the sea retreating from 
the shore, returned back with such an immense 
force as to destroy Callao, during all which af 
flicting; circumstances the viceroy exhibited that 
fortitude and constancy which alone could have 
borne him out as the faithful protector and father 
of that distressed kingdom. His government ter 
minated in 1761 ; when he delivered it to his 
successor, 

36. Don Manuel de Amat Junient Planella, 
Aimeric and Santa Pau, knight of the order of 
San Juan, brigadier of the royal armies, pre 
sident of Chile, governor and captain-general of 
the kingdom, as was his predecessor, when he re 
ceived orders of passing to the succession of the 
viceroyalty of Peru in the year aforementioned. 
He shortly after received notice of the declara 
tion of war by the English ; dedicating himself 
with the greatest zeal to fortify the kingdom 
against their intrigues. Nothing, however, was 
effected by them ; and he resigned the office of 
viceroy in 1775 to the successor, 

37. Don Manuel de Guirior, knight of the 
order of San Juan, lieutenant-general of the 
royal armada. He was serving as viceroy of 
the kingdom of Granada when he received or 
ders to pass to Peru, to the utmost sorrow of 
those whom he had governed: for his rectitude, 
affability, and skill, had acquired him the love 
and veneration of all classes. But his arrival 
at Peru was equally hailed as a fortunate event; 
he had to encounter little Jess of tumult and dif 
ficulty than existed in the former reign ; nor was 
he free from calumnies during a long career of 
useful services ; but even these calumnies, unjust 
as they were, were not loaded upon him by the 
Americans, but by the Europeans, the enemies to 
reason and justice, as was verified in the general 
absolution of the king at the consultum of the 
council of the Indies. 

38. Don Agustin de Jauregui, knight of the 
order of Santiago, lieutenant-general of the royal 
armies. He passed to the presidency and cap 
tainship-general of Chile in 1782, and exercised 
the viceroyship till 1785, when, embarking to re 
turn to Spain, he died on his voyage. 

39. Don Teodoro de Croix, knight of the order 
of Teutoniso in the German empire, lieutenant- 
general of the royal armies. He began to serve 
in the regiment of the royal Walloon guards, 
where he was lieutenant ; and was from thence 



P E S 



125 



promoted to the royal body guard, and then to 
the company of the guard of the viceroy of 
Mexico, the Marquis of Croix, his uncle. He 
returned to Spain, where he was nominated com 
mandant-general of the provinces of La Sonora, 
and from his extraordinary merits appointed by 
the king to the viceroyalty of Peru in 1785. 

[PERU, a new township of New York, in 
Clinton County, on the ty.side of Lake Champlain. 
It was taken from the towns of Plattsburg and 
Willsburg, and incorporated in 1792. It is an 
excellent tract of land, and settling fast. In 
1796 there were, of the inhabitants, 120 qualified 
electors ; 27 miles s. of Champlain Town, and 47 
n. of Ticonderoga at the n. end of Lake George.] 

PERUCHO, a settlement of the kingdom of 
Quito, in the district of the corregimiento of Las 
Cinco Leguas de la Capital ; situate to the w. of 
the same capital. It takes its name from the 
river Guallabamba, which is there called Peru- 
cho, the shores of which are very abundant in 
Guinea pepper, sugar canes, cotton, and every 
kind of fruit of a warm climate, this being its 
temperature, and one by no means healthy. In 
its district is a place called Tanlagua, and which 
was an estate of the Jesuits, where there are 
many hot medicinal fountains, which also have 
the quality of petrifying vegetable substances. 
At a short distance are the estates of Campanario 
and Casitagua. It is in lat. 8 n. 

[PERUVIANS, the aboriginal inhabitans of 
Peru, in S. America, who were the most civilized 
of any Indians on the continent. These people 
keep numerous Hocks ofpacos, whose wool they 
employ in the manufacture of several kinds of cloth 
which have the brillancy of silk, but there are 
none found in Chile, either in domestic or savage 
state.] 

PESAQUID, a city of the province of Nova 
Scotia or Acadia in N. America : situate on the 
shore of the Basin des Mines in the Bay ofFundy. 
and at the entrance of the river of its name. 

PESAQUID, a river which rises in the same pro 
vince, runs n.e. and enters the Basin des Mines of 
the Bay ofFundy. 

PESCA, a settlement of the province arid corre- 
gimientoof Tunja intheNuevo Reynode Granada. 
It is of a very cold temperature, abounds in wheat, 
maize, papas, c. is situate in the llano of Saga- 
moso, and near this settlement. It has large 
breeds of cattle, and from their wools are fabri 
cated some woven stuffs. It contains more than 
200 housekeepers and 100 Indians, and was in the 
time of the Indians a great, populous, and rich 
city, as being the court of the third elector of th? 



PET 



king of Tunja, from whence it lies 62 miles to the 
n. e. 

PESCA, a great lake in the province and cap 
tainship of the Rio Janeyro in Brazil ; on the 
shore of the Parayba. 

PESCA, a bay on the w. coast of the Straits of 
Magellan, between the Port Redondo and the 
point of Santa Ana. 

PESCADERO, a settlement of the province 
and government of Sonora; situate on the shore 
of the river Petiqui. 

PESCADO, CUEVA DEL, an hollow on the e. 
coast of the Straits of Magellan and channel of 
San Sebastian. 

PESCADORES, BANCO DE, a large sand-bank 
in the river La Plata, near the n. coast and the 
colony of Sacramento, by which there is a 
channel. 

PESCADORES, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Chancay in Peru ; on the coast, 
opposite the island Maracasi. 

PESCADORES, some isles near the coast of Peru, 
in the province and corregimiento of Camana. 

PESCADORES, another settlement, of the head 
settlement of the district and alcaldia mayor of 
Acaponcta in Nueva Espana ; situate on the 
shore of a lake, into which the river San Pedro 
runs, and on the shores of which is the state of 
Chilapa ; 12 leagues of its capital. 

PESINAMIN, an island of the river Mara- 
iion in the part of the province and country of 
Las Amazonas, possessed by the Portuguese, 
opposite the mouth of the river Negro. 

PESMATLAN, a settlement of the head set 
tlement of the district and alcaldia mayor ofZo- 
chicoatlan in Nueva Espana. It is of an hot 
temperature, contains 50 Indian families, and is 
two leagues n. of its capital. 

PESQUERIA, VALLE GRANDE DE LA, a 
settlement of the Nuevo Reyno de Leon in N. 
America ; annexed to the curacy of its capital. 
It contains 20 families, and its territory is very 
abundant in goats, seeds, and other fruits. It has 
various silver mines, which render but sparingly 
owing to the great mixture of lead found with this 
metal. It lies in the road to the provinces of 
Mexico, Nueva Vizcaya, Nueva Toledo, Nuevo 
Mexico, and other provinces which lie to the n. 
and s. ; 23 miles n. of Monterrey, and 82 e. by n. 
of Castanuela. 

PESTEGUA, a great llanura of the province 
and government of Santa Marta in the Nuevo 
Reyno de Granada ; discovered by Captain Luis 
Manjarres in 1537. It is of an extremely hot 
climate, and consequently not populous. 



PETAGUEI, a province of the kingdom of 
Brazil, bounded n. by that of Dele, e. by the sea, 
s. by the captainship of the Rio Grande, and w. 
by the country of the Tapuyos Indians. It is 
very fertile, and abounding in silver mines. 

PETAPA, S. MIGUEL DE, a settlement of the 
province and coffcgimiento of Guatemala in the 
kingdom and valley of this name. It is pleasant 
and fertile in vegetable productions ; contains 
830 Indians, who speak the Pocoman language ; 
in this number being included other three settle 
ments of its district, called Pinula, Mexico, and 
Chinauta, annexed to its curacy. It was a doc 
trinal establishment of the religious of St. Do 
mingo, and one of the most celebrated, and it 
had for some years as curate Fr. Thomas Gage, 
an Irishman of the same order, and author of 
an account of the voyage made to America, full 
of fables. There is in Petapa a family which 
descends from the princes of this kingdom, and 
it has the title of Guzman, and many privileges 
granted to it by the king. 

[This settlement is situate on the n. shore of 
the river Naccus, 20 miles n. e. of Guatemala.] 

PETAQUILLAS, a settlement of the jurisdic 
tion and alcaldia mayor of Tixtlan in Nueva Es 
pana. It is of a mild temperature, and contains 
152 families of Indians. 

PETARE, a settlement of the province and go 
vernment of Venezuela in the N uevo Reyno de 
Granada ; situate near the coast, to the e . of the 
city of Caracas. 

PETATCHOVAN, a lake of New France or 
Canada in N. America, in the limits which divide 
it from the country or land of Labrador. 

PETAS, a barbarous nation of Indians de 
scended from that of Los Chiquitos in Peru ; 
discovered by the missionaries of the Jesuits who 
had been in that country in 1549. It is but little 
known. 

PETATLAN, S. SEBASTIAN DE, a settlement 
of the head settlement of Atempa and alcaldia 
mayor of Teuzitlan in Nueva Espana ; annexed 
to the curacy of the former. It contains 70 In 
dians, and is three quarters of a league from its 
capital. 

PETATLAN, another settlement, of the head 
settlement ofZitlala and alcaldia mayor of Chi- 
lapa in the same kingdom ; inhabited by 88 
families of Indians, 4 leagues e. of its head settle 
ment. 

[PETAWONTAKAS, an Indian nation for 
merly in alliance with the Hurons.] 

PETEN, a castle of the province and govern 
ment of Cornayagua in the kingdom of Gua- 



PET 

temala, on the n. coast ; situate behind the river 
Balis, for the purpose of restraining the English, 
who had established themselves there to carry on 
an illicit trade in dyeing wood, and were making 
their way into the province. 

PETER, a fort of the province of Georgia in 
N. America ; on the shore of the river of its 
name. 

PETER, a river of S. Carolina, which enters the 
sea close to the Port Royal. 

PETEROA, a settlement of the province and 
corrcgimicnto of Maule in the kingdom of Chile ; 
on the shore of the river Lontue, between this 
and the river Claro. 

PETEROA, a volcano of the same province and 
kingdom, in one of the mountains of its cordillera. 
[The eruption of this volcano, which took place 
in 1760, was the greatest ever known in those 
parts. It happened on the third of December; 
the volcano then formed itself a new crater, and 
a neighbouring mountain was rent asunder for 
many miles in extent. It is 105 miles s. s. e. of 
Santiago, and 192 n. e. of Concepcion, in lat. 34 
53 s. and long. 69 40 w. ] 

PETERS, a small island of the N. Sea, one of 
the Virgin Isles ; situate between those of S. 
Juan and Copers, to the e. of that of Puertorico. 

[PETER S BANK, ST. a large fishing ground off 
the s. end of Newfoundland Island, and extends 
from Cape Race to St. Peter s Island, opposite 
Placentia, St. Mary and Trepassy Bays. It is 
ly degrees of latitude in breadth on the w. side. 
From St. Peter s Island it decreases as it ap 
proaches Race Point. It lies w. of the Great 
Bank, and has on the s. a considerable distance, 
Green and Whale Banks, which are among the 
smallest on the coast. It has from 45 to 30 
fathoms water on it.] 

[PETER S BAY, ST. on the s. coast of Cape Bre 
ton Island, having St. Peter s Island at its mouth.] 

[PETER S FORT, ST. on the island of Martinico, 
in the W. Indies. Lat. 14 44 n. Long. 61 
14 a&amp;gt;.] 

[PETER S HARBOUR, ST. on the n. coast of the 
island of St. John s, in the Gulf of St. Lawrence, 
about 32 miles w. of E. Point. W. of it are An- 
guille Bay and Port Chimene.] 

[PETER S Haven. St. on the e. coast of La 
brador, lies round the s. e. point of Sadel Bay. 
Lat. 56 30 n. Long. 60 42 o&amp;gt;.] 

[PETER S Island, a small isle on the w. coast of 
St. John s Island, near to, and n. by w. of, Gover 
nor s Island, in the narrowest part of the strait 
between New Brunswick and St. John s Island.] 

[PETER S Island, ST. or ST. PIERRE S, on the s. 
coast of Newfoundland Island, lies s. s. &amp;lt;v. of the 



PET 



127 



s. e. point of Fortune Bay, and near to, and s. e- 
of, the s. point of Miquelon Island. Lat.J 46 41 
n. Long. 55 57 w.] 

[PETER S, ST. one of the Virgin Isles, in the W. 
Indies, dependent on Virgin Gorda.] 

[PETER S, ST. a harbour at the oxend of Sydney 
or Cape Breton Island; is a very commodious 
place for carrying on the fishery.] 

[PETER S, ST. a town at the s. extremity of Cape 
Breton Island. It stands on an isthmus about 
half a mile broad, which separates the harbour of 
St. Peter from the great lake of that name, also 
called Lake Labrador. It is about 10 miles n. e. 
of Point Toulouse. To this harbour vessels of 
the greatest burden can come with safety. Be 
fore the American revolution, a great fishery was 
carried on here.] 

[PETER S Lake, ST. a part of St. Lawrence 
River, into which empty, from the 5. and e., Sorel 
or Richlien River from Lake Champlain, the river 
St. Francis, and some smaller rivers, from the n. 
w. The Masquinonge, Omachis, &amp;c. enter the 
lake. The centre of the lake is 73 miles above 
Quebec, and 208 n. e. of Kingston, at the mouth 
of Lake Ontario.] 

[PETER S Mountain, in Pennsylvania, lies on 
Susquehannah River, between Halifax and Har- 
risburg, in Dauphin County.] 

[PETER S ST. a river on the coast of Labrador ; 
about four leagues from the island of Bellisle, in 
the straits of that name.] 

[PETER S, ST. and ST. PAUL, a river at the 
bottom of the Gulf of Campeachy. Its branches 
form an island, called Tabasco. J he bar at the 
mouth of the e. branch admits small vessels. At 
flood there is 2y to three fathoms water, and 
very good anchorage within the bar.] 

[PETER S, ST. a parish of S. Carolina, in Beau&amp;lt;/ 
fort district.] 

[PETER S, ST. one of the n. w.- branches of 
Mississippi River, which it joins, in lat. about 43 
58 n. and long. 92 57 w. N.B. For other 
places named Peter or Peter s, see PIERRE.] 

[PETER S, a township of Franklin County, 
Pennsylvania.] 

[PETERBOROUGH, a post town in Hills- 
borough County, New Hampshire. It was in 
corporated in 176(), and contains 861 inhabitants. 
It is 53 miles w. by s. of Portsmouth, 14 w. of 
Amherst, 15 e. of Keene, and 227 from Philadel 
phia. Lat. 42 51 n. Long. 71 54 w.~\ 

[PETERSBURG, a township of New York, in 
Rensselaer County, e. of the village of Troy, in 
corporated in 1793. In 1796 there were 512 of 
the inhabitants qualified electors.] 

[PETERSBURG, a post town of Pennsylvania. 



128 



PET 



in York County, 2 miles n. of the Maryland line. 
It contains a Roman Catholic church, and about 18 
houses. It is 22 miles 5. w. of York Town, 33 
n. of Baltimore , and 90 zo. by 5. of Philadelphia. 
Lat. 39 42 30" n. Long. 77 6 w.] 

[PETERSBURG, a small town of Kentucky ; 
situate in Woodford County, on the e. side of Ken 
tucky River, 13 miles w. s. w. of Lexington, and 
10 s. s. e. of Frankfort. It has a tobacco ware 
house, and a few dwelling-houses.] 

[PETERSBURG, a post town of Virginia, and a 
place of considerable trade ; situate in Dinwiddie 
County, on the s. e. bank of Appamatox River, 
just below the falls, about 20 miles s. of Rich 
mond. It contains about 300 houses, built irre 
gularly. The Free Mason s hall is a handsome 
building ; there are several tobacco warehouses, 
stores of dry goods, and some few neat and 
commodious dwelling-houses. This town is a 
corporation, and comprehends the village of 
Blanford in Prince George s County, and Pow- 
hatan in Chesterfield county, on the opposite side 
of the river. It Contains 2828 inhabitants, in 
cluding 1265 slaves. The situation of the town 
is low and rather unhealthy. From the inspec 
tor s books it appears that on an average, for some 
years back, the quantity of tobacco received 
here has considerably exceeded 20,000 hhds. per 
annum ; and that for some of the later years the 
quantity of flour made in this town, and within an 
hundred yards of it, has exceeded 38,000 barrels ; 
at other mills within a few miles, 16,000 barrels 
per annum; to this add the flour made at the 
several country mills, and brought to this place 
for sale, the whole quantity may safely be stated to 
exceed 60,000 barrels per annum . The whole ex 
ports of this town, valued at the usual peace prices, 
amount to 1,389,300 dollars, besides the value 
of peach and apple brandy, whiskey, &amp;c. not 
included. The Indian princess, Pocahontas, the 
daughter of king Powhatan, from whom de 
scended the Randolph and Bowling families, 
formerly resided at this place. It is 68 miles w. 
by n. of Norfolk, 108 s. of Washington, and 205 
s. w. by 5. of Philadelphia. Lat. 37 14 n. Long. 
77 4F 30" o&amp;gt;.] 

[PETERSBURG, a very flourishing post town of 
Georgia, in Elbert County, in a pleasant and 
healthful situation, on the point of land formed 
by the confluence of Broad with Savannah River 
opposite to Vienna. Several respectable mer 
chants are settled in this town. It is 20 miles 
from Elberton, 25 n. by e. of Washington, 41 
above Augusta, and 62 n. n. e. of Louisville. 
Lat. 33 54 n. Long. 82 22 o&amp;gt;.] 

[PETERSHAM, a flourishing and pleasant 



PET 

township in Worcester County, Massachusetts, 
formerly called by the Indians Nichtwaug ; situ 
ate 23 miles n. w. of Worcester, and 54 w. of 
Boston. Swift River, a branch of Chickopee 
River, passes though this town. The soil is rich 
and fertile, and here are large and excellent 
orchards.] 

PETIGUARES,a barbarous nation of Indians 
of the kingdom of Brazil, to the w. of the cap 
tainship of Paraiba ; bounded w. by the Figuares. 
These infidels have been irreconcileable enemies 
to the Portuguese since the year 1584, when great 
hostilities prevailed between either. 

PETIT, a river of the province and colony 
of Virginia, which runs e. and is one of those 
issuing from the Pamunkey. 

[PETIT ANSE, a village on the n. side of the 
island of St. Domingo, 2| leagues s. of Cape 
Francois.] 

[PETIT CODIAK, a river which falls into an 
arm of the Bay of Fundy, called Chegnecto Chan 
nel. The Indians have a communication from 
the head of it with St. John s River, by a portage 
across to the head of Kennebecsius.] 

PETITE, a river of S. Carolina, which rises 
in the limits of Grenville territory, runs s. e. for 
many leagues, between those of Pedi Great and 
Little, and unites itself with the second to enter 
the former. 

PETITE, another river, of N. Carolina, which 
runs n. and enters the Conhaway. 

PETITE, another, of Canada, which runs n. and 
enters the sea in Hudson s Bay, at the entrance 
of the mouth of the river Albany. 

PETITE, another, of the province and country of 
Iroquees Indians in N. America, which runs e. in 
the territory of the Autaouacs, and enters the 
river of the Otaways near the island of Montreal. 

[PETIT GOAFRE, or the LITTE WHIRLPOOL, 
in Mississippi River ; is 16 miles from Fort Rosa 
lie, and four miles from Bayouk Pierre, or Stony 
River.] 

PETIT GUAVES, or GOAVE, a jurisdiction, 
town, and bay, on the n. coast of the s. peninsula 
of the island of St. Domingo, and near the head 
of the bay or bite of Leogane. The jurisdiction 
contains five parishes, and is the unhealthiest 
place in the colony, the inhabitants being con 
stantly subject to fevers, occasioned by the bad 
ness of the waters. Its dependencies, however, 
are healthy, and are remarkable for the culture 
of coffee. Its exports from January 1, 1789, to 
December 31,of the same year, were 27,090 Ibs. ; 
white sugar 655,1871bs.; brown sugar 807,865 
Ibs. ; coffee 50,053 Ibs. ; cotton : and 210 Ibs. 
indigo. The value on duties on exportation of 



P E T 

the above, was 4127 dollars 97 cents. The 
town lies on the e. side of the bay, 7 miles w. of 
Grand Guave, and 36 w. by s. of Port au Prince. 
Lat. 18 23 n. Long. 72 54 w. Some writers 
call the great bay, which is commonly called the 
Bay, Bight, or Bite of Leogane, by the name of 
Petit Guaves.] 

[PETIT Port, on the w. side of Newfoundland 
Island, towards the s. end ; is about 5| leagues 
. of Cape Ray, and one s. of Anguille Cape. 
Lat. 47 51 30". Long. 59 15 w.] 

[PETIT Port, on the coast of Peru, otherwise 
called Portete, or Little Port, lies a short way 
n. of the equator, and about five leagues to the 
s. e. within the bay from the Cape Francois to 
Cape Passado on the s. by w. There is anchor 
age in five fathoms, and plenty of fresh water 
near the head land, which is high. It is neces 
sary to sound, on account of the sand banks, 
called the Portetes.] 

[PETIT Rivere, a small town in the French 
part of the island of St. Domingo, close to the 
Spanish division line, 1| leagues n. by w. w. of 
Varettes, and separated from it by Artibonite; 
10 leagues e. by n. of St. Marc, and as far n. w. of 
Mirebalais. Lat. 19 8 X n. Long. 72 15 .] 

[PETIT Terre Island, near the Deseada, in the 
W. Indies. Lat. 16 12 n. Long. 61 10 o&amp;gt;.] 

[PETIT Trou, is on the n. side of the s. peninsula 
of the island of St. Domingo, on the point of land 
which forms the e. side of the entrance into the 
Bay of Baradaires ; 4| leagues w. of Anse a 
Veau, and 19 e. of Jeremie.] 

[PETIT Trou, a small cove on the s. side of the 
island of St. Domingo, s. by w. of the mouth of 
Neybe River, and about five leagues w. e. of Beate 
Island. Small barks come to this place from St. 
Domingo city, to fetch the meat, lard, and fowls 
derived from the chase. J 

PETLACALA, a settlement ofthe head settle 
ment of the district of Olinala and alcaldia mayor 
of Tlapa in Nueva Espana. It contains 56 
families of Indians, and is three leagues n. e. of its 
head settlement. 

PETLALCALZINCO, a settlement of the 
same alcaldia mayor and kingdom as the former. 
It contains 33 families of Indians. 

PETLAPA, a settlement of the head settle 
ment of the district of Testalzinco and alcaldia 
mayor of Villalta in Nueva Espana. It is of an 
hot temperature ; contains 84 Indian families, 
and is nine leagues n. ofthe capital. 

PETLASTAHUACA, SAN FRANCISCO DE, a 
principal and head settlement of the district of 
the alcaldia mayor of Tepezcolula in Nueva 



P E V 



Espana. It contains 184 families of Indians, with 
those of the wards of its district, who are em 
ployed in the cultivation of maize and wheat, in 
which it is very fertile. 

PETLAZINCO, a settlement of the head 
settlement of the district and alcaldia mayor of 
Tlapa in Nueva Espana. It contains 17 families 
of Indians, and is three leagues w. of that head 
settlement. 

PETOBAMBA, a settlement of the province 
and corregimiento of Porco in Peru. 

PETORCA, a town ofthe province and corre 
gimiento of Quillota in the kingdom of Chile, and 
the asiento of the celebrated gold mines of this 
name. In its district are many palms growing 
on the slope ofthe mountains which are very lofty 
and dry ; and in those alone to the w. are found 
small cocoa trees. When the stock of these trees 
are cut, liquor is distilled, which, being purified 
by the fire, comes to the consistency of honey, 
and is very well tasted. In the vicinity of this 
town breed merino sheep, from the wool of which, 
the same being very large and fine, are made 
excellent saddles for riding, which are much 
esteemed in Peru, being a branch of the com 
merce of this place. 

PETORCA, the mine mentioned in the above 
article, one ofthe richest and most abundant of all 
those discovered in this kingdom, it having pro 
duced immense riches. It is now much neglected, 
the metal having been discovered to be much 
allayed with silver, and the labour of working it 
being most expensive ; . ofthe city of Santiago, 
the capital ofthe kingdom. 

[PETTQUOTTING, a river ofthe N. W. 
Territory, which empties into Lake Erie, from 
the s. near Huron River.] 

PEVAS, a barbarous nation of Indians, who 
inhabit the woods n. of the river of Las Ama- 
zonas, near the river Cuchiquina. These infidels 
are numerous, and are divided into various tribes ; 
bounded e. by the Ticunas, and w. by the Mayo- 
runas. Some of these were reduced to the faith 
by the Jesuits, the missionaries in the province 
of Mainas, and who founded the settlement of San 
Ignacio de Pevas, 41 miles e. ofthe mouth ofthe 
river Napo, on the n, shore of the Maranon, or 
Amazon River, in lat. 3 28 s. 

PEVINGUES, a barbarous, ferocious, and 
untamed nation of Indians, of the kingdom of 
Chile, in the s. part, towards the mountains ofthe 
Andes, and who occupy the fertile and beautiful 
country of Tapatapa. It is very fertile in grain 
and cattle. These Indians are at continual war 
with the Pulches. 



VOL. IV. 



130 



P H 1 



[PEYTONSBURG, the chief town of Halifax 
County, Virginia, having a court-house and five 
or six other houses, three of which are ordinaries 
or taverns.] 

PEZ, a river of the province and captainship 
of San Vincente in Brazil, which runs s. s. w. and 
enters the Teviquari. 

PEZUAPA, a settlement of the head settle 
ment of the district of Tetela and alcaldia mayor 
of Azuchitlan in Nueva Espafia ; situate on the 
margin of the river of Los Balzas. Near its 
head passes another stream, which is so abundant 
in the rainy season as to inundate all the circum 
jacent country ; and it is found necessary to pass 
it en taravita. It contains 40 families of Indians 
and nine of Mustees, who trade in breeding the 
large cattle, and by cultivating seeds and fruits in 
the many gardens in its district ; 12 leagues s. e. 
of its head settlement. 

PEZUL, a settlement of the province and 
government of Paraguay, on the shore of the 
river Parana, s. of the town of Curuguato. 

PEZULAPA, a settlement of the province and 
alcaldia mayor of San Salvador in the kingdom of 
Guatemala. 

PEZULAPILLA, a settlement of the same 
province and kingdom as the former. 

PHILADELPHIA, a county of the province 
and colony of Pennsylvania in N.America, bound 
ed n. e. by the county of Bucks, s. e. by Jersey, s. 
w. by Chester, and n. w. by Berks. It takes the 
name of the capital of the whole province. 

It contains about 89,600 acres, and is divided 
into 12 townships. On the banks of Schuil- 
kill, in this county, is an excellent quarry of 
marble, from which the stone-cutters of Philadel 
phia are supplied. It contains, besides Philadel 
phia, its capital, upwards of 15,000 inhabitants, 
of whom 180 are slaves. 

Pennsylvania, the capital of the above province, 
is situate most delightfully, stretching along a strip 
of land upon the conflux of the two rivers Dela 
ware and Schuilkill ; it is of an oblong figure, 
extending two miles from river to river, and form 
ing eight short streets, which are intersected at 
right angles by about sixteen others of a mile and 
a half each ; wide, spacious and level, and leaving 
sufficient space for the public buildings, churches, 
and market places. In the centre is a large 
public place in the figure of a decagon. The two 
principal streets, called High Street and Wide 
Street, are 100 feet across ; the greater part of 
the houses, gardens, and orchards, are irrigated by 
small canals running from the river and supply 
ing to the use and necessities of the town, as also 
to the delight and recreation of its inhabitants. 



P H I 

The dock is beautiful and 100 feet large, and of 
such depth as to be capable of receiving to repair 
a vessel of 500 tons burden. The store-houses 
are numerous, capacious, and convenient, and the 
dock so large that 20 vessels have been built in 
it at once. The city, without including the store 
houses and the suburbs, contains 3000 houses, the 
greater part of brick, and all well built and of 
large size, the same containing 18,000 souls. The 
primitive plan of its foundation is not complete; 
but according to that which was laid down, and 
which has been regularly followed up, it promises 
to become in time one of the finest cities in America. 
It is inhabited by many very rich merchants, who 
have become domiciliated here, through the flou 
rishing commerce that it has, for many years, 
carried on with the colonies of the English, 
French, Spanish, and Dutch, with the islands of 
the Azores, Canaries, with those of Madeira, and 
with England, Ireland, Spain, Portugal, and Hol 
land, making immense profits. Not to mention 
the abundant quantity of all sorts of provisions 
which this province produces, and which are 
carried by the rivers Delaware and Schuilkill; 
the Dutch employ from eight to 9000 carts, each 
drawn by four horses, for transporting the produc 
tions of their estates to the Philadelphia market. 
There entered in its port, in 1749, no less than 303 
vessels, and the number that left it was about 290. 
Here are two churches of the reformed religion, 
one Catholic chapel, another of Swedes ; three 
Quakers meetings, two of Presbyterians, one of 
Lutherans, another of Dutch Calvinists, another 
of Anabaptists, and another of Moravians. The 
most sumptuous building in the whole town is 
the house of representatives of the colony, where 
the members meet frequently in the course of the 
year ; and on the side of this stands the great 
library which was built in 1732 by the celebrated 
Benjamin Franklin, the same being open to the 
public only on Sundays, but to the founders every 
day in the week. Any one may take out the 
books, paving something for the use of them, and 
being under an engagement to return them at a 
fixed time, with the which should any person not 
comply, he is forced to pay a fine which goes to the 
increasing the collection of books : many instru 
ments for mathematics and physics have been 
lately added, as also a fine cabinet of natural 
history. Near this library is another of Greek 
and Latin classics, with their most accredited 
commentations ; also of the best productions in 
the modern languages, the same having been be 
queathed as a legacy by the learned citizen Logan 
in 1752. It has a college where all the sciences 
are studied, the same having been established 



PHILADELPHIA. 



131 



in the year 1749, by the said illustrious founder, 
as was the library, the same being also an aca 
demy of sciences. In addition to what we have 
said, this city has been rendered celebrated, from 
the congress that was established here, in 1774, 
of the three American colonies which formed a 
body to separate themselves from the dominion 
of England ; which separation was decreed in 
1776. 

[Philadelphia, the metropolis of Pennsylvania, 
was the seat of the government of the United 
States, until this was removed to Washing 
ton in Maryland. It is situate in the county 
to which it gives name, on the w. bank of the 
river Delaware, which is here a mile broad. It 
lies in lat. 39 56 54" n. and long. 75 C 10 30" w. 
from Greenwich, distant about 120 miles from the 
Atlantic Ocean, by the course of the bay and 
river, and about 40 or 46 in the s. c. direction. A 
74 gun ship can come up to this city ; sloops go 
35 miles farther to Trenton ; and boats that carry 
eight or nine tons can go 100 mile farther up the 
Delaware. It was laid out by William Penn, the 
first proprietary and founder of the province, in 
the year 1683, and settled by a colony from 
England, which arrived from that and the pre 
ceding years, and was increased by a constant 
and regular influx of foreigners, to so great a 
degree, that in less than a century, and within 
the lifetime of the first person born within it of 
European parents, it was computed to contain 
6000 houses, and 40,000 inhabitants, in the city 
and suburbs. The ground-plot of the city is an 
oblong square, about one mile n. and s. and two 
c. and w. lying in the narrowest part of the isth 
mus betwen the Delaware and Schuilkill Rivers, 
about five miles in a right line above their con 
fluence. In the beginning of this settlement, it 
was expected that the fronts on both rivers would 
be first improved for the convenience of trade and 
navigation, and that the buildings would extend 
gradually in the rear of each, until they would 
meet and form one town, extending from e. to w. 
But it was soon found that the Delaware front was 
alone sufficient for quays and landing-places. 

The buildings now occupy a space not ex 
ceeding three miles in length from n. to s. and in 
the most extended part do not reach a mile from 
the Delaware. The city is intersected by a great 
number of streets, crossing each other at right 
angles. Of these there were originally nine, 
which extended from the Delaware to the Schuil 
kill ; these were crossed by 23 running n. and s. 
The e. and w. streets, except High Street, are 
named after the trees first found by the colony 



on their arrival in the country, viz. Vine, Sassa 
fras, Mulberry, Chesnut, Walnut, Spruce, Pine, 
and Cedar ; which last is the s. boundary of the 
city. The streets running n. and s. receive their 
names from their numerical order, beginning at 
Delaware River ; Front is first, then Second, 
and so on to Thirteenth Street, whence the nume 
rical order ceases from Delaware Front, and begins 
at Schuilkill in the same order, as First, Second, 
&amp;c. to the Eighth Street, between which and 
Thirteenth Street, is Broad Street, so named from 
its being the widest in the city. The number of 
squares in the original plan was 184 ; but as 
several of the squares have lately been intersected 
by new streets, their number now amounts to 304 : 
and several of these are again intersected by lanes 
and alleys. Broad Street is 113 feet wide ; 
High Street 100 ; Mulberry, 60 ; and the other 
streets in the original plan 50 feet wide. Most 
of the city is well paved with neat foot-paths of 
brick, furnished with common sewers and gutters ; 
so that the streets are, in general, kept very clean 
and neat. Besides the streets already mentioned, 
there are several others not laid down in the ori 
ginal plan, as Water, Dock, Cherry, Penn, Prune, 
&amp;c. Water Street is only 20 feet wide, and ex 
tends from the . liberties across the dock, to Pine 
Street, parallel to the course of the Delaware, 
and between it and Front Street. The space 
occupied by it was intended in the original plan 
to serve only as a cart-way to accommodate the 
wharfs and stores, so that the river should be 
open to the view from Front Street. It is now 
built with lofty houses (except a very few vacancies 
here and there) throughout the whole front, and 
commodious wharfs are extended into the river, 
at which the largest ships that use the port can lie 
in safety, to receive and discharge their cargoes ; 
and are defended from the ice, in winter, by the 
piers, made of logs, extending into the river, 
sunk with stone, and filled with earth, so as to be 
equally firm with the main land. Dock Street 
was formerly a swamp, with a small stream 
running through the middle of it. It is from 90 
to 100 feet wide, and winds n. w. in a serpentine 
track, through several streets. It is planted on 
each side with a row of Lombardy poplars, and 
promises to be one of the pleasantest streets in 
the city. No less than 662 lamps of two branches 
e*ach, disposed at convenient distances, in all 
parts of the city, are lighted every night, and are 
estimated to consume annually nearly 9000 
gallons of oil. 

The houses in the city and suburbs are gene 
rally of brick, three stories high, in a plain neat] 
s 2 



132 



PHILADELPHIA. 



[style, without much display of ornament. The 
general height of the ground on which the city 
stands is nearly 40 feet above the Delaware ; but 
some of the streets are considerably lower, par 
ticularly Water Street ; several stores in which 
have sometimes received much damage when the 
river happened to be raised by a high flood and 
a strong s. e. wind. 

Here are now 27 places of public worship, viz. 
five for Friends or Quakers, six for the Presby 
terians and Seceders, three for Episcopalians, 
three for Roman Catholics, two for German Lu 
therans, two for Methodists, one for German 
Calvinists, one for Swedish Lutherans, which is 
the oldest church in town, one for the Mora 
vians, one for Baptists, one for Africans, and a 
Jewish synagogue. The first Presbyterian church 
is finished with a degree of elegance that would 
do honour to any city in Europe. The roof is 
supported in front by six pillars, finished in the 
Corinthian order ; but as it stands in an obscure 
place, on the s. side of Market Street, it is seen 
to disadvantage. The German Lutheran church, 
which was built not many years since, was un 
fortunately burnt in the winter of 1795. The 
new building is 108 feet by 48; andw r as probably, 
when first completed, one of the handsomest and 
largest churches in the United States. Mr. D. 
Taneberger, a member of the society of the 
United Brethren at Letiz, a man of extraordi 
nary mechanical genius, completed and erected a 
large organ for this church, but it received much 
injury when the roof and inside of the building 
were consumed, before the pipes could be dis 
engaged. Christ Church stands on the zo. side 
of Second Street, between High and Mulberry 
Streets. It is an old Gothic structure, and is 
ornamented with a handsome steeple, and fur 
nished with a chime of bells. The second Pres 
byterian church, at the corner of Mulberry and 
Third Streets, is also ornamented with a hand 
some steeple. The Episcopalian churches are 
furnished each with an organ, as are the Ger- 
and two of the Roman Catholic churches. 



man 



The African church is a large neat building. It 
is supplied with a Negro clergyman, who has been 
lately ordained by the bishop. They are of the 
Episcopalian order. 

The other public buildings are, a state-house 
and offices, two city court-houses, a county court 
house, an university, the Philosophical Society s 
hall, a public library,, an hospital, dispensary, 
an almshouse, a gaol, three incorporated banks, 
two dramatic theatres, a medical theatre, a labo 
ratory, an amphitheatre, three brick market- 



houses, and one which is to be erected in Front 
Street : in the N. Liberties, a fish market, a 
house of correction, and a powder magazine 
which contains often upwards of 50,000 quarter 
casks of gunpowder. The state-house stands on 
the s. side of Chesnut Street, between Fifth and 
Sixth Streets, and was erected about the year 
1753 ; and considering the infancy of the co 
lony, the architecture is much admired. The 
state-house garden occupies a whole square ; it is 
a small neat place, ornamented with several rows 
of trees and gravel walks, and inclosed by a high 
brick wall on three sides, and the state-house, 
&amp;c. on the other. Pottersfield, formerly a public 
burying ground, is now converted into a public 
walk, and planted with rows of Lombardy pop 
lars on each side. When the trees are grown, 
and the ground levelled, it will be one of the 
most pleasant promenades in the vicinity. The 
legislature of the United States used to hold 
their sessions in an elegant building in the n. w. 
corner of the state-house yard. In the n. e. corner 
of the yard, adjoining the left wing of the state- 
house, is the town-hall or new court-house ; s. 
of which is the Philosophical-hall. Here Mr. 
Peal keeps his museum, by permission of the 
Philosophical Society. It is the largest collec 
tion of natural curiosities that is to be found in 
America. In it are 400 species of birds, some 
living animals, &amp;c. Opposite the Philosophical- 
hall is the Philadelphia library : these add much 
to the beauty and grandeur of the square. The 
Philadelphia library originated, as Albedo has 
observed, with Dr. Franklin, and was incorpo 
rated in 1742, since which time the collection of 
books has been greatly augmented. At present 
it contains upwards of 12,000 volumes, besides 
a museum and a valuable philosophical appa 
ratus. This library is furnished with tables and 
seats : and a stranger, without any introduction,, 
may call for any book he wants, and sit down 
and peruse it as long as he pleases. The pro 
prietors amount to several hundreds, and each 
subscriber pays 10 s. annually, for defraying ex 
penses and making new additions. To the li 
brary is annexed a rare and valuable collection 
of books, the bequest of James Logan, Esq. to 
the public. The building belonging to the li 
brary company is remarkably elegant, and has a 
fine appearance. In front of the building, in a 
nich over the door, is a handsome statue of Dr. 
Franklin, the donation of William Bingham, Esq. 
to the company. It is of white marble, was exe^ 
cuted in Italy, and is said to have cost 500. 
The public gaol stands in the next square, *.] 



PHILADELPHIA. 



133 



[of the state-house yard. It is a hollow square, 
100 feet in front, built of stone, three stories 
high. All the apartments are arched with stone, 
as a precaution against fire ; and it is the largest, 
strongest, and neatest building of the kind in the 
United States. To the gaol is annexed a work 
house, with yards to keep the sexes apart, and 
criminals from the debtors. There are also 
apartments lately added for the solitary con 
finement of criminals. The whole is securely 
inclosed by stone walls. 

The market-house, in High Street, is perhaps 
exceeded by none in the world, in the abundance, 
neatness, and variety of provisions, which are ex 
posed for sale every Wednesday and Saturday. 
Butchers meat and vegetables may be had any 
other day, except Sunday. It extends from Front 
to Fourth Street, and is supported by 300 pil 
lars. 

The new theatre in Chesnut Street, near the 
state-house, is large and convenient. It was 
finished in 1793. Further w. is a spacious build 
ing, which was intended for the accommodation 
of the president of the United States, but is not 
occupied by him. Opposite to the new theatre 
is the amphitheatre, wherein feats of horseman 
ship are, at certain seasons, performed with great 
dexterity, for the amusement of the citizens. 
It is a large commodious building. 

The university stands on the w. side of Fourth 
Street, between High and Mulberry Streets. It 
was formed by the union of two literary institu 
tions, which had previously existed a consider 
able time in Philadelphia, one designated by the 
above name ; the other by that of the college, 
academy, and charitable schools of Philadelphia. 
They now constitute a very respectable semi 
nary. It was incorporated in 1791. The phi 
losophical apparatus, which was before very com 
plete, has been lately increased to the value of 
several hundred pounds. The funds of the uni 
versity produce annually a revenue of about 
2365. The aggregate number of students, 
in the several schools, is, on an average, about 
510. And the number usually admitted to de 
grees in each year about 25. The Friends aca 
demy, and Young Ladies academy, are also re 
spectable and useful establishments. 

The chief literary and humane societies are the 
American Philosophical Society ; the College of 
Physicians ; the Society for promoting Political 
Inquiries ; the Pennsylvania hospital ; the Phi 
ladelphia dispensary ; the Pennsylvania society 
tor the abolition of slavery ; the society for alle 



viating the miseries of prisons ; the Pennsyl 
vania society for the encouragement of manu 
factures and useful arts ; the Philadelphia society 
for the information and assistance of emigrants, 
and two other societies of the same kind, one 
for the relief of German, and another for the re 
lief of Irish emigrants : and an humane, an agri 
cultural, marine, and various charitable socie 
ties. Here is a grand lodge of free and accepted 
masons, and eight subordinate lodges. The in 
surance company of N. America, lately esta 
blished here, is in high repute, and insure 
houses, goods, &amp;c. against fire, on very reason 
able terms. 

Few cities in the world of the same popula 
tion and riches as Philadelphia are better pro 
vided with useful institutions, both public and 
private. There are also a sufficient number of 
academies for the instruction of both sexes. Al 
most every religious society has one or more 
schools under its immediate direction, where 
children belonging to the society are taught to 
read and write, and are furnished with books 
and stationary articles. 

In the city and suburbs are 10 rope-walks 
which manufacture about 800 tons of hemp an 
nually ; 13 breweries, which are said to con 
sume 50,000 bushels of barley yearly ; six sugar- 
houses ; seven hair-powder manufactories in and 
about town ; two rum distilleries, and one rec 
tifying distillery ; three card-manufactories. 
The other manufactories are, 15 for earthenware ; 
six for chocolate ; four for mustard ; three for 
cut-nails, and one for patent-nails ; one for steel : 
one for aqua-fortis ; one for sal-ammoniac and 
glauber-satts ; one for oil colours ; 1 1 for brushes ; 
two for buttons ; one for Morocco leather, and 
one for parchment ; besides gun-makers, copper 
smiths, hatters, tin plate-workers, coachmakers, 
cabinet-makers, and a variety of others. The 
public mint, at which the national money is 
coined, is in this city. The great number of 
paper-mills in the state enable the printers to 
carry on their business more extensively than 
is done in anv other place of America. There 
are 31 printing-offices in this city ; four of these 
publish each a daily gazette ; two others publish 
gazettes twice a week, one of these is in the 
French language ; besides two weekly papers, 
one of which is in the German language. The 
other offices are employed in printing books, 
p amphlets, &amp;c. The catalogue of books for sale 
in this city, contains upwards of 300 sets of Phi 
ladelphia editions, beside? a greater variety of] 



134 



PHILADELPHIA. 



[maps and charts than is to be found any where 
else in America. 

The pleasure carriages within the city and 
liberties, according to enumeration, are as fol 
low, viz. two-wheeled carriages, 553 ; light wag 
gons, 80 ; coaches, 137; phaetons, 22; chariots, 
35 ; and coachees, 33 ; the whole amounting to 
307 four-wheeled carriages. The roads are good, 
and becoming better ; stage-coaches perform the 
journey from this city to Lancaster in 11 hours, 
on the new turnpike road : the distance is 58 
miles. 

This city is governed by a mayor, recorder, 
15 aldermen, and 30 common council-men ; ac 
cording to its present charter, granted in the 
year 1789. The mayor, recorder, eight alder 
men, and 16 common council-men make a quo 
rum to transact business ; they have full power 
to constitute and ordain laws and ordinances for 
the governing of the city ; the mayor, recorder, 
and aldermen are justices of the peace, and jus 
tices of oyer and terminer. They hold a court 
four times a year, to take cognizance of all 
crimes and misdemeanors committed within the 
city : two aldermen, appointed by the mayor and 
recorder, hold a court on the forenoon of Monday 
and Thursday of every week, to judge of all mat 
ters which are cognizable before a justice of the 
peace. 

The trade of Pennsylvania is principally car 
ried on from this city, and there are few com 
mercial ports in the world, where ships from 
Philadelphia may not be found in some season of 
the year. The number of vessels which entered 
this port in 1786, was 910; in 1787, 870; in 
1788, 851 ; in 1793, 1414, of which 477 were 
ships ; in 1795, 1620, viz. ; ships, 158 ; barks 
and snows, 26 ; brigs, 450 ; schooners, 506 ; 
sloops, 480. Clearances, 1789. It is not men 
tioned how many of these were coasting vessels. 
The number of vessels built in 1795 was 31, of 
which 23 were ships and brigs. In the year 
1792, Philadelphia shipped 420,000 barrels of 
flour and middlings ; in 1794, 300,751. 

The value of the exports from the state in the 
year ending September 30, 1791, was 3,436,092 
dollars, 58 cents; 1792, 3,820,662 dollars ; 1793, 
6,958,836 dollars ; 1794, 6,643,092 dollars ; 1795, 
11,518,260 dollars. The sickness in the autumn 
of 1793, and the embargo in the spring follow 
ing, interrupted the commerce of Philadelphia 
for nearly five months. The late war occasioned 
some extraordinary articles in the exportation of 
this place ; coffee, &amp;c. were carried to Philadel 



phia, and from thence to Hamburg, as neutral 
ports. 

The environs of the city are very pleasant, 
and finely cultivated. In the n. are Kensing 
ton, near the suburbs on Delaware, noted for 
ship-building; Germantown, a populous neat 
village, with two German churches ; and Frank 
fort, another pretty village, both within seven 
miles, besides many country-seats. In the s. i 
Derby, a small pleasant borough, about seven 
miles distant ; and, on Schuilkill, four miles 
from the city, the botanical garden of Messrs. 
Bartrams. In the w. on the same river, 18 
acres of ground have been lately destined for 
a public botanical garden. 

According to a list published of the births and 
deaths in the several religious societies of Phila 
delphia, it appears that from August 1, 1792, to 
August 1, 1793, the births amounted to 2511, and 
the deaths to 1497. In the year 1793, Philadel 
phia was visited with a severe scourge, the yel 
low fever, which raged with uncommon violence 
for above three months, and in that short space 
swept off nearly 5000 inhabitants. The humane 
efforts of a committee of health, appointed by 
the citizens, were highly instrumental in di 
minishing the calamity. A few weeks after this 
disorder ceased to rage, the trade of the city was 
restored in a manner incredible to any but eye 
witnesses. It is an honourable proof of the 
humane attention paid to the prisoners in this 
city that of 4060 debtors, and 4000 criminals, 
who were confined in Philadelphia goal between 
the 28th of September, 1780, and the 5th of Sep 
tember, 1790, only 12 died a natural death. In 
1794, there were 9000 houses in this city, and 
400 which were building; and the present num 
ber of inhabitants may be estimated at about 
55,000. 

Philadelphia is 728 miles s. w. of Passama- 
quoddy, which is the easternmost part of the sea- 
coast of the United States, 347 s. w. of Boston, 
222 s. w. of Hartford, 95 s. w. of New York, 
102 n. e. of Baltimore, 278 n. e. of Richmond, 
144 n. e. of Washington s city, and 925 n. e. by 
n. of Savannah in Georgia. The above dis 
tances are English miles, and include the wind 
ings of the roads. The direct distances in geo 
graphical miles are as follows : Philadelphia is 
480 miles s. w. of Passamaquoddy, 235 s. w. of 
Boston, 161 s. w. of Hartford, 70 s. w. of New 
York, 83 n. e. of Baltimore, 190 n. e. of Rich 
mond, 110 n. e. of Washington, and 560 n. e. 
of Savannah. See PENNSYLVANIA, for an ac-] 



P H I 

count of several other particulars relating to this 
city.] 

[PHILADELPHIA, a township in Rutland 
County, Vermont ; about 15 miles e. of Orwell. 
It contains 39 inhabitants.] 

[PHILIP, a large island in Lake Superior, 
in the territory of the United States. It lies 
towards the s. side of the lake, and s. e. of Isle 
Royal.] 

[PHILIP, ST. a fort which commands the en 
trance of Maranhan Harbour, on the coast of 
Brazil.] 

[PHILIP, ST. a point within the harbour of 
Port Royal, S. Carolina.] 

[PHILIP S ST. a parish of S. Carolina ; si 
tuate in Charlestown district.] 

PHILIPOLIS, a city of the Straits of Ma 
gellan ; founded by the admiral Pedro Sarmiento 
de Gamba in 1584 ; and not in 1582, as is as 
serted by the ex-jesuit Coleti ; neither in 1584, 
as according to Mr. La Martiniere. Its name 
was given to it by its founder, in honour of 
King Philip II. It was situate in the narrowest 
part of the strait, with a good port, and on the 
n. coast : it had four bastions and some artillery, 
but it lasted only a short time, for in 1587, the 
English pirate Thomas Candish passing by, 
found it totally void of population, its inhabitants 
having died of hunger ; and from this cause it 
has been since called Port of Hunger. In lat. 
53 IT s. 

[PHILIPPE, S. a city of the province and go 
vernment of Venezuela, was once a miserable 
village, named Cocorote, but has become a city 
by the resort of people from Baraquisimeto arid 
the Canaries, and is now famous for the industry 
and activity of its inhabitants. The soil is fer 
tile, and is watered to the e. by the river Yarani, 
and to the w. by the Aroa, crossed by a vast 
number of rivulets. Cocoa, indigo, and coffee 
are cultivated, but they grow very little cotton 
and still less sugar. The inhabitants amount to 
6800. The city is regularly built; the streets 
are broad, and the church is handsome and well 
supported. The air is cold and wet, and the 
town therefore unwholesome. The police and 
justice are administered by a cabildo. It lies in 
lat. 10 12 w. 110 miles, with a slight inclina 
tion to the s. of Caracas ; 34 miles w. of Valen 
cia, and 17 n. w, of Niragua.] 

[PHILIPPEAU, an island on the n. side of 
Lake Superior, n. of Isle Royal.] 

[PHILIPPEAU, a bay on the n. shore of the 
Gulf of St. Lawrence, near the Straits of Bellisle, 
and partly formed by islands which project s. on 



P I A 



135 



its e. part, and extend towards the w. The e. 
part of the bay lies in lat. 51 20 n. ] 

[PHILIPPINA, a small town of the province 
of Guatemala in New Spain ; situate on a bay 
of the N. Pacific Ocean, to the s. e. of Guate 
mala.] 

[PHILIPSBURG, a town of New Jersey; 
situate in Sussex County, on the e. bank of De 
laware River, opposite to Easton in Pennsyl 
vania. It is 35 miles n.w. of Trenton.] 

[PHILLIPSBURGH, or PHILIPSTOWN, a 
township of New York, in Dutchess County, on 
the e. side of Hudson s River, 26 miles above 
New York, near the s. end of Tappen Bay. It 
contains 2079 inhabitants, including 25 slaves. 
In 1796, there were 347 of the inhabitants elec 
tors. In this township is a silver- mine, which 
yields virgin silver.] 

[PHILLIPS Academy. See ANDOVER and 
EXETER.] 

[PHILOPOLIS, a settlement in Lucerne 
County, Pennsylvania ; 12 or 14 miles w. of 
Mount Ararat, and at the head of the w. branch 
of Tunkhanock Creek, about 45 miles s. e. of 
Athens, or Tioga Point. Lat. 41 40 n. Long. 
75 33 w.l 

PIACHIS, a river of the province and cor- 
regimiento of Caxamarquilla in Peru. 

PIACOA, a settlement of the province of 
Guayana, and government of Cumana ; a re 
duction of the missions of the Indians, held 
there by the Capuchin Catalanian Fathers. 

PIAGUI, a river of the kingdom of Brazil, 
which rises between those of Acuracu andParai- 
nala, runs n. and enters the second ; detaching 
in its mid-course, an arm which joins the former 
river. 

PIAKEMINES, a river of the province and 
government of Louisiana in N.America. It is 
an arm which enters the Mississippi near the 
coast, runs n. w. and empties itself into the sea 
by two mouths, between N. Cape and Ascencion 
Bay. 

PIANDAMA, a river of the province and 
government of Popayiin, in the Nuevo Reyno 
de Granada. It rises s. of the city of Buga, and 
enters the river Grande de la Magdalena. 

[PIANKASHAWS, or PYANKISHAS, VER- 
MILLIONS, and MASCONTINS, are tribes of In 
dians in the N. W. Territory, who reside on 
the Wabash and its branches, arid Illinois River. 
These, with the Kickapoos, Musquitous, and 
Ouiatanons, could together furnish about 1000 
warriors, 20 years ago.] 

PIANKATANK, a river of the province and 



13CJ 



P I C 



It runs s. e. 



colony of Virginia in N. America, 
with a large body into the sea. 

PIAS, SANTA ISABEL DE, a settlement of the 
province and corregimiento of Caxamarquilla in 
Peru ; annexed to the curacy of Chilia. 

PIASTLA, a settlement and head settlement 
of the district of the alcaldia mayor of Acatlan 
in Nueva Espana, in the district of which are 
many large saline earths, which afford a com 
merce to the natives. 

PIASTLA, an abundant river of the province 
and alcaldia mayor of Copale, and kingdom of 
Nueva Vizcaya. It rises in the vicinity of Du- 
rango, the capital, and running to e. s. e. enters 
the S. Soa in lat. 23 j, under the tropic of 
Cancer. It abounds greatly in fish, and on its 
shores is collected a tolerable portion of salt of 
very good quality, in which consists its trade, 
and by which the settlements on its shores profit ; 
three of these being of the reduccion of the In 
dians, although very small, and of the missions 
which were held by the Jesuits. 

PIAY, a river of the province and captain 
ship of SanVincente in Brazil, which runs n.n.w. 
and enters the Parana-pape. 

PIBIL, a settlement of the province and cor 
regimiento of Abancay in Peru. 

PIBINCO, a river of the district and pro 
vince of Maguegua in the kingdom of Chile, 
which runs w. and enters the Ngeloi. 

PIC, a small river of Canada, which runs s. w. 
and enters Lake Superior. 

PICA, a settlement of the province and cor 
regimiento of Arica in Peru. 

PICA, a river of this province and kingdom, 
which runs n. near the coast, then turns w. and 
enters the S. Sea. 

PICACHO, a settlement of the province and 
government of Sonora in N. America. 

PICACHOS, a settlement of the head settle 
ment of the district and alcaldia mayor of Aca- 
poneta in Nueva Espana. Fifteen leagues n. e. 
of its capital. 

PICAMARAN, a settlement of the province 
and corregimiento of Yauyos in Peru ; annexed 
to the curacy of Pacaran. 

PICAZURU, a river of the province and 
government of Paraguay. It runs w. in a very 
abundant stream, and enters the Parana. 

PICCHA, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Guanta in Peru ; annexed to the 
curacy of Ticllas. 

PICCHOS, a settlement of the same province 
and kingdom as the former ; annexed to the 
curacy of Huaribamba. 



P I C 

PICHANA, a settlement of the province and 
government of Tucuman in Peru, on the skirt of 
a mountain, on the shore of the river of its 
name. 

PICHANA, another settlement, in the province 
and corregimiento of Caxamarquilla. 

PICHANA, the aforesaid river, which runs w. 

PICHAOMACA, a settlement of the province 
and corregimiento of Quillota and kingdom of 
Chile, between the port Papudo and the shoals 
of Mala Cara. 

PICHICPICUNTA, a river of the kingdom 
of Chile, which rises e. of the volcano of Tuca- 
pel, runs s. with some inclination to s. s. e. and 
loses itself in the lakes of the Desaguadero. 

PICHIDEGUA, a settlement of the province 
and corregimiento of Aimaraez in Peru; annexed 
to the curacy of Pocoanca. 

PICHIDEGUA, another settlement, in the pro 
vince and corregimiento of Canes and Canches, 
or Tinta in Peru. 

PICHILINGUES, PUERTO DE LOS, a large, 
sheltered, and convenient bay of the Gulf of Ca 
lifornia, or Mar Roxo de Cortes. Its entrance is 
closed up by the large island of Espiritu Santo, 
and on the side of this are two other small islands, 
called S. Lorenzo and La Gallina ; the which 
form channels or entrances which are very nar 
row. In the innermost part of this bay, is an 
other bay still more sheltered, called La Paz. 

PICHINCHE, a very lofty mountain and vol 
cano of the kingdom of Quito ; on the skirt of 
which stands this capital. On the top it is di 
vided into various points or pinnacles, the loftiest 
of which, called Rucu-Pichinche, or Pichinche- 
viejo, is raised 5605 fathoms, two inches, and 
eight lines, above the level of the sea, as was 
measured by the academicians of the sciences of 
Paris. It is constantly covered with snow. 

This volcano has burst, vomiting fire, in the 
years 1535, 1577, 1G60, and 1690, when it caused 
terrible mischief, and particularly to the pro 
vince of Esmeraldas to the w. that being the con 
stant scene of the greatest calamities, as the 
mouth of the volcano is turned this way. Nearlj 
the whole of the mountain is dry and barren, and 
the street only towards Quito is cultivated. On 
the top, where the snow is, the mercury rises 
16 inches, and the dilatation of the spirit of wine 
is from 995 to 1012 in Reaumur s thermometer, 
according to the observations made by the afore 
said academicians. 

From this mountain a society of literati of the 
city of Quito take their name, being called the 
Pichinchense Academy, and employed in astro- 



PIC 

noraical observations and physical phenomena ; 
an account of which we have given, that it might 
explain the meaning of certain letters found 
posted in parts of that capital, namely, A A. PP. 
Academicians Pichinchenses. But this society 
terminated in 1767, on the expulsion of the Je 
suits. Some few years back many silver-mines 
have been discovered in this mountain, but which 
have not been worked through want of capital in 
the natives. In lat. 1 1 32" s. 

PICHIPIL, a settlement of Indians of the 
district of the island of Laxa in the kingdom of 
Chile, between the rivers Buren and Recalgue. 

PICHIRHUA, a settlement of the province 
and corregimiento of Aimaraez in Peru, annexed 
to the curacy of Sirca. 

PICHIU, a spacious llanera on the coast of the 
S. Sea, of the ancient province of Chimu in Peru, 
/?. of Lima. Its territory was conquered by the 
Inca Huavna-Capac, thirteenth emperor. 

PICHpTA, a settlement of the district of Pu 
erto V iejo in the province and government of 
Guayaquil and kingdom of Quito : s. e. of the 
settlement of Charapoto, on the shore of the river 
Chico. In its territory is produced abundance 
of cotton of the best quality. In lat. 55 / s. 

PICHUNSIS, a barbarous nation of Indians 
of the province and government of Guayaquil 
in the kingdom of Quito : they are descendants 
of the ancient Mantas, who inhabited the coast 
of the Pacific Sea, and were extremely dissolute. 
They were conquered by Huayna-Capac, thir 
teenth emperor of the Incas, who put to the sword 
or burnt as many of them as he could take, as a 
punishment for the detestable vice of sodomy to 
which they were so much addicted, and at last 
destroyed them entirely. 

PIC KAVILLANI, DEL OHIO, a settlement of 
the province and colony of Virginia in N. Ame 
rica ; where the English have built a fort, on the 
shore and at the source of the river Great 
Miamee. 

PICKERING, a settlement of the island of 
Barbadoes near the n. coast. 

PICKOVAGANI, a settlement of Indians of 
Canada in N. America, in the country and terri 
tory of the nation of the same name ; on the 
shore of the lake San Juan. 

PICO, Alto, a lofty mountain on the coast of 
Peru, in the province and corregimiento of Ca- 
fiete, close to the settlement of Chilca. 

Pico, another mountain, also very lofty, on 
the n. coast of the Straits of Magellan, behind the 
bay of the same denomination. 

VOL. IV. 



P 1 C 



137 



Pico, a port on the coast of the province and 
government of Venezuela of the Nuevo Rpyno 
de Granada, within the Gulf of Venezuela, at 
the entrance of the lake of Maracaibo. 

PICO AS A, a settlement of the district and ju 
risdiction of Puerto Viejo, in the province and 
government of Guayaquil and kingdom of Quito; 
on the zv. shore of the river of its name, but 
which is most commonly known by that of the 
district very near to it. On the n. w. opposite the 
point o^ Chama, which is towards that rhumb, 
is a hill called the Height de Picoasa, from 
whence may be discovered the vessels navigating 
that coast, and which serves as a watch-house. 
In lat. 1 % s. 

PICOI, a settlement of the province and go 
vernment of Tarma in Peru, annexed to the cu 
racy of Acobamba. 

PICOI, another settlement in the province and 
corregimiento of Chancay in Peru, annexed to the 
curacy of Canchas. 

PlCOLATA, a fort of the province and go 
vernment of Florida, on the same island as that 
on which stands the city of S. Augustin. 

PICOLER, ROCHE DU, a point on the n. coast 
of St. Domingo, in the part possessed by the 
French. It is between the shoal of Coquille- 
vielle and Port Frances. 

PICOPORO, a settlement of Indians reduced 
to the faith, of the missions held by the religious 
of St. Domingo, in the territory of the city of 
San Christoval of the Nuevo Reyno de Granada; 
situate on the shore of the river Apure. It is of 
a very hot temperature, produces cacao, maize, 
plantains, yucas, and other fruits of a warm cli 
mate, and its population is composed of 100 In 
dians, who are given to sloth. 

PICT A, a settlement of the province and go 
vernment of San Juan de los Llanos in the Nu 
evo Reyno de Granada. 

PICTA, a river of the same province ; which 
runs e. and then turning its course n. enters the 
sea in the strait of Canseau. 

PICTOU,a small island near the coast of Nova 
Scotia in N. America, and in the strait which it 
forms with the island St. John. 

PICUN, a river of the province and govern 
ment of Tucuman in Peru, which rises in the 
territory of the Puelches Indians, runs s. s. e. and 
enters the Moyalec. 

PICURIS, a river of the kingdom of Nuevo 
Mexico in N. America. 

PICURU, a small river of the district and 
territory of Cuyaba in Brtizil, which rises in the 
T 



138 



P I E 



mountains, runs ro. and unites itself with the 
Ipia^ui to enter that of Los Porrudos. 

PlCUY, an ancient province of Peru in the 
empire of the Incas ; to the n. of Cuzco. It was 
conquered and united to the monarchy by Vira- 
cocha-Incha, eighth emperor. It is now con 
founded in the division of the provinces made by 
the Spaniards after the conquest of the kingdom, 
and its limits cannot be justly defined. 

PIDGEON, a mountain on the point Ana of 
the coast of New England and province of Mas 
sachusetts in N. America. 

PIDGEON, a cape or point of land on the w. 
coast of the river St. Lawrence in Canada and 
N. America. 

PIE DE PALO, CERRO DE, a very lofty moun 
tain of the province and corrcgimtento of Cuyo 
in the kingdom of Chile, and at the source of the 
river Heuque-Leuva. 

PIEDAD, a principal and head settlement 
of the district of iheafca/dia mayor of Tlazasalca 
in Nueva Espafia, which is the ordinary resi 
dence of the alcaldes mayores of the jurisdiction. 
It contains 1 13 families of Spaniards, Mustees^ 
and Mulattoes, and 30 of Indians, and in the 
four cultivated estates of its district are 162 of 
all classes: 10 leagues n. of its capital. 

PIEDAD, another settlement, in the province 
and captainship of S. Vicente in Brazil, on the 
shore of the river Paraiba on the s. 

PIEDRA, PUNTA DE, a point on the coast of 
the province and government of Yucatan, between 
Port Sisal and El Palmar. 

PIEDRA, MONTE DE, a small isle near the 
coast of the province and captainship of Portose- 
guro in Brazil, close to the bank of Los Escollos. 

PIEDRA, GORDA, a principal and head set 
tlement of the district of the alcaldia mayor of 
the town of Leon, in the province and bishopric 
of Mechoacan ; founded at the end of the sixteenth 
century : it contains 414 families of Spaniards, 
84 ofMustees, and 43 of Mulattoes, all of whom 
are employed in agriculture and in breeding 
cattle : six leagues s. of its capital. 

PIEDRA-IMAN, SIERRA DE, mountains of the 
province and government of Buenos Ayres in 
Peru, which run from n. to s. on the coast of the 
river La Plata, between the rivers San Joseph 
and Canelones. 

PIEDRAMELLERA, a settlement of the pro 
vince and government of Nueva Santander, or 
Sierra Gorda, in the Bay of Mexico and kingdom 
of Nueva Espana : one of those founded there 
in 1748 by the Count of Sierra Gorda, Don Jo- 



P I E 

seph de Escandon, colonel of militia of Quere- 
taro, the conqueror of the country. 

PIEDRAS, a settlement of the district and 
jurisdiction of the city of Tocaima, in the go 
vernment of Mariquita of the Nuevo Reyno de 
Granada. It is very scanty and poor, of an hot 
temperature, and producing only fruits of this 
climate. It takes its name from a river thus 
called, passing near it. 

[PIEDRAS, a parish ofthe province and govern 
ment of Buenos Ayres ; situate about 10 miles 
n. e. of Maldonado, in lat. 34 45 24", long. 56 
12 4".] 

PIEDRAS, a river of the province and govern 
ment of Tierra Firme, which runs n. between 
Portobello and Port Pilon. 

PIEDRAS, another, in the province and govern 
ment of Veragua, which runs s. between the city 
of Alanje and the settlement of Bugava. 

PIEDRAS, another, a small river ofthe province 
and corregimiento of Pasto in the kingdom of 
Quito, which, at a small distance from its source, 
enters the Caqueta. 

PIEDRAS, another, ofthe province and govern 
ment of Santa Marta in the Nuevo Reyno de 
Granada, which rises in the sierra, runs n. in 
the country of the Taironas Indians, and enters 
the sea to the e. ofthe Cape St. Juan de Guia. 

PIEDRAS, another,a small river of the province 
and government of Tucuman in Peru, which 
rises in the mountains ofthe valley of Calchaqui, 
runs e. and enters the Grande of Salado, between 
the Blanco and the Concha. 

PIEDRAS, another, of the province and cap 
tainship of Portoseguro in Brazil, which runs n. 
and enters the Palmital. 

PIEDRAS, another, of the province and cap 
tainship of Todos Santos in the same kingdom 
as the former : it rises near the coast, runs s. s. e. 
and enters the sea between the Joana and the 
Ponica. 

PIEDRAS, a point of land on the coast of the 
province and captains/lip of Rio Janeyro, in Bra 
zil, between the settlements of Obrandive and 
Soapari. 

PIEDRAS, another, on the coast ofthe province 
and government of Cartagena and Nuevo Reyno 
de Granada, opposite the island Fuerte : it is 
one of the two which form the Bay of Rada. 

PIEDRAS, another, on the coast ofthe province 
and government of the Rio del Hacha in the 
Nuevo Reyno de Granada. 

PIEDRAS, another settlement, called Valle de 
las Piedras, of the government and jurisdiction 



P I E 

of Merida in the Nuevo Reyno de Granada : it 
is of a temperate climate, annexed to the curacy 
of Santo Domingo, produces much maize and 
papas, neat cattle, horses, and sheep ; and its na 
tives make large and small hampers of leather 
very nicely worked, and thus maintain a good 
commerce. It has only 50 housekeepers. 

PIED R AS, a bay, on the coast of the province 
and alcaldia mayor of Tampico in Nueva Espana 
and Bay of Mexico, between Point Delgada and 
the Tierra Blanca. 

PIEDRAS, a convenient and secure port for 
canoes and small vessels in the river and province 
of Paraguay, seven leagues from the city of 
Asuncion. 

PIEDRAS, another port, on the coast of the 
province and captainship of Pernambuco in Brazil, 
between Port Calbo and the settlement of Mon- 
gaguaba. 

PIEDRAS, some large shoals, or rocks, called 
Piedras Partidas, from their figure ; in the pro 
vince and government of Paraguay, on the shore 
of the river of this name, between the rocks of 
Itapua-quazu and Itapua-mini. 

PIERRE, S. River of the Fort of, in the island 
of Guadalupe. It enters the sea by the coast 
which looks to the n. between the fort of this 
name and the Grande A nee, thus called from a 
fort or castle which it has to defend the extremity 
of that coast. 

PIERRE, another river of the same island, 
which rises in the mountains of the 5. e. runs to 
this rhumb, and enters the sea between that of 
Baillie-argent and that of Des Hayes. 

PIERRE, a point of land, or extremity of the 
n. coast of the island of St. Domingo, in the part 
possessed by the French, between the bay of its 
name and that of Los Goanavas. 

PIERRE, a large bay in the same coast and 
island as the former, between this and the Morro 
del Diablo. 

PIERRE, another river, of the island of Mar 
tinique, one of the Antilles : it runs n. w. from 
the mountains of the n\ where it rises, and enters 
the sea between the settlement of its name and 
that of Movillage. 

PIERRE, a lake of Canada, in the territory and 
country of the Nekubanistes Indians ; formed 
from some waste waters of the other lakes. 

PIERRE, another lake of the same province, 
distinct from the former. It is a pool of water 
formed from the river St. Lawrence, between the 
city of Quebec and the island Montreal. 

PIERRE, a small island near the s. coast of 
Newfoundland; situate at the entrance of a 



PIE 



139 



channel formed by the coast of this island and 
that of Mickon. 

PIERRE, a very large sand-bank near the coast 
of the same island, Newfoundland, which extends 
from the island of its name as far as Race Cape. 

PIERRE, another sand-bank to the s. of New 
foundland ; and one of those which serve for the 
whale-fisheries. 

PIERRE, a port, on the e. coast of the island of 
St. John in Nova Scotia. 

PIERRE, a settlement of the island Cape Bri 
tain ; on the s. coast, at the entrance of the lake 
of Labrador. 

PIERRE, an isle near the e. coast of Cape Bri 
tain, between the Bay of Coul and the island 
Platte. 

[PIERRE, ST. the first town built in the island 
of Martinico in the West Indies, situated on a 
round bay on the a), coast of the island, five 
leagues s. of Fort Royal. It is a port of entry, 
the residence of merchants, and the centre of 
business. It has been four times burnt down, 
yet it contains at present about 2000 houses. 
The anchorage-ground is situate along the sea 
side on the strand, but is very unhealthy. An 
other port of the town is separated from it by a 
river, and the houses are built on a low hill, 
which is called the fort, from a small fortress 
which defends the road, which is commodious for 
loading and unloading ships, and is likewise easy 
of access ; but in the rainy season the shipping take 
shelter at Fort Royal, the capital of the island.] 

[PIERRE, ST. or ST. PETER S, a river in Loui 
siana, which empties into the Mississippi, from 
w. about 20 miles below the Falls of St. An 
thony. It passes through a most delightful 
country, abounding with many of the necessaries 
of life, which grow spontaneously. Wild rice is 
found here in great abundance, trees bending 
under loads of fruits, such as plums, grapes, and 
apples. The meadows are covered with hops, 
and many other vegetables ; while the ground is 
stored with useful roots, as angelica, spikenard, 
and ground-nuts, as large as hens eggs. On its 
e, side, about 20 miles from its mouth, is a coal 
mine. N.B. For other places named PIERRE, 
see PETER.J 

PIERRE-ROUGE, a small river of the pro 
vince and colony of Virginia ; which runs n. w. 
and enters the Ohio. On its shores are some 
large meadows or llamuras on the confines of 
Pennsylvania, and where the English fought a 
battle in the war of 1740. 

PIERS, a settlement of the island of Barba- 
does, in the s. part, near the coast. 
T 2 



140 



P I K 



PIFO, a settlement of the kingdom of Quito, 
in the district of the corregimicnto of Las Cinco 
Leguas de la Capital ; delightfully situate, and 
of an extremely agreeable climate. Its territory 
is very fertile and pleasant, and irrigated by seve 
ral streams. It is S. of the settlement of Oyam- 
baro, s.w. of that of Tumbaco, and . of Itulcache. 
in lat. 13 s. 

[PIGEON, the name of two s. zv. branches 
of French Broad River, in the State of Tennessee. 
The mouth of Little Pigeon is about 20 miles 
from the confluence of French Broad with Hols- 
ton River, and about three beloAv the mouth of 
Nolachucky. Big Pigeon falls into the French 
Broad nine miles abo^ e Little Pigeon River. 
They both rise in the Great Iron Mountains.] 

[PIGEON, a hill on Cape Ann, Massachusetts. 
See AGAMENTICUS.] 

[PIGEON, a small island, whose strong fortifi 
cations command and secure safe and good an 
chorage in Port Royal Bay, in the island of Mar- 
tinico, in the West Indies.] 

PIGNOCAS, PIGNOQUIS, or PINOCOS, a bar 
barous nation of Indians of Peru, who dwell s. 
of that of the Chiquitos : they are very numerous, 
and extend from the lake Maniore on the e. as 
far as the mountain of Yobibe to the w. The 
climate of this country is hot and moist, and con 
sequently unhealthy. These Indians are not 
known. 

PIGCJENA. See TIGRE. 

PIGWAKET, a river of the province of New 
Hampshire, one of the four of New England. 
It rises from a small lake, runs s. turns s. e. in 
the province of Continent, and enters the sea. 

PIJAGUA, a settlement of the province and 
government of Popayan in the Nuevo Reyno de 
Granada ; near the source of the river Cauca, to 
the w. of the capital. 

PIJAOS, a barbarous and ancient nation of 
Indians of the same province and kingdom as the 
former settlement. They are ferocious, warlike, 
cruel, and cannibals. United with the Manipos 
they gave much ado to the conquerors of that 
kingdom, and destroyed the cities of San Vi 
cente and Los Angeles, the first having been si 
tuate in the llanos of Saldana, the latter 22 leagues 
from Tocaima, and nine from Neiva. These 
barbarians had their cabins or dwellings on the 
tops of trees : they are now very few, and live 
retired on the mountains. 

[PIKE, Lake and River, in N. America, in 
the territory belonging to the Hudson s Bay 
Company. This lake is about 27 miles long from 
e . tow. and about 10 broad from . to s. From this 



P I L 

lake flows the river of its name, bending its 
course w. and enters an arm of Play Green Lake, 
which communicates with Lake Winnipy. Pike 
Lake is about 80 miles e. of the nearest part of 
Lake Winnipy.] 

[PIKELAND, a township in Chester County, 
Pennsylvania.] 

PILAGUIN, SANTA ROSA DE, a settlement 
of the jurisdiction of the asicnto of Ambato in 
the corrcgimiento of Riobarnba and kingdom of 
Quito : it abounds in barley, of which it reaps 
great crops, and which is esteemed to be the best 
in the whole kingdom. 

PILAHALO, a settlement of the province and 
corrcgimtento of Tacunga in the same kingdom 
as the former. 

PILALA, a lake of the province and govern 
ment of Guayana, which empties itself into the 
river Blanco by another river of its own name. 

PILAU, NUESTRA SENORA DEL, a settle 
ment of the missions which were held by the 
Jesuits in the Nuevo Reyno de Granada : founded 
in 1661 on the skirt of the Sierra Nevada by Fa 
ther Nicholas Pedroche. Its natives were very 
dirty, and were afflicted with a leprosy which 
was catching : it is on the shore of the river 
Tame, s. of the city of Pamplona. 

PILAR, another settlement, in the province of 
Barcelona and government of Cumana, s. of the 
capital. 

PILAR, another, of the missions held by the 
religious of San Francisco in the province and 
government of Texas in N. America. At the 
distance of 15 leagues from it are some very good 
and abundant saline ponds. 

PILAR, another, of the province and govern 
ment of Buenos Ayres; situate on the coast 
stretching between the river La Plata and the 
Straits of Magellan. It consists of the Puele- 
hes Indians reduced to the faith. [This parish 
lies in lat. 34 25 56", and long. 59 \3 40".] 

PILAR, another, in the province and govern 
ment of Tucuman in Peru. See MECAPILLO. 

PILAR, another, of the province and govern 
ment of Cumana ; on the shore of the river of 
its name between the coast and the interior bay 
of the Gulf of Triste. 

PILAR, the aforesaid river, rises in the Serra- 
nia on the e. part of the city of Ciriaco, runs to 
this rhurnb, and enters the sea in the Gulf of 
Triste. 

PILARES, CABO DE, or Pillar Cape, the ex 
tremity or point at the w. end of the s. coast of 
the Straits of Magellan, and one of those which 
form its mouth or entrance into the S. Sea. The 



P I L 

Nodales call it Cabo de Sejada. [It is in lat. 
52 45 *. and long. 74 52 X w. \ 

PILAS, a settlement of the province and cor 
regimiento of Yauyos in Peru ; annexed to the 
curacy of the settlement of Omos. 

PILATOS, a settlement and parish of the 
French in the part they possess in St. Domingo ; 
on the shore of the three rivers, near the settle 
ment of Plasencia. 

PILAYA Y PASPAYA, or CINTI, a province 
and corregimiento of Peru ; bounded n. e. by the 
province of Tomina, and nearly by the same 
rhumb by the province of Pomabamba ; e. s. e. 
by the territory of the infidel Chirig-uanos In 
dians ; s. and s. w. by the province of Chichas, 
and n. w. and n. by that of Porco. Its length 
from n. w. to s. e. is 30 leagues, and its width 40. 
It is intersected by many mountains, and amongst 
their ravines are situate the different settlements 
of its jurisdiction. 

It is of a moderately hot temperature, abound 
ing in fruits and seeds, and in some of the colder 
parts in the productions of the sierra. They ga 
ther here quantities of grapes, of which they 
make brandy, which is much esteemed in the 
neighbouring provinces. The rivers which lave 
this territory are the San Juan, which is very 
abundant, and has its origin in the province of 
Lipes ; the Toropalca, which enters the Chichas; 
the Cinti, which irrigates and fertilizes the valley 
to which it gives name; the Supas and the Ag- 
chilla, which run 5. and form the Paspaya, which, 
afterwards changing its course to c. incorporates 
itself with the Pilcomayo, serving as a boundary 
to this province, and dividing it from that of 
Pomabamba. 

It has many rich settlements, since the greater 
part of its inhabitants, who should amount to 
12,000 souls, are dispersed in different estates. 
The town of Playa, which was formerly the ca 
pital, was destroyed and depopulated by an ir 
ruption made by the infidel Chiriguanos Indians. 
As the territory is mountainous and rough, it is 
filled with wild beasts and noxious reptiles. The 
corregidor, since that time, resides in the valley 
of Cinti, which is delightfully pleasant, and ex 
tends for nearly 20 leagues. Paspaya experi 
enced the same misfortune as that which we 
have just observed happened to Pilaya ; both of 
these being equally on the frontiers of those 
barbarians ; but a fort has been built to restrain 
them in future in that part. In the settlement of 
Pototaca are some very abundant lead mines. 
The corregidor had a repartirniento of 37,400 
dollars, and it paid an alcavala of 299 yearly. 



P I L 



141 



PILCAYA, a settlement of the head settle 
ment of the district of Cozcatlan and alcaldia 
mayor of Tasco in NuevaEspana. It contains 
92 families of Indians, and is six leagues n. w. of 
its capital. 

PILCOMARCA, a settlement of the province 
and corregimiento of Cuenca in the kingdom of 
Quito, annexed to the curacy of the settlement 
of Azogues. 

PILCOMAYU, or PILCOMAYO, a large and 
abundant river of the province of Charcas in 
Peru. It rises from various streams which unite in 
this province, and then joins itself with the river 
Tarapaya, which runs from the province of Porco, 
collecting the waters of the Potosi, the which, 
having been employed there for the working of 
the silver, carries with it a portion of quick 
silver, and from thence it is asserted, that in the 
Pilcomayo, fish will not breed for many leagues ; 
but this is not the fact, as within this jurisdiction 
some fish, though certainly not large, are caught. 
It then incorporates itself with the Cachimayo, 
which is that which passes through Chuquisaca, 
flows down to the province of Pilaya and Paspaya, 
and through that of Tomina enters the Chaco, 
running 80 leagues, as far as the llanos of Manso ; 
from whence it follows its course amongst ex 
tremely thick forests to the s. c. and enters the 
Paraguay a little to the s. of Cidade da Asuncion 
del Paraguay. The river here swarms with fish 
of various kinds, and particularly dories, of 
from 20 to 25 pounds weight. As it is so large, 
and has its origin in the provinces of Peru, it 
was attempted in 1702 to discover a communica 
tion by it between this kingdom and the province 
of Paraguay, but without effect. 

In 1721 the Jesuits made a like attempt, and 
proceeded on their discovery in a bark with two 
boats ; but they were obliged to return, not find 
ing sufficient depth of water, after that, from 
the winding of the river, they had proceeded a 
distance of 350 leagues : they had, indeed, chosen 
a bad season, namely, the months of September, 
October, and November, when it does not rain, 
and when the rivers suffer from drought. They 
might, therefore, perhaps have succeeded at any 
other time ; and could it be effected, the object 
were very great, as a round-about journey of 
500 leagues through the province of Tucuman 
would be avoided, and the reduction of many in 
fidel nationsto the faith would be the consequence. 
This river has a beautiful stone bridge in the 
high road leading to La Plata. The Ex-Jesuit, 
Coleti, says, that it enters the Guapay ; but lie 
is deceived. 



142 



P I L 



PILCOMAYA, with the dedicatory title of 
SAN CHRISTOVAL, a settlement of the province 
and corregimiento of Yamparaes in Peru, belong 
ing to the archbishopric of Charcas. 

PILCOMAYA, a large island of the province and 
country of Chaco in Peru, formed by the river of 
its name, which divides itself into two arms to 
enter the Paraguay, inhabited by infidel In 
dians. 

PILCUj a settlement of Indians of the province 
and corregimiento of Maule in the kingdom of 
Chile ; situate on the shore of the river Biobio, 
in the part called Las Cruces; 

[PILDRAS, ST. on the e. shore of the Gulf of 
Campechy, in the Gulf of Mexico.] 

PILES, a settlement of the province and go 
vernment of Choco in the Nuevo Reyno de Gra 
nada ; on the coast of the S. Sea, and on the 
shore of the river Raposo, in the bay which is 
also called Piles. 

[PILES Grove, a township in Salem County, 
New Jersey.] 

PILETA, a settlement of the province and 
government of Cartagena in the Nuevo Reyno 
de Granada ; situate n. of the town of San Bcnito 
Abad. 

[PILGERRUH, or PILGRIM S REST, was a 
Moravian settlement of Christian Indians, on the 
scite of a forsaken town of the Ottawas; on the 
bank of a river, 20 miles n. w. of Cayahoga, in 
the N. W. Territory, near Lake Erie, and 102 
miles n. w. of Pittsburg.] 

[PILGRIM S Island, on the s. e. shore of St. 
Lawrence River, and below the island de Cou- 
dres.] 

PILLACHIQUIR, a mountain of the province 
and corregimiento of Cuenca in the kingdom of 
Quito, to the s. and to the e. of that of Chumbe. 
It rises in the river Paccha, which runs from s. to 
n. till it enters the Paute, in lat. 3 6 s. 

PILLAO, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Guanuco in Peru, annexed to 
the curacy of Santa Marta del Valle ; situate on 
the confines of the Panataguas infidel Indians. 

PILLAO, another settlement, in the province 
and government of Tarma in the same kingdom 
as the former ; annexed to the curacy of Tapu. 
[PILLAR. See PILARES, CABO DE.] 
PILLARO, a settlement of the district and 
jurisdiction oftheasientoof Ambato and province 
and corregimiento of San Miguel de Ibarra in 
the kingdom of Quito. It is to the s. of Isam- 
ba, and in its vicinity runs by the w. part the 
river San Felipe, which fertilizes its fields. The 
inhabitants of this settlement have the credit of 



being the most dexterous robbers of any in the 
kingdom. The climate is very agreeable, and 
the territory fertile, in lat. 1 \\ s. 

PILMAIQUEN, a settlement of the province 
and corregimiento of La Concepcion in the king 
dom of Chile, on the coast between this and the 
river Canchupel. 

PILOES, River of the, in the kingdom of 
Brazil. It runs s. s. e. and enters the Preto or 
La Palma. 

PILOENS, a river of the same kingdom as the 
former, which rises in the sierra of the country of 
the Araes Indians, runs n. and enters the Parau- 
pasa, to the w. of the town of Boa. 

PILON, VALLE DE SAN MATEO DEL, a set 
tlement of the Nuevo Reyno de Leon. It con 
tains 50 families of Spaniards, and the district of 
its territory is bounded by the nation of the 
Nazas Indians, who are called Pilones from some 
streaks which they have in their face, and being 
distinguished from the Nazones by the variety of 
colours. This country is watered by a river 
which is always of the same height, and by the 
irrigation of this the territory is rendered very 
abundant in sugar canes, also in breeds of large 
and small cattle, these being its productions ; 18 
leagues s. s. e. of its capital. 

PILOT, or ARARAT, some mountains of the 
province and colony of N. Carolina, which form 
a cordillera running from 5. w. to n. c. from the 
source of Little River. [See SURRY COUNTY, 
N. Carolina.] 

PILOTE, a settlement and parish of the 
French in the island of Martinique ; situate on 
the sea shore, on the ??. w. coast of Little Port. 

[PILOTO, or SALINAS DEL PILOTO, upright 
craggy rocks on the w. coast of Mexico, s. e. of 
Cape Corientes ; where there is good anchorage 
and shelter from n. w. and s. w. winds. There 
are salt-pits near this place.] 

PILOTO, a river of the same island as the 
former settlement, which runss. w. and enters the 
bay. 

[PILOT Town, in Sussex County, Delaware, 
lies near the mouth of Cool Spring Creek, which 
falls into Delaware Bay, near Lewiston, and six 
miles n. w. of Cape Henlopen.] 

PILPICHACA, a settlement of the province 
and corregimiento of Castro Virreyna in Peru, 
called de Los Cerros, as being situate in the 
cordillera. 

PILPILCO, a settlement of Indians of the 
territory of the Araucanos in the kingdom of 
Chile ; situate on the shore of the river of its 
name. 



P I M 

PILPILCO. This river runs s. s. w. and enters 
the Lebo. 

PILPINTO, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Chilques and Masques in Peru ; 
annexed to the curacy of the settlement of Accha 
Urinzava. 

PIMACHI, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Caxatambo in Peru ; annexed 
to the curacy of Hachas. 

PIMAMPIRO, a settlement of the province 
and corregimiento of the town of Ibarra in the 
kingdom of Quito ; situate e. n. e. of the capital. 
It is small and poor, of an hot temperature, but 
of a fertile soil, particularly in sugar cane ; close 
to it, on the n. passes the river Pisco, which 
afterwards unites itself with that of Angel, and 
then enters the Mira. This settlement was of 
Indians of the Pimampiro nation, from whence 
it takes its name ; but these made an insurrection 
and fled to the mountains, in lat. 24 n. 

PIMAN, a spot in the province and corre gimi- 
ento of the Villa de Ibarra in the kingdom of 
Quito to the n. It is lofty and impracticable to 
pass in the winter time. It is watered on the s. 
by the lake Yaguar-cocha, where are found 
those numbers of ancient sepulchres of the In 
dians, called Guacas. 

[PIMENT Port, a village on the s. w. coast of 
the s. peninsula of the island of St. Domingo, 4 
leagues n. w. of Coteaux, between which are two 
coves affording anchorage ; that nearest Coteaux 
is called Anse a Damassin. Port Piment is 
nearly eight leagues e. by s. ofTiburon.] 

PIMERIA, an extensive province of N. Ame 
rica which take this name from the Pimes Indians, 
who inhabit it, although here are found many 
other nations. It is bounded n. by the prevince 
ofSonora, and extends upwards of 100 leagues. 
It is divided into parts, upper and lower ; and 
both abound with streams, which fertilize the 
territory, and cause it to produce great crops of 
wheat, and fine pastures, in which breed large 
herds of cattle. 

In the n. w. part are many settlements and 
farms of Indians, who, although Christians, act 
just as though they were not ; preserving their 
perverse customs, and all the richest having their 
five or six wives apiece, and this in spite of the 
remonstrances of the missionaries of San Fran 
cisco. They are much given to agriculture, 
and besides the wheat, as aforesaid, they cultivate 
maize, lentils, French beans, and cotton. 

The richest land of this province is near the 
sea coast to the w. where there are &amp;lt;jood saline 
earths, and especially at the Bay of Coborca, 



P I M 



143 



which is ISO leagues n. w. of San Juan, and close 
to the river of San Marcos ; 50 leagues higher 
up dwell the nation of the Papagos, an extremely 
docile and mild people, who live among the in 
accessible parts of the mountains, and who come 
at different seasons to the higher part of the pro 
vince, bringing with them their children to be 
baptized ; and they make the same journey s when 
ever the missionaries require them to come to 
labour. Here is also another nation more civi 
lized, namely, that of the Sobaipuris. They are 
docile friends to the Spaniards, numerous, and live 
in rancherias in the most fertile valleys, building 
their houses of sedges woven in form of a mat. 
They sow maize and wheat, and breed some 
sheep. In the mountains and mountain plains 
are many mines which are not worked. The 
climate in this part is of a very irregular tem 
perature, being moist, cold, and windy. The 
rain and snow fall continually during the winter, 
and they last six or eight days. 

These Sobaipuris Indians are bounded by 
others, called Cocomaricopas ; amongst the which 
are some, although few, who have embraced the 
faith, persuaded by some of the missionaries who 
have made their way amongst them ; but they, 
nevertheless, do not quit their barbarous habits. 
They are at continual war with the Niojoras, with 
whom they are bounded ; the territories of the 
two being divided by a large river which collects 
many streams flowing down from the sierra 
Madre, by the n. and empties itself into the sea 
by the w. From the enmity and hatred existing 
between these two nations, the Cocomaricopas 
steal away all the children of the Niojoras that 
they can lay hands on, and sell them as slaves 
to the Pirnes : these sell them to the Spaniards, 
who buy them at a very low price and bap 
tize them, keeping them till they are instructed 
in the faith for menial purposes, but this is 
generally a very long period, owing to the na 
tural stupidity of this race, and to the difficulty of 
instructing them in the Mexican tongue. 

These Niojoras have the credit of being very 
gentle, pusillanimous, and cowardly. Their 
numbers are small. They are bounded by the 
Moquinos, who dwell in the centre of the sierra 
Madre. On the n. part, bordering on Nuevo 
Mexico, there were formerly some Christians con 
verted by the zeal of apostolical missionaries 
of San Francisco; but all having rebelled, and 
put to death the ministers of the gospel, they still 
remain in their idolatry and barbarism, \\ ithout 
their reduction ever having again been able to 
be brought about. In this province of La Pime-* 



144 



P I N 



ria less progress in civilization has been made 
than might have been wished, owing to the re 
peated invasions of the Apaches Indians ; and 
thus it is that the greater part of it is seen to be 
uncultivated and unpeopled. As some check to 
the above grievances the garrison of San Felipe 
de Jesus Guevavi was founded in 1745. 

fPIMIENTO, Port. See PIMENT.] 

PIMIENTO, another port in the same island 
and territory, by the side of the Bay of Las Goa- 
navas. 

PIMITIOVI, a settlement of the province and 
colony of Virginia in N. America; on the shore 
of a lake of the same name, between this lake and 
the river Ouramani, where the French have a 
fort built. 

The above lake is formed of an arm or waste 
water of the river Mississippi. 

PIMOCHA, a settlement of the district of Ba- 
bahoyo, in the province and government of 
Guayaquil and kingdom of Quito. 

PlMPOLLO, a settlement of the province 
and government of Tucuman, s. of the settlement 
of Ambargasta. 

PIN, PADRE, a port of the n. coast of the 
island St. Domingo, between those of Plato and 
Santiago. 

PINAGOA, a small river of the province and 
government of Quito. It enters just below its 
source into the Putumayo. Mr. Bellin calls it 
Pinaya, in his chart of the course of the Ori 
noco. 

FINAL, PUNTA DEL, a point on the coast of 
the province and government of Choco in the 
Nuevo Reyno de Granada, in the S. Sea, be 
tween the mountain or port Quemado and the 
point of Garachine. 

PIN AL, a small settlement of the province and 
government of San Juan de los Llanos of the 
Nuevo Reyno de Granada. It is of a hot tem 
perature, poor and reduced, containing not more 
than 60 Indians, who cultivate some wheat, maize, 
and plantains. 

PINANCAI, a paramo or snowy mountain of 
the district and corregimicnto of Alausi in the 
kingdom of Quito. 

PINARE, a city of the province aud captain 
ship of Para in Brazil. 

PINARE, a very abundant river of the pro 
vince of Maranan in the same kingdom, which 
rises in the mountains, runs in a very rapid 
stream from n. to s. then turns to e. s. e. and 
enters the Miari. Near its source dwell some 
barbarian Indians who have fled from the Por 
tuguese. The trees, with which its shores are 



covered, are of most exquisite wood, and some 
are of Brazil wood. In the fields of its vicinity 
are sown cotton, and there are some plantations 
of sugar cane, of which sugar is made to export 
to Europe. 

PINAS, S. MATEO DE LAS, a settlement of 
the head settlement of the district- of Ostolotepec 
and alcaldia mayor of Miachuatlan in Nueva 
Espana. It is of an hot temperature, abounding 
in cochineal and other fruits of the climate. 

PINAS, another settlement, in the province and 
corregimiento of Tunja in the Nuevo Reyno de 
Granada, at the source of the river Chire. 

PINAS, a port on the coast of the province and 
government of Darien and kingdom of Tierra 
Firme in the S. Sea. It is very c&amp;lt;fmmodious and 
sheltered from the winds, but its entrance is 
narrow and dangerous from three small islands 
at its mouth. It has afforded a constant refuge 
and asylum to the pirates of the S. Sea ; and 
here it was that the pirate named John Cliperton 
careened his vessels, who at the beginning of the 
17th century infested these coasts. 

PINAS, a river in the district of the alcaldia 
mayor of Penonome and province and kingdom 
of Tierra Firme. It rises in the mountains of 
the vicinity of that settlement, and disembogues 
itself into the N. Sea, to the w. of Chagre. 

[PINAS Island, on the coast of the Gulf of 
Honduras, is situated off Trivigillo Bay,] 

PINAY, a small river of the province and 
government of Paraguay in Peru, which runs w. 
and enters the river of that name between the 
settlements of Guararnbare and Nuestra Seiiora 
de Belen. 

PENAYUBI, a river of the same province 
and government as the former, which runs s. 
and enters the Uruguay. 

PINCET, a small port of the w. coast of New 
foundland, between the Ports Orange and San- 
ton, in then. part. 

PINCHES, a barbarous nation of Indians of 
the province and government of Mainas in the 
kingdom of Quito, to the n. of the river Pastaza. 
Some of these infidels were introduced to the 
catholic faith together with others of the nation 
of the Semigaes, and formed the settlement of San 
Joseph de Los Pinches, on the store of the same 
river, near another of its name. It belonged to 
the missions held by the Jesuits of this province, in 
lat. 2 50 30" s. 

PINCHES, the aforesaid river, rises in the 
country of the Coronados Indians, runs 5. s. e. 
and enters the Pastaza just before the former 
settlement. 



P I N 

[PINCHINA, one of the Cordilleras in S. 
America. M. Baugier found the cold of this 
mountain, immediately under the equator, to ex 
tend from seven to nine degrees under the freezing 
point every morning before sun-rise.] 

PINCHOLLO, a settlement of the province 
and corregimiento of Collahuas in Peru ; annexed 
the curacy of Chabanaconde. 

PINCHORROI, a settlement of the province 
and government of Cartagena in the Nuevo 
Reyno de Granada, of the district of Sinii ; 
formed of various small settlements, which were 
united in 1776, by the governor Don Francisco 
Pimienta. It is on the shore of the river Sinu. 

PINCK, a settlement of the island of Barba- 
does, on the extremity of the n. coast. 

[PINCKNEY, an island on the coast of S. 
Carolina.] 

[PINCKNEY, a district of the .upper country of 
S. Carolina, lying w.of Camden and Cheraw dis 
tricts ; subdivided into the counties of York, 
Chester, Union, and Spartanburgh. It contains 
25,870 white inhabitants ; sends to the state 
legislature, nine representatives, and three sena 
tors ; and in conjunction with Washington, sends 
one member to Congress. It was formerly part 
of Camden and 96 districts. Chief town, Pink- 
neyville.] 

[PINCKNEY VILLE, a post town of S. Caro 
lina, and capital of the above district, in Union 
county, on the s. w. side of Broad River, at the 
mouth of Pacolet. It contains a handsome court 
house, a gaol, and a few compact houses. It is 
79 miles n. n. w. of Columbia, and 36 w. s. w. 
from Charlottesburg in N. Carolina.] 

PINCOS, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Andahuailas in Peru ; six leagues 
irom its capital. 

PINCUS, a barbarous nation of Indians of the 
kingdom of Chile, in the province and corregimi 
ento of Coquimbo in the s. e. part. It was for 
merly very numerous and warlike, made resist 
ance to the Emperor Yupanqui, eleventh monarch 
of the Incas of Peru; and obliged him to put a 
limit to his conquests and empire on the s. part 
of the river Maule. 

PINE, a bay on the coast of the province and 
government of Louisiana, between the bays of 
Pascagoula and Mobila. 

PINE, a small river of S. Carolina, which runs 
n, w. and enters the Watery. 

PINE, another, also small, of the province and 
colony of Virginia ; which runs s. e. and enters 
the Ohio. 

[PiNE House, a settlement belonging to the 
VOL. iv. 



P I N 



145 



Hudson s Bay company ; situate on the n. side of 
Assineboine or Red River.] 

[PiNE, Cape, on the s. coast of the island of 
Newfoundland, is about eight leagues w. of Cape 
Race. Lat. 46 42 n. Long. 53 20 o&amp;gt;.] 

[PiNE Creek, in Northumberland county, 
Pennsylvania, a water of the w. branch of Sus- 
quehannah River. Its mouth is about 1 1 miles 
w. of Lycoming Creek, and 36 n. w. of the town 
of Northumberland.] 

[PINES. SeePiNos.] 

[PINE ISLAND LAKE, a lake of N. America, 
in the territory belonging to the Hudson s Bay 
company ; the river Saskashawan passes through 
this lake, and on its s. shore stands Cumberland 
house about 120 miles w. of the w. end of Lake 
Winnipy, its nearest distance.] 

PINGANTE, a river of the province and 
kingdom of Tierra Firme, to the e. of the city of 
Panama. It washes a very fertile and pleasant 
territory, and is one of the most delightful rivers 
of that country. It disembogues itself into the 
sea in the Gulf of Panama. Some call it Pinu- 
ganti. 

PINGOVIN, an island of the N. Sea, near 
the e. coast of Newfoundland. 

PINGOVINS, a small island situate near the 
coast of Port Deseado, in the coast which lies 
between the river La Plata and the straits of 
Magellan ; thus called from the number of birds 
of this name found in it. 

PINGUES, or PINGEO, a pleasant, fertile, 
and delightful spot of the province and govern 
ment of Riobamba in the kingdom of Quito ; on 
the shore of the river Patate. It belongs to the 
house of Velasco in that city, and lies in the 
territory of Ambato. It is a llanura of a very 
pleasant climate, abounding in the most choice 
fruits, and in sugar canes ; in lat. 1 22 6" s. 

PINGUINAS, some islands of the N. Sea, in 
the straits of Magellan ; situate opposite the 
point of San Silvestre. 

PINGULLA-YACA, a rapid river, which 
runs from w. to e. in the ancient province of Los 
Gayes, and enters the Bobonasa by the w. part, 
in lat. 147 *. 

PINHANGA, a town of the province and 
captainship of San Vicente in Brazil ; on the 
shore of a small river which enters the Paraiba 
del Sur, and between the towns of Jambute and 
Guratingueta to the n. and to the s. 

PINILLI, a river of the province and govern 
ment of Paraguay, which runs n. and enters the 
Picazuru, between those of Ipebra and Ibirapita- 
guazu. 

u 



146 



P I N 



PINNARI, a small river of the province and 
captainship of Maranan in Brazil, which runs e. 
and enters, by different mouths into which it is 
divided, into the bay which forms the mouth of 
the Maranan. 

PINNEBURG, a settlement of the province 
of Guayana or Nueva Andalucia, in the part 
possessed by the Dutch, in the colony of Suri 
nam ; situate on the shore of the river Cotica. 

PINO, S. BARTOLOME DEL, a settlement of 
the head settlement of the district of San Juan 
del Rio, and alcaldia mayor of Queretaro in 
Nueva Espana ; annexed to the curacy of the 
settlement of Tequisquiapan. It contains 36 
families of Indians. 

PINO, a small river of the province and govern 
ment of Maracaibo in the Nuevo Reyno de Gra 
nada. It rises n. of the city of Merida, between 
this city and the great lake of Maracaibo, and 
empties itself into it. 

PINOS, a sierra of the jurisdiction and alcaldia 
mayor of the kingdom of Nueva Galicia, and 
bishopric of Guadalaxara in N. America. It 
marks the limits of this kingdom and that of Me- 
choacan by the e. The capital, which is of the 
same name, with the dedicatory title of S. Matios, 
was formerly a real of mines, from the excellent 
silver found in its territory ; the labour of which, 
although the mines have greatly fallen to decay, 
is still sufficient for the support of the poor 
people. 

In 1720, there was discovered in a part of this 
jurisdiction, called de Los Angeles, and which is 
eight leagues n. w. of the capital, some mines 
which were worked by fire, the produce of which, 
on account of the abundance of the metals, 
was carried to the foundaries of S. Luis de 
Potosi. 

In this province dwell many families of Spa 
niards, Mustees, and Mulattoes, and some In 
dians, scattered in many cultivated estates sur 
rounding the capital ; and in these are large and 
abundant breeds of cattle. From n. to e. are 
those estates of the names of Ballena, Pendencia, 
Santa Teresa, Espiritu Santo Santa Gertrudis, 
and Santiago ; and from e. to s. are those of S. 
Martin, La Jaula, El Gallinero, and Los Ojuelos ; 
from s. to w. those of S. Nicholas, Buena Vista, 
Ajostadero, and El Lobo ; and between w. and n. 
those of Marquillos and Salitre. It has thus so 
few settlements, that they are reduced to two, 
the following ; Ojo Caliente and Cienega de 
Mata. 

PINOS, an island of the N. Sea, near the s. 
coast of the island Cuba ; from which it is sepa- 



P I N 

rated by a channel of 16 leagues long and six 
wide. It abounds in pastures and very large 
trees ; also in goats and other animals. It is de 
sert, and inhabited only by some fishermen on 
the coast. It has several very secure and well 
sheltered roads. [It is about 42 miles long, and 
34 broad, in lat. 21 38 n. long. 82 45 w.} 

PINOS, another island of the N. Sea, near the 
coast of the province and government of Darien 
in the kingdom of Tierra Firme. It is covered 
with trees, and is of a very low territory. Be 
tween its shore on the s. and the continent is a 
channel of good depth for vessels, although the 
entrance is very dangerous. The Scotch, the 
settlers of Calidonia, had inhabited it in the six 
teenth century, but since they were routed by 
the Spaniards it has remained unpeopled. Its 
figure is in the form of a horse s hoof; and the 
frog forms a port, convenient and sheltered, and 
fit for small vessels. It Is two leagues long, 
abounds in good water, and is covered with firs, 
palms, cocos, dates, oranges, lemons, and fruits 
which grow wild, and it is only used by the In 
dians in their hunting and fishing excursions. 
[It is 115 miles e.s.e. of Rio Velo, in lat. 8 
57 n. and long. 77 39 o&amp;gt;.] 

PINOS, another, a small island of the N. Sea, 
one of those called the Caicos, and of the lesser. 
It is close to the head, or w. point of the Caico 
Grande, and forms with it a small bay or port, 
in which foreign trading vessels are accustomed 
to lie at anchor. 

PINOS, a settlement with the dedicatory title 
of San Pedro, in the province and corregimiento 
of Yauyos in Peru; annexed to the curacy of 
Saraos. 

PINOTEPA, a settlement and head settle 
ment of the district of the alcaldia mayor of Xi- 
cayan in Nueva Espana, the jurisdiction of which 
comprehends other six settlements. It contains 
80 families of Indians, employed in the commerce 
of cochineal, tobacco, and seeds. Six leagues 
n. e. of its capital. 

PINOTEPA, another settlement, with the ad 
ditional title Del Rey, in the same alcaldia mayor 
and kingdom as the former. It contains 40 fa 
milies of Spaniards, 74 of Mulattoes, and 236 of 
Indians, who are occupied in the same trade as 
those of the former settlement, as also in cotton. 
Eight leagues e. of its capital. 

PINQUET, a settlement of the island of Bar- 
badoes, near the parish of S. Felipe. 

PINS, Point of, on the n. coast of Lake Erie 
of Canada in N. America. 

PINSA, a settlement of the province and cap- 



P 1 N 

tainship of S. Vicente in Brazil ; between the 
settlements of Araraz and Samambaya. 

PJNTAC, a settlement of the kingdom of 
Quito, in the district of the corregimiento of 
Las Cinco Leguas de la Capital. In its territory 
are two large estates, called Ichubamba and 
Changalvi. 

PINTAC, a mountain in that district, to the n. 
of that of Sinchulagua, sometimes covered with 
snow. Many there are who assert that it is a 
volcano, and that it has vomited bitumen in an 
cient times. 

[PINTARD S Sound, on the n. w. coast of 
N. America, sets up in an e. direction, having in 
it many small islands. Its mouth extends from 
Cape Scott, on the s. side, in lat. 50 56 , and 
long. 128 57 w. to Point Disappointment, in 
lat. 52 5 , and long. 128 50 w. It communi 
cates with the Straits de Fuca; and thus the 
lands on both sides of Nootka Sound, from Cape 
Scott to Berkeley s Sound, (opposite Cape Flat 
tery, on the e. side of the Straits de Fuca) are 
called by Captain Inj^raham, Quadras Isles.] 

[PINTCHLUCCT River, a large branch of 
the Chata Uche, the upper part of Appalachi- 
cola River.] 

PINTO, a settlement of the province and 
government of Cartagena in the Nuevo Reyno 
de Granada ; situate on the shore of the river 
Grande de la Magdalena in the district of Mom- 
pox. 

PINULA, SANTA CATALINA DE, a settlement 
of the province and kingdom of Guatemala in 
N. America, in the valley called as is the pro 
vince. It is annexed to the curacy of San Mi 
guel de Petapa, contains 490 Indians, and was 
formerly a curacy of the religious of St. Do 
mingo. 

PINZANDARO, a town and head settlement 
of the district of the alcaldia mayor of Tanzitaro 
in the province and bishopric of Mechoacan. It 
is of a warm and moist temperature, and very 
sickly through the thickness of the air. It con 
tains some families, although few, of Spaniards, 
and 47 of Mustees and Mulattoes, and in its ran- 
chos are 21 others, their occupation being the 
breeding of large and small cattle, collecting 
wild wax, maize, and fruits. Ninety-two miles 
w. of Mexico. 

PINZON, Bay of, or PINCON, on the coast 
of the province and government of Dutch Gua- 
yana or Nueva Andalucia. It is large, conve 
nient, and sheltered, and had this name from 
Vicente Yanez Pinzon or Pincon, in 1498. This 
bay has been notorious, as having been the 



P I O 



147 



boundary between the dominions of the Spanish 
and Portuguese crowns, and the point from 
whence begins the famous line of demarcation 
drawn by Pope Alexander VI., the which has 
caused so many disputes between the two king 
doms. 

PIOCAZA, a settlement of the division and 
district of Puerto Viejo, in the parish and go 
vernment of Guayaquil, and kingdom of Quito. 

PIOCOCAS, a barbarous nation of Indians 
of the kingdom of Peru; bounded by that of the 
Pequicas, and in the n. e. part by the Chiqui- 
tos. It is not altogether well known. 

PIOJON, a settlement of the province and 
government of Cartagena ; between the point of 
Zamba and the river Grande de la Magdalena. 

PION, a settlement of the province and cor- 
regimicnto of Caxamarca in Peru ; annexed to 
the curacy of Pipincos in the province of Jaen de 
Bracarnoros. 

[PIORIAS Fort and Village, OLD, in the 
N. W. territory, on the w. shore of Illinois 
River, and at the s. end of Illinois Lake ; 155 
miles from Mississippi River, and 26 below the 
Crows Meadows River. The summit on which 
the stockaded fort stood, commands a fine pro 
spect of the country to the e. and up the lake, to 
the point where the river comes in at the n. end : 
to the K&amp;gt;. are large meadows. In the lake (which 
is only a dilatation of the river, 19y miles in 
length, and three in breadth) is great plenty of 
fish, and in particular sturgeon and picannau. 
The country to the zo. is low and very level, and 
full of swamps, some a mile w r ide, bordered with 
fine meadows, and in some places the high land 
comes to the river in points or narrow necks. 
Here is abundance of cherry, plum, and other 
fruit trees. The Indians at the treaty of Green 
ville, in 1795, ceded to the United States a tract 
of 12 miles square at this fort. Lat. 40 53 n. 
Long. 88 3 w.^ 

[PIORIAS Wintering Ground, a tract of land 
in the N. W. territory, on the s. e. side of Illi 
nois River, about 40 miles above, and n. e. of 
the Great Cave, on the Mississippi, opposite 
the mouth of the Missouri, and 27 below the 
island Pierre. About a quarter of a mile from 
the river, on the e. side of it, is a meadow of 
many miles long, and five or six miles broad. 
In this meadow are many small lakes, communi 
cating with each other, and by which there are 
passages for small boats or canoes ; and one leads 
to the Illinois river.] 

[PIORIAS, an Indian nation of the N.W. ter 
ritory, who with the Mitchigamias could furnish 
u 2 



148 



P I R 



P I R 



SOO warriors, 20 years ago. They inhabit near 
the settlements in the Illinois country. A tribe 
of this name inhabit a village on the Mississippi, 
a mile above Fort Chatres. It could furnish 
about the same period 170 warriors of the Pio- 
rias and Mitchigamias. They are idle and de 
bauched.] 

PIPI, a settlement of the jurisdiction of Muzo 
and corregimiento of Tunja in the Nuevo Reyno 
de Granada; annexed to the curacy of Yacopi, 
and as reduced and poor as is this. It produces 
the same fruits, and is of the same temperature. 

PIPI, a river of the province and colony of 
Surinam, in the part of Guayana possessed by 
the Dutch ; and one of those which enter the 
Caroni. 

PIPIBOUGOI, a small river of Nova Scotia 
or Acadia, which runs e. and enters the sea in 
the strait formed by the coast and the island St. 
John. 

PIPINCOS, a settlement of the province and 
government of Jaen de Bracamoros in the king 
dom of Quito. 

PIPIOLTEPEC, SANTA MARIA DE, a settle 
ment of the head settlement of the district of 
San Francisco del Valle, and nlcaldia mayor of 
Zultepec in Nueva Espana. Haifa league n. of 
the settlement of Ahuacatlan. 

PIQUETE, a fort of the province and go 
vernment of Tucuman in Peru ; built on the 
shore of a river, to serve as a defence against 
the infidel Indians. 

PIQUETE, another fort of this province, and of 
the same name. 

PIRA, a settlement of the province and cor 
regimiento ofGuailas in Peru; annexed to the 
curacy of Pampas. 

PIRA, a river, called also Horadado, in the 
province and government of Santa Marta in the 
Kuevo Reyno de Granada: it divides this pro 
vince from that of the Rio del Hacha. It flows 
down from the mountains of the former pro 
vince, and runs n. till it enters the sea in lat. 
11 18 n. 

PIRACABI, a small river of the province and 
government of Paraguay, which runs w. and 
enters the Parana between those of Yaquini and 
Ocoy. 

PIRACAI, a river of the same province and 
government as the former; which enters the 
Uruguay between that of Uruguay-pita and that 
of Cavaguan. 

PIRACIACABA, a small river of the kingdom 
of Brazil; which rises in the mountains, runs 
from e. to w. and enters the Harihambu or Tiete. 



PIRAGUA, Point of, on the coast of the pro 
vince and government of Venezuela in the Nueva 
Reyno de Granada ; opposite the island of Aves. 

PIRAGUAS, BOCA DE, an entrance by which 
the lake of Atole empties itself into the great 
lake of Maracaibo by the w. side, in the province 
and ^government of this name in the Nuevo Reyno 
de Granada. 

PIRAGURI, or, according to others, PIRA- 
GUIRI, a settlement of the province and cap 
tainship of Para in Brazil ; on the shore of the 
river Xingu. 

PIRAJANGUARA, a river of the province 
and country of Los Amazonas ; which rises in the 
territory of the Guarinumas Indians, runs n. and 
turning its course to w. enters the Madara. 

PIRANG, a small river of the province and 
captainship of Rio Grande in Brazil. It rises 
near the coast, runs e. and enters the sea be 
tween that of Los Buzos and the Ciudad Nueva. 

PIRAPO, a small river of the province and 
captainship of Rio Janeyro, in the same kingdom 
as the former. It runs n. n. w. and enters the 
Parana-pane. On its shores stood the settle 
ment of the missions of Loreto, which were de 
stroyed by the Portuguese of San Pablo. 

PIRAPOPO, a river of the province and go 
vernment of Paraguay ; between those of Gua- 
cay and Tembes. 

PIRARA, a lake of the country of Las Ama 
zonas, between the river Maho and the sources 
of the Esquivo. It is the waste-water of an arm 
of the former. 

PIRAS, a barbarous nation, and but little 
known, inhabiting the woods near the river Ara- 
ganatuba. They go entirely naked, and main 
tain themselves by the chase, having for arms 
bows and arrows. 

PIRATINI, a river of the province and go 
vernment of Paraguay, which runs from 5. e. to 
n. w. and enters the Uruguay between those of 
Yuy and Icabaqua. 

PIRATININGA, a settlement of the pro 
vince and captainship of Rio Janeyro in Brazil ; 
one of the first founded in this kingdom at the 

beginning: of the conquest. It still remains, but 
j i j 

is very poor and reduced. 

PIRATU, a small river of the province and 
government of Paraguay ; which runs w. and en 
ters the Piratini. 

PIRATUNUNGA, a small river of the pro 
vince and captainship of Pernambuco in Brazil. 
It rises near the coast, runs e. and enters the sea 
between the Tierra and the settlement of San 
Benito. 



P I R 

[PIRAUGY, a river of Brazil, S. America, 
s. s. e. of Rio Grande and Point Negro.] 

PIRAURE, a river of the province and country 
of Las Amazonas, which rises in the territory of 
the Chirivas Indians, n. of the mountains of the 
Andes of Cuahoa, runs n. and turning e. enters 
with a large stream into the Beni. On its shores 
dwell some Portuguese, who have intruded on 
the dominions of the king of Spain, and esta 
blished themselves there. 

PIRAUSU, a mountain of the coast of Bra- 
eil, in the province and captainship of Para, 
between the point of Latigioca and the settle 
ment of Munigituba. 

PI RAY, a river of the province and govern 
ment of Santa Cruz de la Sierra in Peru. It 
rises s. of the capital, from various rivers, which, 
united, form one very large, which runs to n. n. w. 
and enters the river La Plata to encrease the 
waters of the Marmore. 

Pi RAY, another, a small river, in the pro 
vince and government of Paraguay ; which runs 
o&amp;gt;. and enters the Parana between those of Pa- 
ranuay and Aguaray. 

Pi RAY, a settlement of Chiriguanos Indians of 
the province and government of Santa Cruz de 
la Sierra ; between the river of its name and 
that of La Plata. 

PIRAY-GUAZU, a river of the province and 
government of Buenos Ayres, which enters the 
Caraguatay. 

PIRAYMINI, a river of the same province 
and government as the former, and which also 
enters the same. 

PIRAYU, a lake of the province and govern 
ment of Paraguay. It is at the foot of some 
mountains near the river Paraguay, to the e. of 
the city of Asuncion. It empties itself into this 
same river. 

[PIRAYU, a parish of the above province and 
government ; situate in a plain about 26 miles 
5. e. from Asuncion, in lat. 25 29 19" s. and 
long. 57 15 12" w.] 

PIRAYX, a river of the kingdom of Peru, 
which rises in the territory and country of the 
Chiriguanos Indians, on the n. w. part, laves the 
territory of the Juracares, and, after running 40 
leagues from s. to n. enters by the w. shore into 
the Guapay, with the name of Pesca, at 54 miles 
distance from the city of Santa Cruz de la Sierra, 
in lat. 1639 s. 

PIRCA, a settlement of the province and cor- 
regimiento of Canta in Peru ; annexed to the cu 
racy of Atabillos Altos. 



P I R 



149 



PIRHUANI, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Pilaya and Paspaya in Peru. 

[PIRIBEBUI, a parish of the province and 
government of Paraguay ; situate in the road 
from Asuncion to Villa de Curuguaty, and about 
32 miles s. e. from the former, in lat. 25 27 54" s. 
and long. 57 4 37" &amp;gt;.] 

PIRINBAI, a river of the province and go 
vernment of Maracaibo in the Nuevo Reyno de 
Granada. It rises in the island formed by the 
river Catacumbo, at its entrance into the lake of 
Maracaibo, and runs into this lake. 

PIRINOTA, a small river of the province and 
government of Guayana or Nueva Andalucia : 
one of those which enter the Cuyuni by the n. 
side. 

PIRIOS, a settlement of Dutch Guayana or 
colony of Surinam; on the shore of the river 
Marawini. 

PIRIPIRI, a settlement of the province and 
captainship of Pernambuco in Brazil ; near the 
sea-coast. 

PIRITI, a small river of the province and go 
vernment of Buenos Ayres in Peru. 

PIRITU, a province of the Nuevo Reyno de 
Granada ; bounded by that of Venezuela on the 
e. at the Cape of Codera and by that of Cumana, 
on the w. by the river and vallies of Santa Fe. 
Its length of coast between the two aforesaid 
provinces is 70 leagues ; and its climate is in 
tolerably hot during calms, but temperate when 
the breezes are up. In the time of the rains the 
heat is more intense, from the vapours which ex 
hale from the earth ; and these begin from the 
month of June and last till October. The rains 
in common years are almost daily, and always 
attended with storms of thunder and lightning. 
The days are equal. 

This province is watered by many rivers, all 
of which run into the sea : the Pertigalete, Gu- 
antar, N every, Huare, Uchire, Cupira, Paparo, 
Higuerote, and Curiepe. 

On its coast are some bays, and convenient 
ports, which abound in fish of various kinds, and 
in shell-fish, of which the natives are very fond. 
Also in the mountains are a great variety of wild 
beasts, lions, tigers, very large and fierce ; two 
kinds of bears, antas, sanos ; porcupines, rabbits, 
squirrels, and four different sorts of monkies, 
one only of which, called araguata, is eaten by 
the Indians: these are large, of a red colour, and 
have long beards like goats. Here also breed 
numbers of deer, and plenty of noxious creatures, 
such as snakes of different species, rattle-snakes, 



150 



P I R I T U. 



ant-eaters, which they here call quiagucquenoto ; 
centipes, scorpions; very large spiders, black 
and hairy ; ticks, and musquitoes of many sorts, 
so troublesome, that it is impossible to sleep 
without a musquito-net. These latter insects 
sometimes appear in a cloud, obscuring- the sun. 
Here are also reremice, which, although preju 
dicial, since they sometimes bite the tops of the 
fingers of a person asleep, have the property of 
eating up the musquitoes, there being some of 
these latter most troublesome insects, which leave 
in the puncture the seed for a worm which breeds 
within the cutis, causing incredible pain unless it 
be killed with tobacco. 

This province is no less plagued with noxious 
ants, but there is a great, rare, and excellent variety 
of birds, as of parrots, which learn with greater 
facility to speak the Indian than the Spanish lan 
guage ; coloras, which are very loquacious ; car- 
denales, of a most beautiful colour ; and another 
bird, as small as the goldfinch, of a green colour, 
with the union of the wings blue, and the beak 
curved ; which imitates the song of the other 
birds, and is called by the Indians pupitiri ; an 
other called turicha, which has the breast and 
wings bl ck and white, and the rest of the body 
orange, and which is domesticated so as to eat 
from the hand or the table. Here are also par 
tridges, which, although resembling the Euro 
pean, are much larger and of a different colour 
and note ; quails, doves, turtle-doves, geese, 
white and black turkies with yellow feet, and 
wild fowl. 

This province was peopled by Indians of the 
nations of the Cumanagotos, Palenques or Gua- 
tines, Cores, Tumuzas, Chaimas, Farautes, Cua- 
cas, Arvacas, Caribes, and others. Its conquest 
was proposed to the king by Don Juan de Urpin, 
native of the principality of Cataluna ; when it 
fell out that the natives surrendered themselves 
up, seeking a peace. This person then founded 
the city of Barcelona, at a distance from that of 
the present day. A short time after he died, and 
was succeeded by Captain Diego de Urbes ; but 
the violences offered by the Indians induced 
his majesty Philip to ask the opinion of Don 
Fernando Lobo, bishop of Puerto Ilico, to whose 
diocess the province belonged : and this dignitary 
having returned for answer, that these Indians 
were rather to be conquered by mild than coer 
cive measures, and that the peaceful influence of 
the gospel would tend more to ensure their obe 
dience than the force of arms ; the monarch 
caused to be sent thither some religious of the 



order of San Francisco, who entered the province 
in 1656 from the convent of Abrojo ; and whoj 
with their commissary Fr. Juan de Mendoza, 
who had been provincial in Florida, and with 
others who have since succeeded to the mission, 
have reduced to the Catholic faith those infidels, 
founding 40 settlements which still exist, and in 
which dwell 12,000 Indians, and are as fol 
lows : 

Nra. Sra. de la Con- 
cepcion del Piritu, 

Sta. Clara de Lapata, 

S. Antonio de Mana- 
reima, 

S. Joseph de Chigua- 
tacuar, 

S. Miguel de A rave - 



neicuar, 
Jesus, Maria y Joseph 

de Caigua Patar, 
S. Antonio de Carines, 
Ntra. Sra. del Pilar de 

Guaimacuar, 
S. Juan Evangelista 

de Aguaritacuar, 
San Buena ventura de 

Chacopata, 
Mucuras, 
San Pedro Regalado 

de Cabrutico, 
S.Diego de Chacopata, 
S. Francisco de Cutu- 

aeuar, 
San Bernardino Guer- 

tecuar, 
San Pablo de Mata- 

ruco, 
Santisimo Christo de 

Pariaguan, 

Ntra. Sra. de los Do 
lores de Quiamare, 



Sta. Cruz de Cachipo, 
Sta. Clara de Aribe, 
Encarnacion de Mus- 

tacu, 
San Joseph de Cura- 

taquiche, 

San Juan del Guarive, 
Atapiriri, 
San Francisco Solano 

del Platonar, 
San Juan Evangelista 

del Tucuyo, 
San Juan Capistrano 

de Puruey, 

Holoanillo, 

San Diego de Cua- 

cuar, 
Santo Domingo de 

Araguita, 
San Pedro Alcantara 

de Chupaquire, 
San Mateo de Ori- 

tuco, 

Santa Ana, 
Santa Barbara, 
S. Joaquin de Pariri, 
Sta. Rosa de Ocopi, * 
Nra. Sra. de Chama- 

riapa, 
S. Antonio de Guazai- 

paro. 



It takes the name of Piritu from the country or 
territory inhabited by its natives, from the abun 
dance of a species of small palm found here, the 
fruit of which resembles unripe grapes, and 
having the trunk like a cane, covered with thorns 
very black, and so strong and close, as to be used 
for pipes for smoking, it resisting very strongly 
the influence of fire. If any one wishes to in 
struct himself further on the subject of this ar 
ticle, let him see the conversion of the Indians 
of Piritu, written by the Father, Fr. Matias Ruiz 
Blanco ; also the history of Nueva Andalucia, by 



PIR 



PIS 



151 



jpr. Antonio Caulin ; both missionaries of the 
order of San Francisco in this province. 

PIRITU, the capital, is the settlement of the 
game name, with the dedicatory title of Nuestra 
Seiiora de la Concepcion : founded in 1656 by 
Fr. Juan de Mendoza, commissary of the first 
missionaries of the order of San Francisco, who 
entered to preach the gospel there. It is situate 
in a moderate-sized ravine, which is surrounded 
by a serrania, about If miles from the sea, and 
15 from the city of Barcelona. The territory is 
scant of water, and the inhabitants are obliged 
to cultivate the lands at a league s distance : but 
it abounds in exquisite fish and shell-fish, as 
also in neat cattle. It has a magnificent church, 
the best of all that bishopric. Its population, at 
the present day, amounts to 1600 souls of all 
ages, who are of good dispositions and laborious, 
constant in the faith and friendly to the Spaniards. 

PIRITU, some isles of the N. Sea, situate near 
the coast of the former province, from which 
they are named : they are two in number, desert, 
and lie vs. of the city of Barcelona. 

PIROS, a barbarous and cruel nation of In 
dians dwelling in the woods near the river Uca- 
yale, e. and n. of the rivers Yapati and Manua, 
in the province and country of Las Amazonas. 
It is very numerous, and at continual war with 
the Cunivps. These Indians were reduced to the 
Catholic religion by the Jesuits ; but they sud 
denly rose and put to death their vicar Enrico 
Ricter, and betook themselves to the woods, re 
turning to their idolatry : in 1764 their reduction 
was again undertaken, and for this purpose there 
entered amongst them some of the religious of 
San Francisco, of the province of Lima. 

PIROYOL, a small river of the province and 
government of Venezuela in the IN uevo Reyno 
de Granada : it rises near the town of Sail Se 
bastian to the n. runs w. and enters the Guarico. 

PIRQUE, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Quispicanchi, in Peru, annexed 
to the curacy of Papres. 

PIRQUI, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Santiago in the kingdom of Chile; 
near the head of the river Maipo. 

PIRRI, a settlement of the province and go 
vernment of Darien and kingdom of Tierre- 
Firme ; on the shore of the river of its name, 
near its mouth. 

PIRRI, this river rises in the mountains of 
the 5. part, runs n. and enters the Grande de Tuira. 

PIRU. See PERU. 

PIRUBIPIBA, a river of the province and 
captainship of Espiritu Santo in Brazil, It rises 



in the mountains, runs n. and enters the Para- 
catus. 

PIRUMA, a settlement of Indians of the dis 
trict of Puchacay in the kingdom of Chile ; on 
the shore of the river Hueda, and to the w. of the 
town of the Nombre de Maria. 

PIRUSAI, a river of the province and go 
vernment of Esmeraldas in the kingdom of Quito : 
it runs from s. e. to n. w. and, after collecting the 
waters of the Nambillo and Canchupi, turns its 
course to w. laves the settlement of Mindo, which 
is on its n. shore, and, after being united with the 
Chaloya, takes the name of Rio Blanco, and, 
with others, augments the stream of the Gual- 
labamba, and forms that of Esmeraldas, in lat. 27 X . 

PISAGUA, or PISAHUA, a settlement of the 
province and corregimiento of Arica in Peru, an 
nexed to the curacy of the settlement of Camifia, 
with a port in the S. Sea. In it is caught 
abundance of fish by the natives, which is carried 
for sale to the internal provinces of the kingdom : 
inlat. 19 40 s. 

PISAGUA, a small river of this province and 
kingdom, which rises in the Cordillera from three 
or four streams, which unite, runs w. and enters 
tne sea opposite the rocks. 

PISAGUA, a part of the kingdom of Quito, in 
the province of Chimbo, of the road which leads 
to the settlement of Bodegas. It is noted from 
the danger attached to it, in its being so deep of 
mud from the quantities of water. 

PISANO, or PESANO SANTA CATALINA, a 
settlement of the missions held by the religious 
order of San F/ancisco, in the province of Caxa- 
marquilla and kingdom of Peru : on the shore 
of the river of its name. 

PISANO, the aforesaid river rises in the sierra 
which divides this province from that of Luya 
and Chillaos, runs e. and enters the Maranon. 

PISBA, a settlement of the jurisdiction of 
Santiago de las Atalayas in the province and go 
vernment of San Juan de los Llanos in the Nuevo 
Reyno , de Granada. It is of an hot tempera 
ture, but more mild than that of the other settle 
ments of this province : it abounds in goats, and 
is very fertile in maize, yucas^ plantains, and 
cotton, of which a portion of linen is made, and of 
which is its chief commerce : 32 leagues fromTunja. 

[PISCA, a town of the audience of Lima in 
Peru. See PiscoJ 

[PISCADORES, or FISHERS, two great rocks 
on the coast of Peru, in lat. 16. 19 s. near the 
broken gap between Attico and Ocona.] 

[PISCADORES, rocks above the town of Callao, 
in Peru j five leagues n. n. w. of Callao Port : 



152 



PIS 



they are six in number ; the largest is w. of the 
port of Ancon de Rhodas, and three leagues s. e. 
of Chaucai Port.] 

PISCATAQUA, a port of the N. Sea, on the 
coast of the province of Continent, one of those 
of New England in N. America, where its boun 
daries touch upon the boundaries of New Hamp 
shire. It is formed by the river of this name, 
which runs 40 miles, and it is the only port in 
this province : moreover, the river for 15 miles 
appears rather a ditch than a river. It has at 
its entrance the island of Newcastle, of 1| miles 
long, and 1$ wide. This river is navigable for 
large vessels nine miles above the w. arm of the 
Exeter. [This port and river are more gene 
rally known by the title of PASCATAQUA, which 
see ; also Index to Additional History concern 
ing Massachusetts. Anno 1641.] 

[PISCATAQUA, Head. See YORK COUNTY, 
Maine.] 

[PISCATAQUA, the ancient name of lands in 
the district of Maine, supposed to comprehend 
the lands known by the name of Kittery and 
jRfti*\vick I 

PISCATAWAY, a city of the County of Mid 
dlesex in New Jersey. It contains 90 families, 
who possess 40,000 acres of land ; and is situate 
on the shore of the river Raritan, 6 miles from 
its mouth. [It has, at present, upwards of 3000 
inhabitants, including 300 slaves. It is 3| miles 
n.e. of New Brunswick, and 14 s. w. of Elizabeth 
Town.] 

[PISCATAWAY, a small post town of Prince 
George s County, Maryland ; situate on the creek 
of its name which runs v). into Patowmac River, 
opposite Mount Vernon in Virginia, and 13 miles 
s. of the Federal City. The town is 1 1 miles 
s. w. of Upper Marlborough, 14 w. of Port To 
bacco, and 38 5. w. by s. of Baltimore.] 

PISCATAWAY, a small river of the province 
and colony of Virginia, which runs e. and enters 
the Rapahanock, near its mouth. 

PISCO, a town of the province and corrcgi- 
miento of lea in Peru ; founded by order of the 
Marquis of Canete on the coast of the S. Sea, 
with a good port, much frequented by vessels, 
and abounding in fish, which the Indians salt, 
and carry to sell in the interior provinces. Its 
territory is extremely fertile in wheat, oil, maize, 
and especially in vines, of which is made a wine 
much esteemed for its quality throughout Peru. 
It was formerly a large and rich town, but now 
much reduced through the misfortunes it has ex 
perienced : the first, when it was sacked by the 
Dutch pirate James Hermit Clerk (whom the 



PIS 

Ex-Jesuit Coleti names Termin, and makes aft 
Englishman), in 1624 ; afterwards by Edward 
David, in 1G86; and at last it was quite de 
molished by an earthquake in 1687, and not in 
1682, as that author asserts ; the sea completely 
inundating it, and when it was, on that account, 
removed to the place where it now stands. It 
has two convents of religious ; the one of San 
Francisco ; the other of San Juan de Dios, with 
a good hospital ; and it had a small college of 
the Jesuits: 118 miles in a s. direction from 
Lima, in long. 76 9 a. lat. 13 46 s. 

Pisco, a river of the province and corregimi 
ento of the town of Ibarra in the kingdom of 
Quito. It runs w. through the territory of the 
settlement of Pimampiro, and then unites itself 
with the river of Los Angeles, in lat. 29 n. 

PISCHILIN, a river of the province and go 
vernment of Popayan in the Nuevo Reyno de 
Granada, which enters the Putumayo at a small 
distance from its source. 

PISCOBAMBA, a settlement of the province 
and corregimiento of Andahuailas in Peru, an 
nexed to the curacy of Ongoy. 

PISCOBAMBA, another settlement in the pro 
vince and corregimiento of Conchucos in the same 
kingdom. 

PISCOPAMBA, an ancient province of Peru 
in the time of the Incas ; now united.to that of 
Cuzco : conquered and united to the empire by 
Pachacutec, tenth emperor, after a long and 
bloody war. 

PISMANTA, a settlement of Indians of the 
province and corregimiento of Coquimbo in the 
kingdom of Chile, on the skirt of the volcano of 
Coquimbo. 

PISQUE, an abundant river of the kingdom 
of Quito, which rises in the mountain or paramo 
of Cayamburu on its x&amp;gt;. part, collecting the waters 
which flow by the s. from the Moxanda, and, 
following a w. course, enters the Guaillabamba. 

PISQUE, LADERA DE, a part of the road bor 
dering on the skirt of the mountain below which 
runs the former river. It is of a great extent, 
but very narrow and dangerous in some parts, 
so as to have become noted. It is in the direct 
road from the town of Ibarra to Quito. 

[PISS-POT, a bay on the s. shore of the 
Straits of Magellan, in the Long Reach, eight 
leagues w. by w. of Cape Notch, lat. 53 20 s. 
long. 73 28 w.l 

PISTOLA, CANO DE, an arm which runs from 
the river S. Felipe, after that this issues from the 
Gamalotal. 

PISTOLES, a river of Canada in N. Ame- 



P I T 



P I T 



15;) 



rrca; an arm issuing from the river St. Lawrence. 
It runs n. e. in Nova Scotia or Acadia, and enters 
the lake Modovia, forming in its course various 
other small lakes. 

[PISTOLET, a large bay at the n. end of 
Newfoundland, setting up from the Straits of 
Bellisle. Its w. side is formed by Cape Norman, 
and its e. point by Burnt Cape; three leagues 
apart.] 

PISUA, a settlement of Indians of the Mos- 
cas or Muiscas nation in the Nuevo Reyno de 
Granada : situate on the skirt of the mountains 
of Bogota, at the entrance of the lianas of San 
Juan. It is of a very hot temperature, and al 
though its district is small, produces abundance 
of maize and cotton. 

PIT, a county of the district of Newburn in 
N. Carolina. 

PITA, a rapid river of the kingdom of Quito 
in the e. s. e. part. It flows from the mountains 
and volcano of Cotopaxi, and runs with the name 
of the Rio del Pedregal as far as Ichubamba, 
where it precipitates down a beautiful cascade, 
called the Fall of Ichubamba ; and it then runs 
to fertilize the valley or llanura of Chillo with 
the name of Pita, passes near the spot where 
stands the royal college of Quito, called De 
Allangasi, and, at the foot of the mountain of 
Guangopolo, unites itself with the river Ama- 
guana, and in this place takes the name of Las 
Juntas. These two rivers, united, form the 
Tumbaco, which makes to itself a new channel, 
penetrating a hill of stone so as to form a natu 
ral bridge. The spot of Las Juntas is in lat, 
IV s. 

PITAHUA, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Filcas Huaman in Peru, annexed 
to the curacy of Huancapi. 

PITANCrUI, u settlement of the province and 
captainship of Rey in Brazil ; on the share and 
at the source of the river Tubagi. 

PITANTORA, a settlement of the province 
and corregimienlo of Chayanta or Charcas, in 
Peru. 

PITANZA, a settlement of the French in 
their possessions of the island St. Domingo : the 
Spaniards burnt and destroyed it in 1691. 

PITAYO, a settlement of the province and 
government of Popayan in the Nuevo Reyno de 
Granada. 

[PITCAIRN S Island, in the S. Pacific Ocean, 
is six or seven miles in length and two in breadth. 
It has neither river nor harbour ; but has some 
mountains which may be seen 15 leagues off to 

VOL. IV. 



the *. e. All the s. side is lined with rocks. Lat. 
25 2 s. long. 133 21 w. The variation of the 
needle off this island, in 1767, was 2 46 e.l 

PITI, a settlement of the ancient province of 
Llanahuara in Peru : of a very cold temperature, 
and of a barren territory, though abounding in 
good pastures, in which breed plenty of cattle, 
the best in that province. 

PITIC, a settlement of the province and cor 
regimiento of Cotabambas in Peru. 

PITIPITI, VIEGO, a settlement of the corre 
gimiento and province of Cercado in Peru. It is 
as it were a suburb of Callao, and in which dwell 
only some Indian fishermen. 

PITIPITI, another settlement in this province, 
with the additional title of Nuevo, to distinguish 
it from the other, to which it is very near. 

PITIQUI, SAN DIEGO DE, a settlement of the 
province and government of Sonora in Nueva 
Espana : on the shore of a river of the same 
name, between the settlements of Uquitoa and 
Caborca ; where there is a fortress furnished 
with troops for the defence of that country. 

PITIQUI, the aforesaid river, runs w. and en 
ters the sea in the Gulf of California. 

PITIQUIN, a settlement of the same pro 
vince and government as the former : distinct 
from it, if perchance it be not a mistake of Don 
Joseph de Villa-senor, in his chart of Nueva 
Espana and its internal provinces, published un 
der the title of Iconismo Hidrografico. 

PITO, a river of the province and govern 
ment of Darien and kingdom of Tierra Fierme, 
which rises in the mountains of the n. part, and 
enters the sea between the Bay of Calidonia and 
Cape Tiburon. 

[PITON Point, GREAT, the s. w. point of 
the island of St. Lucia, in the W. Indies, and 
the most w. point of the island. It is on a kind 
of a peninsula, the n. part of which is called 
Point Chimatchin.] 

PITOS, SAN Luis DE Los, a fort of the pro 
vince and government of Tucuman in Peru ; on 
the shore of the river of Pasage or Salado, and 
n. w. of the settlement of Nuestra Seiiora del 
Pilar, to restrain the infidel Indians. 

PITRACHIQUI, a settlement of the missions 
which were held by the Jesuits in the province of 
Taraumara and kingdom of Nueva Vizcaya : it 
is 36 leagues w. s. w. of the town and real of 
mines of San Felipe de Chiguagua, and has in 
its vicinity some large estates, called Teubachi, 
Cogimapuchi, and Lechuguilla. 

[PITT, a county of N. Carolina, in Newberw 



154 



P I T 



district, bounded n. e. by Beaufort, and s. w. by 
Glasgow. It contains 8275 inhabitants, includ 
ing 2367 slaves. Chief town, Greenville.] 

[PiTT, Fort, formerly Fort du Quesne. See 
PITTSBURG.] 

[PITTSBOROUGH, or PITTSBURG, the ca 
pital of Chatham County, N. Carolina, is situate 
on a rising ground, and contains a court-house, 
gaol, and about 40 or 50 houses. The country 
in its environs is rich and well cultivated ; and 
is much resorted to from the maritime parts of 
the state in the sickly months. The Hickory 
Mountain is not far distant, and the air and 
water here are as pure as any in the world. It 
is 21 miles s. of Hilsborough, 29 w. of Raleigh, 
and 39 n. n. w. of Fayetteville.] 

[PITTSBURGH, a post-town of Pennsylva 
nia, the capital of Alleghany County, situate on 
a delightful plain running to a point. The Al 
leghany, which is a beautiful clear stream, on 
the n. and the Monongahela, which is a muddy 
stream, on the s. uniting below where Fort du 
Quesne stood, form the majestic Ohio, which is 
there a quarter of a mile wide ; 1188 miles from 
its confluence with the Missisippi, and 500 above 
Limestone, in Kentucky, including the windings. 

This town was laid out on Penn s plan, in the 
year 1765, on the e. bank of the Monongahela, 
about 200 yards from Fort du Quesne, which 
Was taken from the French, by the British, in 
1760, and who changed its name to Fort Pitt, in 
honour of the late Earl of Chatham. It contains 
between 150 and 200 houses, a gaol, court-house, 
Presbyterian church, a church for German Lu 
therans, an academy, two breweries, and a dis 
tillery. It has been lately fortified, and a party 
of troops stationed in it. By an enumeration 
made Dec. 1795, it appears that there were then 
1353 inhabitants in this borough; the number 
has since increased to upwards of 2000, the 
most opulent of whom are Irish. 

The manufactories are described by Mr. Ashe 
as being various and flourishing, particularly 
that of glass ; and ship-building is practised to a 
considerable extent. In October, 1806, there 
were several vessels of 350 tons on the stocks. 
Through Pittsburg is carried on an extensive 
trade to the distant ports of Philadelphia and 
New Orleans. Here are storekeepers, who ex 
change the produce of the surrounding coun 
tries, within a circle which embraces a space of 
not less than 5650 miles. 

The hills on the Monongahela side are very 
high, extend down the Ohio, and abound with 



P 1 T 

coals. Before the revolution, one of these coal- 
hills, it is said, took fire, and continued burning 
eight years, when it was effectually extinguished 
by part of the hill giving way and filling up the 
crater. On the back side of the town, from 
Grant s Hill, (so called from his army being 
here cut to pieces by the Indians) there is a 
beautiful prospect ot the two rivers, wafting 
along their separate streams till they meet and 
join at the point of the town. On every side, 
hills covered with trees, appear to add simplicity 
and beauty to the scene. 

At the distance of 100 miles up the Alleghany 
is a small creek, which, in some places, boils or 
bubbles forth, like the waters of Hell Gate, in 
New York State, from which proceeds an oily 
substance, deemed by the people of this country 
singularly beneficial, and an infallible cure for 
weakness in the stomach, for rheumatic pains, 
for sore breasts in women, bruises, &amp;c. The 
oil is gathered by the country people and In 
dians, who boil it and bring it to Pittsburg for 
sale ; and there is scarcely a single inhabitant 
who does not possess a bottle of it, and is able 
to recount its many virtues, and its many cures. 

The navigation of the Ohio, in a dry season, 
is rather troublesome from Pittsburg to the Min- 
go Town, about 75 miles by water, but from 
thence to the Mississippi there is always water 
enough for barges carrying from 100 to 200 tons 
burden, such as are used on the river Thames, 
between London and Oxford, viz. from 100 to 
to 120 feet keel, 16 to 18 feet in breadth, four 
feet in depth, and when loaded drawing about 
three feet water. During the season of the floods 
in the spring, vessels of 100 or 200 tons burden 
may go from Pittsburg to the sea with safety, in 
16 or 17 days, although the distance is upwards 
of 2000 miles. It is 132 miles w. of Carlisle ; 
233 in the same direction from Philadelphia; 
163 n. w. of Washington in Maryland. Lat. 40 
27 n. Long. 80 o&amp;gt;.] 

[PITTSF1ELD, a pleasant post-town of Mas 
sachusetts, situate on the w. line of Berkshire 
County, six miles n. of Lenox, 28 w. of North 
ampton, 104 w. of Boston, and 22 s. e. of Al 
bany. This township, and those n. and s. of it, 
on the banks of Housatonic river, are in a rich 
vale from one to seven miles wide. It was in 
corporated in 1761, and contains 1992 inhabit 
ants. The place of worship is a very handsome 
edifice, with a bell and cupola, from which there 
is a charming prospect.] 

[PITTSFIELD, a township of New Hampshire, 



P I T 

situate in Rockingham County. It was incorpo 
rated in 1782, and contains 888 inhabitants. It 
was taken from Chichester, on Suncook river, 
. e. of Concord.] 

[PITTSFIELD, the north-easternmost township 
of Rutland County, Vermont, containing 49 in 
habitants. It has Chittenden township on the 
*. w. and Philadelphia, in Addison County, on 
the n. wJ\ 

[PITTSFORD, a township of Vermont, in 
Rutland County.] 

[PITT s Grove, a village in Salem County, 
New Jersey.] 

[PITT S Island, on the n. w. coast of N. Ame 
rica, lies near the main land, about half way 
from Dixon s Entrance to Prince William s Sound, 
and between Cross Sound and Port Banks.] 

[PITTQUOTTING, an Indian settlement in 
the N. W. Territory, at the mouth of Huron 
river, which empties into Lake Erie.] 

[PITTSTOWN, a post-town of the district of 
Maine, situate in Lincoln County, on Kennebeck 
river, five miles below Hallowell Hook, 15 n. 
by w. of Wiscasset, 49 n. by e. of Portland, and 
123 n. by e. of Boston. It contained, in 1790, 
605 inhabitants. The w. part, called Cobisey or 
Cobesey, has an episcopal church, with an an 
nual income of 28 guineas, given by Dr. Gardi 
ner for the support of an episcopal minister.] 

[PITTSTOWN, a post town of New Jersey, in 
Hunterdon County, on the w. head waters of 
Rariton river, 10 miles e. by n. of Alexandria 
on Delaware river, 23 n. of Trenton, and 32 
n. n. e. of Philadelphia.] 

[PITTSTOWN, a township of New York, in 
Rensselaer County. It is bounded s. by Rens- 
selaerwyck and Stephentown, and n. by Schac- 
tekoke and Cambridge. In 1790 it contained 
2447 inhabitants, including 33 slaves ; 419 of 
its inhabitants, in 1796, were electors.] 

[PITTSYLVANIA, a county of Virginia, be 
tween the Blue Ridge and the Tide Waters; 
bounded s. by the state of N. Carolina, and n. 
by Campbell County. It contains 11,252 inha 
bitants, including 5932 slaves.] 

PITUHUANCA, a settlement of the province 
and corrcgimiento of Cochabambos, in Peru. 

PITU1, or PIRITU, some islands of the N. 
Sea, contiguous to the coast of the kingdom of 
Tierra Firme, in the province of Barcelora, and 
government of Cumana. There are six, and 
serve as a sheltering place for Dutch traders, 
which go to carry on an illicit commerce on that 
coast, opposite the settlement of Piritu. 
PITUMARCA, a settlement of the province 



P I U 



155 



and corregimiento of Tinta, or Canes and Canches, 
in Peru, annexed to the curacy of the settlement 
of Checacupi. 

PITRES, a river of the island of Guadeloupe, 
which runs w. and enters the sea in the bay of 
the Petit Cul de Sac. On its shores is a castle 
or fort, to defend the entrance of the port. 

PIURA, a province and corregimiento of the 
kingdom of Peru, in the bishopric of Truxillo : 
bounded n. e. by the province of Loxa, of the 
kingdom of Quito ; e. by that of Jaen de Braca- 
moros, of the same kingdom ; s. e. by the district 
of Huambos, of the province of Caxamarca; w. by 
the S. Sea, and n. w. by the Bay of Guayaquil. 
Its length is 66 leagues from n. to s. including the 
unpeopled tract of Sechura, and 14 in width. 

Its temperature is that of the other provinces 
of the coast, of no very intense heat, but mode 
rately cool and healthy, with the exception of 
that part which looks to the sierra, where the 
heat is felt somewhat stronger, but not so much 
as in the cordillera of the s. part of the king 
dom, as the country is not so elevated from Con- 
chucos towards the n. as in other parts where the 
cordillera runs. It abounds greatly in maize, 
cotton, sugar, which they make here of excellent 
quality ; pita, wheat, vetches, French beans, 
melons, quinces, and other European fruits ; but 
its principal commerce consists in soap and tan 
ned leather, which are carried for sale to the 
other provinces of the kingdom, to Quito, and 
exported to Panama. Here are also plenty of 
goats, herds of which are found over a great part 
of the province of Sana, and of the fat of which 
they make soap. There are many wild beasts in 
the woods : and these are crowded with various 
trees, of different sorts of wood, though those 
which abound most are the oaks, which are very 
large, strong, and incorruptible; the bridges of 
the river Lambayeque and those of other bridges 
being built on piles of the same timber, and 
which have lasted since the conquest of the king 
dom : on the acorns of these trees the goats 
fatten. Near the settlement of Amotape, to 
wards the coast, is a mine of naphta or bitumen, 
which is black and durable, and serves for ca 
reening vessels in lieu of pitch, although it be 
commonly used mixed with this. 

This province is watered by some rivers, which 
are considerable only in the months that it rains 
in the sierra. The principal are, the Tumbez 
towards the n. the Chira to the s. of the pro 
vince, and that which passes by the capital. The 
two latter have their source in the cordillera, to 
wards the province of Loxa, and empty them- 



15(5 



P I U 



P L A 



selves into the S. Sea. The latter is near the 
settlement of Sechura. On the shore of its dis 
trict is found quantities of the fish called tollo, 
which is the cod of Peru and Quito. It has a 
tolerably good port called Paita, where vessels 
arriving from Panama and other parts come to 
anchor. The inhabitants of this province amount 
to 11,000, divided into 26 settlements. The 
corregidor had a repartimiento of 50,000 dollars, 
and it paid an alcabala of 400 annually. 

The capital is of the same name with the de 
dicatory title of San Miguel: the first town 
founded in Peru by Don Francisco Pizarro, in 
1531, and where was erected the first temple 
wherein w r orship was offered to the true God in 
S. America. Its first situation was in the llanura 
of Targosala, from whence it was, a little after, 
translated to the part where it now stands, in an 
extensive sandy llanura, the former spot being 
unhealthy, which is not the case with this latter ; 
for it is, besides, of a delightful climate, with fine 
pure air, particularly for such as are recover 
ing from the venereal disease, which is cured 
with great ease in its hospital; so that patients 
come hither from the other provinces for this 
purpose, as also to benefit by the waters of the 
river, which runs amongst woods of zarzaparilla. 
Its territory is very fertile, and produces much 
Cotton, sugar, pita, maize, and other fruits. Its 
population consists of upwards of 7000 souls, 
and amongst them are many noble and grand 
families. Here are convents of the religious 
orders of San Francisco, La Merced, and an hos 
pital of the Bethlemite fathers. The church of 
Nuestra Senora del Carmen was destined for the 
Jesuits of the province of Quito, who had found 
ed a college there. It is the residence of the 
corregidor, and of the treasury and royal chests, 
and their ministers, who resides sometimes in the 
city, and at other times at the port of Paita. It 
suffered much from an earthquake in 1619: 480 
miles n. n. w. from Lima, 208 n. n. w. of Truxillo, 
on which it depends in ecclesiastical concerns, and 
not on Quito, as Mr. Martiniere, in the word 
San Miguel, asserts; 25 from Paita, and seven 
e. from the sea. It never rains here, and it is in 
lat. 5 11 2" s. and long. 80 36" w. The set 
tlements, of which its corregimiento are com 
posed, are 

Piura, Paita, 

La Punta, Colan, 

Morropon, Asiento de Chiran, 

Suipira, Tumbez, 

Catacaos-y Amotape, 

Sechura, Olmos, 



Sondorillo r 

Sondor, 

Chocan, 

Pacaipampa, 

Asiento de Chalacos, 

Frias, 

Cumbicos. 



Motupe, 

Salas, 

Penachi, 

Caiiares, 

Huarmacas, 

Huancabamba, 

Acabaca, 

The aforesaid river flows down from the 
mountains of Guanca-bamba to the e. and col 
lects in its course the waters of the Gualcas, 
Sauri, Morropon, and Frias, running to the n. w&amp;gt; 
It then turns w. towards the part called Corral 
Quemado, and from thence to s. w. It laves the 
capital, which is on its w. shore, and to which, 
in its floods, it lias done much mischief. In the 
spring it is nearly dry, and runs under the 
ground ; w r here wells are made to extract its 
waters. It disembogues itself into the Gulf of 
Sechura, by the s. part, in lat. 5 32" s. 

PIURASIRENTE, a settlement of the pro 
vince and corregimiento of Caxamarquilla, in 
Peru. 

PIXCE, SAN MIGUEL DE, a settlement of the 
province and corregimento of Sana, in Peru, an 
nexed to the curacy of Chiclayo. 

PIZAC, a settlement of the province and corre 
gimiento of Calca and Lares, in Peru. 

PLACEIROS, NUESTRA SENORA DE LOS, a 
settlement of the province and captainship of Per- 
nambuco, in Brazil ; on the shore of the river 
San Angel. 

[PLACENTIA. See PLAISANCE.] 

[PLACENTIA Bay, on the s. coast of New 
foundland Island, opens between Chapeau-Rouge 
Point westward, and Cape St. Mary s on the e. 
49 miles apart. It is very spacious ; has several 
islands towards its head, and forms a good har 
bour for ships ; and is frequented by such vessels 
as are bound either into the gulf or river of 
St. Lawrence. The port-town, which gives name 
to the bay, is on the e. shore; 267 miles to 
the e. of the island of Cape Breton ; 40 miles w. 
by s. of St. John s, and in lat. 47 15" n. 1 

PLACER, a small island of the N. Sea, in 
the Gulf of Panama ; one of those called De 
Perlas, from the pearl fisheries carried on here. 
It is w. of the island of Rey, from which it is 
four leagues distant. 

PLACER, some shoals of the Archipelago of the 
Antilles. They are two small rocks, one opposite 
the point of Galera, off the coast of Cartagena,, 
and another opposite the cape of La Vela. 

PLACER, a large island of sand in the N. 
Sea, in this rhumb, off the island of Cuba. 

PLACER, another shoal or Jarge sand bank* 



P L A 



P L A 



covered with water, near the coast of the pro 
vince and government of Nicaragua, in the 
kingdom of Guatemala, between the shoals of 
Quitasuefios and La Serranilla. 

PL ACER, another, between the Caiman Grande 
and the coast of the province of Yucatan. 

PLACERES, some rocky shoals of the S. Sea, 
at the mouth of the Straits of Magellan, between 
the capes of Virgen Maria and Espiritu Santo. 

[PLAIN DU NORD, a town on the n. side of 
the island of St. Domingo, situate at the s. e. 
corner of Bay de 1 Acul, and on the road from 
Cape Francois to Port de Paix, nearly five 
leagues w. by s. of the Cape, and 13 s. e. by e. of 
Port de Paix.] 

PLAINE GRANDE, an extensive and lofty 
llanura of Canada, between the two lakes Huron 
and Michigan. It extends from n. to s. and is 
inhabited by Nicariariages Indians, which is one 
of the seven allied nations. 

PLAIN GRANDE, a small river of the island of 
Guadaloupe, which rises in the mountains, on 
the s. e. part, runs to this rhumb, and enters the 
sea between those of Caillou and Boursaul. 

[PLAINFIELD, a township of Massachusetts, 
county of Hampshire. It was incorporated in 
1785, and contains 458 inhabitants. It is 120 
miles w. by n. of Boston.] 

[PLAINFIELD, a township of Northampton, 
county of Pennsylvania.] 

[PLAINFIELD, a township inthew. w. corner 
of Cheshire County, New Hampshire, on the e. 
bank of Connecticut river, which separates it 
from Hartland in Vermont. It was incorporated 
in 1761, and contains 1024 inhabitants.] 

[PLAINFIELD, a township in the s. e. part of 
Windham County, Connecticut, on the e. side of 
Quinabaug river, which divides it from Brook 
lyn and Canterbury. It is about 14 miles n. e. of 
Norwich, has two Presbyterian churches, an 
academy, and was settled in 1689.] 

PLAISANCE, or PLACENTIA, a settlement 
of the s. coast of Newfoundland, with a cele 
brated bay and port, much frequented by vessels 
employed in the cod-fishery. The entrance is by 
a narrow channel, through which not more than 
one vessel can pass. It is of sufficient depth for 
large vessels, and is capable of containing 150 in 
perfect security, well sheltering them from the 
winds ; also, the fishing in it is as tranquil as in 
a river. In front of the channel is a road, which 
is a league and an half in extent, but much ex 
posed to the w. winds, which are frequent here. 
The narrow part of the channel is caused by a 
chain of dangerous rocks, to avoid running foul 



of which, it is requisite to bear upon the star 
board in entering the bay. In one of them the 
French had a fort, called San Louis. The cur- 
rents here are very violent. The coast, on which 
they fish for cod, is about a league in extent, 
between two rapid currents ; one of which, situ 
ate to the 5. w. is divided by a river which issues 
from the channel, and forms a sort of lake, called 
the Little Bay, and in which many salmon are 
caught. On this coast, or strand, is carried on 
a fishery, for lading 60 ships; and on another, 
called Little Strand, is caught the fish accus 
tomed to lie nearest the coast. 

Both these fisheries are carried on without the 
least danger. On the shore of the aforesaid 
stream the French have built some cabins, and, 
not very distant from these, is situate the settle 
ment which was ceded to the English, with the 
fishery, in the peace of Utrecht. 

PLAISANCE, another settlement and parish, of 
the French, in the island of St. Domingo, on the 
shore of the three rivers, near the n. coast. In 
its vicinity is a mine of sulphur. 

PLAISANT MONT, a mountain of the pro 
vince of Georgia, in N. America; on the shore 
of the river Savannah. 

PLAL, a river of the district of BOroa, in the 
kingdom of Chrle, which runs nff. and incorpo 
rates itself with the Hueco, changing its name to 
that of Quepe. 

[PLANTAIN Garden River, at the e. end of 
the island of Jamaica, and n. by w. of Point. 
Morant. There is a kind of bay at its mouth ; 
and on it, within land, is the town of Bath.] 

PLASENCIA, a city of the province of Los 
Panches, in the Nuevo Reyno de Granada, 
founded by Sebastian de Benalcazar, in 1539, on 
the shore of the river Grande de la Magdalena, 
and on the n. of that of Maraquita. It is at pre 
sent destroyed, and consists only of a few houses 
of poor Indians. 

[PLASTOW, orPLAisxow, a township in the 
s. e. part of Rockingham County, New Hamp 
shire, separated from Haverhill in Massachu 
setts, (of which it was formerly a part) by the 
s. state line. It was incorporated in 1749, and 
contains 521 inhabitants ; 12 or 14 miles s. w. of 
Exeter, and 30 s. w. of Portsmouth.] 

PLATA, a city, the capital of the province 
and archbishopric of Charcas in Peru. See Chu- 
quisaca. 

[The jurisdiction of this name is 200 leagues in 
length, and 100 in breadth, extending on each 
side the famous river La Plata. This city i 
seated upon the river Chimbo; but a full de* 



158 



PLATA. 



scription of it is given under the title Chuqui- 
saca, a name by which it is more properly known, 
and to which we have referred; the later his 
tory, however, of the above-mentioned jurisdic 
tion, will be found at the end of the article LA 
PLATA River.] 

PLATA, with the dedicatory title of S. Sebas 
tian, another city of the province and govern 
ment of Popayan in the Nuevo Reyno de Gra 
nada; founded by Sebastian Quintero, in 1551, 
and not in 1538, by Sebastian de Benalcazar, as 
the Ex-Jesuit Coleti asserts, in a beautiful and 
extensive llano called De Cambis, in the territory 
and country of the Jalcones Indians, on the shore 
of the river Guali, which laves it on the s. and 
12 miles from the river Magdalena. It is the 
head of the district of a temperature so hot, that 
even in the winter the heat is felt here. It is 
fertile and abundant in fruits and silver-mines, 
which afford its principal commerce, although it 
is nevertheless poor and reduced; and yet there 
are in its population some families of distinction : 
46 miles e. from Popayan, 165 5. s. w. of Santa 
Fe, and 35 w. n. w. of Timana, in lat. 2 24 &amp;gt;?. 
and long. 75 46 / w. 

PLATA, a large, abundant, and navigable 
river of S. America ; one of the largest known 
after the Maraiion or Amazonas, and giving its 
name to some very extensive provinces : disco 
vered by the pilot Juan Diaz de Solis in 1515; 
who navigated it as far as a small island in lat. 
34 23 30" s. and who, having seen on the shores 
some Indian cabins, had the boldness to disem 
bark with ten men ; when they were all put to 
death at the hands of those infidels. Five years 
afterwards there arrived here Sebastian Goboto, 
who passed from the service of the English to 
that of the Spaniards, by the former of whom 
he was sent to the discovery of the Strait of Ma 
gellan. But he, finding himself impeded in his 
views by an insurrection of the people, was un 
der the necessity of entering the river La Plata : 
by this he navigated as far as the island disco 
vered by Solis, and to which he gave the name 
of San Gabriel, Seven leagues above this island 
he discovered a river called San Salvador, and an 
other at 30 leagues distance, which the natives 
called Sarcana ; where he built a fort, which he 
named the Tower of Gaboto. He then pursued 
his voyage as far as the conflux of the rivers Pa 
rana and Paraguay, and leaving the former to 
the w. entered by the second, and had a battle 
with the Indians, in which he lost 25 men ; but suc 
ceeded in routing the infidels, taking from them 
many valuables of silver, which these had brought 



from Peru ; and he thus, supposing that there 
was an abundance of this metal in the territories 
washed by this river, called it Rio la Plata (Ri 
ver of Silver); whereby it lost the name of Solis, 
first given it by the discoverer. 

This river receives in its extensive course the 
water of various other very large rivers, so that 
it is accustomed to have such excessive high 
floods as to inundate the country for many leagues, 
fertilizing it, however, in the same manner as 
the Nile. When this rise occurs, the Indians 
take their families and effects, and retire to their 
canoes, where they live till the waters subside, 
and that they can return to their habitations. 
The current of this river, when it runs into the 
sea, is so rapid and violent, that its waters, which 
are clear and salutary, maintain themselves sweet, 
without mixing with the waters of the ocean, 
for many leagues from its entrance. It abounds 
with an incredible multitude of fish, and on its 
shores are many most beautiful birds. The dis 
tance from the conflux of the Paraguay and Pa 
rana to its mouth, is about 200 leagues by the 
course of the river, the whole space being filled 
with the most delightful islands, and being na 
vigable for the largest vessels. 

The country on either side of the river is most 
extensive and level, but so scantily supplied with 
fountains, lakes, or streams, as to render travel 
ling very precarious. It produces every species 
of American and European fruit, as also grain 
and seeds, cotton, sugar, honey, &amp;c. but what 
is its chief recommendation is its excessively 
large breeds of cattle, inasmuch as it abounds 
in excellent pastures, from the llanuras extending 
for upwards of 200 leagues. The first heads of 
cattle brought from Europe have increased to 
such a degree, that it is impossible for any one 
to define those which belong to himself; from 
whence it arises that all are in common, and 
every one takes such as he may want, the num 
ber being so extraordinary, that, for lading all 
the vessels which come to Spain, many thousand 
animals are killed merely for the sake of their 
hides, the flesh being left to be devoured by the 
wild beasts and the birds of prey. Those who 
want milk, go out and profit by as many cows as 
they require, driving home with them the calves : 
nor is there a want of an equal abundance of 
horses ; the which are common to all, with no 
other expense or trouble than that of catching 
them : the birds and animals of the chase are 
also equally numerous, and the partridges, which 
are as large as the hens of Europe, are not un- 
frequently knocked down with sticks. In short, 



PLATA. 



there is nothing wanting in this country but salt 
and fuel ; the first, however, is brought in vessels, 
and, for the second, large plantations of peach- 
trees are made, which, from the richness of the 
soil, produce extremely well. 

This river is at its mouth about 60 leagues 
wide ; the said mouth being formed by the Cape 
San Antonio on the 5. part, and that of Santa 
Maria on the n. From thence as far as Buenos 
Ayres it preserves its name, being afterwards 
called the Parana. Although, as we have before 
observed, it is, the whole of it, navigable, it has 
many shoals and rocks, on which many vessels 
have been wrecked, especially during the preva 
lence of some very impetuous winds, which they 
here call pamperos ; and which blow from w. to 
s.w. acquiring from the shore so much the greater 
force in proportion to the smallness of the ob 
stacles they find to impede their course ; for 
they sweep over llanuras of 200 leagues with 
out being interrupted either by mountains or 
trees. On some occasions, though not very fre 
quently, a regular hurricane takes place here ; 
the which, if it takes its course along the river, 
no vessel can resist, but its masts are immediately 
snapped in twain, as has happened to some ships 
even when their top-masts and yard-arms were 
struck. In this river the storms are more fre 
quent than at sea. It laves the cities of Buenos 
Ayres, the colony of Sacramento, which belonged 
to the Portuguese, and Monte Video. It has 
some very good ports, and its mouth is in lat. 

[In continuation of the description of the ri 
ver La Plata, we shall first give some extracts 
respecting the jurisdiction of this name from the 
work of Mr. Mawe, and, afterwards, a concise 
account of the late revolutions with which that 
jurisdiction has been affected Mr. Mawe thus 
describes the approach to this mighty river : 

" Wearied and exhausted by frequent calms 
under a vertical sun, we were at length relieved 
by a breeze ; and crossing the line at long. 23 w. 
had a favourable passage to the mouth of the 
great river Plata, our entrance into which we 
were enabled to judge from the muddy colour of 
the water and from numerous flig-hts of sea birds, 
long before we saw land. 

" Our passage," he continues, " was impeded 
by a strong s. w. gale, in these parts called a 
pampero, which blew for several days, and 
obliged us to lay the vessel-to during the whole 
time ; we shipped so much water, that our boats 
were hourly in danger of being washed away, 
and, owing to the stupid carelessness of a Ge- 



noese sailor, our cabin was at one time half-filled. 
The gale at length ceased ; a breeze sprung up 
to the e. and we made all possible sail : after 
running a s. w. course for two days, we found 
soundings at 35 fathoms water, and on the second 
day following, at noon, saw the high land of 
Maldonado at a distance of about nine leagues, 
and the Isle of Lobos four or five leagues ahead. 
Passing through the channel which divides them, 
we encountered a strong breeze, and soon after 
wards found ourselves in a very critical situa 
tion ; a dark night, a heavy and increasing gale 
of wind, the violent uncertain currents of the 
river, the English bank to the s. and the Isle of 
Flores to the w. n. w. The captain knew nothing 
of the navigation, and I was obliged to com 
mand instead of advising. I caused the vessel 
to be laid-to, under the smallest and most 
manageable sail possible ; kept the lead conti 
nually going, and wore the vessel every two 
hours. The night was one of the most dreadful 
I ever witnessed ; the moon was overcast by 
heavy black clouds pouring torrents of rain, ac 
companied with terrible lightning and loud thun 
der; the waves, owing to the shallowness of the 
water (seven and eight fathoms), appeared like 
breakers. At daylight our prospect was not 
much bettered ; a dense fog hindered us from 
seeing at all beyond the vessel, and the conflict 
of the wind with the current rendered the waves 
still more boisterous. In the course of the 
morning the thunder moderated, but the stormy 
rain continued : no object was distinctly visible ; 
hidden rocks and sand-banks lay on each side of 
us ; and we were approaching a channel not a 
mile wide, rendered more formidable by a strong 
and ever-shifting current. In consequence of 
incessant exertion I was in a most exhausted 
state, but the captain and crew were incapable 
of affording me a moment s respite ; danger 
seemed to have deprived them of their reason, 
and they looked on all that passed with a fearful 
and senseless apathy. I had often had occasion 
to observe the intrepid constancy and activity of 
British seamen in similar emergencies, and I 
could not but be struck with the contrast. We 
shipped several heavy seas which had the ap 
pearance of broken-water, and hence it again 
became necessary to keep the lead continually 
going. At eleven A. M. on finding that we 
shoaled our water extremely fast, being already 
in four fathom and over very hard ground, I was 
convinced that we were at the head of the English 
bank, and ^therefore immediately wore on the 
other tack * toward the island of Flores. The] 



U50 



PLATA. 



[fog prevented us from taking a meridianal ob 
servation, but at three P. M. it cleared, and to 
our great joy we saw Monte Video before us at 
tour leagues distance. Our seamen now took 
heart, and began to be more expert ; we made 
all sail ; but the wind gradually declining, and 
a strong current setting directly from the har 
bour, we were obliged in the evening to let 
go our anchor about two leagues outside the 
port." 

Mr. Mawe, owing to his short stay at Buenos 
Ayres, had no time to make any geological re 
searches ; indeed the country behind it, being a 
vast plain, without any traces of rock, did not 
offer much scope for such an undertaking. With 
the exception of a part of the bank near the 
anole, which is of granite, he scarcely found an 
indurated substance during the whole route. 
Judging from the shells and other marine pro 
ductions which are occasionally found in the 
pampas he should conclude that those extensive 
level districts have formed, at some period, the 
bottom of the river, and that they have been 
left dry by the progressive precipitation of matter 
and the deepening of the Rio de la Plata in its 
present channel through a long course of ages. 
A circumstance which seems to support this con 
jecture is, that the land continually gains upon 
the river, and that at those times when the wind 
blows from the Pampas, a considerable extent of 
the bank on the side of Buenos Ayres is left dry. 

The population of Buenos Ayres and its im 
mediate suburbs, exclusive of the country in its 
vicinity, has been ascertained to amount to up 
wards of 60,000 souls. The proportion of females 
to males is said to be as four to one ; but if we 
take into consideration that many men are almost 
daily arriving from Europe, as well as from the 
S. American provinces, and that under the old 
government neither the militia nor the marine 
was recruited from the mass of the population, 
we shall find reason to conclude that the pro 
portion of the sexes is not so unequal. In the in 
terior the excess of males is very great, for as the 
lands are granted in large tracts only, and but 
poorly cultivated, there is no encouragement for 
the labouring classes to marry and settle upon 
them. The poor are compelled to remain single 
from the very bare resources on which they depend 
for subsistence, and are accustomed to consider the 
married state as fraught with heavy burdens and 
inevitable misfortunes. It is not uncommon to 
find estates larger than an English county with 
hardly more than 100 labourers upon them, who 
eubsJst upon the sale of a little corn, which each 



is permitted to grow for himself, but only to 
such an extent as a single man can plough. 

The various races which compose the popula 
tion are as follow : 

1. Legitimate Spaniards or Europeans. In 
Buenos Ayres there are about 3000 ; in the in 
terior the number is very trifling, except in 
Potosi, which, being a mining country, contains 
many. 

2. Creoles ; legitimate descendants from Spa 
niards or Europeans. 

3. Mestizos ; the offspring of European and 
Indian parents. 

4. Indians; almost all of whom have some 
mixture of Spanish blood. 

5. Brown mixtures of Africans and Europeans. 

6. Mulattoes of various degrees. 

All these races intermix without restraint, so 
that it is difficult to define the minor gradations, 
or to assign limits to the ever-multiplying varie 
ties. Few families are entirely exempt from 
characteristics of Indian origin, physical as well 
as moral. It is well known that in the Spanish 
colonies little regard is now paid to purity of 
blood ; the various regulations for preserving 
the races distinct have gradually become obsolete. 
This may be regarded as a momentary evil ; but 
may it not be conducive in the long-run to the 
good of society, by concentrating the interests of 
the various classes, which in remaining separate 
might one day endanger the stability of the go 
vernment, as has been the case in the French 
colony of St. Domingo ? 

In describing the orders of society in Buenos 
Ayres, it is necessary to premise that we class 
them, not by degrees of birth, rank, or profession, 
but by the relative estimation in which they 
stand, in point of property, of public usefulness. 

According to this scale, the first which comes 
under consideration is the commercial class. 
Every person belonging to it, from the huckster 
at the corner of the street, to the opulent trader 
in his warehouse, is dignified by the appellation 
of merchant, yet few individuals among them 
can lay just claim to that title, as they are 
wanting in that practical knowledge so essential 
in commercial dealings. They are averse to all 
speculation and enterprise ; the common routine 
of their business is to send orders to Spain for 
the articles they need, and to sell by retail at an 
exorbitant profit ; beyond this they have hardly 
a single idea, and it has been said that their 
great reason for opposing a free trade with 
foreign nations is a consciousness of their 
own mercantile inexperience. The more con-] 



PLATA. 



1(51 



fsiderable houses are almost all branches of some 
European establishment ; few of the Creoles 
have any regular trade. Those among them how 
ever, who engage in it are much more liberal in 
their transactions than the old Spaniards, and are 
observed to make less rapid fortunes, for their 
manly and independent character makes them 
spurn a miserable economy, and disdain to assume 
that church-going practice which must be ob 
served twice or thrice a day by those who would 
enrich themselves through the patronage of the 
opulent families. Among the inferior tradesmen, 
those who gain most are the pulperos, the ware 
housemen, and the shop-keepers. The pulperos 
retail wine, brandy, candles, sausages, salt, bread, 
spices, wood, grease, brimstone, &amp;c. Their 
shops are generally lounging places for the idle 
and dissipated of the community. In Buenos 
Ayres there are about 700 of them, each more or 
less in the interest of some richer individual. 
The warehousemen sell earthen and glass ware, 
drugs, various articles of consumption, and some 
goods of home manufacture, wholesale and retail. 
The shop-keepers amount to nearly 600 in 
number ; they sell woollen cloths, silk, cotton 
goods of all sorts, hats, and various other articles 
of wearing apparel. Many of them make con 
siderable fortunes, those especially who trade to 
Lima, Peru, Chile, or Paraguay, by means of 
young men whom they send as agents or factors. 
There is another description of merchants, if 
such they may be called, who keep in the back 
ground and enrich themselves by monopolizing 
victuals, and by forestalling the grain brought to 
market from the interior, much to the injury of 
the agricultural interest. 

The second class of inhabitants consist of the 
proprietors of estates and houses. They are, in 
general, Creoles, for few Europeans employ their 
funds in building, or in the purchase of land, 
until they have realised a fortune to live upon, 
which commonly takes place when they are far 
advanced in life, so that their establishments pass 
immediately into the hands of their successors. 
The simple landholders derive so little revenue 
from their possessions, that they are generally in 
debt to their tradesmen ; their gains are but too 
commonly engrossed by the monopolists, and 
having no magistrate to represent them, they 
find themselves destitute of effectual resources 
against wrong and extortion. So defective and 
ill-regulated are the cbncerns of agriculture in 
this country, that the proprietor of an estate 
really worth 20,000 dollars can scarcely subsist 
upon it. 

VOL. IV. 



Under the class of landed proprietors we may 
reckon the cultivators, here called quinteros or 
chacareros, who grow wheat, maize, and other 
grain. These men are so depressed and impo 
verished that, notwithstanding the importance of 
their calling, and the public usefulness of their 
labours, they are ranked among the people of 
least consequence in society. 

The third class is composed of handicraftsmen, 
such as masons, carpenters, tailors, and shoe 
makers, who, although they work hard, and 
receive great wages, seldom realise property. 
The journeymen are usually people of colour; 
the masters for the most part Genoese, and uni 
versally foreigners, for the Spaniards despise 
these trades, and cannot stoop to work along 
with Negroes or Mulattoes. Many of the lower 
orders derive subsistence from these and other 
employments of a similar nature ; here are lime- 
burners, wood-cutters, tanners, curriers, &amp;c. The 
free porters constitute a numerous body of men ; 
they ply about the streets to load and unload 
carts, and carry burdens, but they are so idle and 
dissolute, that no man can depend on their ser 
vices for a week together ; when they have a 
little money, they drink and gamble, and when 
pennyless betake themselves to pilfering. These 
habits have long rendered them a public nuisance, 
but no corrective measures have hitherto been 
taken, nor does there appear, on the part of the 
higher orders, any disposition to reform them. 

Persons employed in public offices may be 
comprehended under the fourth class. The best 
situations under government are held by native 
Spaniards ; those of less emolument by Creoles ; 
the former are regarded as mere sinecures, and 
the persons enjoying them are considered as in 
no way serviceable to the community, except by 
spending their large salaries within it. 

The fifth class is the militia or soldiery. Pre 
vious to the invasion of the English, the officers 
were not much noted for military science, or for 
that ardour which leads to the acquisition of it; 
their chief ambition was to obtain commands in 
towns and villages, especially those on the Portu 
guese frontier, where they might enrich them 
selves by smuggling. The privates were ill-dis 
ciplined, badly dressed, and badly paid. The 
effective force which the crown of Spain main 
tained in these possessions was one regiment of 
the line, which was to consist of 1200 men, but 
was reduced to less than half ; one regiment of 
dragoons amounted to 600, two of cavalry called 
blandengues, 600 each, and one or two com 
panies of artillery. With the exception of the j 



162 



PLATA. 



[Blandengues, all the troops were originally sent 
from the Peninsula, but not having for the last 
20 years been recruited from thence, their ranks 
were gradually filled by natives. By eminence 
they were called veterans, but they have been of 
late disbanded, and their officers have passed to 
the command of the new corps which were 
formed on the English invasion. The force of 
these corps may be estimated at 9000 men. 

The sixth class is the clergy, in number about 
1000. The seculars are distinguished by their 
learning, honour, and probity ; but the friars are, 
in general, grosly ignorant, and render but little 
real service to the public in any way. (Mawe.) 

With respect to the revolution of the Spanish 
colonies, no part of America has made bolder 
advances towards the objects of its wishes, free 
dom and independence, than that tract of country 
comprehended under the title of the jurisdiction 
of La Plata. 

It is true that the commotions of the S. Ame 
rican continent have proved beyond all question, 
from the simultaneous effect of their operation 
that they have all germinated from the same seed, 
though the growth of the tree has been stunted 
or forwarded by the peculiarities of circumstance 
or place. It is our object here to explain the 
origin and to trace the progress of the revolution 
of La Plata. The subject has already been re 
cently treated by various writers with much 
intelligence, and availing ourselves as we shall 
most freely of those sources of information, we 
fear not but that we shall be enabled to put the 
question, if not in a more concise, at least much 
clearer point of light than any in which it has 
hitherto been represented. 

In tracing from their origin the causes of 
this revolution, our attention is involuntarily, in 
a certain degree, drawn back to the circumstances 
which attended the English expedition to the 
shores of the river La Plata, in 1806 ; an ex 
pedition which, it has been justly observed, 
seemed planned with a view only to establish a 
military post, that imgh be thrown into the scale 
of considerations when peace was treated of in 
Europe ; since such a handful of men, acting in 
direct contradiction to the only means afforded 
by the state of the country of insuring the lasting 
good-will of its natives, could never have had in 
contemplation to conquer and garrison an ex 
tensive empire ; or to establish with it an enlarged 
commercial intercourse. 

It was attended, however, with one good, of 
which the British cabinet was not then aware, or 
its agent prepared to convert into national ad 



vantage. It gave an opportunity to those, who 
in the seclusion of their closets had pondered on 
the past wrongs of their country, who had ven 
tured to study those rights which constitute the 
inheritance of all free men, to be known to each 
other. No longer dreading the censure and 
shackles of their old government, they assembled, 
and discussed topics leading to a change of govern 
ment ; their numbers increased, and the protection 
of the British arms was deemed to afford a most 
favourable opportunity for extending the benefits 
of civil independence. Thus did a spark, which 
in its beginning was almost imperceptible, ac 
quire magnitude ; and had it then been fostered, 
had civil talents, combined with a protecting 
and conciliating policy, been then but used, the 
blood subsequently shed would have been spared, 
disgrace would not have fallen on the British 
arms, and instead of that enmity which naturally 
followed, instead of mourning, devastation, and 
reproach, all would have been converted into the 
lasting and sincere blessings of the emancipated 
inhabitants, in favour of a nation that came to 
aid them in a cause connected with their vital 
interests. 

That the British chiefs were early convinced 
that there existed a leading party in favour of in 
dependence and a change of government, evidently 
results from the many official reports produced 
in General Whitelocke s trial, but that they were 
also not provided with any instructions to im 
prove that spirit, seems equally conclusive. We 
feel no hesitation in saying, that on the appear- 
rance of the British army in the waters of La 
Plata, it was hailed as an happy omen by those 
who sought the melioration of their country , and 
the passive part of the community had sufficient 
reliance on the national honour to hope, that 
whatever was attempted would be honestly di 
rected to their relief and benefit. We know that 
men high in civil authority, repeatedly pressed 
the English to declare whether they came as 
emancipators or as conquerors ; and even the re 
ligious communities publicly testified their joy 
and their congratulations in a remarkable dis 
course held on the 28th June, 1806. But we 
also know full well on the other hand, that the 
English chiefs were necessarily silent, and that 
silence in such a case is almost worse than an 
unpropitious avowal. Too well we know how 
soon the interesting and favourable sentiments 
first excited vanished into air ; how rapidly the 
goaded pride and disappointed hopes of the peo 
ple exploded in open clamour ; how rancorously 
the deluded sagacity of the clergy converted thej 



PLATA. 



163 



[pulpits into vehicles of irritated feeling and out 
rageous declamation against the invaders. 

Precisely in this tone is the following extract, 
from the pastoral letter of the bishop of La Paz, 
dated the 3d of May, 1087 : 

" Que seria de nosotros, que seria de nuestras 
propriedades, y de nuestras familias, y que seria 
principalmente de nuetra religion, si llegaran los 
Ingleses a dominar y establecer se en Buenos 
Ayres, y con sus armas y su artificiosa seduccion 
intentasen tambien penetrar en el pais : sirian 
por ventura mas indulgentes con la America Es- 
panola que lo son con la Inlanda que es casi la 
misma patria?" 

The effect produced by discourses of this na 
ture, printed and circulated among a people ac 
customed to devour with avidity any thing in 
print, and to attach unbounded credit to every 
thing from their priests, may be better conceived 
than described. And sorry we are further to ob 
serve, that in the whole columns of the Estrella 
del Sur, a newspaper printed in Monte Video, 
in English and Spanish, and considered as the 
organ of the British chiefs, there is not a line cal 
culated to inspire the natives with the smallest 
confidence, to undo in the slightest degree the 
unfavourable impressions, or to convey any as 
surances of melioration and protection to the de 
sponding minds of a people, to whom fetters only 
in a new form were offered. 

With regard to the events attending this ex 
pedition, it is by no means improbable that its 
fate was decided by the delay which took place 
in the junction of the centre with the advanced 
division ; for, had they joined the day before, 
thev would most probably have entered the town 
immediately, while part of the enemy s forces 
were out of it, and unprepared. This delay, 
though short, gave the latter time to entrench 
and fortify their streets, and to post themselves 
in the most advantageous stations. But the re 
storation of Monte Video was the stipulation 
most to be regretted : for every principle of good 
policy required us to keep that town to the last 
extremity ; nay, some of the best informed 
among the Spaniards were of opinion, that our 
army should have been contented with the pos 
session of the n. side of the Plata, without ven 
turing any farther, because we should thus have 
commanded the trade of the interior, and Buenos 
Ayres would in the end have found it necessary 
to come to terms of accommodation highly to our 
advantage. 

We could willingly have spared ourselves the 
pain of attending to these well known and dis 



graceful circumstances, but we think it our duty 
to relieve the European public of one very gene 
ral error ; which is, that the successes of the La 
Plateans were entirely owing to their chief, Li- 
niers. Biography will have little to relate of a 
favourable nature respecting this man. Till he 
took the command of the Buenos Ayres troops 
he was a gambler, and to flattery and intrigue, 
joined to the courage and misplaced confidence 
of the people, whom he afterwards betrayed, he 
owed his advancement. That he was not even 
entitled to the praise of courage so generally at 
tached to him, we can cite as a proof, that he de 
serted the city in the second attack by General 
Whitelocke,and only returned when he found that 
the danger w r as over. 

He continued to exercise the authority of vice 
roy after the expulsion of the English, and an 
instance was not long wanting to convince the 
people of his secret intentions to deliver up the 
country to the French. As soon as the usurpa 
tion of the throne of Spain had placed on it a 
branch of the Corsican family, emissaries were 
sent to the principal ports of America, to ac 
quaint the governors of the transfer that had been 
made of these distant possessions, and to concert 
measures with them, under the previous promise 
of their continuance in power, how to conciliate 
the people to the new dynasty. The person 
deputed to Buenos Ayres arrived there about 
the 10th of August 1808, and on the 18th Li- 
niers issued a proclamation, advising the people 
" to follow the example of their American an 
cestors, who wisely .avoided the disasters which 
afflicted Spain during the war of the succession, 
by waiting till the fate of the mother country was 
determined, in order then to obey the legitimate 
authority that occupied the throne." To this 
were added insinuations that Spain had already 
yielded, and that opposition was not only un 
timely but criminal. 

It would not be difficult for one who has fol 
lowed the inhabitants of Buenos Ayres through 
every stage of their patriotic efforts, who have 
seen them fight for their invaded rights, to form 
an idea of their feelings on this occasion. To be 
hold a yoke, ten times more offensive than that 
w r hich they had just resisted, now offered to be 
imposed upon them, was not only to insult their 
feelings, patriotism, and national honour, but to 
impeach their judgment. The fact is, that Li- 
niers had concerted with the French emissary, 
that 30,000 men were necessary to keep the 
country in awe, and to penetrate into the in 
terior ; a fact which Avas discovered from the] 
Y 2 



164 



PLATA. 



[interception, by the British, of the dispatch to 
the viceroy Liniers, ordering him to make pre 
paration for their reception." 

Liniers continued to hold the reins of govern 
ment till the central Junta of Spain, on their as 
sumption of the supreme authority, sent out Cis- 
neros to supersede him, and to send him to Spain 
as a prisoner. Here again Liniers not only be 
trayed a weak spirit, but a want of judgment, for 
his powers, at least, had the merit of being con 
stitutional ; but he ceded, without an effort, to 
the new comer, and retired to Cordova, where 
we for the present leave him. 

No sooner had Viceroy Cisneros assumed his 
functions than he found the treasury empty, the 
people desponding of the success of Spain, and a 
freedom of speech, hostile to her supremacy, very 
prevalent. With the ordinary police of old- 
fashioned statesmen in a crisis of affairs which 
bids defiance to all regular habits, and requires 
depth and originality of judgment, he proceeded 
to fortify himself, by calling around him all the 
ancient instruments of the despotic system of the 
mother country. Those who, from the nature of 
their talents and employments, had every thing 
to lose and nothing to gain by a change, flocked 
round him, and the customary system of espio 
nage was organized. Dr. Canete prostituted his 
pen in the formation of 31 articles, which we 
confess that we have perused with horror : every 
measure, in short, was adopted which was thought 
calculated to rivet afresh the fetters in which per 
sonal liberty and the public opinion had so long 
been confined. 

The exhausted state to which the colonial trea 
sury had been reduced by the late military exer 
tions, now gave rise to many schemes for increas 
ing the financial resources of the capital, and af 
fording relief to the people. Amongst these, the 
most important was the free admission of British 
goods, advised by the leading Creoles, but op 
posed by all the ancient Spaniards, and by those 
who adhered to the old form of government. 
The discussion of this momentous question gave 
rise to a celebrated memorial by Dr. Mariano 
Moreno, of which, although from its merit, we 
could have wished to have given it verbatim, we 
must content ourselves with affording only a ge 
neral idea. 

The memorial, composed in elevated language, 
breathes a spirit of indignation against the sel 
fish and monopolizing spirit of the Cadiz mer 
chants, for whose private interests the colony 
was so shamefully oppressed; then addressing 
himself to the viceroy x he energetically adds ; 



" It is attempted to establish advantages on our 
ruin ; the government then ought to be doubly 
vigilant to frustrate so sinister a design. Our 
sovereign conferred on your excellency the high 
dignity of viceroy of these provinces, not to 
watch over and consult the dignity of the Cadiz 
merchants, but to preside over ours. How can 
a trading body, that has at all times raised the 
standard against the common good of other 
towns, that has uniformly been the advocate of 
monopoly, on such an occasion as this be admit 
ted as an antagonist ? Can it be supposed that 
the consulado of Cadiz has any interest or legiti 
mate intervention in the interior regulations of 
this province, or any vote on the means which 
may insure its prosperity ?" 

After successively refuting all the minor argu 
ments brought forward by the opposition, till he 
arrived at that so much insisted on by their cham 
pion, viz. that " it is to be feared, from grant 
ing a free trade to the English, in a few years 
the ties which bind us to the Peninsula will be 
rent asunder." Dr. Moreno proceeds with re 
gard to the English : 

" Our Americans will never be more secure 
than when trading with them ; for a wise and 
enterprizing commercial nation detests conquests, 
and attends less to military enterprise than to 
the interests of her trade. With regard to our 
selves, the days in which we live have afforded 
proofs of our fidelity, which might be envied even 
by the towns of Spain. The English themselves 
will ever view with respect the conquerors of the 
5th of July, and the Spaniards will not forget 
that our military hospitals were not filled with 
traders, but by natives who defended the country 
in which they were born, by shedding their best 
blood in defence of their invaded rights. 

" Nothing, in the present moment, can be 
more advantageous to Spain, than to bind and 
rivet, by every possible tie, the union and alli 
ance of England. This generous nation, strug 
gling almost alone under the weight of the pre 
sent contest in Europe, afforded to our mother 
country aid and succour, such as was before un 
exampled in the friendships of nations ; and cer 
tainly itbecomes us, in our own speculations, to 
consult the interests of her subjects. At such a 
period, he cannot be considered as a true Spa 
niard who beholds the trade of Britain with re 
pining ; let those fatal moments be remembered, 
in which our plundered and insulted monarchy 
found no resources within itself, for they had pre 
viously been destroyed by a subtle enemy. With 
what gratitude was then received the generous] 



PLATA. 



[assistance, with which the English genius placed 
in motion that great machine which, till then, ap 
peared useless and inert. With what jubilee was 
their alliance then celebrated, and with what 
pleasure was announced the imposing force which 
the friendship of that powerful nation imparted 
to us. It is a shameful vileness then to see, that 
scarcely have we thought of establishing a trade 
as the only means of our salvation, and one that 
cannot be carried on but through the means of 
our allies, than they are considered by our tra 
ders as interlopers, and treated with an execra 
tion no less injurious to them, than incompatible 
with our true interests. 

" Let us, then, prove ourselves to be good Spa 
niards, when we have it in our power to contri 
bute by commercial relations to a closer union 
with an opulent and generous nation, whose suc 
cour is absolutely necessary to the independence 
of Spain. We well know, that in the war of the 
succession, France obtained a free commerce with 
our Americas, and we ought to be ashamed to 
deny to gratitude what dependence and dread 
then snatched from us. Under the necessity of 
consulting our own good, let us not repine that 
a reciprocal advantage should fall to the lot of a 
nation to whom we owe so much, and without 
whose aid that amelioration which we propose 
can never be attained. Such are the united 
wishes of 20,000 landholders whom I represent, 
and the only means of establishing, with a dig 
nity suitable to the character of your excellency, 
the foundation of our felicity, and the replenish 
ment of your treasury." 

We cannot help considering this production of 
the Burke of S. America as a very respectable 
specimen of Creole eloquence ; and it was suc 
cessful. The establishment of a free trade with 
England gradually raised the country from its 
depressed state ; the operations of agriculture 
were resumed and increased, from the certainty 
of a vent for its produce ; and even hides which, 
as Dr. Moreno says, their grandfathers threw 
away as objects of no value, now became a staple 
commodity. 

The minds of the people were at length ma 
tured ; and the supposed certainty that Spain 
had fallen a prey to the rapacity of a foreign 
power, made them anxious for their own safety. 
Aware of those reiterated attempts by which the 
French had endeavoured to enthral their allegi 
ance, and that even the servants of the old go 
vernment could not be trusted, with one voice 
they resolved to place the executive power in 
the cabildo, to be exercised by that representa 



tive body of the people in the name of their sove 
reign Ferdinand VII. till a superior Junta should 
be assembled. Notwithstanding Cisneros had 
assured the people that he would adopt no mea 
sures without their concurrence, they would not 
permit him to retain any power, or even allow 
him to preside in their councils. 

On the 26th of May, 1810, the provisional 
Junta was installed, amidst the general accla 
mations of the inhabitants, and from that date, 
an established authority calmed everv fear, and 
removed the uncertainty and fluctuation of opi 
nion in the capital. 

Thus was a revolution effected, without a drop 
of blood shed, which levelled to the ground a 
vassalage of three centuries, and eternally en 
graved the names of its authors on the hearts of 
their fellow citizens. 

The first endeavours of the Junta were to in 
spire confidence in their constituents. It was 
ordained, that all the proceedings of their ses 
sions should be printed weekly, that the people 
might judge of the conduct of their representa 
tives ; who themselves considered, that mystery 
and reserve were only invented by power to 
cover or palliate crimes. Every citizen was in 
vited to give his opinion freely, in writing, on 
any public measure, and authorized to address 
himself, personally, to the Junta in session ; or 
to an individual deputy, in cases of complaint, 
claims, or remonstrance. Measures were taken 
to regulate the military establishment and trade, 
and to reform the system of police. Thus, with 
out a contention or civil broil, without anarchy 
or confusion, and without a change of civil po 
licy, did they lay the foundation of a representa 
tive and local government ; nor were the rela 
tions of domestic life, or the security of property 
for a moment affected. 

Monte Video had, during the government of 
Liniers, been the first to convene a Junta within 
itself, but it was more for the purpose of escap 
ing from the controul of Liniers, than to lay the 
foundation of a representative local government; 
and it was never carried into full effect. Its in 
habitants acknowledged that of Buenos Ayres, 
in a general assembly held on the fifth of June, 
after the communications from the latter were 
made known, and a public act of allegiance was 
registered ; the cabildo however opposed the 
measure the next day, and from that time, to 
the present, Monte Video has continued firm to 
the Cadiz regency, under the influence of Spa 
nish naval officers, and has remained the seat of 
the naval equipment for blockading the capital.] 



166 



PLATA. 



[Its population, added to that of the surrounding 
country, is estimated at 14,090 inhabitants, and 
from great desertion, the garrison of the town is 
reduced to 1500 men. The transactions of the 
interior have till very lately prevented the pa 
triotic army of the J unta from making any at 
tempt to dislodge this handful of opponents ; but 
the wishes of the people have universally tended 
to an union with the capital. 

Though the installation of the Junta of Bue 
nos Ayres and every measure that immediately 
followed, produced the sincere and unanimous 
acclamations of the people at large, yet the 
abridgment of power must naturally be expected 
to have created a dislike on the part of those 
who have hitherto been the immediate servants 
of the old government, and accustomed to give 
an account of their transactions to the councils of 
the Indies alone. The royal audience, consist 
ing of Europeans, nominated at home, had been 
left in the superintendance and administration of 
public justice, but was soon discovered caballing 
with Cisneros, in opposition to the Junta, whom 
they refused to acknowledge, or to take the usual 
oaths of office. To such a length was this spirit 
of party hostility carried, that the Junta, to se 
cure the public tranquillity, were under the ne 
cessity of sending back to Spain Cisneros, three 
oidores, and the ftscales of the royal audience, in 
order that they might be there judged by the 
supreme government. On the 29th of June the 
Junta published its manifesto, explaining the par 
ticulars which had given rise to this measure, 
and detailing their reiterated endeavours to 
bring the members of the royal audience to a 
sense of their duty, and as public functionaries 
to impress upon them the danger of disregarding 
the wishes of the people, and sowing the seeds 
of discord and disunion. 

But it is now time to return to Liniers, whom 
we left in Cordova ; and to illustrate a subject 
which, as well from distance as design, has been 
greatly misrepresented to the English public. 

No sooner had tranquillity been restored to 
the capital, by the departure of Cisneros, and 
his fellow-plotters, than it was discovered that a 
more formidable party was collecting in the in 
terior, and particularly at Cordova, headed by 
Liniers, the intendant Concha ; his assessor Ro- 
drigues, Bishop Orellana, Colonel Allende, and 
accomptant Joaquim Moreno. Their intention 
was not only to suppress the votes of the people, 
but to oppose by an armed force all obedience to 
the government established in the capital. They 
publicly declared the Junta " insurgent, and re 



volutionary," and even the bishop endeavoured, 
but in vain, to profane the pulpits, by rousing a 
party to his cause ; yet so firm was the public 
mind, though at the distance of much more than 
100 leagues, that very few partizans were made. 

In vain did the Junta of Buenos Ayres use 
every friendly remonstrance and exhortation to 
dissuade these leaders from their hostile designs, 
and not to deluge the country in the blood of 
their fellow citizens ; every overture was treated 
with disdain, nay, even rejected with outrage. 
All correspondence with the capital was inter 
dicted, every thing on the roads was intercepted, 
and a plan of raising an armed force to depose 
the Junta, and reinstate the old servants of the 
government, was resolved on. Every proclama 
tion breathed captivity, fire and sword, and every 
tool and despot of the old system was invited to 
join them. Liniers took the command of the few 
troops he could collect, and in vain did the peo 
ple of Cordova sigh for a release from the op 
pression of this French satellite. 

The account of these proceedings diffused 
through the patriots of La Plata a general feel 
ing of compassion for the distresses of the people 
of Cordova, and many volunteers stepped for 
ward, offering to march to their relief. Towards 
the beginning of August the patriot army reached 
the frontiers of Cordova, where they were re 
ceived by their fellow provincials as their so 
licited and sighed for liberators, who came as 
brothers to release them from the miseries of ra 
pine and civil discord, and to wrest from un 
worthy hands the power that oppressed them. 

Notwithstanding Liniers had previously con 
certed the defence of the town, after dilapidating 
the public treasury, and committing in the true 
French style other acts of coercion on its defence 
less inhabitants, he fled on the first of August at 
the approach of the Buenos Ayres army towards 
Peru, carrying with him his fellow conspirators, 
nine cannon, and 400 men. Havoc and destruc 
tion attended his footsteps ; the country was laid 
Waste, the farms and dwellings of the peaceable 
inhabitants who would not join him were burned 
to the ground ; on them he satiated his fury and 
his avarice, for they were the objects no less of 
his cruelty than of his pillage. But his career 
was soon stopped. On the fifth he was taken 
prisoner by a small party detached in pursuit, 
after having been abandoned by those whom he 
had in a great measure forced into his service, 
and with three other leaders was sent to the ca 
pital a prisoner for trial. Cordova, relieved 
from the presence of its tyrant, unanimously] 



PLATA. 



167 



[voted Dr. Funes as its deputy to the Junta, and 
peace and tranquillity were restored to its inha 
bitants. 

The incorporation of Chile with Buenos Ayres 
took place in September 1810, and the addition 
of this extensive and important kingdom, with 
the union of Cordova, completed a jurisdiction 
that reached to the shores of the S. Seas. The 
interesting province of Cochabamba bordering 
upon Peru, brought its little army into the field, 
secured part of the Cordova conspirators who 
had escaped, and relieved the neighbouring towns 
from their old oppressors, and from the influence 
held over them by the viceroy of Lima. Potosi, 
Charcas, La Paz, Cochabamba, Cordova, and 
Salta, have all joined : so that, with the excep 
tion of part of Paraguay still under the ascend 
ancy of the court of the Brazils, the jurisdiction 
of the Junta of Buenos Ayres extended itself 
over the whole of the vice-royalty of La Plata as 
it lately stood, with the kingdom of Chile, and 
2,500,000 inhabitants exulted in their new-born 
freedom. 

From the period of the first differences between 
the New Junta of Buenos Ayres and the Gover 
nor of Monte Video, the general aggregate of 
the events we have to record, up to the end of 
the year 1811, may be stated in these words; 
namely, that while the troops of Buenos Ayres 
were bombarding the town of Monte Video, the 
seamen of the latter place were assailing, in the 
like melancholy manner, the former city. These 
two powers were evidently the representatives 
of very different interests ; but the spirit of war 
seemed to be so determined in these unhappy re 
gions, that, even when there was a temporary 
cessation of hostilities between those natural 
rivals, the old and new Spaniards of the city of 
Buenos Ayres itself engaged in the most deadly 
enmities, and were constantly conspiring against 
each other s lives. From about the 2d of July 
to the beginning of August, 1812, the city of 
Buenos Ayres was in a state of the utmost com 
motion. The cause of this is said to have been 
the dissatisfaction which the European Spaniards 
had conceived, on account of the abject condi 
tion in which they were held by the Junta of 
Buenos Ayres. Hence they are said to have 
conceived the idea of overturning the existing 
government, with the view of taking into their 
own hands the supreme authority. They failed 
in their project, and upwards of 200 of the con 
spirators (comprising the first class of merchants) 
were made prisoners, of whom 25 were shot. The 



following extract of a letter contains some of the 
particulars of these unhappy occurrences. 

" The conspiracy was planned by Martin Al- 
zagu, a Spaniard, 60 years of age, who had ac 
cumulated a large fortune in Buenos Ayres. His 
chief assistants were Telechea Francisco Valde- 
pares, and a monk named Jose de las Animas. 
They had provided 1500 stand of arms. Accord 
ing to their project, the depots of ammunition 
and artillery, and the military guards in different 
parts of the city, were to be surprised at one 
and the same moment. They were then to at 
tack the fortress. It was planned that a party 
should secure the Fort Major, and compel him 
to open the principal gate, at which 300 of the 
conspirators were to be ready to enter. They 
had prepared false keys to open the sally port, 
and 400 were to enter on that side. The attempt 
was to be made at two o clock in the morning of 
the 4th of July. The Spanish sailors in the 
road were to land at day -break, by a signal 
agreed upon, to assist the conspirators. All the 
members of the government and the magistrates 
were to be immediately shot ; and all the native 
inhabitants, and the American settlers, were to 
be shipped off for Monte Video. The plot was 
discovered on the 2cl, by a slave belonging to 
one of the principal conspirators; and, on the 
3d, Alzaga and three more of the conspirators 
were secured, and instantly shot. Alzaga has 
left a wife and 14 children." 

The following is a list of the names of the al 
leged culprits, and the time of their death. Most 
of them were persons of distinction and opu 
lence. These persons were executed on the 
several days stated: 

July 3. Francisco Cara, Mathewes Camira, 
Sebastian Torres. 

July 6. Martin de Alzaga, Francisco Tele 
chea, Francisco Valdepares, Miguel Marco, Jose 
Bias, Diego Saintenac. 

July 13. Jose de Animos (Barbon Friar). 

July 16. Domingo Liargo, Valentin Sopina, 
Carlos Castelana. 

July 23. Carlos Durac, Fernandez Pares, 
Roque Laureta, Jose Carracela, Antonio Ver- 
duga, Juan Mourin, Mateo Fernandez Barula, 
Felipe Alonzo Conde. 

Besides these, one European Spaniard more, 
had been convicted of being a principal in the 
conspiracy, and had paid the forfeit of his life. 
In all 28 had been put to death. During these 
events, through the interference of Lord Strang- 
ford, a perfect good understanding was main-] 



168 



PLATA. 



[tained between the Portuguese government and 
the Junta; but, on the other hand, information 
had reached Buenos Ayres that all the Peruvian 
mines, and the mint at Potosti, were in the power 
of the army of Lima. The punishment of the 
conspirators had revived the animosity of the 
government and inhabitants of Monte Video, 
against the Junta of Buenos Ay res ; and active 
preparations were making for the recommence 
ment of hostilities. 

Whilst such continued to be the state of affairs 
in the colonies, the Cortes were at length pro 
ceeding at home to adopt some measures, with a 
view to conciliation. The following are extracts 
from the Cadiz papers, of Oct. 22. 

" CORTES, 21sx DAY. 

" In consequence of an official dispatch from 
the secretary of marine having been read, and 
various other documents, stating that general 
Monteverde had pacified all the province of Ca 
racas, and taken the rebel Miranda, and all the 
other insurgent chiefs prisoners. Senor Cala- 
trava proposed, that the regency should be in 
structed to inform Don Domingo Monteverde, 
that the Cortes had seen with ^reat satisfaction 
the happy results of his operations, as likewise 
the important services which he, and the troops 
under his command, had performed in the pacifi 
cation and reconquest of the Caracas. This pro 
position was approved, with the suppression of 
the word reconquest, on the proposal of Senor 
Mendiola. 

" The Cortes then proceeded to the consider 
ation of the ultramarine commission (see the 
sitting of the 12th August 1812) relative to the 
abolition of the Mitas, (1) and the other propo 
sitions of Senor Castello. This senor made a 
long and learned discourse, in which, with the 
most solid reasons he proved the inhumanity, 
injustice, and barbarity of such an establishment. 
Having concluded, he begged of Senor Conde de 
Toreno that they should immediately proceed to 
vote, as the point did not require greater illus 
tration, and all the deputies being convinced (ex 
cept, perhaps, Senor Astolza, who had made a 
proposition in favour of the Las Mitas) of the 
necessity of abolishing an establishment which 
opposed, the principles of equality established 
between the ultramarine Spaniards and those of 
the peninsula. After some discussion, in which 
senors Astolaza and Larrazabel took a part, the 
report of the commission was put to the vote and 
unanimously approved. 



" 1st. That Las Mitas should be for ever abo 
lished." (The Mitas are a certain contribution 
of men which the people are obliged to give for 
the cultivation of the land, working of the mines, 
&amp;c.) 

" 2d. That the Indians should be exempted 
from the personal service they gave the clergy, 
or any other public functionary whatever; oblig 
ing them, however, to satisfy the parochial rights 
the same as the other classes. 

"3d. That the public charges, such as the 
building churches, making roads, &amp;c. should be 
equally borne by all the inhabitants indiscrimi 
nately. 

" 4th. That divisions of land should be made 
to the Indians, leaving to the provincial deputies 
the care of assigning the quotas, &amp;c. &amp;c. 

" 5th. That in all the territories of America 
some of the dignitaries should necessarily remain 
with the Indians." 

By advices from Buenos Ayres, up to the 15th 
of the same month, in which the above decree 
was passed, it appeared that an extraordinary 
courier had arrived in that town from Chile, with 
the intelligence that the European and American 
Spaniards had come to an amicable understand 
ing, and that great rejoicings were going on ; 
but we do not consider this reconciliation as likely 
to be of any long standing. It was also observed!, 
that the British navigation would probably be 
much molested by the Lima cruizers on the coast 
of Chile. 

By the same post, it was asserted that the 
town of Buenos Ayres had been in a ferment 
ever since the commencement of the month, in 
consequence of the struggles of the different par 
ties for power, which had ended in the overthrow 
of the persons in office, and that a new set was 
brought forward for the three ensuing months, 
until the next general assembly met. This is 
the fourth attempt at an elective body for a po 
pular representation, and the next will probably 
share the fate of their predecessors, of being in 
terrupted in their debates, and turned out of 
doors by the military. The new executive body 
consists of Dr. Juan Jose de Pasos, Dr. Nicolas 
de la Pana, and Dr. Antonio Alvarez de Jonte. 
The public appeared to be reconciled to the 
change. 

It is, we should suspect, needless for us to ob 
serve, after the various changes of fortune exhi 
bited in the jurisdiction of La Plata, within the 
last three years, that no idea of the final issue of 
the revolution can be formed from the events last] 



PL A 

[ enumerated, any farther than as they tend to 
shew, and, as we believe, most justly, that the 
soil should perish ere the tree of freedom that 
has been planted in it should be rooted up; or, 
in other words, that those who have pledged 
themselves to the cause of emancipation, would 
leave no stratagem, no hardiness untried, to effect 
the object of their wishes. See the General Pre 
face.] 

PLATA, another, a large river of the province 
and government of Santa Cruz de la Sierra, in 
Peru. It rises from some lakes, runs in a very 
abundant stream, forming a curve ; inclining to 
n. 11. w. and enters the Piray in the province and 
government of Moxos. It is also called Guapaix 
and Grinde; and to the n. of the capital of Santa 
Cruz it has a good port, called Pailas. 

PLATA, another, a small river, of the pro 
vince and government of Popayan in the Nuevo 
Reyno de Granada. It runs from the e. to w. 
and a little from its source enters the Patu- 
mayo. 

PLATA, a small island of the S. Sea, near the 
cape or promontory of San Lorenzo, in the pro 
vince and government of Guayaquil. It is the 
gulf of this name, and belongs to the jurisdic 
tion of the district of Puerto Viejo. Francisco 
Pizarro called it thus, as having seen here the 
first silver of Peru amongst the Indians. It is 
two leagues long and one and an half wide, sur 
rounded with very lofty and pointed rocks, de 
sert and covered with trees, and filled with 
snakes and vipers. A little more than three 
leagues from the continent, in lat. 1 12 s. 

PLATA, some very large shoals or sand banks, 
to thes. of St. Domingo. They are two, the one 
round, the other long. 

PLATANAR, a settlement of the province of 
Barcelona, and government of Cumana. Al 
though it is situate in Guayana, it is one of the 
settlements founded by the religious observers of 
San Francisco del Piritu. 

PLATANAR, another settlement, in this pro 
vince, on the shore of a river, and near its en 
trance into the Orinoco. ^ 

PLATANOS, SAN JUAN DE LOS, a settle 
ment of the head settlement of the district and 
alcaldia mayor of Tanzitaro in Nueva Espana. 
It is of an hot temperature, inhabited by 44) fa 
milies of Indians, produces in abundance fruits 
and palms of cocos, much esteemed in the other 
jurisdictions ; and is 10 leagues n. of its head 
settlement. 

PLATANOS, a river of the island of Cuba. 
. iv. 



PL A 



16$ 



which rises in the Sierras, which it has to the e. 
runs n. n. e. and enters the sea between the point 
of Las Mulas and the bay of Nipes. 

PLATE, a small isle of the N. Sea, near the 
road of Nova Scotia, in the Gulph of St. Law 
rence, between the island of Buenaventura and 
Cape Gaspe. 

PLATE, another, a small island on the w. coast 
of Newfoundland. 

PLATE, another, near the e. coast of Cape 
Britain, between the bay of Miray and the Piedra 
de Fusil. 

PLATE, a point of land or cape, on the same e. 
coast of Cape Britain, between Port Delphin and 
the Bay of Naganiche. 

[PLATE, MONTE DE, a mountainous settle 
ment near the centre of the island of St. Domin 
go, towards its eastern extremity, 15 leagues n. 
of the mouth of Macoriz river, and 16 to the 
n. e. of the city of St. Domingo. It was formerly a 
flourishing place, and called a city ; but the whole 
parish does not now contain above 600 souls. 
Two leagues to the w. e. of it is the wretched set 
tlement of Boya, to which the cacique Henri re 
tired, with the small remnant of Indians, when 
the cruelties of the Spaniards, in the reign of 
Charles V. had driven him to a revolt. There 
does not now exist one pure descendant of their 
race.] 

[PLATE, POINT, the n. point of the entrance 
into Port Dauphin, on the e. coast of the island 
of Cape Breton, or Sydney ; and three leagues 
s. w. by s. of Cape Fumi, which is the s. w. 
boundary of the harbour of Achepe.] 

[PLATE, PORT DE, on the n. coast of the island 
of St. Domingo, is overlooked by a white moun 
tain, and lies 22 leagues w. of Old Cape Fran 
cois. It has three fathoms water at its entrance, 
but diminishes within; and is but an indifferent 
harbour. The bottom is in some parts sharp 
rocks, capable of cutting the cables. A vessel 
must, on entering, keep very close to the point 
of the breaker, near the eastern fort; when in, 
she anchors in the middle of the port. The can 
ton of Port de Plate greatly abounds in mines of 
gold, silver and copper. There are also mines 
of plaster. It is unhealthy, from the custom 
which the inhabitants have of drinking the water 
of a ravine. It has a handsome church, and about 
2,500 inhabitants.] 

[PLATE FORME, LA, a town on the s. side of 
the n. peninsula of St. Domingo, three leagues 
w. of Point du Paradis, which is opposite the 
settlement of that name, a league from the sea; 



170 



P L A 



miles s. by e. of Bombarde, and 21 s. e. 
of the Mole. Lat. 19 35 n. Long. 73 



eight 
by s. 
15 o 

PLATEROS, an ancient and barbarous nation 
of Indians, of the province and corregimiento of 
Cuenca in the kingdom of Quito. They occu 
pied the country which lies to the e. of the river 
Paute, and were excellent artificers of silver, 
from whence they had this name given to them. 
They are now entirely extinguished. 

[PLATFORM, a bay on the n. coast of the 
island of Jamaica, eastward of Dunklin s Cliff.] 

PLATO, a settlement of the province and 

government of Santa Marta in the Nuevo Reyno 
e Granada, on the shore of the river Grande de 
la Magdalena, and s. of the town of Tenerife. 

PLATRIERE, a bay or large and convenient 
port of Cape Britain, in N. America. 

[TLATTE, LA, a small river of Vermont, 
which falls into Lake Champlain at Shelburne.] 

PLATTSBURG, a town near the n. shore of 
Lake George in the state of New York. Five 
miles w. of Ticonderoga, and 187 n. of New York 
city. 

IPLATTSBURGH, is an extensive township 
in Clinton County, New York ; situate on the w. 
margin of Lake Champlain, lying n. of Wills- 
borough, about 240 miles n. of New York city, 
and 146 s. s. w. of Quebec in Canada. From the 
s. part of the town the mountains recede wide 
away from the lake, and leave a charming tract 
of excellent land, of a rich loam, well watered ; 
and about an equal proportion suitable for mea 
dow and for tillage. The land rises in a gentle 
ascent for several miles from the lake, of which 
every farm will have a delightful view. Several 
years ago this township, and the whole county 
indeed, which at present contains several thou 
sand inhabitants, was a wilderness ; now they 
have a house for public worship, a court-house 
and gaol, the courts of common pleas and gene 
ral sessions of the peace sit here twice in a year ; 
they have artizans of almost every kind among 
them, and furnish among themselves all the ma 
terials for building, glass excepted. Polite cir 
cles may here be found, and the genteel traveller 
be entertained with the luxuries of a sea-port, a 
tune on the harpsichord, and a philosophical con 
versation. In 1790, it contained 458 inhabitants, 
including 13 slaves. In 1796 there were 123 of 
the inhabitants qualified electors.") 

PLAY-GREEN, or PUSCACOGAN, a lake in 
N. America, in the territory belonging to the 
Hudson s Bay Company ; lies near the n. shore 
of Lake Winnipy. 



P L E 

PLAYA, LA, a part of the coast of Peru, in 
the province and corregimiento of Truxillo ; be 
tween the port of Guanape and the settlement of 
Moche. 

PLAYA, another, with the addition of Parda. 
which is a port on the Strait of Magellan, at 
the entrance of the narrow pass called Del Pa- 
sage. 

PLAYA, another, with the addition of Blanca, 
and the dedicatory title of San Agustin, a settle 
ment of the province and government of Carta 
gena in the Nuevo Reyno de Granada ; situate 
on the shore of the river Grande de la Magda 
lena. It is one of the new towns founded in 
1776 by the governor Don Francisco Pimienta. 

PLAYA, another, with the addition of Grande, 
in the same province and government as the 
former. It lies upon a large strand at the en 
trance of the city of Cartagena. 

PLAZA, a settlement and asiento of gold 
mines of the province and corregimiento of Quil- 
lota in the kingdom of Chile ; in a fertile and 
beautiful valley. 

PLAZA, a river of the province and govern 
ment of Popayan in the Nuevo Reyno de Gra 
nada, which rises in the valley of Los Paces, and 
enters the Cauca. 

PLAZILLA, a settlement and asiento of gold 
mines of the province and corregimiento of Quil- 
lota in the kingdom of Chile. 

[PLEASANT Point, a n. e. head-land in 
Merry Meeting Bay, district of Maine, and in 
Lincoln County. See MERRY MEETING Bay.] 

[PLEASANT Point, the e. boundary of the- 
mouth of Hawk s or Sandwich River, in the 
harbour of Chebucto, on the s. coast of Nova 
Scotia.] 

[PLEASANT River, a small village, where is 
a post-office on the sea-coast of Washington 
County, district of Maine, and at the head of 
Narraguagus Bay ; 16 miles n. e. of Goldsbo- 
rough, and 24 w. by s. of Machias.] 

[PLEIN River, the n. head-water of Illinois 
River. It interlocks with Chicago River, a 
water of Lake Michigan. Forty miles from its 
source is the place called Hid Island ; 26 miles 
farther it passes through Dupage Lake; and 
five miles below the lake, and s. of Mount Ju 
liet, it joins Theakiki River, which comes from 
the e. Thence the united stream assumes the 
name of Illinois. The land between these 
branches is rich, and intermixed with swamps 
and ponds.] 

PLESIS, a river of the island Guadalupe, 
one of the Antilles. It rises in the mountains 



P L U 

of the s. e. runs w. and enters the sea between 
those of Vieux Habitans and Bailif. 

[PLUCKEMIN, a town or village of some 
trade in Somerset County, New Jersey ; 28 miles 
n. of Princeton, and about 18 s. w. of Brunswick. 
It derived its singular name from an old Irish 
man noted for his address in taking in people.] 

[PLUE, LAC LA, or RAINY Lake, lies zo. by 
n. of Lake Superior, and e. by s. of the Lake of 
the Woods, in Upper Canada. 

The Narrows are in n. lat. - - 49 3 2" 
Fort Lac la Plue - . *, 48 35 49 

Island Portage - - - 50 7 31 
At the Barrier - - 50 7 51 

W. long. - b+nJ - - 95 8 30 
[PLUMB Island, on the coast of Massachu 
setts, is about seven miles long, and about half a 
mile broad, extending from the entrance of Ips 
wich River on the s., nearly a n. course to the 
mouth of Merrimack River, and is separated from 
the main land by a narrow sound, called Plum 
Island River, which is fordable in several places 
at low water. It consists for the most part of 
sand, blown into curious heaps, and crowned 
with bushes bearing the beach-plum. There is 
however, a valuable property of salt-marsh, and 
at the s. end of the island are two or three good 
farms. On the n. end stands the light-houses, 
and the remains of a wooden fort, built during 
the war, for the defence of the harbour. On the 
sea-shore of this island, and on Salisbury Beach, 
the Marine Society, and other gentlemen of New- 
bury Port, have humanely erected several small 
houses, furnished with fuel and other conveni 
ences, for the relief of mariners who may be 
shipwrecked on this coast. The n. end lies in 
lat. 42 47 n. and long. 70 50 w. See NEW- 
BUR Y Port.] 

[PLUMB Island, on the n. e. coast of Long 
Island, in the state of New York, is annexed 
to Southhold in Suffolk County. It contains 
about 800 acres, and supports seven families. 
It is fertile, and produces wheat, corn, butter, 
cheese, and wool. It is three-fourths of a mile 
from the e. point of Southhold. This island, 
with the sandy point of Gardner s Island, form 
the entrance of Gardner s Bay.] 

[PLUMB Point, GREAT, on the s. coast of the 
island of Jamaica, forms the s. e. limit of the 
peninsula of Port Royal, which shelters the har 
bour of Kingston. Little Plumb Point lies w. 
of the former, towards the town of Port Royal, 
on the s. side of the peninsula.] 

[PLUMSTEAD, a post-town of Pennsylvania; 
situate on the w. side of Delaware River, 28 



PLY 



171 



miles w. of Philadelphia, and 14 s. by w. of Alex 
andria in New Jersey.] 

[PLYMOUTH, a maritime county in the e . 
part of the state of Massachusetts, having Massa 
chusetts Bay to the n. e.., Bristol County s. w. 9 
Barnstaple County s. e., and Norfolk County n.w. 
It is subdivided into 15 townships, of which Ply 
mouth is the chief; and contains 4240 houses 
and 29,535 inhabitants. Within the counties of 
Plymouth and Bristol, there are now in opera 
tion, 14 blast, and six air furnaces, 20 forges, 
seven slitting and rolling mills, besides a number 
of trip-hammer shops, and an almost incredible 
number of nail-shops, and others for common 
smithery. These furnaces, supplied from the 
neighbouring mines, produce annually from 1500 
to 1800 tons of iron ware. The forges, on an 
average, manufacture more than 1000 tons an 
nually, and the slitting and rolling mills, at least 
1500 tons. The various manufactures of these 
mills, have given rise to many other branches in 
iron and steel, viz. cut and hammered nails, 
spades and shovels, card-teeth, saws, scythes, 
metal buttons, cannon balls, bells, fire arms, &amp;c. 
In these counties are also manufactured hand- 
bellows, combs, sheet-iron for the tin manufac 
ture, wire, linseed-oil, snuff, stone and earthen 
ware. The iron-works, called the Federal Fur 
nace, are seven miles from Plymouth Harbour.] 

[PLYMOUTH, a sea-port town in Massachu 
setts, shire town of the county of Plymouth, 26 
miles s. s. e. from Boston ; a post-town and 
port of entry ; bounded n. by Kingston, and a 
line- extending across the harbour to the Gur 
net, w. by Carver, s. by Wareham and Sand 
wich, and e. by the sea. The township is ex 
tensive, containing more than 80 square miles. 
It is about 16 miles in length, and more than five 
in breadth. The number of inhabitants, by the 
census of 1791, was 2995. The Town, or prin 
cipal settlement, which contains more than two- 
thirds of the inhabitants, is on the n. e. part of 
the township, near a stream called the Town 
Brook, which flows from a large pond, bearing 
the name of Billington Sea. One main street 
crosses the stream, and is intersected by three 
cross streets, extending to the shore : another 
street runs w. on the n. side of the brook. The 
town is compactly built, and contains about 200 
dwelling houses, (the greater part of which are 
on the n. side of the Town Brook), a handsome 
meeting-house, court-house, and gaol. There 
are two precincts ; one includes the town, and 
the districts of Hobbs Hole, and Eel River; the 
other is at Monument Ponds, a village lying] 
z 2 



J72 



PLYMOUTH. 



[about seven miles 5. from the town, beyond the 
high lands of Monument. 

The soil near the coast is generally good ; the 
residue of the township is barren, and notwith 
standing the antiquity of the settlement, is yet a 
forest. The wood is principally pine, though 
there are many tracts covered with oak. 

The harbour is capacious, but shallow, and is 
formed by a long and narrow neck of land, called 
Salt-house Beach, extending s. from Marshfield, 
and terminating at the Gurnet Head, and by a 
smaller beach within, running in an opposite di 
rection, and connected with the main land near 
Eel River, about three miles from the town. 
There is a light-house on the Gurnet, and on 
Salthouse Beach is placed one of the huts erected 
and maintained by the Humane Society of Mas 
sachusetts, for the reception and relief of ship 
wrecked mariners. There is a beach in the inner 
beach, which exposes the shipping, even at the 
wharfs, during an e. storm. 

The principal business of the town is the cod- 
fishery, in which are employed 2000 tons of 
shipping, and about 300 men annually. There 
are a few coasting vessels belonging to the place, 
and two brigs ; and 10 or 12 schooners, em 
ployed in foreign trade. Many of the fishing 
vessels make voyages to the 5. states in the 
winter season. The exports, which, at the com 
mencement of the present federal government, 
were very inconsiderable, not exceeding 8000 or 
9000 dollars annually, are now respectable. In 
1795, they exceeded 70,000 dollars, and in 1796, 
they amounted to near 130,000 dollars. For 
merly the produce of the fishery was sold at 
Boston or Salem ; it is now almost wholly ex 
ported from the town, and considerable quanti 
ties of fish have lately been purchased at Boston, 
and exported from Plymouth. The proceeds of 
the foreign voyages, are generally conveyed to 
Boston for a market. 

The losses and sufferings of the inhabitants of 
Plymouth, during the war for independence, were 
extreme. Their vessels were almost all captured 
or lost. The men who used to be employed in 
them, were dispersed in the sea and land service, 
in which many of them lost their lives : a great 
number of widows and orphans were left desti 
tute ; business languished, houses, stores, and 
wharfs went to decay, and a general appearance 
of poverty and oppression prevailed. A few 
years of peace and good government have re 
versed this melancholly state of things. A young, 
industrious, and enterprising race of seamen has 
succeeded to those who are gone : business has 



revived ; the navigation and commerce of the 
place are more respectable than at any former 
period ; the houses are in good repair, many 
new ones are erected, and a spirit of enterprize 
and improvement is apparent. An academy is 
contemplated : a valuable slitting-mill, and other 
works are erected on the Town Brook. A stage, 
which goes twice a week to Boston, is well sup 
ported ; and an aqueduct for bringing fresh water 
to the houses of the inhabitants is more than half 
completed. 

The township abounds with ponds and streams. 
More than 100 ponds appear on the map lately 
taken by a committee of the town, and transmit 
ted to the secretary s office. Billington Sea is 
about two miles from the town, and covers near 
300 acres. From the stream flowing from &amp;gt;his 
pond the aqueduct will be supplied. South Pond 
is much larger. Further s. is Halfway Pond, 
and Long Pond. Near Sandwich Line is the 
Great Herring Pond. To Billington Sea, Half 
way Pond, and the Great Herring Pond, ale- 
wives resort in their season in great abundance. 
The Great Herring Pond has been contemplated 
as a reservoir for the projected canal across the 
isthmus, between Buzzard and Barnstable Bays. 
Many of the ponds abound with white and red 
perch, pike, and other fresh water fish ; and in 
the numerous brooks which run into the sea in 
different parts of the township, are found excel 
lent trout. These ponds and streams are often 
the scenes of amusement for parties of both sexes 
in the summer season. 

At the village of Monument Ponds and Eel 
River, and in some other parts of the township, 
many of the inhabitants are farmers. In the 
town the gardens are numerous and well culti 
vated, and when aided by the aqueduct will be 
productive equal to the wants of the inhabi 
tants. 

The situation of the town is pleasant and 
healthful. The e. winds of the spring, how 
ever, are distressing to persons of tender habits, 
and are uncomfortable even to the robust. The 
market is not regularly supplied. Fuel, fish, 
poultry, and wild fowl are plentiful and cheaper, 
perhaps, than in any other sea-port of the size. 
The people are sober, friendly, and industrious. 
It is the first settlement in New England, and is 
peopled, principally, by the descendants of the 
ancient stock. But few foreigners are among) 
them. The rock on which their forefathers first 
landed, was conveyed, in 1774, from the shore to a 
square in the centre of the town. The senti 
mental traveller will not fail to view it ; and if] 



PLYMOUTH. 



173 



The is passing to Cape Cod, he will pause a mo 
ment at Clampudding Pond, about seven miles 
from the town, where the people in ancient days, 
when travelling from the cape to attend the 
courts of Plymouth, used to sit and regale them 
selves with the clams and pudding which they 
brought with them. A few miles further s., on 
the same road, are the Sacrifice Rocks, which are 
covered with the dry limbs of trees and pine- 
knots, heaped upon them by the Indians as they 
pass by, in observance of an ancient usage, the 
origin of which is uncertain. 

The cheapness of living, the plenty of fuel, and 
the convenient mill-seats which are to be found 
in Plymouth, will probably render it, at some 
future period, a considerable manufacturing town. 
Domestic manufactures are now very general 
there. I 1 ishery and foreign commerce at present 
engage almost all the active capital of the town ; 
but the contigencies to which they are exposed 
may lead to some other sources of employment 
and profit. 

In the three last quarters of 1796, the exports 
were as follow : 

Second quarter - - 56,243 dollars 
Third ditto - - 36,634 
Fourth ditto - - 36,006 
In the first quarter of the year 1797, they 
amounted only to 11,466 dollars. This diminu 
tion has been produced by the apprehensions ex 
cited by the depredations of the French on the 
commerce of the United States. 
\JVe shall conclude this article with an interesting 
and authentic summary of the affairs of the co 
lony of New Plymouth, from the first settle 
ment until the incorporation with Massachusetts 
Bay, 8fc. in one province. 

The first settlers of New Plymouth went, in 
the beginning of the seventeenth century, from 
England to Holland. Their removal to Holland 
was attended with no small difficulty and hazard. 
One of the company, by name Bradford, gives 
this account of it : " There was a large company 
of them proposed to get passage at Boston in 
Lincolnshire, and, for that end, had hired a ship 
wholly to themselves, and made agreement with 
the master to be ready at a certain day, and take 
them and their goods in at a convenient place, 
where accordingly they would all attend in readi 
ness. So after long waiting and large expense, 
though he kept not day with them, yet he came 
at length and took them in, in the night. But 
when he had them and their goods aboard he 
betrayed them, having beforehand complotted 
with the searchers and other officers so to do, 



who took them and put them into open boats, 
and then rifled and ransacked them, searching 
them to their shirts for money, yea even the 
women, further than became modesty ; and then 
carried them back into the town, and made them 
a spectacle and wonder to the multitude, which 
came flocking on all sides to behold them. Being 
thus, first by the catchpoles, rifled and stripped 
of their money, books, and much other goods, 
they were presented to the magistrates, and mes 
sengers sent to inform the lords of the council 
of them, and so they were committed to ward. 
Indeed the magistrates used them courteouslvj 
and showed them what favour they could ; but 
could not deliver them till order came from the 
council table, but the issue was that, after a 
month s imprisonment, the greatest part were 
dismissed, and sent to the places from whence 
they came ; but seven of the principal men were 
still kept in prison, and bound over to the as 
sizes. The next spring after there was another 
attempt made, by some of these and others, to 
get over at another place ; and so it fell out;, 
that they light of a Dutchman at Hull, having 
a ship of his own belonging to Zealand. They 
made agreement with him, and acquainted him 
with their condition, hoping to find more faith 
fulness in him than in the former of their own 
nation. He bade them not fear, for he would 
do well enough. He was by appointment to 
take them in between Grimstone and Hull, where 
was a large common a good way distant from 
any town. Now against the prefixed time, the 
women and children, with the goods, were sent 
to the place in a small bark, which they had 
hired for that end, and the men were to meet 
them by land ; but it so fell out that they were 
there a day before the ship came, and the sea 
being rough, and the women very sick, prevailed 
with the seamen to put into a creek hard by, 
where they lay on ground at low water. The 
next morning the ship came, but they were fast 
and could not stir till about noon. In the mean 
time, the shipmaster, perceiving how the matter 
was, sent his boat to get the men aboard whom 
he saw ready, walking about the shore : but after 
the first boatful was got aboard, and she was 
ready to go for more, the master espied a great 
company,, both horse and foot, with bills and 
guns, and other weapons ; for the country was 
raised to take them. The Dutchman, seeing 
that, swore his country oath, sacramentej and, 
having the wind fair, weighed anchor, hoisted 
sails and away. After ensuring a fearful storm 
at sea, for 14 days or more, seven whereof they] 



174 



PLYMOUTH. 



[never saw sun, moon, nor stars, and being driven 
near the coast of Norway, they arrived at their 
desired haven, where the people came flocking, 
admiring their deliverance, the storm having 
been so long and sore, in which much hurt had 
been done, as the master s friends related to him 
in their congratulations. The rest of the men 
that were in greatest danger, made a shift to 
escape away before the troop could surprize 
them, those only staying that best might be as 
sisting unto the women. But pitiful it was to 
see the heavy case of these poor women in dis 
tress ; what weeping and crying on every side, 
some for their husbands that were carried away 
in the ship, others not knowing what should be 
come of them and their little ones, crying for 
fear and quaking with cold. Being apprehended, 
they were hurried from one place to another, 
till, in the end, they knew not what to do with 
them ; for, to imprison so many women with their 
innocent children, for no other cause, many of 
them, but that they would go with their hus 
bands, seemed to be unreasonable, and all would 
cry out of them ; and to send them home again 
was as difficult, for they alleged, as the truth 
was, they had no homes to go to, for they had 
either sold or otherwise disposed of their houses 
and livings. To be short, after they had been 
thus turmoiled a good while, and conveyed from 
one constable to another, they were glad to be 
rid of them in the end upon any terms, though, 
in the mean time, they, poor souls, endured mi 
sery enough." 

After eleven or twelve years residence in Hol 
land, in which time they had contention among 
themselves, and divided and became two churches 
or congregations, one of the congregations, whose 
minister was Mr. John Robinson, determined to 
remove to America. There were many obstacles 
in their way, and it took up several years of 
their pilgrimage to make the necessary prepara 
tions for such an undertaking. At length, in 
the year 1620, about one half the congregation 
embarked, first from Holland to England, where 
two ships were ready to receive them ; and they 
actually sailed at a very seasonable time, but 
meeting with contrary winds and one of the ships 
proving leaky, they put back and were obliged 
to leave her with part of their company behind, 
the other ship proceeding upon her voyage late 
in the year, so that it was about the 8th or 9th of 
November before they made the coast of Ame 
rica, and falling more to the northward than they 
intended, they made another attempt to sail fur 
ther *.; but meeting with contrary wind and 



hazardous shoals, they were glad to put into the 
harbour of Cape Cod, determined to winter in the 
most convenient place they could find. This 
disappointment was grievous to them, but before 
spring, they considered it as a favourable provi 
dence. They were so reduced in the winter by 
sickness and death, that they supposed they must 
have fallen a sacrifice to the Indians upon Hud 
son s River, where they proposed to begin a 
colony. The master, or pilot, it is said, bribed 
by the Dutch West-India company, had engaged, 
at all events, not to land them at Hudson s River, 
but they were determined upon it, and earlier in 
the year he would have found it very difficult to 
have diverted them. 

The ship lay five weeks in Cape Cod harbour. 
They could not expect to find a better harbour, 
but the land was of no value. The passengers 
were employed, sometimes travelling by land, 
sometimes by water, in search of some other har 
bour, where there was better land, but could find 
none capable of receiving vessels of any burden. 
At length, December 6th, they resolved upon one 
attempt more, and after coasting many leagues, a 
violent storm arose and their pilot made for the 
first harbour, which he supposed to be Sagaquabe, 
where he was well acquainted, but soon found 
himself in a cove, since called the Gurnet s Nose, 
full of breakers, and crying out, my eyes never 
saw this place before, would have run the shallop 
ashore before the wind, if a stout seamen who 
was at the helm had not called to the oars men, 
About with her, if you are men ; and by this 
means he saved their lives, for he discovered an 
opening or sound a-head, and, in a short time, run 
the boat under the lee of an island, now well 
known by the name of Clark s Island. Here they 
road out the storm and in the morning went 
ashore, kindled a fire and rested, it being the 
first day of the week. The next day they sounded 
many parts of the harbour, and found good water 
for ships, and were pleased with the land, and 
judged it the best place they had seen, and the 
Indian corn-fields round the harbour encouraged 
them that they should be able also to raise bread 
for their support. Upon their return to the ship 
with this good news they weighed anchor, and 
the whole company arrived the 16th of December. 
The whole number, exclusive of the mariners, 
amounted to 101, about one fourth part heads of fa 
milies, the rest wives, children and servants. They 
supposed some at least of the company which 
they left behind in England, and most of the con 
gregation in Leyden, with Mr. Robinson the 
minister, would follow ; and this seems to havej 



PLYMOUTH. 



175 



[been the whole number expected upon their pi an, 
for completing the colony. In truth, as many 
as 35 did arrive the 9th of November the next 
year, but their minister never came. He en 
couraged them from year to year, and seems to 
have been prevented by disappointments from 
those in England, who undertook to provide for 
the passage of him and his congregation, until 
the year 1625, when he died, and his congrega 
tion dispersed, although some found their way to 
their brethren before and some after his death. 
He was at first a thorough separatist, and Mr. 
Hubbardsays " was transported with their prin 
ciples so far as to publish his opinions against 
hearing any of the preachers of the church of 
England were they never so learned and pious, 
but afterwards acknowledged his error in a judi 
cious and godly discourse," &amp;c. He is said to have 
been a man of good learning and of a benevolent 
disposition, and Mr. Bradford relates an anecdote 
which shows him, as well as their congregation 
in general, to have been in no small esteem 
among the Dutch. 

Our new comers had obtained a grant of part 
of the continent near Hudson s River, before the 
year 1620, and expected to be under the govern 
ment of the colony in Virginia, but, before they 
embarked, they heard that the lands within their 
grant were made part of a new patent to the 
council of Plymouth in Devon ; so th?t they 
were going into a part of the world where there 
was no government subsisting by authority from 
any European state, nor did they carry other 
powers or authority with them, than what each 
of them brought into the world. 

They were convinced, upon their passage, that 
they could not long subsist without government. 
Some of the inferior class among them muttered, 
that when they should get ashore, one man 
would be as good as another, and they would do 
what seemed good in their own eyes. This led 
the graver sort to consider how to prevent it, 
and, for this purpose, they prepared the follow 
ing instrument for every man to sign before he 
landed. 

" In the name of God, Amen. We whose 
names are underwritten, the loyal subjects of 
our dread sovereign lord King James, by the 
grace of God of Great Britain, France and Ire 
land, king, defender of the faith, &amp;c. Having 
undertaken, for the glory of God and advance 
ment of the Christian faith, and honour of our 
king and country, a voyage to plant the first 
colony in the northern parts of Virginia, do by 
these presents, solemnly and mutually, in the 



presence of God and one of another, covenant 
and combine ourselves together into a civil body 
politic, for our better ordering and preservation, 
and furtherence of the ends aforesaid, and by 
virtue hereof to enact, constitute and frame such 
just and equal laws and ordinances, acts, con 
stitutions and offices, from time to time, as shall 
be thought most meet and convenient for the 
general good of the colony, unto which we pro 
mise all due subjection and obedience. In wit 
ness whereof we have hereunto subscribed our 
names, at Cape Cod, the llth of November, in 
the year of the reign of our sovereign lord King 
James, of England, France and Ireland the 18th, 
and of Scotland the 54th, Anno Dora. 1620. 

(Signed by) 

John Carver, John Turner, 

Wm. Bradford, Francis Eaton, 

Edw. Winslow, James Chilton, 

Wm. Brewster, John Croxton, 

Isaac Allerton, John Billington, 

Miles Standish, Joses Fletcher, 

John Alden, John Goodman, 

Sam. Fuller, Digory Priest, 

Christopher Martin, Thomas Williams, 
Wm. Mullins, Gilbert Winslow, 

Wm. White, Edw. Mageson, 

Richard Warren, Peter Brown, 
John Howland, Richard Bitteridge, 

Steph i. Hopkins, George Soule, 
Edw. Tilley, Richard Clarke, 

John Tilley, Richard Gardner, 

Francis Cook, John Allerton, 

Thomas Rogers, Thomas English, 
Thomas Tinker, Edw. Doten, 
John Ridgsdale, Ed. Liester." 
Edw. Fuller, 

These we suppose to have been all the males, 
of age, in the company; 21 of whom died before 
the end of March, of the scurvy and other sick 
ness, caused by bad lodging and bad diet, and 
the hardships of the winter. About the same 
proportion of the women and children died also, 
50 being the whole number then surviving. In 
1650 there were 30 remaining alive, in 1679 only 
12, in 1694 only two; and Mary Cushman only, 
daughter of Isaac Allerton, was alive in 1698. 
We will now ^ive a brief account of several of 

o 

these persons. 

John Carver had been deacon of their church 
in Holland, was esteemed for his discreet dis 
charge of that office, and being a grave judicious 
man, their eyes were upon him for their chief 
ruler, before they embarked. He lived but a 
short time. His grandson died at Marshfield, at] 



170 



PLYMOUTH. 



[the age of 102. Not long before his death, this 
grandson with his son, his grandson and great 
grandson, were all at work together, without 
doors, and the great great grandson was in the 
house at the same time. 

William Bradford was one of the younger men 
of the company. Douglass says, he was a man 
of no family and no learning. His manuscripts 
shew that he was a plain sensible man, and in his 
public trust he was esteemed as a discreet, up 
right and faithful officer ; and he deserves a 
better character than many of superior birth and 
education. His son was deputy-governor after 
his death; his grandson and two of his great 
grandsons have been of the council for the pro 
vince. 

Edward Winslow was of a very reputable fa 
mily, and of a very active genius, which fitted 
him for employment abroad, and in a great mea 
sure prevented a competition between Bradford 
and him for the governor s place. He was con 
cerned in managing their treaties with the In 
dians and with the neighbouring colonies, made 
several voyages to the eastward and to Connec 
ticut river, as well as four or five voyages to 
England, in the service of the colony first, and 
afterwards of the Massachusetts; and so estab 
lished himself in the favour of the then supreme 
authority in England, as to be employed in some 
very important services. In 1651 he was one of 
the commissioners of Haberdasher s-hall, as they 
were called, from the place of meeting: and, in 
1655, was one of the three superintendents in 
Cromwell s West India expedition. In one of 
his embassies, viz. in 1635, he had a difficult 
task to manage in England ; the particular cir 
cumstances his friend Bradford has preserved 
from oblivion, though they are too prolix to be 
inserted here. 

Mr. Winslow s son was first an assistant, then 
governor of the colony ; his grandson one of the 
council for the province, and many years at the 
head of the county of Plymouth ; one of his 
great grandsons lost his life fighting for his 
country ; two others filled offices of honour and 
trust, and there are now many reputable branches 
of the name and family in different parts of the 
province. 

William Brewster was highly esteemed by the 
whole company, was their ruling elder in Hol 
land, which seems to have been the bar to his 
being their governor; civil and ecclesiastical 
office, in the same person, being then deemed 
incompatible. Mr. Bradford gives this account 
&amp;lt;of him : " After he had attained the knowledge 



of the Latin tongue, and some insight into the 
Greek, and spent some small time at Cambridge, 
and then, being first seasoned with the seeds of 
grace and virtue, he went to the court, and served 
that religious and godly gentleman Mr. Davison, 
divers years, when he was secretary of state; 
who found him so discreet and faithful, that he 
trusted him above all other that were about him, 
and only employed him in all matters of greatest 
trust and secrecy. He esteemed him rather as a 
son than a servant, and for his wisdom and god 
liness, in private, he would converse with him 
more like a friend and familiar than a master. 
He attended his master when he was sent in am- 
bassage by the queen to the Low Countries, in 
the Earl of Leicester s time. He afterwards re 
mained with him till his trouble, when he was 
put from his place about the death of the Queen 
of Scots, and some time after, doing him many 
faithful offices and services in the time of his 
troubles. Afterwards he went and lived in the 
country, in good esteem among his friends and 
the gentlemen of those parts, especially the 
godly and religious. He was the chief of those 
that were taken at Boston, and suffered the 
greatest loss. After he came into Holland he 
suffered much hardship, having spent most of his 
means, having a great charge and many chil 
dren; and, in regard of his former breeding and 
cours^ of life, not so fit for many employments 
as others were, especially such as were toilsome 
and laborious. In the latter part of the time 
spent in Holland, his outward condition was 
mended. He fell into a way, by reason he had 
the Latin tongue, to teach many students who 
had a desire to learn the English tongue, for he 
drew rules to learn it, after the Latin manner ; 
and many gentlemen, both Danes and Germans, 
resorted to him, as they had time from their 
other studies, some of them being great men s 
sons. Removing into this country, these things 
were laid aside, and a new course of living must 
be submitted to, in which he was no way un 
willing to take his part and to bear his burthen 
with the rest, living many times without bread 
or corn many months together, many times having 
nothing but fish, and often wanting that also; 
and drank nothing but water for many years to 
gether, yea, till within five or six years of his 
death, and yet he lived, by the blessing of God, 
in health till very old age, &amp;c." He lived until 
1643, and then died at the age of 84. 

William Brewster, grandson of the above, was 
deacon of the church at Duxbury . Many of his pos 
terity, we are informed, are living in that colony.] 



PLYMOUTH. 



177 



[Isaac Allerton or Alderton, the first assistant, 
was employed several times to negociate matters 
in England, relative to their trade, and at length 
left them and settled there. His male posterity 
settled in Maryland. If they be extinct, Point 
Alderton, which took his name, will probably 
preserve it many ages. 

Miles Standish, is said by Morton, to have 
been a gentleman of Lancashire, heir to a great 
estate, surreptitiously detained from him; his 
great grandfather being a second or younger 
brother of the house of Standish. He had been 
a soldier in the Low Countries, and was thought, 
although of remarkable small stature, the most 
proper person for their chief military officer, as 
long as he lived. Many things are said of his 
notable strength and courage. It is said, that 
when the news of the first Indians being killed, 
by him, came to Mr. Robinson in Holland, he 
wrote to his church to consider the disposition 
of their captain, who was of a warm temper, and 
whom he hoped the Lord had sent among them 
for good, if they used him right; but Mr. Ro 
binson doubted, whether there was not wanting 
that tenderness of the life of man, made after God s 
image, which was meet, and he thought it would 
have been a happy thing, if they had converted 
some before they had killed any. It seems Stan- 
dish was not of their church at first; and Mr. 
Hubbard says, he had more of his education in 
the school of Mars than in the school of Christ. 
He acquired, however, the esteem of the whole 
colony, and died in 1656, much lamented. His 
farm in Duxbury retains the name of Captain s 
Hill to this day, and some part of it yet remains 
in the possession of one of his posterity. 

William White was remarkable for being the 
father of the first-born child, Peregrine White, 
who lived until 1704. 

Stephen Hopkins was one of the assistants, 
and seems to have been much employed in their 
public affairs. Purchase mentions one Stephen 
Hopkins, one of Sir George Somers s company 
at Bermudas, as being disaffected to their civil 
and ecclesiastical regulations, and a promoter of 
separation, and not unlikely to be the same per 
son. He was the ancestor of Mr. Hopkins of 
Providence, the present Governor of Rhode 
Island. 

Richard Warren is mentioned by Bradford, as 
a most useful man among them, the short time 
he lived; dying in 1628; his son, grandson, and 
great grandson, have been since employed in 
public posts in the colony and province. 

VOL. IV. 



John Alden was many years an assistant, and 
several of his descendants have sustained public 
offices, and some of them are now living : so are 
the descendants of John Howland. Of the rest 
of this company we can give little or no account. 

Timothy Hatherly, indeed, was a merchant of 
London, engaged with them from the beginning, 
and came over two or three years after the first. 
He was the principal founder of the town of 
Scituate, and was an assistant : so was Thomas 
Willet, who came from London in 1629, and was 
a principal trader with the Dutch at Manhados, 
and in such esteem with them, that they chose 
him a referree to settle their controverted boun 
dary with the colony of Newhaven. He lived 
many years after, and died at Swanzey. His son 
was one of the first settlers of the Naraganset 
country, in the beginning of last century; and 
his grandson, Francis Willet, Esq. was a person 
of distinguished character in that colony. 

William Thomas, Edmund Freeman, James 
Cudworth, Thomas Southworth, were all assist 
ants, and their families still remain in the colony. 

We must not, however, omit taking notice of 
Richard Bourne, an early settler, and a most 
zealous and indefatigable promoter of the gospel 
among the Indians ; and though we do not find 
him named in the magistracy himself, yet two of 
his descendants have been of the council for the 
province, and several more are now living, of 
very reputable characters, and distinguished by 
posts of honour and trust. 

These were the founders of the colony of New 
Plymouth. The settlement of this colony occa 
sioned the settlement of Massachusetts Bay, which 
was the source of all the other colonies of New 
England. Virginia was in a dying state, and 
seemed to revive and flourish from the example 
of New England. We are not preserving from 
oblivion the names of heroes, whose chief merit 
is the overthrow of cities, provinces, and empires, 
but the names of the founders of a flourishing 
town and colony, if not of the whole British 
empire in America. Such then were the leading 
characters who drew up and signed the instru 
ment already mentioned, for the purpose of pro 
viding against any disputes which might arise 
through want of a due subordination upon their 
first landing. 

By this instrument they formed themselves 
into a proper democracy, and, if they had gone 
no further, perhaps they would have done but 
little towards preserving order. But one great 
reason of this covenant seems to have been of a] 

A A 



PLYMOUTH. 



[mere moral nature, that they might remove all 
scruples of inflicting necessary punishments, even 
capital ones, seeing all had voluntarily subjected 
themselves to them. By common consent they 
agreed upon Mr. John Carver to be their first 
governor, " confiding in his prudence, that he 
would not adventure upon any matter of moment 
without consent of the rest, or, at least, advice 
of such as were known to be the wisest among 
them." (Hubbard.) They seem cautiously to 
have reserved as much of their natural liberty as 
could be consistent with the maintenance of go 
vernment and order. This was rational, and 
every thinking man, when he first quitted the 
state of nature, would do the same. Lord Chief 
Justice Holt said, in the case of Blankald versus 
Galdy, that in case of an uninhabited country 
newly found out by English subjects, all laws in 
force in England are in force there, and the 
court agreed with him. Until they should agree 
upon laws suited to their peculiar circumstances, 
our Plymotheans resolved to make the laws of 
England their rule of government, which, Mr. 
Hubbard says, "they were willing to be subject 
unto, although in a foreign land;" and it seems 
they differed much in this respect from the Mas 
sachusetts colonists, and never established any 
distinct code or body of laws, but " added some 
particular municipal laws of their own, suitable 
to their constitution, in such cases where the 
common law and the statutes of England could 
not well reach and afford them help in emergent 
difficulties, following the advice of Pacuvius to 
his neighbours of Capua, not to cashier their old 
magistrates till they could agree upon better to 
place in their room." Cartwright, who had a 
chief hand in reducing puritanism to a system, 
held, that the magistrate was bound to adhere to 
the judicial law of Moses, and might not punish 
nor pardon, otherwise than they prescribed, and 
him the Massachusetts people followed. 

It must be allowed that, in some instances, 
the Plymotheans ran into the same errors with 
the Massachusetts, and established penalties dis- 
proportioned to the offences. A young factor, 
who came from Virginia, was captivated with 
the charms of an Indian girl, and the effects of 
a criminal conversation soon appeared. He found 
suspicions rising against him, and had no other 
way to avoid whipping but to leave the colony. 
Accordingly he privately departed to the colony 
from whence he came, where we suppose his of 
fence would not have been thought very heinous. 
But the feet was, that these people thought the 



magistrates, being God s ministers, were bound 
to punish all offences in their courts in the same 
proportion as the supreme Judge would punish 
them in the court of heaven. 

They had no scruples of their authority, by 
virtue of their combination, to inflict corporal 
punishment for lesser offences. They had been 10 
years combined before any capital offence was 
committed. In 1630, John Billington, who had 
slipped in among them when they were at London, 
not being one of their church, lay in wait for his 
companion, with whom he was offended, and 
wounded him, so that he died presently after. 
They were in doubt of their authority to pass sen 
tence of death. They had just obtained their pa 
tent from the council of Plymouth, which gave all 
the powers which they had authority to give; but 
if the council, by their patent, had no authority to 
inflict capital punishment themselves, it might 
well be inquired, how they could give this power 
to their substitutes. Their chief reliance, there 
fore, seems to have been upon the voluntary 
submission of this offender, among the rest, to 
the laws and orders of the whole body. This, 
from a mere moral consideration, might induce 
them to proceed to trial and punishment; but, 
as they were within the dominions of Great Bri 
tain, and had no constitutional authority to erect 
courts of justice, scruples of the legality still re 
mained. They therefore applied to their neigh 
bours in the Massachusetts, and prayed their ad 
vice. Mr. Winthrop, having consulted with 
" the ablest gentlemen there," concurred with 
the opinion at Plymouth, that the man ought to 
die, and " the land be purged from blood." This 
was founded upon the divine command, " Who 
soever sheddeth man s blood," &amp;c. which was 
not in any case to be dispensed with. Although 
they were not clothed with legal authority, they 
observed, nevertheless, the forms of law, and 
both grand jury and petty jury were impannelled, 
and, after indictment, verdict and sentence, the 
criminal was executed. 

Mr. Carver, the first governor, died suddenly, 
a few months after their arrival. They chose 
William Bradford to succeed him, and Isaac Al- 
lerton his assistant; but gave this reason for 
choosing an assistant, that Mr. Bradford was upon 
recovery from a fit of sickness, and unable to 
bear the whole burden ; however, it served for a 
precedent, and the same persons were annually 
elected governor and assistant until 1624, when 
they added four persons more for assistants, 
and gave the governor a double voice, and inj 



PLYMOUTH. 



[1633 two more; after which they kept to the 
number of seven assistants, until they submitted 
to King James II. his commission to Andros. In 
70 years they had no more than six different per 
sons governors. 

Bradford, who succeeded Carver, was chosen 
annually from 1621, until he died in 1657, ex 
cept in 1633, 1636, and 1644, when Edward 
Winslow was chosen, and 1634, when Thomas 
Prince was chosen; who also succeeded Brad 
ford, and was annually elected, until his death 
in 1673; when Josias Winslow succeeded, and 
continued until he died in 1680 ; and was suc 
ceeded by Thomas Hinkley, who held the place, 
except in the interruption by Andros, until the 
junction with the Massachusetts in 1692. 

We do not find when they first chose a deputy- 
governor, or gave an assistant the name of de 
puty-governor, for we know of no peculiar share 
of power; but, in the latter part of the patent, 
William Bradford, son to the first governor, is 
named deputy-governor. The charters of the 
three New England charter governments men 
tioning such an officer, probably led them to a 
conformity. They had no house of representa 
tives until the year 1639, when committees or de 
puties were sent from each town ; viz. four from 
Plymouth, two from Duxborough, two from Sci- 
tuate, two from Sandwich, two from Cohannet 
(Taunton), two from Yarmouth, two from Barn- 
stable. (Colony Records.) There seems to have 
been no occasion for a house of representatives 
before. Their number was small, the election of 
governor and assistants annual ; they were, to all 
intents and purposes, the representatives of the 
people: and indeed, when the colony increased, 
the increasing the number of assistants might have 
answered all the purposes of choosing the same 
number, with another name. The Massachusetts 
had some special reasons, which Plymouth had 
not. They were limited by charter to 18 assist 
ants. The people were not satisfied that the 
whole powers of government should be in so few 
hands. They could have a remedy in no other 
way than by creating a distinct body of men, to 
share with the governor and assistants in acts of 
government. The Massachusetts, from the be 
ginning, endeavoured to preserve two distinct 
ranks or orders of men, gentry and commonalty. 
There was a general disposition to elect the go 
vernor, &amp;c. from the former rank ; their minis 
ters preached it as a Christian and moral duty. 
That the commonalty, or, as they expressed 
themselves, the generality, might come in for a 
*hare, they formed a new body, by the name of 



representatives, although their charter knew no 
thing of it. 

Whilst they were few in number, so that the 
whole body could assemble in one place, the 
whole were frequently convened, to determine 
upon matters executive as well as legislative. 
When they were increased, and were divided into 
towns remote from the centre, this became im 
practicable. They then seem to have followed 
the model of the Massachusetts, the governor 
and assistants being the supreme judiciary power, 
and sole in judging high offences ; lesser offences 
being cognizable before inferior courts and single 
magistrates, and in civil matters appeals also lay 
from inferior jurisdictions to the supreme. 

We shall briefly touch upon their ecclesiastical 
affairs. We suppose this people were the first 
who took or received the name of Independents, 
which, in a few years after, was the name given 
to a body of men in England, who assumed the 
government there. When they first went to Hol 
land they were known by the name of Brownists. 
Some of the characteristics of Brownism they af 
terwards disclaimed, and, at the same time, dis 
claimed the name, which was generally odious ; 
the character of the founder of the sect being, at 
best, problematical. Besides, he renounced his 
principles, and returned to episcopacy. The Pu 
ritans they could not conform to, and therefore 
considered themselves as a distinct church or 
by themselves, independent of all other. Cardinal 
Bentivoglio makes them a distinct sect in Hol 
land, by the name of Puritans, though he was 
unacquainted with their inducement to leave 
England, and supposes it commerce and not re 
ligion. (I Puritani ancora vi son tolerati, che 
sono i piu puri e i piu rigidi Calvinisti, i quail 
non vogliono riconoscere autorita alcuna ne ma- 
gistrati politici sopra il governo de loro ministri 
heretici, e sono quasi tutti de Puritani d lnghil- 
terra, che per occasion di commercio frequentan 
1 Ollanda, e le altro Provincie Unite. Delia re- 
latione delle Provincie, Sfc.) 

The Massachusetts people refined and took the 
name of Congregationalists, although it will 
perhaps be difficult, at this day, to show any ma 
terial difference between the churches of the two 
colonies ; for although Plymouth never establish 
ed, by act of government, the Massachusetts plat 
form, yet in practice they seem generally to have 
conformed to it. 

Whilst they expected their minister from Hol 
land, they were without the sacraments, they had 
constant public worship, their pious elder gene 
rally praying and preaching, or, as they then! 
A A 2 



180 



PLYMOUTH. 



[termed it, prophesying, and sometimes one or 
other of the brethren best gifted or qualified. After 
their minister s death, they made trial of four or 
five; but some were of bad morals, others of prin 
ciples not approved, and others met with better 
offers, so that they had no minister settled to 
their satisfaction until Mr. John Reyner came 
among them, in the year 1636. The whole colony 
made but one church until the year 1633, when 
those brethren who lived on the side of the bay 
opposite to the town, where Duxbury now is, 
broke from the rest, because of the difficulty of 
travel, and became a distinct society. Perhaps 
their being so long without a minister at first, 
might be the reason why they were less anxious 
to be furnished with ministers, immediately upon 
their spreading and forming new towns and set 
tlements, than their neighbours in Massachusetts 
and Connecticut. 

Considering the rapid increase of the Massa 
chusetts and Connecticut, it may not be amiss to 
give the reasons of the very slow growth of Ply 
mouth ; for in 13 or 14 years the whole colony 
was not become too numerous for one middling 
town. They had pitched upon some of the poorest 
land in New England, and had frequent thoughts 
of quitting it. In 1623, their brethren write from 
Leyden, and desire that, seeing by God s provi 
dence " that place fell to their lot, they would 
not leave it, nor languish after other places, 
though they had discovered more rivers and 
more fertile places than where they were;" but, 
in 1633, they took possession of Connecticut 
river, and built and fortified a house for trade, 
where Hartford now is; and afterwards, when 
the Massachusetts dispossessed them, they urged, 
among other reasons for holding possession, that 
" they lived upon a barren place, where they 
were by necessity cast, and neither they nor 
theirs could long continue upon the same, and 
why should they be deprived of that which they 
had provided and intended to remove to, as soon 
as they were able?" 

In the next place, the plan they set out upon 
was not to make a great colony in a little time, 
but to preserve a pure and distinct congregation ; 
they neither desired any people of a different 
persuasion to mix with them, nor did any such 
incline to go among them. When one of the 
number was hanged, 10 years after the settle 
ment began, it was remarked that he had been a 
profane person, and guilty of other miscarriages 
before that for which he suffered, and that by 
means of some of his friends in London, he had 
been shuffled in among them. If all in England, 



who called themselves Brownists and Indepen 
dents, at that day, had come over with them, they 
would scarcely have made one considerable town. 
Indeed, a few years after, most of those who 
had before been called Puritans, were willing 
enough to own the same principles with them, 
though they did not like the name. 

We may add one cause more, viz. that their 
views, when they left England, were rather to 
establish a factory than a colony. They had 
no notion of cultivating any more ground than 
would afford their own necessary provisions, but 
proposed that their chief secular employment 
should be commerce with the natives; and they 
entered into contract with a company of 20 or 
more merchants and others, many of them be 
longing to Bristol, who were to furnish them with 
foods ; and, at the end of seven years, the pro- 
ts were to be divided equally between the mer 
chants in England and the colonists, all the 
houses and improved land to be valued in the 
joint stock. This last circumstance was a suffi 
cient bar to any extraordinary improvement of 
the lands. Here we cannot help remarking, that 
they had a fine opportunity of making fortunes, 
having few or no rivals ; whilst the Indians were 
charmed with European goods, as well to adorn 
as to clothe themselves, and goods sold at great 
advance, and the furs came cheap ; though it is 
fair to acknowledge, that a variety of misfortunes 
and losses by sea, for several years together, kept 
the balance against them. 1 hey were but little 
acquainted with trade, and perhaps they were 
not so worldly-minded as their posterity have 
since been. At first they made every man a part 
ner. Every man s person was valued at 10 
interest in the stock, and his whole time was to 
be employed for the common benefit. He that 
had .90 in the general stock, with the addition 
of 10 for his person, was to share ten times 
as much as he who had no substance at all. This 
was a hard bargain for the poor, and we should 
not wonder if persons who could bring no money 
to put in the stock were discouraged from settling 
among them. After the expiration of the seven 
years, and a settlement with their partners in 
England, the principal persons were obliged to 
become bound for the balance which remained in 
the hand of the colony or factory, and from that 
time took the trade into their own hands, exclusive 
of the poorer sort, who had spent seven years in 
labour and toil, and had received subsistence 
only, and that oftentimes scarce enough. 

They had for eight or ten years almost the,- 
whole supply of the Indians who were nearl 



PLYMOUTH. 



181 



[neighbours to them, but their greatest expecta 
tions were from the eastern Indians; and they set 
up a truck-house at Penobscot and another upon 
Kennebeck river. The latter they found most 
advantageous, and sought for a grant of a con 
venient tract from the council of Plymouth, which 
they obtained in the year 1628, but it was " so 
strait and ill-bounded," that the next year, 1629, 
when a grant was made of the lands intended for 
the whole colony, the tract of country at Kenne 
beck was granted anew, and the limits enlarged. 
They met with some opposition in 1634, from 
persons employed by Lord Say and Lord Brook, 
who claimed a right of trading at the same place 
with the Plymouth people, we suppose by a grant 
from Gorges ; and a fray happened, in which one 
was killed on each side. Lord Say s company 
were Puritans, and those of Plymouth Indepen 
dents. This grant upon Kennebeck, within a few 
years past, from a different construction of the 
words which describe the limits, has been the 
cause of great contention. Perhaps the relation 
of this action, by Governor Bradford, may afford 
some light in the controversy. We shall there 
fore insert it, exactly as the words and points 
stood in his manuscripts. 

I am now (he writes) to enter upon one of 
the saddest things that befell them since they 
come. But before I begin it will be needful to 
premise such parte of their patente as gives them 
right and priviledge at Kenebeck. As followeth. 
The said counsel! hath further given, granted, 
bargained, sold, infeoffed, allotted, assigned and 
set over, and by these presents, doe clearly and 
absolutely give, grant, bargane, sell, alliene, en- 
fteofe, allote, assigne and confirme unto the said 
William Bradford, his heirs, associates, and as- 
sigries. All that tracte of land or part of New 
England in America afforesaid, which lyeth within 
betweene, and extendeth it selfe, from the 



or 



utmost limits of Cobiseconte which adjoyneth to 
the river of Kenebeck towards the westerne 
ocean, and a place called the falls of Nequam- 
kick in America aforesaid, And the space of 15 
English myles, on each side of the said river, 
commonly called Kenebeck river, and all the said 
river called Kenebeck, that lyeth within the said 
limits and bounds eastward, westward and north 
ward and southward, last above mentioned ; and 
all lands, grounds, soyles, rivers, waters, fish 
ing, &amp;c. And by vertue of the authority to us 
derived by the said late Majesty s Lettres patent 
to take, apprehend, seise, and make prise of all 
fucb persons their ships and goods, as shall at- 



tempte to inhabite, or trade, with the savage 
people of that countrie within the severall pre- 
sincts, and limits of his, and their several plan 
tations, &amp;c. 

Now it so fell out that one Hocking, belong 
ing to the plantation of Piscataway, wente with 
a barke, and comodities to trade in that river, 
and would needs press into their limits, and not 
only so but would needs goe up the river above 
their house (towards the falls of the river) and 
intercept the trade that should come to them. He 
that was cheefe of the place forbad them and 
prayed him that he would not offer them that in- 
jurie, nor go about to infringe their liberties, 
(which had cost them so dear) but he answered 
he would go up and trade there in dispite of 
them, and lye there as longe as he pleased ; the 
other told them he must then be forced to remove 
him from thence, or make seasure of him if he 
could. He bid him do his worste, and so w r ente 
up and anchored there. The other took a boat 
and some men, and went up to him, when he saw 
his time, and againe entreated him to departe, 
by what persuasion he could. But all in vaine, 
he could get nothing of him but ill words. So he 
considered that now was the season for the trade 
to come downe, and if he should suffer him to 
lye, and take it from them, all their former 
charge would be lost, and they had better throw 
up all. So consulting with his men, (who were 
willing therefor) he resolved to put him from his 
anchores, and let him drive down the river with 
the streame ; but commanded the men that none 
should shoote a shote upon any occasion except 
he commanded them. He spoake to him again 
but all in vaine, then he sent a euple in a canow 
to cutte his cable, the which one of them per- 
formes, but Hocking takes up a pece which he 
had layded ready, and as the barke shered by 
the canow he shot him close under her side, in 
the head (as I take it) so he fell down dead in 
stantly. One of his fellows (which loved him 
well) could not hold, but with a musket shot 
Hocking, who fell down dead and never spoake 
word ; this was the truth of the thing ; the rest 
of the men carried home the vessel and the sad 
tidings of these things. Now the Lord Saye and 
the Lord Brooke with some other great persons 
had a hand in this plantation ; they write home 
to them, as much as they could to exasperate 
them in the matter ; leaving out all the circum 
stances, as if he had been killed without any of 
fence of his parte, conceling that he had killed 
another first, and the just occasion that he had] 



182 



PLYMOUTH. 



["given in offering- such wrong- ; at which their 
Lordships were much offended till they were 
truly informed of the matter. (Bradford s MS.) 
But to return to our history Two or three 
years after the arrival of our colonists, all things 
were in common, no man having any property 
but what was put into the common stock, and 
every person furnished with clothing and pro 
visions out of this stock. A certain quantity of 
land in the beginning of the year was assigned 
for planting, and every one had such a proportion 
of the labour assigned him. Mr. Brad ford re marks, 
upon this occasion, that the ill success of this 
community of goods, even among godly and sober 
men, fully evinced the vanity of that conceit of 
Plato, that the taking away property and bring 
ing in community into a commonwealth would 
make them happy and flourishing : and, in fact, 
they raised so little provisions, that once, at least, 
they were in danger of starving ; and, before 
their crops were fully ripe, great part would be 
stolen out of the fields, to satisfy hungry bellies, 
and severe whipping of the offenders would not 
deter others in the like circumstances from com 
mitting the like offence. Besides, it occasioned 
constant discontent and murmuring, as the young 
men, most capable of labour, who had no families, 
thought much of labouring for other men s wives 
and children, whilst those in their full strength, 
complained that it was unjust to allow them no 
more in the division of victuals and clothing 
than them who were weak and could not do a 
quarter part of the labour : again, the aged and 
grave men thought it an indignity and disrespect 
to be upon a level, as in labour so in victuals 
and clothes, with the younger, and those in 
other respects of inferior condition. Husbands 
could not brook it that their wives should be 
commanded to do menial services, dressing meat, 
washing clothes, &amp;c. for other men. All being 
obliged to do, and all accustomed to receive 
alike, it was inferred that, in all other respects, 
they ought to be alike, and one man was to all 
intents and purposes as good as another, and no 
subordination, no civil distinction could be pre 
served. After three years, they found it abso 
lutely necessary to come into some new measures, 
and began with assigning to each family a certain 
quantity of land, sufficient to raise corn enough 
for their support, but in all other respects to 
continue in the general way, until the seven 
years for which they had contracted with their 
partners in England for the profits of their la 
bour were expired. There was immediately a 



new face upon their affairs, much more corn was 
planted than the governor, by the exertion of all 
his authority, could ever cause them to plant in 
any year before. Women and children, who were 
weak and unable before, went cheerfully with 
their husbands and parents to plant corn, and 
every family had enough for their support, and 
many of them some to spare. An emulation was 
created and increased every year to exceed in 
quantity, and in a few years they were able to 
raise sufficient to make it a valuable article in 
their Indian trade, being then worth 6s. sterling 
a bushel. The Indians now, in a great measure, 
left off raising it, the hunting life being more 
agreeable to them, and finding, as they did, that 
with their furs they could purchase what they 
wanted. 

The colony had struggled for seven or eight 
years, and had made but small improvements in 
cultivating the ground, and was not numerous 
enough to think of dividing and extending to the 
inland parts of the country when Mr. Endicot ar 
rived at Salem to prepare the way for the grand 
undertaking of settling the Massachusetts. This 
must have given fresh spirits to the Plymotheans. 
Without this, we think, there is great reason to 
question whether the plantation would not in a 
few years have been deserted, and the settlers 
have removed to some more fertile part of Ame 
rica, or, which is more probable, have returned 
to England, where, from the change of times, they 
might have enjoyed civil and religious liberty, 
for the sake of which they first quitted it, in as 
great a latitude as their hearts could wish. 

In a small colony it cannot be expected that 
we should meet with many events of moment 
after they had grappled with the hardship which 
attended their first settlement. Mr. Bradford 
remarks, that the Spaniards were thought by 
Peter Martyr to have suffered hardships which 
none but a Spaniard could endure, when they 
were obliged to live for five days together upon 
the parched grain of maize only, and that not to 
satiety, whereas the Plymotheans the first two 
or three years thought a meal of their maize as 
good as a feast ; and sometimes not for five days 
only, but for two or three months together, were 
destitute of that and all other corn or bread of 
any kind. But with their miseries, he says, they 
opened a way to these new lands, for other men 
to come afterwards with ease and inhabit them. 
The fourth year after their arrival, they were 
threatened with the total destruction of their 
crop, and absolute famine. From about the] 



PLYMOUTH. 



183 



( middle of May to the middle of July, they had 
not one shower of rain, and the extreme heat 
of the sun upon their sandy soil had so dried up 
their corn, that they were almost in despair of 
its ever being restored ; but in the evening after 
a day of fasting and prater it began to rain, and 
by repeated showers their corn recovered its ver 
dure, and they had a plentiful harvest. They 
afterwards found by experience that such droughts 
are frequent in this climate ; but a kind Creator 
has so ordered the seasons, that these droughts 
have always been followed, before the end of the 
summer, with refreshing rains ; and, although 
the fruits of the earth have been much diminished, 
yet harvest hath never failed; men and beasts 
have been supported, and ordinarily, in the next 
succeeding year, there has been a remarkable 
plenty. 

The terror which fire-arms struck into the In 
dians, prevented them from destroying this small 
company. There were not above seven men ca 
pable of bearing arms in the time of sickness the 
first winter. Soon after the potent nation of 
Naraganset sent to the English a bundle of ar 
rows tied with a snake s skin, as a defiance and 
denunciation of war. The English filled the 
skin with bullets, and sent it back with this 
answer : that they had done them no wrong, 
did not fear them, and were provided for them 
come when they would. The Naragansets would 
not suffer the bullets to come near them, and they 
were moved about from place to place, till they 
found their way back to the English again, and 
the Indians remained quiet. As the Indians 
learned the use of fire-arms, the English increased 
in number, and until the year 1675, there was no 
open rupture, except the short offensive war with 
the Pequots in their own country, which ended 
in their destruction. 

However rigid the New Plymouth colonists 
may have been at their first separation from the 
church of England, yet they never discovered 
that peisecuting spirit which we have seen in the 
Massachusetts. When Mrs. Hutchinson and her 
adherents were banished from that colony, they 
applied to the colony of Plymouth for leave to 
settle upon Aquidnick or Rhode Island, which 
was then acknowledged to be within Plymouth 
patent, and it was readily granted, although their 
tenets were no more approved by Plymouth than 
by the Massachusetts. Some of the Quakers also 
fled to Plymouth bounds, and probably saved 
their lives ; for although laws were made severe 
enough against erroneous opinions, yet were 
these in no case capital. The Baptists also were 



still more favourably received ; the town of 
Swansey being principally settled by Baptist 
refugees from the Massachusetts colony, and 
w hen one of their ministers settled in the church 
of Plymouth, they were content that he should 
baptize by immersion, or dipping any who de 
sired it, provided he took no exception to the 
other minster s sprinkling such for whom immer 
sion was not judged necessary. 

Until 1629, they were in doubt about their 
title to their lands. They were constantly so 
liciting a grant, or, as they term it, an assurance 
from the council of Plymouth. In 1624, they 
employed one John Pierce, who procured a grant 
to himself for about 50, but he kept it in his 
own hands, and refused to assign it for less than 
500. This they justly complained of as a 
great breach of trust, and attributed to it seve 
ral losses and disappointments he met with in 
his intended voyage, which frightened him and 
made him also look upon them as the punish 
ment of his perfidy and to relinquish his claim. 
We do not find that those who employed him 
reaped any benefit from the grant. After they 
had their patent in 1629, they were easy until 
the restoration ; but when Connecticut and Rhode 
Island, who held their lands, or most of them, 
under patents from the council of Plymouth, 
thought it necessary to solicit, and had obtained 
a royal confirmation and charter, giving authority 
to govern, New Plymouth solicited also, but 
they were rather too late. The court began to 
be jealous of the colonists. Such sort of char 
ters as had been granted left them, it was said, 
too much to themselves, and although they were 
not peremptorily refused, they were put off from 
time to time, and told that the only difficulty was 
to settle such a form of government as should 
secure their dependence as a colony, and should 
nevertheless afford to them liberties and privi 
leges to their satisfaction. 

This was no easy matter for both sides to 
agree upon, and thus a state of suspense made 
the colony more pliable and obsequious than 
their neighbours of Massachusetts. This was 
particularly the case when the commissioners 
from King Charles came to New England in 
1664, and when Plymouth submitted to their 
determination a controversy between that colony 
and Rhode Island about bounds. At this time 
they received, indeed, a very gracious letter from 
the king, but all ended in mere professions. 
We can easily conceive of a parent state grow 
ing every day more and more popular in its go 
vernment, and nevertheless at the same time re-] 



184 



PLYMOUTH. 



j straining the liberties of its colonies for the sake 
of continuing- the connection ; but when there is 
a scheme of establishing absolute power in the 
parent state, how can it be expected that popular 
governments should be established in the colo 
nies ? However, no advantage was ever taken 
of their want of authority, and their proceedings 
were connived at until the general shipwreck of 
charters in 1684, when an arbitrary government 
was established in the other colonies, and they 
could not expect to escape. All their hopes 
being at an end, they made as loud complaints 
of oppression, under Andros, as any people of 
his government, and perhaps with as much rea 
son ; and when the Massachusetts imprisoned 
him and reassumed their charter, Plymouth as 
sumed their old form of government also. Now 
it was that they first sensibly found the want of 
a charter. Connecticut and Rhode Island, who 
had resigned their charters, were justified, by the 
example of the corporations in England, in as 
suming them again ; but Plymouth had none to 
assume. Their first attempt was to procure a 
charter and to continue a distinct government. 
In this they could not succeed. Perhaps, if it 
had been solicited in the best manner, they might 
have succeeded, but interior divisions prevented 
any proper measures being pursued. Mr. Hink- 
ley, their governor, wrote to Mr. Mather, the 
Massachusetts agent, to desire him to solicit in 
their behalf, but the people refused to advance 
any money, and so small a sum as 200 ster 
ling could not be raised. The inhabitants of 
some of the principal towns subscribed, upon 
condition the whole sum should be raised. Some 
of the towns refusing, the whole subscription 
failed. Such was the effect of their divisions, 
that neither party would acknowledge the au 
thority of the government when any act passed 
which they did not approve of. Mr. Wiswall, 
one of their ministers, by advice of some gentle 
men in Boston, went to England, but having no 
commission, and, which is more fatal to those 
who have affairs at court, no money, he never 
could make a public appearance, arid served only 
to give offence to the ministry, by offering ex 
ceptions to the proposal of joining Plymouth to 
the Massachusetts, and, eventually, occasioned 
their being annexed to New York. It is said, 
however, that they were taken out of Slaughter s 
commission by Mr. Mather s interest ; for al 
though Slaughter arrived at New York the year 
before Phipps arrived in the Massachusetts, and 
sent his orders to Little Compton in Plymouth 
colony, in terms as high and authoritative as if 



he had been their governor, or depended upon 
being such ; yet was their junction with New 
York suspended until they were actually included 
in the Massachusetts. 

It has been said this last determination gave, 
and continues to give, to this day, great satis 
faction to every individual in the colony of Ply 
mouth, and that there is not one who does not 
think it a most happy circumstance that they were 
annexed to Massachusetts rather than to New 
York. There might, indeed, at first, have been 
jealousies of unequal distinctions, upon some oc 
casions, in favour of the Massachusetts, yet they 
have long since been at an end, and the customs, 
manners, and religious opinions of the two colo 
nies being much the same, they mutually consider 
themselves as having one joint general interest 
as fully in all respects as if they had been one 
colony from the beginning. For a continuation 
of this history, see Index to additional matter 
concerning Massachusetts.] 

[PLYMOUTH, a town of New York in Onon- 
dago County, lately laid out and named by 
E. Watson, Esq. a native of Plymouth, New 
England. The town lies about 12 miles s. e. of 
Geneva, on a beautiful declivity on the e. side of 
Seneca Lake, and commands a charming and ex 
tensive view of the whole lake. The town plat 
is on the spot formerly called Apple Town, and 
w r as the head-quarters of the Seneca Indians, who 
were conquered and dispersed by General Sul 
livan, in his western expedition in 1779. The 
situation is healthful and pleasant, well watered 
by copious living springs. Twenty houses were 
building here in 1796, and as the new state-road 
from the Cayuga intersects the town, a ferry esta 
blished, and another town laid out on the oppo 
site side of the lake, it promises fair to become a 
considerable and very thriving village. It is 
well watered by copious springs.] 

[PLYMOUTH, a town in Litchfield County, 
Connecticut.] 

[PLYMOUTH, a post-town of New Hamp 
shire ; situate in Grafton County, at the mouth 
of Baker s River, on its s. side, where it falls 
into the river Pemigewasset ; 36 miles n. of 
Concord, 61 n. w. of Portsmouth, and 277 
n. e. of Philadelphia. The township was in 
corporated in 1763, and contains 625 inhabi 
tants.] 

[PLYMOUTH, the name of two townships in 
Pennsylvania, the one in Luzerne County, the 
other in that of Montgomery.] 

[PLYMOUTH, a small post-town of N. Caro 
lina, on the s. side of Roanoke River, about five 



P O G 

miles above Albemarle Sound. It is 14 miles 
s. w. by s. of Edenton.] 

[PLYMOUTH, a settlement on the s. peninsula 
of the island of St. Domingo, and in the depend 
ence of Jeremie.] 

[PLYMOUTH Town, in the island of Tobago 
in the W. Indies.] 

[PLYMPTOI\, a township in Plymouth 
County, Massachusetts ; 27 miles 5. e. of iBoston. 
It was incorporated in 1707, and contains 956 
inhabitants.] 

POANGUE, a river of the kingdom of Chile, 
which rises in the mountains of the cordillera, 
runs many leagues under ground, and enters the 
Maipo, From its source it proceeds through 
minerals of gold and through aqueducts ; is girt 
on either side by fine trees. Its waters are salu 
tary, and contribute greatly to digestion : and 
although the appetite they provoke is, perhaps, 
excessive, they cause an agreeable hilarity. This 
river is not without a beneficial influence, even 
in its subterraneous course, for communicating 
itself by veins all through the valley, it imparts 
a useful and fertilizing moisture from beneath ; 
so much so, that although it never rains during 
the summer, and the place does not obtain other 
irrigation, it is not wanting in the production of 
the most abundant and exquisite fruits, particu 
larly maize and melons, \vhich no where else are 
so good. 

POBLACION, NUEVA, a town of the pro 
vince and government of Paraguay, on the shore 
of the river Parana, in the part where it enters 
the grand river of Curitaba. 

POBLACION, another settlement, in the pro 
vince and captainship of Rey in Brazil, on the 
coast, between this province and the great lake 
of Los Patos. 

[POCAHONTAS, a town in Chesterfield 
County, Virginia ; within the jurisdiction of 
Petersburgh in Dinwiddie County. It probably 
derives its name from the famous Princess Poca- 
hontas, the daughter of King Powhatan.] 

POCHOTLA, a settlement of the head settle 
ment of the district of Atengo, and alcaldia 
mayor of Chilapa in Nueva Espana. It con 
tains only 11 families of Indians, and is one 
league from its head settlement. 

POCHUTLA, SAN PEDRO DE, a principal 
and head settlement of the district of the alcaldia 
mayor of Huamelula in Nueva Espana, at the 
foot of a lofty mountain-plain, six leagues from 
the sea ; on the shore of which is a bay known 
by the name of Barra de Coyula ; and in the 

VOL. IV. 



P O G 



185 



passage from this to the settlement of San Agus- 
tin, dwell 50 families of Indians, applied to the 
cultivation of cotton. Seven leagues from Hua- 
tulco. 

POCHUTLA, another, a small settlement or 
ward, in the head settlement of the district of 
Moloacan and alcaldia mayor of Acayuca in the 
same kingdom ; distant a musket-shot from its 
head settlement. 

[POCKREKESKO, a river of New Britain, 
N. America.] 

POCOANCA, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Aimaraes in Peru. 

PbCOATA, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Chayanta or Charcas in Peru. 

POCOMACK. [See PATOWMACK.] 

POCONA, a settlement of the province of 
Mizque, and government of Santa Cruz de la 
Sierra in Peru. It is of an agreeable and de 
lightful temperature, fertile in choice fruits ; and 
having in its vicinity a lake two leagues in cir 
cumference. 

POCOPO, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Porco in Peru. 

POCORAI, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Chilques and Masques in Peru ; 
annexed to the curacy of Acchaamansaya. 

[POCOTALIGO, a village of S. "Carolina-, 
15 miles from Combahee Ferry, and 67 from 
Charlestown.] 

POCOTO, a settlement of the province and 
corregimienio of Yamparaes, and archbishopric 
of Charcas in Peru. It has in its district a very 
devout sanctuary of the title of Nuestra Senora 
de la Candelaria de Piosera, 

POCQUIURA, a settlement of the province 
and corregimiento of Abancay in Peru. 

POCRI, a river of the province and alcaldia 
mayor of Nata in the kingdom of Tierra Firme. 
It has its origin near the mountain of the mine 
of Guerrero, and empties itself into the S. Sea. 

POCSI, a settlement of the province and cor- 
regimhnto of Moquehua in Peru. 

PODRE, a small river of the province and 
country of Las Amazonas, in the part and terri 
tory possessed by the Portuguese. It enters the 
Madera by the w. side. 

[POGE, Cape, the n. e. point of Chabaquid- 
dick Island, near Martha s Vineyard, Massachu 
setts. From Holmes s Hole to this cape the 
course is s. e. by e. 3\ leagues distant. In the 
channel between them there are 11 and 12 fa 
thoms water. Lat. 41 24 30" n. Long. 70 
22 30" w. from Greenwich.] 

B B 



186 



P O J 



POM 



POQUATANCATON, a sea-port on the 
coast of the province and colony of Maryland 
to the s. of Cold Cape. 

[POINT, a township in Northumberland 
County, Pennsylvania.] 

[POINT ALDERTON, the s. w. point of Boston 
Harbour. Lat. 42 17 X n. Long. 70 52 wJ] 

[POINT AU FER, a place near the head or n. 
part of Lake Champlain, within the limits of the 
United States. It was delivered up by the Bri 
tish in 1796.] 

[POINT LE PRO, the e. limit of Passama- 
quoddy Bay, on the coast of New Brunswick.] 

[PoiNTE DBS PIEGES, a cape on the s. side of 
the island of St. Domingo, two leagues w. of the 
mouth of Pedernales River.] 

[POINT JUDITH, in the township of S. Kings 
town, is the s. extremity of the w. shore of Nar- 



raganset Bay in Rhode Island. It is 10 miles 

Long. 71 



n. 



s. s. w. of Newport. Lat. 41 
28 a&amp;gt;.] 

[POINT PETRE, in the island of Guadalupe, 
has strong fortifications, and lies about 20 miles 
from Fort Louis.] 

POINTE BASSE, a settlement and parish of 
the island of Martinique, a curacy and establish 
ment of the religious of St. Domingo, on the n. 
coast, on the shore of the river of its name. 

POINTE, another, with the surname of Noire, 
in the island of Guadalupe, on the w. coast of 
Basse Terre, between the rivers Caillou and 
Bailie-argent. 

POINTE, a small river of the province of N. 
Carolina, which runs n. e. and enters the Cou- 
haway, between the settlements of Walker and 
Roseaux. 

POINTE, another, a small river of the island 
Martinque, which runs n. and enters the sea 
between those of Falaise and Roche. 

POINTE, a point of the . coast of Lake Erie, 
in Canada in N. America. 

[POINTE. See PUNTA.] 

POISON BLANC, Point of, on the s. coast 
of Lake Superior in Canada, one of those which 
form the mouth of the strait by which this lake 
communicates with Lake Huron. 

[POJAUHTECUL, called by the Spaniards, 
Volcan de Orizaba, a celebrated mountain in 
Mexico, or New Spain, which began to send 
forth smoke in 1545, and continued to do so for 
20 years ; but for two centuries past there has 
not been observed the smallest sign of burning. 
The mountain, which is of a conical figure, is 
the highest land in Mexico, and is descried by 



seamen, who are steering that way, at the dis 
tance of 50 leagues ; and is higher than the Peak 
of Teneriffe. Its top is always covered with 
snow, and its border adorned with large cedars, 
pine, and other trees of valuable wood, which 
make the prospect of it every way beautiful. 
It is 104 miles e. of the city of Mexico.} 

[POKONCA, a mountain in Northampton 
County, Pennsylvania ; 22 miles n. w. of Easton, 
and 26 s. e. of Wyoming Falls.] 

POLANCO, Asperities of. Some very craggy 
sierras of the province and captainship of Key 
in Brazil. 

POLANCO, a river of the province and govern 
ment of Buenos Ayres, which runs n. and enters 
the Gil. 

[POLAND, a township in Cumberland County, 
district of Maine.] 

POLINDERA, a large and ancient province, 
now incorporated with that of Popayan, of the 
Nuevo Reyno de Granada ; discovered by Se 
bastian de Benalcazar, in 1536. It has in it 
some rich gold mines ; but these are not worked, 
the territory being desert and full of woods. 

POLLARD, a settlement of the island of 
Barbadoes ; situate on the e. coast of the s. part. 

[POLLIPLES Island, a small rocky island, 
about 80 or 100 rods in circumference, at the n. 
entrance of the high lands in Hudson s River ; 
remarkable only as the place where sailors re 
quire a treat of persons who have never before 
passed the river.] 

POLONIA, S. a settlement of Indians, of the 
missions which were held by the Jesuits in the 
province of Topia of N.America. 

POMA, a settlement of the province and cor- 
regimiento of Lucanas in Peru ; annexed to the 
curacy of Querobamba. 

POMABAMBA, a province and corregimiento 
of Peru ; bounded n. by that of Tomina, e. and 
s. e. by the lands of the infidel Indians ; s. and 
s. w. by the province of Pilaya and Paspaya, w. 
by that of Porco, and n.w. by that ofYampa- 
raes. Its length is 24 leagues from e. to w. with 
out any other curacy or settlement than the town 
of its name, and one settlement annexed, in the 
province of Tomina, called Taraita, all the other 
parts consisting of campaign-estates. It was se 
parated from the aforesaid province through a 
certain subject ; who having obtained of his ma 
jesty the title of Castellano, found himself under 
the necessity of posting a garrison in that part 
most advanced on the Chiriguanos Indians, and 
it thue also obtained the title of province and 



POM 

eorregimiento. Its inhabitants, who should amount 
to 3000, gain a scanty subsistence from their 
agriculture and cattle, the which are often plun 
dered by those infidels. 

It has at the distance of seven miles to the n. 
a river which they call Parapeti : and 30 leagues 
further on is the river Nuevo, just in the terri 
tory of the barbarian Indians ; whither the inha 
bitants repair, at great risk, to fish for very large 
dories and olive-fish, which they carry to La 
Plata and Potosi in the frosty season only, 
since in the hot weather they corrupt. 

The capital and only settlement is the town 
of the same name ; situate on the shore of the 
river Parapeti, about nine miles e. with a slight 
inclination to the s. of La Plata. Lat. 1955 / s. 
and long. 64 8 / w. 

POMABAMBA, another settlement, of the pro 
vince and corregimiento of Vilcas Huaman in 
Peru ; annexed to the curacy of Cangallo. 

POMACANCHE, a settlement of the pro 
vince and corregimiento of Guarochiri in Peru ; 
annexed to the curacy of Huanchor. 

POMACANCHE, another settlement, in the pro 
vince and corregimiento of Quispicanchi in the 
same kingdom. 

POMACARAN, S. JUAN DE, a settlement of 
the head settlement of the district of Arantran, 
and akaldia mayor of Valladolid in the province 
and bishopric of Mechoacan. It contains 36 fa 
milies of Indians applied to the culture of seeds, 
cutting woods, fabricating earthenware, and sad 
dle trees. 

POMACOCHA, or PUMACOCHA, a settle 
ment of the province and corregimiento of Gua 
rochiri in Peru ; annexed to the curacy of the 
settlement of Yauli. 

POMACOCHA, another settlement, in the pro 
vince and corregimiento of Andahuailas in the 
same kingdom ; annexed to the curacy of the 
settlement of Pampachiri. 

POMACOCHA, another, of the province and 
corregimiento of Chachapoyas in the same king 
dom ; annexed to the curacy of the settlement of 
Corobamba. 

POMACOCHA, another, of the province and 
corregimiento of Canta in the same kingdom. 

POMACOCHA, a large and fertile valley of the 
province and corregimiento of Vilcas Huaman 
in Peru, on the shore of the river Pampas. 

POMACOCHA, a large lake, formed by three 
small ones, uniting by a short canal in the pro 
vince and corregimiento of Tarma in Peru ; si 
tuate in the mountains, and from it rises the 
river Paria. 






POM 



187 



POMAGUACA, a settlement of the province 
and government of Jaen de Bracamoros in the 
kingdom of Quito. 

POMALLACTA, a settlement of Indians of 
the province and corregimiento of Riobamba in 
the kingdom of Quito. It was celebrated in the 
time of the Incas, but now destroyed, nothing 
remaining but the ruins of a palace belonging 
to the emperors, and resembling- that mentioned 
in article ATUNCANAN, with the which this pa 
lace is said to have had a subterraneous commu 
nication, notwithstanding at the distance of six 
leagues from each other ; nor is it other than a 
fact, that there is in the palace of Atuncaiian a 
sort of door blocked up with earth in the interior 
of the tower. This settlement is annexed to the 
curacy of that of Guasuntos, and is four leagues 
from Quito. 

POMARE, SIERRAS DE, a cordillera of moun 
tains of the province and captainship of Seara in 
Brazil, which runs from s. to n. between the 
rivers of Concepcion or San Francisco and La 
Cruz, closest to the former. 

POMASQUE, a settlement of the kingdom 
of Quito, in the district of the corregimiento of 
Los Cinco Leguas de Esta Ciudad; celebrated 
for a miraculous image of Christ, which is vene 
rated in the convent of the religious Recoletans 
of San Francisco, much frequented from the de 
votion paid to it by the faithful of all those set 
tlements near the capital ; from whence this set 
tlement is four leagues distant. 

POMATA, a settlement of the province and 
government of Chucuito in Peru ; in which are 
two very good hermitages, one dedicated to Nu- 
estra Senora del Rosario, and the other to Santa 
Barbara. It is situate on the shore of the great 
lake of Chucuito, 17 leagues from its capital. 

[POMFRET, a township in Windsor County, 
Vermont : containing 710 inhabitants. It is 10 
miles v). of the ferry on Connecticut River, in 
the town of Hartford, and 55| n. n. e. of Ben- 
nington.] 

[POMFRET, a post-town of Connecticut, in 
Windham County. It is 29 miles e. of Hartford, 
56 s. w. of Boston, and contains a Congrega 
tional church, and a few neat houses. The town 
ship was first settled in 1686 by emigrants from 
Roxbury. It was part of the Mashamoquet pur 
chase, and in 1713 it was erected into a town 
ship. Quinabaug River separates it from Kil- 
lingly on the e. In Pomfret is the famous cave, 
where General Putnam conquered and slew the 
wolfj 

POMMES, River of, in the province of Nova 

BBS 



188 



PON 



Scotia. It is small, runs w. and enters the Ba 
sin of the Mines, in the interior of the Bay of 
Fundy. 

POMOBAMBA, a settlement of the province 
and corregimicnto of Conchucos in Peru. 

POMPATAO, or CESAR, a river of the Nuevo 
Reyno de Granada. It flows down from the 
mountains of Santa Marta, runs w. laving the 
spacious territories of LJpar, then turns its course 
opposite the settlement of Los Reys to the s. and 
empties itself into Lake Zapatosa, with the name 
of Sesar; and from the above-mentioned lake 
it communicates with the river Grande de la 
Magdalena, in lat. 8 47 n. 

[POMPEY, a military township in Onondago 
County, New York ; incorporated in 1794. It 
comprehends the townships of Pompey, Tully, 
and Fabius, together with that part of the lands 
called the Onondago Reservation ; bounded n. 
by the Genessee Road, and w. by the Onondago 
Creek. In 1796, there were 179 of the inhabi 
tants qualified electors.] 

[POMPTON, in Bergen County, New Jer 
sey ; lies on Ringwood, a branch of Passaik 
River, about 18 miles n. w. of New York city.] 

PONAYA, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Chachapoyas in Peru ; annexed 
to the curacv of the settlement of Quillay. 

PONCHE, a river of the island of Marti 
nique, which runs from e. to w. and enters above 
the river Grande into the sea, in lat. 14 49 n. 

PONGO, a settlement of the province and 
government of Popayan in the Nuevo Reyno 
de Granada. 

PONGO, DE MANSERICHE, a channel or strait 
of the Maranon or Amazonas, where it is for the 
space of three leagues confined by two stony 
mountains, being 50 or 60 Spanish yards across ; 
and where the current is so rapid that this whole 
distance is navigated in a quarter of an hour, 
not without the greatest hazard to such as ven 
ture to pass it ; although the general method is 
of emptying the vessel of all the passengers and 
effects, and to leave it to be carried by the 
stream, when it is afterwards caught by the In 
dians who swim out to meet it and bring it into 
shore for the purpose of relading what has been 
conveyed, for this distance, by land. Most com 
monly, however, the Indians accompany the ves 
sel in their canoes ; since, as they are excellent 
swimmers, they never hurt if these be upset. 

PONICA, a small river of the province and 
captainship of Todos Santos in Brazil ; which 
rises near the coast, runs s. s. e. and enters the 
sea between that of Piedras and that of Jacupa, 



PON 

in lat. 1228 / 5. In its mouth are caug-ht sea- 
calves. 

PONIENTE, PUERTO DEL, a port on the n. 
coast of the island of Cuba, between the bay 
of Caravelas Chicas and the settlement of Pa- 
drones. 

PONOGANTI, a river of the province and 
g-overnment of Choco, in the Nuevo Reyno de 
Granada, which rises in the mountains of the w. 
part, and enters the mouth of the Atrato. 

[PON PON. See EDISTO River, S. Caro 
lina.] 

PONT, MONTAGUE DU, or, Mountain of the 
Bridge, in the island of Cayenne ; on the skirt 
of which the French have an establishment. 

[TONTCHARTRAIN, a lake of W. Florida, 
which communicates e. with the Gulf of Mexico, 
and w. with Mississippi River, through Lake 
Maurepas and Ibberville River. It is about 34 
miles long-, 20 broad, and 18 feet deep. The 
following- creeks fall into it on the n. side, viz. 
Tangipaho, and Le Comble, four feet deep ; Che- 
functa, seven ; and Donfouca, six ; and from the 
peninsula of Orleans, Tigahoc, at the mouth of 
which was a small post. The Bayouk of St. John 
also communicates on the same side. The French 
inhabitants, who formerly resided on the n. side 
of this lake, chiefly employed themselves in mak 
ing pitch, tar, and turpentine, and raising stock, 
for which the country is very favourable. See 
MAUREPAS.] 

[PONTCHARTRAIN, an island in Lake Supe 
rior, s. by w. of Maurepas Island, and n. w. of 
Hocquart Island.] 

PONTCHARTRAIN, a fort built by the French 
in Canada, on the shore of the strait which com 
municates Lake Erie with Lake Superior. 

[PONTE DI DIO. Sec ATOYAQUE.] 

[PONTEQUE, or PONTIQUE, a point on the 
r;\ coast of Mexico, 10 leagues n. by e. of Cape 
Corientes, between which is the Bay de Valde- 
ras. To the w. of it are two small islands of its 
name, a league from the main. There are also 
rocks, called the Rocks of Ponteque, 20 leagues 
s. z&amp;. of the port of Matanchel.] 

PONTEZUELOS, a settlement of the pro 
vince and government of Buenos Ayres, e. of 
the fort of Pergamino, on the shore of the river 
Sala. 

PONTONES, a river of the province and 
government of Jaen de Bracamoros in the king 
dom of Quito, which rises n. of the capital, and 
runs w. until it enters the Marafion. 

PONZITLAN, a settlement of the head set 
tlement, of the district of the akaldia mayor of 



POP 

N uevu Galicia ; situate in the line which divides 
this bishopric from that of Guadalaxara. It has 
a convent of the religious order of San Francisco, 
and is 10 leagues n. zo. of its capital. 

POOLS, an island of the N. Sea, in the 
county of Baltimore, of the province of Mary 
land ; situate in the interior of the Bay of 
Chesapeak. 

POOPO, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Paria in Peru, of the arch 
bishopric of Charcas. 

[POOUSOOMSUCK, a river of Vermont, 
which runs a 5. course, and falls into Connecticut 
River in the township of Barnet, near the lower 
bar of the Fifteen-mile Falls. It is 100 yards 
wide, and noted for the quantity and quality of 
salmon it produces. On this river, which is set 
tled 20 miles up, are some of the best townships 
in the state.] 

POPA, NUESTRA SENORA DE LA, a sanctuary 
and convent of the barefooted Augustins, in the 
province and government of Cartagena, of the 
Nuevo Reyno de Granada. It is a quarter of 
a league from that city, on the top of a very lofty 
mountain of the figure of a galley ; and which, 
being looked upon by the part where the convent 
stands, resembles the poop of the same ; from 
whence it has its name. Fr. Antonio Calancha 
asserts that it was full of woods, and abounded 
exceedingly in monkeys and reptiles ; serving 
also as a place of refuge for criminals ; to whom 
the devil was said to appear under the name of 
Busiraco : also that this infernal spirit had en 
tered into a compact with a certain Mitstee, 
named Luis Andrea ; who was punished by the 
Inquisition of that city in 1613; when he con 
fessed his guilt, and stated his vile agent to have 
been concerned in that terrible tempest and hur 
ricane which arose at the founding of the con 
vent of the Santisimo Sacramento, by the Father 
Vicente Mayon. Vessels on their voyage to 
Cartagena, as soon as they discover the moun 
tain of Popa, which is seen many leagues before 
you arrive at the port, raise a shout, giving 
thanks to the Virgin for their safe arrival. 

POPABA, a settlement of the corregimiento 
and jurisdiction of Velez in the Nuevo Rev no 
de Granada. It is of an hot temperature, poor 
in vegetable productions and population ; and to 
this are added some 40 Indians. Eight leagues 
from the city of Velez. 

[POPAMADRE, a town of S. America in 
Tierra Firme, 50 miles e. of Cartagena.] 

POPAPURA, a small river of the province 
and government of Mainas in the kingdom oi" 



POP 



189 



Quito ; which rises in the country of the Ura- 
rinas Indians, between the rivers fchambira and 
Tigre. It runs e. and enters the latter. 

POPA VAN, a province and government of 
the Nuevo Reyno de Granada in S. America ; 
bounded n. by the province of Los Llanos de 
Nieva, n. e. by that of Cagualan, w. by that of 
Raposo, and s. by that of Pastes of the kingdom 
of Quito. It is 128 leagues long from n. to s. 
and nearly 100 wide from (?. to w. and is one of 
those provinces called Equinoctial, from its im- 
mediation to the line, and being of a country, 
for the most part, mountainous and rough, al 
though not without beautiful and extensive val 
leys which are very fertile. 

The climate is, generally speaking, moderately 
hot, but in the sierras it is proportionably cold. 
It was much larger before the provinces of 
Choco-, Antioquia, and Neiva, were separated 
from it and formed into separate governments. 
This province is divided into various small juris 
dictions or districts. It was discovered and con 
quered by Sebastian de Belalcazar in 1536, at 
the expense of great labours, combats, and fa 
tigues, occasioned by the Indian natives, the 
Pacces, Pijaos, Xamundis, Timbas, Guanbas, 
Malvasaes, Polinderas, Palacees, Tembios, and 
Colazas ; who were most valorous and warlike, 
and governed by their caciques Popayan and Ca- 
lambaz ; the province taking the name of the 
former. It is extremely fertile, and abounds in 
cattle, provisions of every kind, pulse, delicate 
fruits, sugar canes, of which they make much 
sugar, honey and brandy, tallow, ropes made of 
Indian thread, tobacco and cotton. 

It maintains a great commerce with the king 
dom of Quito, sending clothes and fruits of Eu 
rope, which are carried to Cartagena in free- 
trading vessels, and taking in exchange cloths, 
baizes, linen, woven cotton stuffs, and other ma 
nufactures of that country. It buys in money at 
Santa Fe the linens, which are finer than those 
of Quito, tanned leather, mantles, blankets, and 
some European articles. With the province of 
Choco it barters small coin for gold-dust, or such 
as is extracted from the washing places ; although 
it sometimes gives in exchange all kind of Eu 
ropean and native clothes, iron, steel, flesh, 
cheese, and other provisions. The same pro 
vince it also does with the provinces of Antio 
quia, receiving in payment gold-dust. 

It has, itself, many mines of this class, which, 
like all the others of this kingdom, are worked: 
by companies of Negro slaves ; and in the terri 
tories of Neiva and Caloto are some very- rid*. 



190 



P O P A Y A N. 



mines of silver, the working of which is even 
now projected by Don Pedro Agustin de Valen 
cia, native and inhabitant of Popayan, through 
the medium of the companies called the Accio- 
nistas. The only silver, which circulates now in 
this province, is that which comes from Quito, 
in the remittances to Cartagena ; and those who 
carry it there take in exchange dobloons, paying 
a reduced premium of two or three per cent. 
This province is watered by several large rivers ; 
but the greater of them is the Cauca, which enters 
the Grande de la Magdalena, and traverses this 
province. 

The mountains and woods abound in a variety 
of animals and birds, as also in exquisite trees. 
The most illustrious Don Lucas de Piedrahita 
asserts that it had 600,000 inhabitants when the 
Spaniards entered it; but that there was no 
town whatever; the inhabitants living on the 
tops of trees, changing their situation in tribes, 
like the Arabs. At the present day, the number 
of inhabitants, compared with its natural advan 
tages, is very small ; for it has every thing that 
might render it one of the finest and most pro 
fitable provinces in all America. 

[The whole of the regular troops in the Nuevo 
Reyno de Granada (as appears by the Foreigners 
Guide, published in Spain, in 1802), amounted 
to 3290, in which number is comprehended the 
garrison of this province, together with that of 
Panama, Cartagena, Quito, &amp;c. j 

Population, Rivers, Mountains, &amp;c. of the 

Province of Popayan. 
Cities. Pastas, 

Almaguer, Insa, 

Anserma Vieja, Pupiales, 

Anserma Nueva, Carlosama, 

Barbacoas, Guaitara or 

Buga, Guaitarilla, 

Cali, Tumaco, 

Caloto, Santa Lucia, 

Cartago, Yaquanquer, 

Pasto, S. Luis, 

Popayan, Mercaderes, 

Toro, Patia, 

Rondanillo. Quilichas, 

Town. Llano Grande, 

La Candelario. Tuloa, 

Settlements. La Cruz del Raposo, 

Tuqueres, Canas Gordas. 

Guachical, Of Indians. 

Cumbal, Cruz de Almaguar, 

Ipiales, Purase, 

Supia, Pulindara and 

Quiebralomo, Tortoro, 



Buisaco, 

Tambo or 

Alto del Rey, 

Cucunuco, 

Julumito, 

Paniquita, 

Timbio, 

Yanaconas, 

Puelenge, 

G nan via. 



Esmita, 
Guachicon, 
Yervas buenan, 
S. Jorge, 
Mayo, 
Malvasa, 
El Molino, 
Mo j arras, 
Ovejas, 
Ollucos, 



Nation of Indians. Palase, 
Andaquies. Palo bobo, 

Mountains. Patia, 

Cucunuco, Piendamo, 

Purase, Pulindara, 

Santa Barbara, Purase, 
Guanacas, Quilcase, 

Alto del Rey, Rio Negro, 

Quindio, Timbio, 

La Poblazon. Vinagre. 

Rivers. Port. 

Aguas Blancas, San Buenaventuta, in the 
Botijas, S. Sea, belonging to 

Bojoleo, the province of Rapo- 

Cauca, so, one of those of 

El Cofre, Choco, and 50 leagues 

Ejido, from Popayan. 

The capital, of the same name, was founded 
by the discoverer and conqueror of the province, 
Sebastian del Belalcazar, in 1536, on an exten 
sive and delightful llanera. In 1538 the king gave 
it the title of very Noble and very Loyal City, 
and for arms a shield having in one angle the 
sun in the middle of a city, and two rivers which 
surround it, with a tree above and another on 
the side of each river, and for orle four Jerusa 
lem crosses. 

It was erected into a bishopric by his Holiness 
Paul III. in 1547, when the choir was composed 
of five dignitaries ; though now only of three, 
which are the dean, the maestre-escuela, and 
treasurer, two canons of office, penitentiary and 
magisterial, two racioneros and two half racione- 
ros. It is a suffragan to the archbishopric of 
Santa Fe. 

The town does not correspond with the great 
advantages offered by the territory and the ex 
cellence of the climate; since the population 
amounts to only 8000 souls, including Spa 
niards, people of different casts, the clergy, and 
nuns. [This enumeration was probably correct at 
the time Alcede wrote, but the population, even 
in 1802, amounted to upwards of 25,000 souls.] 
Popayan has the convents of the religious or 
ders of S. Domingo, S. Agustin, of the Minis- 



P O P A Y A N . 



191 



tros Agonizantes of San Camilo de Lelis, a col 
lege of the missionaries of San Franciso, charged 
with the reduction of the Infidel Andaquies In 
dians, who dwell on the banks of the rivers Ca- 
queta and Putumayo, the which is a community 
whose austere and rigorous observance of their 
institutes affords the most edifying example, and 
whose temple, which has been lately finished, is 
magnificent, adorned with images of devotion 
made at Quito, and precious ornaments and sa 
cred vases; an hospital of Bethlemites, founded 
by D. Christoval Botin, who was an inhabitant 
of this city ; two monasteries of nuns, one of 
bare-footed Carmelites, the other of Calzadas 
Augustins, in the which there are upwards of 70 
nuns, and 230 secular women and ladies, who 
choose to live retired. It also had a college of 
the Jesuits, with a seminary of collegiates, in 
which were professorships of Latin, philosophy 
and theology, moral and scholastical : and, after 
the expulsion of this order from the kingdom, 
the same college fell under the charge of a secu 
lar clergyman, preserving only two of its pro 
fessorships, and having about 20 or 24 colle- 
fiates, with eight fellowships, endowed by the 
ing. In the time of the Jesuits, the higher 
degrees were conferred here ; and, now, for these 
they have recourse to the universities of Santa 
Fe and Quito, for the studies of theology, canons, 
and laws. The curacy of the cathedral was tran 
slated to the church of this college, from which 
it was before separated, and in which officiated 
a deputy-curate, nominated by the prebends. At 
the present day it serves as a cathedral, from the 
former being in ruins, but the rebuilding of which 
is in agitation. Here is a relic of St. Barbara, to 
which particular respect is paid by the whole 
of the city ; also other insignia of different saints, 
which were brought hither from Rome, through 
the zeal and piety of the present prebend, D. 
Manuel Ventura Hurtado. Here are also two 
hermitages ; the one at the foot of the mountain 
called De Belen, which is at an extremity of the 
city, and the other, with this dedicatory title, 
upon the same mountain, and offering a beautiful 
prospect. 

The streets of this town are all drawn at 
straight lines, of sufficient width, and the plots 
of the houses are equal ; so that they have the 
appearance of a draught-board ; and the build 
ings are very good. Here are some very pretty 
small squares, and a beautiful grand square. The 
temperature, though there be a continual pro 
pensity to rain, is that of a continual spring, 
without any greater distinction between the sum- 



mer and winter than that the rains are not so 
abundant in the months of June, July, and Au 
gust. There is, however, a much fresher air 
than in the summer, from the prevalence during 
that season of the winds blowing from the part of 
the Sierra Nevada or Paramo of Purase, which 
is distant half a day s journey from Popayan. 
The settlements close to this Paramo are very 
cold, but there are others near the city very hot, 
so that they easily procure the fruits of both tem 
peratures, such as melons, water-melons, apples 
of various kinds, peaches, strawberries larger 
than those of Europe, figs, calabashes, cucum 
bers, and many other fruits ; amongst the which the 
chirimoya deserves preference, from the delicacy 
of its flavour ; and some there are of this species 
from 10 to 12 Ibs. It abounds also in every kind 
of green herb, in neat cattle, and excellent wheat, 
though the natives are far from encouraging its 
cultivation ; their attention being rather drawn 
to the working of the gold-mines, so that they 
do not even gather sufficient corn for the con 
sumption of the city ; but provide themselves 
with flour from Almaguer, which is 20 leagues 
distant, and from Pasto, which is 50 ; and this 
too, when the grain of these places is of a very 
inferior sort. 

The tempests prevalent here, although very 
strong, are soon over, and then the heavens are 
quiet and serene. The same is the case with the 
earthquakes ; and from thence has arisen the 
proverb, " The sky, soil, and bread of Popayan." 
At the back of the town is a mountain covered 
with trees, called of the M, as it represents the 
form of this letter. The city is surrounded by 
the river Molino, and to pass this, there are two 
bridges of brick and mortar, at the two opposite 
extremes ; which are the wards of Callejon and 
that known by the name of Arrabal. v\ 7 hich, with 
the hospital of the Bethlemites, is divided from 
the city by this river, the waters of which are 
very good and salutary. Moreover, it passes 
through the settlement of Yanaconas, a little 
more than a quarter of a league distant ; from 
whence it flows by an aqueduct, which was made 
at the expense of Don Pedro Agnstin de Valen 
cia, to carry the water to the Mint, founded at 
his expense, according to the celebrated contract 
made in 1749 ; although, through the obstacles 
thrown in by the interested parties at Santa Fe,. 
metals were not wrought here until 1758, and 
even then, the litigations not being appeased, 
the king ordered it to be shut up in 1761. 

After this, in justice to Valencia, it was or 
dered that every indemnification should be 



P O P A Y A N. 



him for the loss he might sustain. This was ac 
cordingly done by the council of the Indies ; and 
the Mint was re-opened in 1766, for the advan 
tage of the royal treasury, and in 1770 the king 
determined to incorporate it with the crown- 
rights, not without taking into his consideration 
the protection which was due to the family of 
Valencia, for the great difficulties and losses that 
this individual had sustained : and this influence 
was immediately felt by D. Francisco de Valen 
cia, the eldest son, who, established in his father s 
properties, and vested with the appointment of 
Secretary to the Universal Dispatch of the In 
dies, was made Cross Pensioner of the Royal 
and distinguished Order of Charles III. his son 
too, Don Pedro de Valencia, was made Knight- 
Page of the Royal House, and he is now ac 
tually serving as Captain of the African Infantry 
Regiment. Also, in virtue of the celebrated 
contract between the same Don Francisco Valen- 
, the king determined, in 1687, that his son 



cia 



should be reinstated in all the rights of the fa 
mily, and, as a compensation for the losses it 
had sustained, made him treasurer of the same 
Mint, with the annual revenue of 5000 dollars, 
in quality of master, for himself and for his heirs 
for ever. At present there are made in this Mint 
annually from seven to 8000 dollars in dobloons, 
and a small quantity in silver. 

After the erection of this Mint, a public foun 
tain was made in the principal square, the water 
of which was supplied from the aqueduct above 
mentioned, and which was executed by Don Pe 
dro Augustin de Valencia, and ceded gratui 
tously, as were also several houses and convents. 
At a short space from the city runs another small 
river of the name of Ejido, since it passes through 
this place; and at a quarter of a league distance 
is the abundant stream of the Cauca, very rapid 
and deep, now united with the Vinagre, a river 
so called from the acidity of its waters, and which 
communicates the same qualities to those of the 
Cauca. To pass this river the Indians had, in 
the time of their gentilism, a prodigious bridge, 
formed by an arch of reeds twined within each 
other, which reeds the Spaniards used to use for 
making shades ; and after this there was built 
here a bridge of wood, upon a foundation laid in 
the middle of the river, of stone and mortar: but 
on account of the detriment arising from the in 
attention in repairing the wood-work of the 
bridge, and the circumstance of its lying in the 
direct road to all the provinces, the city was 
obliged, in 1768, to rebuild it on an improved 
plan, suggested by the engineer and chief of Car 



tagena, Don Antonio de Arevalo, over a part 
where the river is only 24 yards across, at a 
small distance from the old bridge. 

The new bridge is of only one arch, resting, 
in the part towards the city, upon a rock, and in 
the other upon an artificial foundation ; and on 
this side is a causeway made, upon arches of 93 
yards in extent, to equalize the road, and on the 
opposite side one of 32 yards. This work was 
undertaken through a contribution of the inha 
bitants ; but the sum thus procured not being 
equal to the purpose by 25,000 dollars, this dif 
ference was made up by Don Francisco Basilio 
de Angulo and Don Joseph Hidalgo, who were 
to be reimbursed by a toll upon the bridge ; and 
his majesty authorizing the profits so arising, 
after the satisfaction of their demands, to be car 
ried to the profit of the city. 

By the ward of the Arrabal or Suburbs there 
still exists the bridge made of oziers, which is 
repaired by the Indians every two years. This 
is only for foot passengers ; but it is very secure, 
as having strong breast- works of the same oziers 
on both sides of it. 

The city of Popayan is ennobled by many 
great and rich families, descended from the first 
conquerors and settlers, as also by various other 
distinguished persons, who have passed over in 
different employs, and who are : L)on Sebastian 
de Belalcazar, who married at Burgos Dona Ma 
ria de Herrera y Sarmiento ; the Captain Pedro 
de Velasco, descendant of the constables of Cas- 
tille, married to Doiia Catalina de Zuiiiga, daugh 
ter of the Marquis of Quintana ; Captain Diego 
del Campo, married to Dona Mariana del Cam- 
po Salazar ; Captain Francisco Mosquera de Fi- 
gueroa, descendant of the Dukes of Feria and 
Alva, married to Dona Leonor de Velasco; Juan 
Lopez Cabron de Viscarra, native of Navarra, 
married to Dona Jues de Vergara, who was born 
at Sevilla ; Captain Francisco de Aranas, and 
others, of whom are descended the distinguished 
families existing in Popayan ; the natives of which 
place are prudent, economical, and of clear un 
derstandings ; are faithful in their dealings, and 
of great circumspection. This city is also the 
native place of Father Francisco de Figueroa, 
of the Jesuits, first martyr of the missions of the 
Maranon, and killed by the Cocamas Indians, at 
the entrance of the river Apena, in 1666 ; also 
of various illustrious men, who have filled the 
civil, military, and ecclesiastical stations of the 
kingdom. 

In 1735 an earthquake was experienced here, 
which destroyed many houses, and the greater 



POPAYAN. 



193 



part of the temples, and amongst the rest that 
of St. Domingo, which was rebuilt very sumptu 
ously by the House of the Arboledas. [The po 
pulation of this city, in 1802, amounted to 25,000 
souls. It is 195 miles s. s. w. from Santa Fe, and 
the same distance n. n. e. from Quito, in lat. 2 
28 38" n. and long. 76 3V 30" a&amp;gt;.] 

Bishops who have presided in Popayan. 

1. The Master, Don Juan del Valle, first 
bishop of the holv cathedral church of Popayan, 
first presented in 1547 ; although many do not 
count him among the bishops, as he died before 
he took possession. This, however, was not the 
case, as appears by the chronicles of Fr. Antonio 
de Zamora. 

2. Don tr. Augustin de Coruna, monk of the 
order of San Agustin, called from his virtues the 
Saint Bishop. He was a native of Coruiia del 
Conde, passed over to America in 1554, with five 
other religious, was in Mexico professor of prime, 
prior of various convents, and provincial in 1560. 
He returned to Spain with the provincials of St. 
Francisco and St. Domingo, to treat of a remedy 
for the losses sustained by the Indians. Whilst 
in Se villa he was presented by King Philip II. to 
the bishopric of Popayan ; this he accepted by 
force, passed to his church, and founded the con 
vent of his order, where he lived as one of the 
religious. Assisted at the council of Lima in 
1567 ; and when he spoke with any one, he used 
to call him Angel of God ; was very zealous of 
the ecclesiastical community. This bishop died 
at Timana in 1590, in the greatest poverty, as 
he had given away all that he possessed in cha 
rity. When his body was removed from the ca 
thedral, it was found to be incorrupt. 

3. Don -Fr. Domingo de Ulloa, of the order of 
St. Domingo, native of Toro in Castilla, of the 
house of the Marquis of La Mota. He was col 
legiate in the college of San Gregorio de Valla- 
dolid, and its rector, prior of his convent of San 
Pablo in the same city, and formerly lecturer 
in the convent of Toro, vicar-general of the pro 
vince of Castilla ; presented to the bishopric of 
Nicaragua, promoted to Popayan in 1591, and 
from thence to the bishopric of Mechoacan in 
1596. 

4. Don Juan de la Roca, native of Lima, a 
man of great virtue and literature. He was doc- 
torial canon in his native place, judge in ordi 
nary of the Inquisition, elected bishop of Po 
payan in 1599 : was consecrated by St. Toribius, 
spent all he had in rebuilding temples and in 
charity, and died poor in 1605. 

VOL. IV. 



5. Don Diego de Vega Sarmiento, maestre- 
escuela of the Puebla de los Angeles : elected 
bishop of Popayan in 1608 ; he did not accept 
the office, and died dean of Mexico. 

6. Don Fr. Juan Gonzalez de Mendoza, reli 
gious of the order of San Agustin : native of 
Toledo. Being plenipotentiary apostolic in 1584, 
he was sent by Philip II. as ambassador to the 
Emperor of China; was bishop of Liparia in Si 
cily, and of Anillo in the archbishopric of Toledo : 
of Chiapa in 1607, and promoted to Popayan in 
1608, where he died in 1618. 

7. Don Fr. Ambrosio Vallejo. religious of the 
order of Nuestra Senora del Carmen, native of 
Madrid. He read arts and theology, was prior 
of the convents of Avila, Valladolid, Medina del 
Campo and Madrid, provincial of Castilla, and 
procurator-general of the provinces of Espana 
and kingdom of Portugal ; consultor of the holy 
office ; he was presented to the bishopric of Po 
payan in 1619, and promoted to the archbishopric 
of St. Domingo in 1628, and before he passed 
from thence, to the bishopric of Truxilloin 1630. 
He died in 1635, and his body was translated to 
his convent of Madrid, to which he had given 
30,000 dollars. 

8. Don Diego de Montoya y Mendoza, native 
of Mijancas in the bishopric of Calahorra. He 
studied grammar in the college of the company 
of Vergara, and arts and theology in Salamanca ; 
was collegiate of Santa Catalina del Burgo de 
Osma, and graduated as doctor in Avila. He 
gained, by opposition, a curacy in the arch 
bishopric of Toledo, and resigned it to oppose 
himself to the college of the archbishopric of 
Salamanca in 1623 : was there professor of arts, 
and by opposition magisterial canon of Coria. He 
was sent by its church to Madrid, for the quin 
quennial congregation, and was presented by the 
king to the bishopric of Popayan in 1632, where 
he entered the following year. He undertook 
the reduction of the Indians, the Chocoes and 
Noanamas, whither he went in person ; and was 
promoted to the bishopric of Truxillo in 1639, 
and being elected to that of Cuzco, he died ex 
ceedingly poor in 1640. 

9. Don Fr. Gonzalo de Lara, of the order of 
Merced, who did not accept the office. 

10. Don Feliciano de Vega, native of Lima, 
one of the wisest and most virtuous men that 
ever lived in Peru. Was canon, chantre and 
provisor in the archbishopric of that holy church, 
governor of the same, commissary of the holy 
crusade and of the inquisition, and councillor of 
the viceroys in the most arduous affairs, profes- 

c c 



194 



P O P A Y A N. 



sor of canons in the university, and presented to 
the bishopric of Popayan in 1628. He converted 
many barbarian Indians ; in which journeys he 
spent more than 20,000 dollars of his fortune, 
and was promoted to the bishopric of La Paz in 
1639. 

11. Don Fr. Francisco de la Serna, of the or 
der of San Agustin : native of Leon de Gua- 
nuco in Peru. He studied arts and theology, the 
latter for four years ; was master of students, 
lecturer and professor of theology, and noon and 
vespers lecturer in the university ; calificador of 
the holy office, and twice provincial. Presented 
to the bishopric of Paraguay, and, before he 
passed thither, removed to that of Popayan in 
1639 ; promoted to La Paz in 1645. 

12. Don Fr. Bernardino de Cardenas, of the 
order of San Francisco; promoted to the bishop 
ric of Paraguay, and, through his renunciation 
of the same, the see was offered Doctor Don 
Andres Juan Gaitan, Inquisitor of Lima, who 
also refused it ; and then to Don Juan Machado 
de Chaves y Mendoza, native of Quito, treasurer 
and archdeacon of the church of Charcas, who 
died before he was consecrated. The king then 
presented the bishopric to Don Agustin Velaz 
quez de Tineo, native of Cuellar, in the bishop 
ric of Segovia, friar of the order of Alcantara, 
doctor in theology, chaplain of honour to his 
majesty, and prior of Magacela, in 1653. 

13. Don Luis de Betancur y Figueroa. 

14. Doctor Don Vasco de Contreras, treasurer 
of the holy church of Lima, his native place ; 
dean of that of Cuzco. He studied in that uni 
versity, was presented to the bishopric of Po 
payan, and promoted to Guamanga in 1664. 

15. Don Fr. Francisco de la IVinidad y Ar- 
rieta, of the order of St. Domingo : promoted 
from the bishopric of Santa Marta. He died be 
fore he entered his church, in 1664. 

16. Don Melchon de Lilian y Cisneros, pro 
moted from the bishopric of Santa Marta, in 
which catalogue of bishops he is mentioned. He 
was promoted to the archbishopric of Charcas in 
1671. 

17. Don Christoval Bernaldo de Quiros, pro 
moted from the bishopric of Chiapa in the king 
dom of Guatemala, to this of Popayan, in 1670. 

18. Don Pedro Diaz de Cienfuegos, brother of 
the Cardinal Don Alvaro de Cienfuegos, of the 
Jesuits. He was elected bishop of Popayan, and 
promoted to the bishopric of Truxillo in Peru, 
in 1697. 

19. Don Mateo de Villafane, who was pro 
moted to La Paz in 1711. 



20. Don Juan de Laiseca Alvarado, elected 
bishop of Tucuman, and, before he took pos 
session, promoted to Popayan in 1711. 

21. Don Juan Gomez de Nava y Frias, being 
curate of the settlement of Mostoles in the arch 
bishopric of Toledo : presented by the king to 
the bishopric of Popayan in 1714 ; and promoted 
to the church of Quito in 1725. 

22. Don Juan Francisco Gomez Calleja, pro 
moted from the bishopric of Cartagena of the 
Indies to this of Popayan in 1725. He died in 
1731. 

23. Don Fr. Diego Fermin de Vergara, of 
the order of San Agustin : presented to the bi 
shopric of Popayan in 1732, and removed from 
thence to the archbishopric of Santa Fe in 1740. 

24. Don Francisco Joseph de Figucredo, ma- 
cstre-escuela of the church of Popayan, and 
elected bishop of the same in the aforesaid year 
1740 ; and promoted to the archbishopric of Gua 
temala in 1751. 

25. Don Diego de Corro, maestre-escuela of 
the holy metropolitan church of Lima; presented 
to the bishopric of Popayan in 1752, and pro 
moted to the archbishopric of Lima in 1758. 

26. Don Geronimo de Obregon y Mena, na 
tive of Lima : elected bishop of Popayan in 1758. 
He was the bishop who governed this church for 
the longest time, not quitting it till his death in 
1786. 

27. Don Joaquin Mateo Rubio de Arevalo, 
native of Quito, and bishop of Cubu in the 
Philippine Isles : he was elected on the 16th of 
August, 1787, and died even before he heard the 
news of his election. 

28. Don Angel Velarde Bustamante, arch 
deacon of Carrion of the cathedral of Palencia ; 
elected on the 13th March, 1788. 

Series of the Governors of Popayan. 

1. Don Sebastian de Belalcazar, conqueror of 
this province through the commission of Don 
Francisco Pizarro, founder of the city, and first 
governor perpetual of it, by the royal title of 
the 10th of March, 1540, till 1550, when he died. 

2. The Licentiate Francisco Briceno, native of 
Corral de Almagner, oidor of Santa Fe, who 
entered provisionally in 1551. He corrected 
the abuses committed in that province, and re 
turned to Santa Fe to serve in his old situation 
in 1552, leaving the government to 

3. The Captain Diego Delgado, justice major 
of Popayan, native of Alcandete in La Mancha, 
who chastised and cut off the head of the tyrant 
Alvaro de Yloyon. He governed until 1554, 



POPAYAN. 



195 



when the emperor nominated Garcia del Busto, 
native of Ocana ; but the ship he was sailing in 
having the misfortune to be set on fire, he pe 
rished with his wife and five children, though 
his brother was saved on a raft. 

4. Pedro Fernandez del Busto, who was picked 
up by another vessel of the fleet, and arrived at 
Santa Fe, where the misfortune caused such re 
gret, that the oidors vested the government in 
the brother who had been saved, and who re 
tained it until the arrival of 

5. Don Luis de Guzman, who entered in 1554, 
and governed till 1556. 

6. Don Pedro de Agreda ; till 1562. 

7. Don Alvaro de Mendoza Carvaial ; till 
1567. 

8. Don Geronimo de Silva ; till 1572. 

9. Don Pedro Fernandez del Busto ; thrice 
nominated by the king. He passed promoted to 
the government of Cartagena. 

10. Don Francisco Gamarra : nominated pro 
visionally by the president of Santa Fe, 1575, 
and who, for having married without the royal 
licence, was separated from it the same year. 

11. Don Bartolome de Mazmela; nominated 
by the president as provisional governor, by a 
title dated 19th December, 1575. 

12. Don Sancho Garcia del Espinal ; who was 
the same that caused the imprisonment of the 
bishop Don Fr. Agustin de Coruiia, in vengeance 
of an excommunication so rightly pronounced 
against him. He governed till 1579. 

13. The captain Francisco de Mosquera Fi- 
gueroa, till 1585. 

14. Don Diego Orbonez de Lara, native of 
Salamanca. He died whilst exercising the go 
vernment there, and in his place was nominated 
as provisional governor 

15. The Licentiate Cueva Montesdoca ; till 
1591. 

16. Don Diego de Noguera Valenzuela ; who 
took possession in 1593, and exercised the go 
vernment till his death. 

17. Don Francisco de Hoyos, provisionally, in 
1597. He was made secretary of the council of 
orders. 

18. Don Franciso de Berrio, also provisionally, 
in 1598. 

19. Don Francisco Sarmiento de Sotomayor ; 
from 1609. 

20. Don Pedro Laso de la Vega ; nominated 
in 1619. 

21. Don Juan Menendez Marquez, in 1620: 
he died in his employ. 

22. Don Juan de Borja, of the habit of San 



tiago : nominated provisionally by his father, the 
president of Santa Fe ; of his own name. 

23. Don Juan Bermudez de Castro, in 1627. 

24. Don Lorenzo de Villaquiran, in 1633. 

25. Don Juan de Borja, aforesaid, nominated, 
for the second time, governor by the king, in 
1638. 

26. Don Juan de Salazar; of the habit of 
Santiago, in 1644. 

27. Don Luis de Valenzuela Faxardo, of the 
habit of Alcantara ; in 1649. 

28. Don Luis Antonio de Guzman, knight of 
the habit of Santiago ; in 1658. 

29. Don Geronimo de Ojeda : nominated go 
vernor in 1662, being- at the time governor of 
the island of Santa Catalina : he died before he 
arrived. 

30. Don Gabriel Diaz de la Cuesta : nominated 
in 1667. 

31. Don Miguel Garcia; till 1675. 

32. Don Fernando Martinez de Fresneda, 
knight of the order of Calatrava; till 1681. 

33. Don Geronimo de Berrio y Mendoza ; till 
1689. 

34. Don Juan de Salazar. 

35. Don Baltasar Carlos Perez de Vivero, 
Marquis of San Miguel de la Vega ; till 1708. 

36. Don Fernando Perez Guerrero y Pena- 
loso ; till 1727. 

37. Don Pablo Fidalgo, ensign of the regi 
ment of the royal Spanish guards ; elected in 
1734. 

38. Don Joseph Francisco Carreno ; in 1737. 

39. Don Antonio Mola de Villacorta, in 1747; 
and succeeded, through his promotion, to be 
serjeant-major of the plaza of Cartagena, by 

40. Don Manuel Bernal de Huidobro, on the 
10th of November, 1748. It appears that he 
died before he took possession ; and in the inte 
rim the government fell to 

41. Don Juan Francisco de Equizabal, native 
of Popayan ; and to 

42. Don Francisco Damian de Espejo; until 
the arrival of the right proprietor ; who was 

43. Don Antonio de Alcala Galiano; nomi 
nated by the king on the 16th September, 1754. 

44. t)on Pedro de la Moneda, captain of the 
royal Spanish infantry guards, on the 27th De 
cember, 1759, finding himself at the time go 
vernor of the island of Trinidad. 

45. Don Juan Antonio de Celaya ; on whom 
the government was conferred, with the super- 
intendancy of the royal mint, when this became 
incorporated with the crown rights; on the 1st 
February, 1770. He died exercising the au- 

c c 2 



106 



FOR 



thority ; and in the interim was nominated by 
the viceroy of Santa Fe 

46. Don Joseph Ignacio Ortega, who kept 
it till the arrival of 

47. Don Pedro de Becaria; who was appointed 
on the 6th of June, 1776, though not to the su- 
perintendancy of the mint, this being conferred 
upon Don Joseph Jacob Ortiz Rojano. 

48. Don Joseph de Castro y Correa ; by decree 
of the 1st of December, 1787, although he has 
not taken possession. 

POPEGI, a settlement of the province of 
Taraumara and kingdom of Nueva Vizcaya in 
N. America. 

[POPLAR Spring, in the n. w. part of Ann 
Arundel county, Maryland, near a brook, three 
miles s. of the o&amp;gt;. branch of Patapsco River, on 
the high road from Baltimore to Frederick s 
Town, about 26 miles w. of Baltimore.] 

[POPLIN, a township of New Hampshire, 
in Rockingham county, 12 miles w. of Exeter, 
and 20 w. of Portsmouth. It was incorporated 
in 1764, and contains 493 inhabitants.] 

POPOLAPA, a settlement of the head set 
tlement of the district and alcadia mat/or of Igua- 
lapa in Nueva Espana; 3\ leagues s. e. of its 
capital. 

POPULO, a settlement of the province and 
government of Sonora in N. America: on the 
shore of the river of this name, between the 
settlements of Los Angeles and La Magdalena. 

POPUTLA, a settlement of the head settle 
ment of the district of Pinoteca del Rey, and 
alcadia mayor of Xicayan in Nueva Espana: it 
is much reduced, and seven leagues s. w. of its 
head settlement. 

[POQUE CHOUDIE, a low flat point be 
tween the Gut of Chepagan and the village of 
Caraquet, on the s. side of Chaleur Bay. It is 
about four leagues distant from the Gut, in a 
s. w. direction. The island of Caraquet, at the 
same distance from the Gut, lies in a w. direc 
tion from the main. The village is about three 
leagues in extent; its plantations, &amp;c. has a 
church, and a number of inhabitants, all Roman 
Catholics. The oyster and cod-fisheries are car 
ried on herej 

PORACICABA, a river of the province and 
captains/tip of San Vicente in Brazil ; which runs 
re , and enters the Tiete or Anembi. 

PORATE, ARRAYAL DE, a settlement of the 
province and captainship of Para in Brazil : on 
the shore of the river Tocantines, at the mouth 
of the Taquanhuna. 



FOR 

PORCELADOS, Coast of, in the province 
and captainship of Seara in Brazil, between the 
Point of Pena and the Bay of Iguape. 

PORC-EPI, Cape of, on the coast of the pro 
vince of Nova Scotia in N. America. 

PORC-EPI, a small island of this province. 

PORC-EPINE, Cape of, on the same coast of 
the province as the former, and in the Bay of 
Fundy : one of those which form the entrance 
of the basin of the mines. 

PORCO, a province and corrcgimicnto of 
Peru : bounded n. by that of Orura, n. w. by 
that of Paria, w. e. by that of Yamparaes ; s. e. 
by that of Pomabamba ; s. by that of Pilaya and 
Paspaya, and by that of Chichas ; and w. by that 
of Lipes : it is 40 leagues in length from n. to 
s. and 60 broad from e. to w. at the widest part. 
Its temperature, with the exception of one or 
two valleys contiguous to the river Pilcomayo, 
which is the most considerable passing through 
this province. This river, in the n. w. part, has 
a bridge of shapeable stones, and another in the 
e. by which is the pass to the prov ince of Ampa- 
raes and the city of La Plata. Nearly in the 
centre of the province is found the city of Po- 
tosi. Its productions are similar to those of the 
other parts of the sierra; such as papas., barley, 
beans, bark, and some wheat ; and in the tem 
perate valleys are fruits and vineyards, from which 
they make some wine. The breeds of sheep here 
are considerable, as arc also the flocks of native 
sheep, vicunas, and liuancos. It has streams of 
warm water; and its principal commerce con 
sists in its many silver minerals, always celebrated 
for their abundance, and even now some of them 
producing well : in the district of Tomahave 
alone a miner extracted, a few years past, in a 
vein of metal formed by the junction of different 
veins, three millions of dollars. The inhabitants 
of this province amount to 22,000. The capital 
is Talavera de Puna ; and its corregidor had a 
repartimiento of 76,365 dollars, and it used to 
pay an alcabala of 610 annually. 

PORCO, a settlement of this same province 
and corregimicnto. 

PORCO, a mountain, also of the same, very 
abundant in silver ; and in which is one of the 
most celebrated mines of this metal ; and from 
whence the Indians, before the entrance of the 
Spaniards, extracted great wealth : 23 leagues 
from Chuquisaca. 

PORCON, a settlement of the province and 
captainship of San Vicente in Brazil : n. of that 
of Frutas and s. of that of Altos. 



FOR 

PORCOS, a settlement of the province and 
captainship of Rey in the same kingdom as the 
former ; situate w. of the town of Curituba. 

PORCOS, some islands of the river of Las 
Amazonas, near its mouth ; close to the coast of 
the fort and town of Macapa, at the back of the 
great island of Caviana. 

[PORCOS, MORRO DE, or HOG S STRAND, on 
the a/\ coast of New Mexico, is n. of Point Hi- 
guerra, the s. w. point of the peninsula which 
forms the Bay of Panama. From thence ships 
usually take their departure, to go s. for the coast 
of Peru.] 

PORCOZ, a settlement and asiento of silver- 
mines, of the province and corregimiento of Caxa- 
marquilla in Peru ; annexed to the curacy of the 
settlement of Chilia. 

PORE, SAN JOSEPH DE, a city of the pro 
vince and government of Los Llanos in the 
Nuevo Reyno de Granada ; founded by the go 
vernor Anciso : it is of a very hot and unhealthy 
temperature, producing cacao, maize, yuc os, plan 
tains, &amp;c. but its principal commerce is in 
dressed leathers and skamois, which they make 
from the deer-skins, which abound here greatly ; 
the said hides being almost esteemed as much 
as those of Florida. Here are also large breeds 
of cattle, with which the other provinces are 
provided. In the stamps and lakes is a great 
variety of fish ; and one which they call pabon 
or cttrbinata, which has above each eye a white 
transparent stone of the size of an olive, of 
special virtue against the stricture of urine, and 
to dissolve the stones forming in the bladder : 
this city should contain about 500 inhabitants, 
fit is 133 miles n. e. of Santa Fe and 82 s. of 
Pamplona. Lat. 5 40 n. long. 72 13 30" a?.] 

PORFICA, Cape of, a point of land of the 
coast of California; opposite Nueva Espana : 
one of those which form the bay of Magdalena. 

PORIANAS, a barbarous nation of Indians 
but little known ; inhabiting the woods border- 
in on the river Putumayu. All that is known 
ofthem is, that they use bows and arrows, and 
live like wild beasts, supporting themselves by 
the chace. 

PORLAND, QUARTEL DE, a part of the 
island of Guadalupe, one of the Antilles, towards 
the great land on the n. coast. 

PORLAND, a small island, near the coast of 
Nova Scotia ; opposite the Bank Frances. 

POIIOCOCHA, a settlement of the province 
and corregimiento of Yauyos in Peru ; annexed 
to the curacy of the settlement of Tauripampa. 



FOR 



197 



POROMA, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Yamparaes, and of the archbi 
shopric of Charcas, in the same kingdom as the 
former. 

PORONGO, SAN JUAN BAPTISTA DE, a 
settlement of Chiriguanos Indians ; reduced to 
the Catholic religion by the missionaries of Nu- 
estra Senora de la Merced ; subject to the pro 
vince and government of Santa Cruz de la Sierra 
in Peru. Its inhabitants amount to above 12,000; 
and they are most docile and laborious, and, in 
habiting the frontiers of the infidel Yucaraep, 
they serve to check the incursions of the latter 
against the province, from the capital of which 
this settlement is 16 miles distant. 

PORONGOS, Lakes of the, which are five : 
in the province and government of Tucuman and 
kingdom of Peru : they are very close to each 
other, and all of them communicate with one 
another ; the largest of which is the depot of the 
waters of the Dulec and Salado rivers. The 
waters of these lakes are salt ; and they are 83 
miles n.e. of the city of Cordoba, between lat. 30 
and 31 s. and long. 61 and 62 w. 

[PORPOISE, Cape, on the coast of York 
county, district of Maine, is seven leagues n. by 
e. of Cape Neddock, and five s. w. of Wood 
Island. It is known by the highlands of Kcn- 
nebunk, which lie to the n. w. of it. A vessel 
that draws 10 feet water will be a-ground at low 
water in the harbour here. It is so narrow that 
a vessel cannot turn round; is within 100 yards 
of the sea, and secure from all winds, whether 
you have anchor or not.] 

PORQUERA, a settlement of the province 
and government of Cartagena in the Nuevo 
Reyno de Granada : situate in the road which 
leads to the river Grande de la Magdalena, and 
not far from this river. 

PORQUERA, another settlement in the pro 
vince and government of Maracaibo, and of the 
same kingdom as the former : on the shore of 
the great lake, and at the point of Santa Lucia ; 
which is formed at the s. entrance to the capital. 

PORRUDOS, River of the, in the province 
and government of Paraguay ; which runs w. 
and enters the Cayaba. Respecting its course 
there is a difference between the Father Charle- 
voix, in his history of that province, and Don 
Juan de la Cruz, in the great chart of S. Ame 
rica. 

PORT, a port of the w. coast of Newfound 
land, between the two bays of Three Islands and 
that of St. George. 



FOR 



FOR 



[PORT AMHERST, a bay on the s. e. coast of 
Nova Scotia, s. w. of Port Roseway, and 17 miles 
n. e. of Cape Sable.J 

[PORT ANGEL, a harbour on the w. coast of 
Mexico, about half-way between St. Pedro and 
Compostella. It is a broad and open bay, having 
good anchorage, but bad landing. Lat. 13 32 n. 
long. 97 w.~\ 

[PORT ANTONIO, in the n. e. part of the island 
of Jamaica, lies w. by n. of the n. c. point; hav 
ing Fort George and Navy Island on the w. and 
Wood s Island e. It is capable of holding a large 
fleet ; and if it were fortified and accommodated 
for refitting ships of war, would be of great 
importance, as it is only 36 leagues w. of Cape 
Tiburon, in St. Domingo, and opens directly 
into the Windward Passage. The town of T itch- 
field lies on this bay.] 

[PORT AU PRINCE, a jurisdiction and sea 
port, at the head of the Great Bay or Bight of 
Leogane, in the w. part of the island of St. Do 
mingo. The town, which is seated on the head 
of the bay, is the seat of the French government 
in the time of peace, and a place of considera- 1 
ble trade. Though singularly favoured with the 
e. winds, it was long the tomb of the unhappy 
Europeans, in consequence of the difficulty of 
obtaining good water. By the exertions of M. 
de Marbois, who resided here about five years, 
in constructing fountains, public basins, and airy 
prisons, the place has become far more healthy 
and desirable. 

The jurisdiction contains six parishes, and its 
exports, from January 1, 1789, to December 31, 
of the same year, were as follow : 2,497,321 Ibs. 
white sugar ; 44,716,225 Ibs. brown sugar ; 
17,829,424 Ibs. coffee ; 1,878,999 Ibs. cotton ; 
137,951 Ibs. indigo ; other articles, as hides, mo 
lasses, spirits, &amp;c. to the value of 8,248j livres. 
The total value of duties on the above articles 
on exportation was 189,945 dollars, 46 cents. 
This fine town was nearly burnt down by the 
revolting negroes, in November and December, 
1791. 

It is only fit for a shipping-place for the pro 
duce of the adjacent country, and for that of the 
rich plains of the Cul de Sac to the n. The 
island of Gonave to the w. would enable a squa 
dron to block up the port. The line of commu 
nication between Port au Prince and the town of 
St. Domingo, is by the ponds, and through the 
towns of Neybe, Azua, Bani, &amp;c. The distance 
from Port au Prince to St. Domingo City is 142 
miles e. Port au Prince is 19 miles e. of the 



town of Leogane, and about 90 s. s. e. from Port 
de Paix. Lat. 18 31 30" n. long. 72 19 o&amp;gt;.] 

[PORT BANKS, on the n. w. coast of N. Ame 
rica, lies s. e. of Pitt s Island, and n. w. of Point 
Bukarelli.] 

[PORT CABANAS, on the n. side of the Island 
of Cuba, lies e. by n. of Bahia Hondu, and w. of 
Port Mariel.] 

[PORT DAUPHIN, a bay on the e. coast of 
Cape Breton Island, about 18 leagues s. by w, 
of Cape Raye in Newfoundland.] 

[PORT DE PAIX, or PAZ, a jurisdiction and 
sea-port, on the n. side of the island of St. Do 
mingo, towards the w. end, and opposite the 
island of Tortue, seven miles distant. The ju 
risdiction contains seven parishes ; the ex 
ports from which, from January 1, 1789, to 
December 31, of the same year, were as follow : 
331,900 Ibs. white sugar; 515,500 Ibs. brown su 
gar; 1,957,618 Ibs. coffee; 35,154 Ibs. cotton; 
29,181 Ibs. indigo. The duties on exportation 
of the above amounted to 9,407 dollars, 60 cents. 
It is 54 miles n. of St. Marcos, 39 e. of the Mole, 
and 33 w. of Cape Francois. Lat. 19 54 n. 
long. 72= 46 30" wj 

[PORT DE LA CHAUDIERE, on the s. coast of 
the island of St. Domingo, lies at the e. entrance 
of the Bay of Ocoa, which is 18 leagues w. by 
*. of the city of St. Domingo. This port is large, 
open, and deep enough to admit vessels of any 
burden.] 

[PORT DESIRE, a harbour on the e. coast of 
Patagonia, S. America, where vessels sometimes 
touch in their passage to the S. Sea. It is about 
150 miles n. e. of Port St. Julian. Lat. 47 6 s.] 

[PORT DU PRINCE, a town on the n. coast of 
the Island of Cuba, having a good harbour. The 
town stands in a large meadow, where the Spa 
niards feed numerous herds of cattle.] 

[PORT EGMONT, on the n. coast of the w. of 
the Falkland Isles, and towards the w. end of 
that coast. It is one of the most extensive and 
commodious harbours in the world ; so that it 
has been asserted, that the whole navy of Great 
Britain might ride securely in it. Commodore 
Byron discovered this excellent harbour in 1775, 
on being sent to take possession of the islands for 
the British government.] 

[PORT JULIAN, or PORT ST. JULIAN, a har 
bour on the e. coast of Patagonia, in S. America, 
104 miles s. by w. of Port Descado. It has a free 
and open entrance, and salt is found near it. The 
continent is not above 100 leagues broad here. 
Besides salt ponds, here are plenty of wild cattle, 



FOR 

horses, Peruvian sheep, and wild dogs, but the 
water is bad. Lat. 49 10 s. long. 67 45 wJ] 

[PORT MARQUIS, a harbour on the coast of 
Mexico, in the N. Pacific Ocean, three miles e. 
of Acapulco, where ships from Peru frequently 
land their contraband goods. Lat. 17 27 n. 
long. 102 26 .] 

[PORT PAIX. See PORT DE PAIX.] 

[PoiiT OF SPAIN, the capital of the Island of 
Trinidad, in the W. Indies, situated on the w. 
side of the island. See TRINIDAD.] 

[PORTA MARIA, in the n. e. part of the 
Island of Jamaica, s. e. from Gallina Point.] 

[PORTA Port, on the w. w. side of the island of 
Newfoundland ; the s. entrance into which is 10 
or 12 leagues from Cape St. George.] 

PORTAGE, a river of the province and go 
vernment of Luisiana ; which rises from a small 
lake near the Lake Misigan, runs s. e. and enters 
the river St. Croix. 

[PORTAGE, Point, on the e. coast of New 
Brunswick, and in the s. w. part of the Gulf of 
St. Lawrence, forms the n. limit of Miramichy 
Bay, as Point Ecoumenac does the s.~] 

PORTAGES, a sea-port of Nova Scotia ; at 
the entrance of the Bay of Fundy. 

PORTAHUELO, a small port of the S. Sea ; 
in the coast of the province and corregimiento of 
Truxillo and kingdom of Peru : near the settle 
ment of Moche. 

PORTAIL, a port of the s. coast of Lake 
Superior in Canada ; between the river Hicame- 
peque and the Bay of Grandes Sables. 

PORTALES, a settlement of the province 
and government of Santa Marta in the Nuevo 
Reyno de Granada : on the coast on the shore 
of the Bay of Zinto, near Cape San Juan de 

r* J r 

truia. 

PORTE, a settlement of the province and 
captainship of Paraiba in Brazil : on the shore of 
the River Aracay, near the coast. 

PORTE-NEUVE, an island of the N. Sea, near 
the coast of Nova Scotia. 

PORTEE GRAND, a settlement of the pro 
vince and colony of Virginia ; on the shore of 
the river Ohio. 

[PORTER, a lake of Nova Scotia, which 
empties itself .into the ocean; five leagues e. of 
Halifax. It is 15 miles in length, and half a 
mile in width, with islands in it.J 

[PORTERFIELD, a small settlement in York 
County, district of Maine.] 

[PORTERO, a river of Peru, which empties 
itself into the sea at the City of Baldivia.] 



FOR 



199 



PORTETE, a sea-port in the province and 
government of the Rio del Hacha, in the Nuevo 
Reyno de Granada : situate to e. of Cape la 
Vela, and w. of that of Chichibacoa. 

PORTETE, another port, in the province and 
kingdom of Tierra Firme, on the side of the 
mouth of the river Chagre ; at the back of the 
point which this forms, and where there is a 
castle. 

PORTETE, another, of the n. coast of the pro 
vince and government of Costarica and kingdom 
of Guatemala; between the river Las Suerte 
and that of La Concepcion. 

[PORTLAND, a post-town and port of entry, 
in Cumberland County, district of Maine. It is 
the capital of the district, and is situated on a 
promontory in Casco Bay, and was formerly a 
part of Falmouth. It is 32 miles s. by w. of 
Wiscasset, 88 n. by e. of Boston. In July, 1786, 
this part of the town, being the most populous 
and mercantile, and situated on the harbour, 
together with the islands which belong: to Fal- 

~ 

mouth, was incorporated by the name of Port 
land. It has a most excellent, safe, and capacious 
harbour, which is seldom^ or never completely 
frozen over. It is near the main ocean, and is 
easy of access. The inhabitants carry on a con 
siderable foreign trade, build ships, and are 
largely concerned in the fishery. It is one of 
the most thriving commercial towns in the com 
monwealth of Massachusetts. 

Although three-fourths of it was laid in ashes 
by the British fleet in 1775, it has since been 
entirely rebuilt, and contains about 2300 inha 
bitants. Among its public buildings are three 
churches, two for Congregationalists, and one 
for Episcopalians, and a handsome court-house. 
A light-house was erected in 1790, on a point of 
land called Portland Head, at the entrance of 
the harbour. It is a ?tone edifice, 72 feet high, 
exclusive of the lanthorn, and stands in lat. 43 
47 / n. and long. 70 10 30" w. The following 
directions are to be observed in coming into the 
harbour. Bring the light to bear n. n. w. then 
run for it, allowing a small distance on the lar 
board hand : and when a-breast of the same, then 
n. by w. This course will give good anchorage 
from half a mile to a mile and a half. No va 
riation of the compass is allowed. The works 
erected in 1795, for the defence of Portland, 
consist of a fort, a citadel, a battery for 10 
pieces of cannon, an artillery-store, a guard 
house, an air furnace for heating shot, and a co 
vered way from the fort to the battery.] 



"200 



FOR 



[PORTLAND Head, in Casco Bay, in the dis 
trict of Maine, the promontory on which the 
light-house above described stands. From the 
light-house to Alden s Ledge is four leagues 5.s. e. 
High water in Portland harbour, at full and 
change, and 45 minutes after 10 o clock. See 
PORTLAND.] 

[PORTLAND Point, on the 5. coast of the Island 
of Jamaica, and the most s. land in it, lies in 
lat. 17 44 n. and long. 77 5 w. 

[PORTLOCK S Harbour, on the n. w. coast 
of N. America, has a narrow entrance compared 
with its circular form within. The middle of the 
entrance lies in lat. 57 43 30" and long. 136 
42 / 30 // ty.J 

PORTO, a settlement of the province and 
captainship of Ilheos in Brazil ; on the shore of 
the river Ilheos, on the coast and at the mouth 
of the river Santa Cruz. 

[PORTO DEL PRINCIPE, a sea-port on the n. 
coast of the island of Cuba, 300 miles s. e. of the 
Havannah, and 186 n. w. of Baracoa. It w r as 
formerly a large and rich town, but being taken 
by Captain Morgan, with his buccaneers, after a 
stout resistance, it never recovered itself. Near 
it are several springs of bitumen.] 

[PORTO Rico, one of the W. Indian isles. 
See PUERTO Rico.] 

[PORTO SANTO, a port situate in the mouth of 
the river of its name, on the coast of Peru, n. of 
Point Ferol, and 15 miles 5. e. of Cape de Chao, 
or Chau, and in lat. 8 58 30" s.l 

PORTOBELLO, a city and sea-port of the 
kingdom of Tierra Firme, on the declivity of a 
mountain surrounding the port. The greater 
part of the houses are of wood; although there 
be some which have the first body of stone : they 
are all large, and amount to about 130, which 
run in one long street ; this being intersected, 
however, with some other houses, and there being 
also some scattered about the mountain. It has 
two squares, one in front of the custom-house, 
which is of stone, and another opposite the parish 
church also of stone, and which is large, prettily 
adorned, and served by a parochial curate and 
other priests. There are other two churches, 
one which is a convent of the monks of La 
Merced, and another of those of San Juan de 
Dios, having under their charge the hospital ; 
but both these are poor and small, and nearly in 
a state of complete ruin. 

At the e. extremity of the city, and in the road 
which leads to PanamJi, is a place called Guinea ; 
this being where the Negroes dwell, as well the 



P O 11 

bondmen as the slaves of both sexes : and thi 
spot was, during the trade carried on by the gal 
leons, very thickly inhabited ; inasmuch as it 
was resorted to by the greater part of the neigh 
bourhood, in order to let out their houses to the 
people of the galleons, and by the many artisans 
who came down from Panama. 

This city, which is but poorly inhabited, was 
in the time of the galleons one of the most popu 
lous in the world ; for its situation upon an isth 
mus of the two seas, the n. and 5. the goodness 
of its port, and its vicinity to Panama, gave it 
the preference of all the other settlements of 
America for the celebration of the richest fair in 
the universe, and which was carried on nearly 
every year by the Spanish merchants of Spain 
and Peru. Immediately on the arrival at Pa 
nama of the fleet ef Peru with its riches, the gal 
leons of Cartagena dropped down to Portobello ; 
not doing it sooner in order to avoid many in 
conveniences, such as sickness and the exorbitant 
expences which arose from the vast concourse of 
people which used to assemble on the occasion ; 
when a moderate sized parlour and bed would 
cost 1000 dollars, and the houses let for 5000 or 
6000. Scarcely did the sailors bring their ves 
sels to anchor, but they formed with sails a large 
booth in the square of the town, where to dis 
embark and lodge cargoes ; each one recognizing 
his own effects by his mark. At the same time 
was to be seen the arrival of large mule-droves 
of 100 mules each, loaded with chests of gold and 
silver from Peru : some of these would lodge 
their valuable burdens in the custom-house, others 
in the square ; and it was, indeed, well worthy 
of admiration to see with what little disorder and 
confusion every thing was conducted amongst so 
great a diversity of men and characters ; robbery, 
murders, or any other less serious disturbances 
being entirely unknown on these occasions. 
Again, the spectator who had just before been 
considering Portobello in a poor, unpeopled 
state, without a ship in its port, and breathing 
nothing but misery and wretchedness, would re 
main thunderstruck at beholding the strange al 
teration which takes place at the time of this fair. 
Now he would see the houses crowded with peo 
ple, the square and the streets crammed with 
chests of gold and silver, and the port covered 
with vessels ; some of these having brought by 
the river Chagre from Panama the effects of 
Peru, such as cacao, bark, vicuna, wool, Bezoa 
stone, and other productions of those provinces. 
He would see others bringing provisions from 



PORTOBELLO. 



201 



Cartagena ; and he would reflect that, however 
detestable might be its climate, this city was the 
emporium of the riches of the two worlds, and 
the most considerable commercial depot that was 
ever known. 

Scarcely have the merchants of Spain disem 
barked their merchandise, and those of Peru, at 
tended by the president of Panama, arrived with 
their riches, than the general of the galleons and 
the deputies of the two trading parties proceed 
to regulate the prices of all the articles ; and this 
being once published nothing will alter. Thus 
the sales and exchanges used to be made in the 
course of 60 days, the time of the duration of the 
fair ; during which period the vessels laden with 
the newly purchased Spanish goods would pro 
ceed up the river Chagre, the same kind of arti 
cles being carried by land to Panama ; and the 
European merchants would begin to put a-board 
the treasures of America : the city at the end 
of the aforesaid period remaining in the same de 
plorable state as before. 

This port was discovered by Admiral Don 
Christoval Columbus in 1502 ; who, observing it 
to be so large, deep, and well sheltered, gave it 
the name of Puertobelo. Its entrance, though 
three-quarters of a mile in width, was well de 
fended by the castle of San Felipe de Todo Fi- 
erro, situate on the n. part ; for the s. part being 
full of rocks, vessels were under a necessity of 
passing between these and the aforesaid fort, 
where there is from 9 to 15 feet water. But in 
the s. part also, at the distance of 200 toises from 
the city, was another large castle, called De San 
tiago de la Gloria ; and opposite the city another 
castle, with the name of San Geronimo ; all 
which were built by the celebrated engineer Juan 
Baptista Antoneli, by order of Philip II., and 
which were destroyed by the English admiral 
Vernon in 1742, who took the city. 

To the n. w. of the city is a small bay, called 
La Caldera, sheltered from every wind, and ex 
cellent for careening vessels. Amongst the 
mountains which surround the port from the 
castle of Todo Fierro, as far as the opposite 
part, is one very peculiar, not only on account 
of its height, but as being the barometer of the 
country, and as announcing all the changes of 
the seasons : it is called Capira, and is in the in 
terior of the port, and in the road which leads 
to Panama : its top is perpetually covered with 
a very thick cloud, and they have a saying here 
of " calarse el gorro Capira," (Capira has put on 
his night-cap) since, when the cloud descends 

VOL. IV. 



lower than ordinary, it is a certain indication of 
a storm : indeed this occurs almost daily, and the 
top of the mountain is scarcely ever visible or 
uncloudy. The climate of this city is bad in the 
extreme, for the heat is excessive ; and this is 
encreased by its peculiarity of situation, as being 
hemmed in on all sides by a lofty mountain, such 
as will not admit of a free passage for the air. 
Again, the trees are so thick they will not per 
mit the rays of the sun to penetrate the ground, 
and they, of course, prevent this from being ever 
sufficiently dried, although they admit the exuda 
tion of sufficient vapours to condense into clouds, 
and form deluging rains. Scarcely are these over, 
than the activity of the sun dries up such parts 
of the ground as lie exposed and uncovered by 
trees, and the atmosphere becomes again subject 
to strong exhalations : let then the sun but dis 
appear, and it immediately rains again; and thus 
it is that, day and night, the heat is always the 
same and undiminished. These showers some 
times come accompanied with such tempests of 
thunder and lightning as to cause a general 
alarm ; and the terrifying peal will be prolonged 
in sullen echo through the caverns of the moun 
tains, and followed up with the outrageous chat 
tering of monkies of a thousand kinds which 
dwell therein. 

This continual intemperate state of the atmo 
sphere, united to the fatigues and labours of the 
mariners, causes them to have a debilitating 
sweat ; and to recover their strength they have 
recourse to brandy, of which there is an extra 
ordinary consumption ; and this spirit, together 
with the excess of toil ; in short a constant state 
of intoxication, and the natural malignity of the 
climate, ruin the best constitutions, and breed 
the most ruinous disorders. Thus the number 
of inhabitants of Portobello is extremely small, 
and the greater part is of Negroes and Mulat- 
toes, the whites being very few. 

The provisions are scarce and dear, particu 
larly so at the time of the fairs, though plenty 
were then brought from Panama and Cartagena. 
The onlv eatable abounding here is fish, which 
is of excellent quality and of all sorts. Water 
flows down in streams from the mountains; some 
passing without the city, and others through it ; 
and although the qualities of being light and easy 
to pass would render it estimable in any other 
place, in this country, destined to be unfortu 
nate, and in which even what is good degene 
rates into evil, the circumstance of its subtilty 
and digestive powers is attended with the pro- 
D D 



202 



FOR 



moting of dreadful dysenteries, causing other evils 
of no easy cure. 

As the woods closely surround the city, the 
tigers are accustomed to make frequent incursions 
by night through the streets ; carrying away fowls, 
pigs, and other domestic animals, and sometimes 
even human beings. The snakes are also very 
abundant, but the toads so as to exceed all be 
lief; for when it has rained during the night 
more than usual, on the morrow the streets are 
covered with these reptiles ; so that it is scarcely 
possible to walk without treading upon them and 
bein"- bitten by them ; which, added to the noise 
they 3 make, renders them insufferably unplea 
sant. 

This city w r as peopled from the inhabitants of 
Nombre de Dios : founded by Diego Nicuesa ; 
the which having been many times ruined by the 
Indians of Darien, was by command of Philip II. 
translated to this spot in 1584, for the greater 
security and better situation of its commerce. 
The Duke of La Plata, viceroy of Peru, began to 
fortify it. but did not follow this up, judging that 
the three castles aforesaid, which were rebuilt in 
1751, by the lieutenant-general Don Ignacio de 
Sala, a celebrated engineer and governor of 
Cartagena, were sufficient for its defence. It 
has experienced several invasions ; the first in 
1596, by the English pirate Francis Drake ; the 
second in 1668, by John Morgan ; the third in 
?680, by John Spring ; the fourth in 1702, by 
two English ships of war and three bilanders ; 
the fifth, by the English admiral Edward Vernon, 
who took it through a capitulation in 1742, its 
governor being Don Juan de la Vega Retes ; and 
the sixth in 1745, when it was ill-treated by the 
captain William Kinhills, who battered it with 
5000 cannon-balls to recover a prize he had lost, 
although he did not dare to disembark, as he 
had threatened. [It is 33 miles from Panama, 
and 248 from Cartagena, in lat. 10 27 n. long. 
79 26 w.~] 

PORTOBELLO, another port, of the province 
and captainship of Ilheos in Brazil ; between the 
river Dulce and that of Santa Cruz. 

PORTO-SEGURO, a province and captain 
ship of Rey in Brazil ; bounded n. by the pro 
vince of Los Ilheos, s. by that of Espiritu Santo, 
e. by the sea, and its jurisdiction terminating on 
the w, by the river Grande de San Francisco ; 
which serves it as a barrier. It was the first 
territorv and port discovered by the Portuguese 
in this kingdom in 1500. It is very fertile and 
delightful, although of a very hot climate ; 



FOR 

abounding in sugar canes, of which they make 
a considerable portion of sugar. Its extent is 
54 leagues ; and it is watered by the rivers S. 
Antonio, Yucara, Caravelas, Macuripe, Mara- 
nepe, and Curubabo. 

It was ceded by the king of Portugal to Pedro 
de Campos Tourinho, native of the town of 
Viana, who passed to take possession of it, with 
his family and other noble families of that king 
dom which accompanied him, and who disem 
barked in the same part, as did Pedro Alvarez 
Cabral its discoverer. He succeeded in all the 
engagements which he fought with the natives, 
and caused them to flee to the interior of the 
mountains. At his death, the heir to this pro 
vince was his daughter Dona Leonor de Cam 
pos ; who sold it to Don Juan de Lancaster, 
first Duke of Aveiro, son of Don Jorge, Duke of 
Coimbra, grand-master of the military orders of 
Santiago and Avis. 

The king of Spain and Portugal, Don Philip II. 
erected it into a marquisate in favour of Don 
Alonso de Lancaster, Marquis of Valdefuentes, 
son of the duke of Aveiro ; and to this house 
it belonged until 1758, when it was united to 
the crown. 

The governor-general, Luis Brito de Almeida, 
from intelligence he had received that there were 
in the interior of this province and on the con 
fines of that of Espiritu Santo precious stones ; 
sent in search of the same Sebastian Fernandez 
Tourinho, who navigated with some companions 
by the river Dulce and by an arm of that called 
the Mandy, where he disembarked, pursuing his 
rout by land for many leagues, until he arrived at 
a lake, which, from its size, was called by the In 
dians, Mouth of the Sea : pushing still forward 
for 70 leagues, as far as where the river Dulce 
enters into another called Acesi ; he traversed 
the shores of this for 50 leagues further on, and 
found some quarries of stone of various colours 
between blue and green. The Indians, who 
were his guides, also affirmed that on the top of 
the quarry were red and other coloured stones 
with veins of gold ; and that, at the foot of a 
sierra covered with trees, of more than a league 
long, there were some of the same sort. Here, 
indeed, he found an emerald and a zaphyr, both 
perfect ; and 70 leagues higher up, in another 
sierra, various green stones. 

It was asserted by the natives, that there 
were more of these, though much finer, in a 
mine of chrystal ; and this induced the governor 
to send out Antonio Diaz de Adorno, vvho, con- 



P O 11 T O - S E G U R O. 



203 



firming- the account, namely, that from the sierra 
of crystal, eastward, there were to be found 
emeralds, and, westward, zaphyrs, brought home 
some as a proof, which were forthwith transmit 
ted to the king. 

Just at this period the crown devolved on 
Philip II. king- of Spain, and these discoveries 
were pushed no father ; those valuable spots re 
maining in the possession of the infidels, and the 
different routs which had been taken being so 
completely lost sight of, as never since to admit 
of discovery, notwithstanding the frequent search 
that has been made after them. 

There are in this province two towns, which 
are, that of its name, and that of San Antonio 
de las Caravellas ; and two leagues distant from 
the former is the church of IS uestra Sefiora de 
Ayda ; celebrated for the miracle of a copious 
fountain, which burst forth on a sudden from 
the rock when the church was building, and 
when there was a lack of water. 

[We have extracted the following description 
of the province of Porto-Seguro, of the manners 
of its inhabitants, and of its trade, manufac 
tures, military establishments, &amp;c. from the com 
pendious little history by Mr. Grant. 

The trade from Brazil to Europe is chiefly 
carried on by three principal ports. These are, 
Grand Para, Bahia, or the Bay of Santos, and 
Rio Janeiro. Into the last of these are poured 
the treasures from the mines of the s. ; and from 
this port are exported the commodities of Porto- 
Seguro, Spiritu-Santo, and S. Vicente. 

The province of Porto-Seguro is bounded on 
the n. by the Rio Grande, which separates it 
from the captainship of the Ilheos ; and on the s. 
by that of Spiritu-Santo. 

Porto-Seguro, so denominated from its being 
a safe harbour, is formed by a ledge of rocks 
that stretch out from an extended point of the 
main, about a mile, in a direction parallel to 
the land, forming a natural mole. These rocks, 
which are dry at low water, terminate abruptly, 
and again appear at the distance of half a 
league. 

The space between these rocks is the bar or 
entrance to the harbour, over which, during high 
tides, the depth of water is about 20 feet ; but, 
within, it decreases to 12 feet. A little farther 
up, how r ever, where a river disembogues itself 
into the harbour, the water again somewhat 
deepens. This port has a fine sandy bottom, ter 
minating in a broad beach. 

On entering the port, the adjacent country 



presents to the view a most delightful and va 
riegated landscape. Close to the shore we be 
hold a range of fishermen s cabins, shaded with 
luxuriant trees ; and in the back ground, exten 
sive woods, intersected with paths leading to 
various sequestered habitations. To the n. rises 
a steep hill, on the summit of which stands 
the capital, termed, like the province, Porto- 
Seguro. 

Though, from its commanding situation, this 
city certainly has an elegant aspect at a dis 
tance, yet, on a nearer approach, its general 
appearance is mean and wretched. The streets 
are straight and sufficiently wide ; but they are 
irregularly disposed, and the houses, in general, 
low and ill-constructed. Few of them are above 
one, and none of them exceed two stories ; they 
are built of a soft kind of brick, and covered 
over with plaster ; the windows are furnished 
with a kind of split-cane blinds, as a substitute 
for casements. 

There are no public edifices in Porto-Seguro 
deserving of attention. The town-house is a 
large quadrangular building ; and the prison is 
also of considerable extent. There are only two 
churches in the city, one of which is a neat plain 
building, furnished with glass casements ; but 
the other is no way distinguished from the ware 
houses, except by having been erected of better 
materials, which are a mixture of stone and red 
brick. 

In 1550 a monastery of Franciscans was esta 
blished, at the expence of the city, which has 
long since fallen into a state of decay. 

On the banks of the river running at the foot 
of the hill, on which stands the city, a village is 
situated equal in extent to the town itself. It 
consists of about 400 huts or cabins, and, in 
cluding Indians and slaves, contains a popula 
tion of nearly 3000 souls. The sole occupation, 
of these villagers consists in fishing off the is 
lands and rocks of Abrolhos, where a species 
of salmon abounds, which is salted for the 
market of Bahia. About 50 or 60 small ves 
sels are employed in this fishery, and remain at 
sea for a month or six weeks till their cargoes are 
completed. 

Those of the inhabitants not engaged in this 
fishery are employed in careening and repairing 
these vessels, and manufacturing the lines and 
nets. These lines are excellent, being composed 
of cotton well twisted, and afterwards several 
times rubbed over with the inner bark of a tree, 
which contains a glutinous substance that hardens} 
D D 2 



204 



P O R T O - S E G U R O. 



[on the exposure to the sun, and is proof against 
the action of salt water. These lines are there 
fore both strong- and elastic. 

These fishing vessels are the property of a 
few individuals, who are comparatively rich. 
At Bahia they either receive cash in return for 
their fish, or else exchange them for different 
articles of food or clothing, which they retail to 
such of their more indigent neighbours as can 
afford to purchase them. 

The food of the inhabitants consists princi 
pally of salt fish and the flour of the manioc, 
which is sold here at about 3s. 6d. per bushel. 
Scanty, however, as may be their means of en 
joyment, they at least live in a temperate cli 
mate, where they are exposed to fewer miseries, 
and experience fewer hardships, than the inhabi 
tants of colder regions. In the latter, a sheltered 
habitation, warm clothing, and fuel during the 
rigorous season of winter, are necessary to the 
comfort of existence ; whereas in a tropical cli 
mate these necessaries may with less inconveni 
ence be dispensed with, or a sufficiency of them 
more easily obtained ; while food is supplied in 
greater abundance by the bounteous hand of na 
ture, in warmer than in colder countries. Thus, 
for instance, oranges, bananas, cocoas, and a pro 
fusion of other delicious fruits, which arc so highly 
prized in Europe, form part of the sustenance 
of the poorest inhabitants of these climates. 

Various species of fish, besides that already 
mentioned, abound on the coast, but the inhabi 
tants are of too indolent a disposition to avail 
themselves of this advantage, consequently fresh 
fish is both scarce and bears a high price at 
Porto-Seguro. Beef, of a very indifferent qua 
lity, and of which but a scanty supply is brought 
to market, is in general sold at three vintims 
about 4d. per pound ; and mutton or pork is al 
most unknown. No attention is indeed paid in 
this district to the breeding of hogs or sheep, 
though the woods afford an inexhaustible store 
of food for these animals. 

The more opulent part of the inhabitants pos 
sess each a country-house*, with extensive plan 
tations of sugar-cane and manioc attached to 
them. These farms are in general situated on 
the banks of a river which runs past the city. 
They are well stored with poultry and domestic 
cattle, but from the total deficiency in the art of 
cookery, their tables are not much better sup 
plied here than in the city ; and indeed they may 
be said, in a great measure, to exist in poverty 
and want in the midst of abundance. 



The attention paid to literature and science 
in Rio is extremely small, but here, if we are 
to rest on the authority of Mr. Lindley, who 
was unwarrantably detained a considerable time 
in Porto-Seguro, the inhabitants are buried in a 
still greater degree of ignorance. 

" Employment of any sort," he observes, " is 
nearly unknown among the females. In some 
instances they fabricate a kind of coarse lace 
for their own use, but even this is by no means 
universal among them. The needle they are 
still less acquainted with ; for there are few who 
can sew the simple chemises (although their chief 
article of dress), and they have Mulatto slaves 
for that purpose. Cookery is entirely out of the 
question, their general diet not requiring nor ad 
mitting it ; and so completely ignorant are they 
of this addition to our comforts, that some flour 
which I had I could not get converted into bread 
throughout the town." 

The province naturally abounds in the most 
delicious fruits for preserves ; but this prepa 
ration too is totally neglected by the ladies, 
even the confections and marmalades of Bahia 
and Rio de Janeiro being manufactured by male 
slaves. In short, the people here merely vege 
tate in a senseless apathy and unnerving indo 
lence, increased by the equal neglect of their 
minds : for few of the females can read ; and 
writing is an art which not many of the men 
acquire. 

The same inanimate existence and constitu 
tional idleness characterise the male sex. They 
lose whole days in visiting each other, yawning 
in flimsy conversation, or playing at cards for 
pence ; while the plantations, &amp;c. are carried 
on by European overseers, some favourite Mu- 
lattoes, or confidential slaves. Nor is the cli 
mate to be admitted as an excuse for want of 
exertion : for many weeks are moderate as an 
European September, and their winter months 
are generally so. Even during the hot days, 
there are intervals of cool breezes, besides some 
hours of every evening and morning, during 
which the sun s rays have but little force, and 
the ground is cool, from the excessive dews ge 
nerally found within the tropics, and particularly 
here. 

The inhabitants of Porto-Seguro plume them 
selves on the circumstances of their s being the 
immediate spot where Brazil was first discovered 
by Cabral ; and they still preserve with great 
veneration the holy cross that was erected under 
a spreading tree at the first high mass, with mu-] 



PORTO-SEGURO. 



fsic, discharge of ordnance, &amp;c. during- which the 
Indians, they say, flocked in crowds at a sight so 
novel, and continued in profound silence, ab 
sorbed in amazement and curiosity ; and that 
the divine spirit so visibly manifested itself, that 
the natives, at the moment, were converted to 
the holy faith. 

The interior of the district abounds with wild 
cattle and horses, but they never approach the 
coast. The horses employed by the inhabitants 
are of the Buenos Ayres breed. They are in 
general 14 hands high, small boned, but capa 
ble of sustaining great fatigue ; they, however, 
neither possess much beauty of form, nor dis 
play much spirit in their motions. 

The sheep here, with a few exceptions, are of 
a small breed, and resemble those of Europe. 
There is one variety, however, that has several 
horns, and another apparently of the hairy Afri 
can breed. The ewes of Guinea (ovis Guineensis)^ 
might be transported from Angola to Brazil with 
the greatest advantage. 

The numerous herds of cattle that are found 
in this and indeed in the interior of all the pro 
vinces of Brazil, might, under proper manage 
ment, afford cheese and butter, not only for 
home consumption, but also for foreign com 
merce ; but at present these useful articles are 
prepared in small quantities, and rather for curi 
osity than use. The cheese made in the colony 
is of a very indifferent quality ; and it is a pretty 
general opinion, that butter cannot be prepared 
on account of the heat of the climate; though it is 
well known that in the East Indies, where the 
weather is much warmer, most excellent butter 
may always be procured. 

The vast number of oxen killed in Brazil are 
mostly slaughtered on account of their hides, 
though it is evident that, besides salting the 
carcase, other parts of the body might be appro 
priated to some useful purpose. But without the 
adoption of a liberal plan of policy, and judicious 
encouragements being offered for the promotion 
of agriculture, it will, in all probability, as well 
as its sister arts, continue to languish in a coun 
try possessing every advantage of climate and 
natural situation. 

The mules reared in and near Porto Seguro 
are large, well shaped, and extremely handsome. 
They are lively, and do not display, in their ge 
neral appearance, the sluggishness common to 
these animals. 

The wild animals of this district are similar to 
those of the other provinces of Brazil. The ra 
venous quadrupeds of the New World, such as 



ounces, leopards, tygers, hyenas, &amp;c. display less 
ferocity, and are far inferior in size and strength 
to those of the same kind in the African and Asia 
tic continents. 

The pregusia or sloth is very common in this 
province, and perfectly harmless. Its head is 
round, with a very small round mouth, and small 
blunt teeth ; its nose is black, high and smooth, 
but the other parts of the body are covered with 
ash-coloured hair, and the eyes are small, black 
and heavy. This animal, which is about the size 
of a fox, feeds on the succulent leaves of trees, 
which serve it both for food and drink. Though 
its limbs appear to be exceedingly weak, it will 
nevertheless lay hold so firmly of the branches 
of trees, as not to be easily shaken off. So great 
an antipathy has the sloth to rain, that on its ap 
proach it carefully conceals itself. It cannot pro 
ceed above a stone s throw in the course of seve 
ral minutes, and derives its name from the un 
common slowness of its motion. Monkeys, which 
are so numerous in other parts of this colony, 
are here extremely scarce : the few that do fre 
quent the woods in the neighbourhood of Porto 
Seguro are chiefly of the grey sort. Armadilloes 
are, however, extremely numerous, and run about 
in every direction. One species possesses a qua 
lity similar to the hedge-hog, of rolling itself up 
into a ball when attacked, and presenting on all 
sides its scaly covering, which forms an impene 
trable shield. The saratue, which is about the 
size of our fox, is an extremely savage animal, 
and commits great depredations among the poul 
try in the vicinity of the city. This animal, when 
attacked, defends itself with great resolution. 

The woods and groves abound with various 
birds, some of which display the most brilliant 
and gaudy plumage, while others delight us by 
their melodious voices ; but as they do not differ 
from those in the other provinces, we shall not 
here enter into a particular description of them. 

The botanical productions are here, as in every 
part of this country, extremely abundant. They 
are, however, but little known to the inhabitants, 
and from the extreme jealousy of the govern 
ment, learned foreigners have been hitherto pre 
vented from examining them. Many of the trees 
round Porto Seguro exude gums of a resinous, 
mucilaginous, and balsamic nature. Among the 
latter is one similar to the balsam of Peru, which 
is collected by the inhabitants, and exported in 
considerable quantities to Europe. It is procured 
from the female of the pine tribe, and is collected 
in pans after the tree is cut down. Towards the 
northern extremity of this captainship, the banksj 



206 



PORTO-SEGURO. 



j of the Rio Grande are covered with immense 
forests, which are considered as the best in Brazil 
tor the purposes of ship-building. It is from 
hence that the king s yards are principally sup 
plied with timber. 

The trees chiefly employed for this purpose, 
are the sippipira^ which resembles the teak of In 
dia, and the peroba, oraubu, and louro, which 
are species or varieties of oak and larch. Cedar 
and other woods, which are used for deck planks, 
also abound in these forests, as well as brazil 
and logwood, mahogany, camwood, campeachy, 
and various other. The Rio Grande is naviga 
ble for canoes to a great distance, uninterrupted 
by any falls or rapids. After ascending the coun 
try to a considerable distance westward, it takes 
a direction to the south, and is supposed to ori 
ginate beyond the mines of Pitangui, though its 
source has not hitherto been explored. It is 
broad and deep at its mouth within the bar, and 
for a considerable distance above it. An expe 
dition was undertaken a few years ago by the 
two sons of the civil governor or judge of the 
province, Sen. Joze Dantes Coelho, accompanied 
by his servant and the capitian mor, or military 
captain of Port Seguro, attended by their ser 
vants and a party of Indians. During fifteen 
days they proceeded up the river in canoes, with 
out experiencing the slightest interruption. They 
found its banks clothed with the most valuable 
natural productions, the forests abounding with 
hogs, and the savannahs with cattle. At the 
termination of their voyage they observed small 
diamonds scattered over the ground, at a short 
distance from the river, as well as several other 
precious stones. The diamonds did not appear 
to them of great value ; but they proposed to 
repeat their excursion, with a view of more ac 
curately investigating this part of the district, 
when they were prevented, by the interposition 
of government, from carrying this resolution into 
effect. 

From the cursory observations which their 
short stay enabled them to make, it appears evi 
dent, that under an enlightened administration, 
and with proper encouragement, settlements 
might be formed on the Rio Grande of Porto 
Seguro, which in a short time would become a 
great national benefit, though at present, from 
the most absurd and mistaken policy, the Portu 
guese government wish it to remain unpeopled 
and unknown. 

On the coast, to the s. of the Rio Grande, has 
been lately established the settlement of Bel- 
mont, which is at present in a thriving condition : 



and, a little farther on, we meet with the town 
of Santa Cruz, which is about five leagues dis 
tant from Porto Seguro. The town, which has 
never been large, is now rapidly falling into a 
state of decay : the harbour admits only small 
vessels, drawing about 12 feet water ; but in the 
Coroa Vermeil, immediately adjoining, ships of 
anv burden may safely come to anchor. 

To the s. of Porto Seguro, the small shallow 
bav of Tranquoso indents the shore. This part 
of the coast is delightful, and covered with seve 
ral thriving plantations. At a small distance from 
Tranquoso, on the banks of the Rio des Fratrep, 
the country is uninhabited ; owing possibly to the 
risks to which vessels are exposed, on entering 
this river, from its mouth being choaked up by a 
very dangerous bar. 

To the s. of the Rio Fratres, the country be 
comes mountainous. Monte Pascoa serves as a 
land-mark to those mariners who navigate this 
part of the coast, which is extremely dangerous, 
on account of a continuation of reefs, sunken 
rocks and shallows, especially to those vessels 
which approach to the river Carevellos ; though 
the neighbouring pilots are so extremely skilful, 
that very few accidents are known to occur. 

From the Rio des Fratres to Villa Prado, the 
coast is inhabited by numerous hostile tribes of 
Indians, which renders travelling so extremely 
dangerous, as to cut off all communication by land 
between these two places. The latter is a flourish 
ing fishing town. The inhabitants in the vicinity 
of this village, as well as of Alcoabass, which is 
situated at a short distance from it, are chiefly- 
occupied with the culture of manioc, and the pre 
paration of the cassava powder, which they carry 
to the port of Carevellos. 

On account of a dangerous bar, only vessels of 
small burden can enter this harbour, though with 
in it the water deepens to 10 fathoms. 

The town of Carevellos is situated about six 
miles above the mouth of the river. It is more 
populous, and the buildings somewhat superior 
to those of Porto Seguro. The country around 
is covered with plantations of manioc, whence 
large quantities of this useful article are sent to 
Rio de Janeiro, Bahia and Pernambuco. Small 
craft are built at the port of Carevellos, not only 
for their own use, but in order to supply what is 
wanted at Porto Seguro. 

San Matthias, which forms the boundary of 
Porto Seguro in this direction, lies about 10 
leagues to the southward of Carevellos. Here 
likewise we meet with extensive plantations of 
manioc. The coast of this captainship extends] 



PORTO-SEGURO. 



207 



[for the length of 70 leagues, with an unbounded 
extent of country towards the HJ. though at pre 
sent there are no settlements in that direction 
above 10 or 12 leagues from the sea. Gold and 
many valuable minerals abound in the interior of 
this district. 

The extreme jealousy displayed by the Portu 
guese, respecting the admission of strangers into 
their colonies, renders our knowledge of the inte 
rior of this interesting country still extremely de 
fective. During Mr. Lindley s enforced stay at 
Porto Seguro,the commission empowered to seize 
his papers, found in his possession a small quantity 
of grain gold, intermixed with gold-coloured sand, 
which had been given to him by one of the colo 
nists, as a sample. This strongly attracted their 
curiosity, and he was strictly questioned respect 
ing it. This gentleman frankly informed them 
how it came into his possession, but declared 
that he was totally ignorant of the person from 
whom he received it, though he had reason to 
suppose that he was an inhabitant of a distant 
settlement ; on which he was ordered to prepare 
for a journey, in order, if possible, to discover 
and identify the individual from whom he ob 
tained it. 

In consequence of this determination, he was 
commanded to be in readiness to accompany the 
minister, &amp;c. on the following morning, at five 
o clock ; and he gives the following interesting 
account of that part of the district which he was 
thus enabled to visit. 

" On the second of August," says he, " we 
mounted our horses, altogether seven of us, and 
took the beach to the s. After an hour s ride, 
abruptly turned to the w. into the country, and 
ascending a steep height, soon arrived at the 
chapel of Nossa Senhora de Judea, on its sum 
mit. The prospect from hence is grand indeed, 
not only of the surrounding country, but com 
manding the adjacent ocean, upon which the 
white walls of the chapel form an excellent sea 
mark ; and its patroness, the virgin, is particu 
larly invoked by the neighbouring coasting ves 
sels and fishing smacks, in cases of distress or 
contrary winds : her fame even extends to curing 
several disorders, if called on with proper faith. 
The inside of the building is decorated with rude 
drawings of vessels in distress, and of sick cham 
bers ; having inscriptions under each, of the dif 
ferent cases which they are intended to comme 
morate. 

" After eating a biscuit, and drinking some of 
the good vicar s water, we visited several plan 
tations and ingenios in the neighbourhood 3 at one 



of which we procured an Indian guide. Taking 
the course of the river, we had a beautiful ride 
over a fine champaign country, wanting only 
cultivation to form the best of meadow land ; the 
soil black mould, at times gravelly, clay patches 
and sandy flats. 

" Leaving the open land, we entered the woods 
of ages, through a narrow path, which admitted 
only one horseman abreast, and was impene 
trably defended from the sun s rays by the over 
hanging branches, which sometimes were so low 
as to be very inconvenient. After two hours 
smart ride, the country again opened ; and we 
passed several plantations of sugar-cane, man- 
diock, &amp;c. with pieces of ground partly cleared, 
and numberless other spots capable of being 
converted into fine land, either for pasture or 
tillage. The scene now changed to a range of 
low hills, lying e. and zo. in the direction of the 
river, to which the land gradually descended ; 
but on the opposite bank it rose precipitately to 
a high cliff, covered with never-fading verdure. 
Riding parallel to these hills, about one o clock 
we arrived at the plantation and ingenio of Jaoa 
Furtado. Here we alighted, expecting better 
accommodation than we might meet with at the 
Villa Verde, a little further ; which, being an 
extreme settlement, is inhabited only by the vicar 
(a missionary), three whites, and a few converted 
Indians. 

" Our host was an old bachelor of 70, who re 
sided with a maiden sister, of nearly the same 
age. The old man \nd me he was born near the 
spot ; that his life had been a series of industry ; 
and the ingenio, building, furniture, &amp;c. were 
almost entirely the work of his own hands. I 
found him very conversant in the natural history 
of the country around him, particularly in 
ornithology ; and I was sorry our momentary stay 
enabled me not to obtain more information. 

" The word ingenio is the Portuguese distinc 
tion of those who have a sugar-work, here very 
simple, consisting of three rollers of ponderous 
wood, two feet in diameter, and three in length, 
working horizontally in a frame : the upper part 
of the centre roller joins a square beam that 
ascends through the frame-work, and to which 
are affixed cross pieces, sufficiently low for the 
harness of two horses, that move the whole. The 
side-rollers work by cogs from the centre one. 
Underneath this machine is a long trough, slant 
ed, that receives the juice of the cane as pressed 
out by the rollers. The juice is then conveyed 
to a shallow boiler, of six feet in diameter, and 
skimmed from all impurities : after cooling in] 



208 



PORTO-SEGURO. 



[another vessel, they add an alkali of wood ashes, 
suffer it to stand some days, pour off the pure 
liquor, convey it to the same boiler, and evapo 
rate till the sugar is formed, the settlings, &amp;c. 
being distilled to a powerful spirit. How widely 
different is this primitive sugar- making, from the 
immense works, machines, and engines, employed 
by our West India planters ! 

" I found the accommodation of the house far 
superior to what I had expected, from the gene 
ral poverty of Porto Seguro, and, in fact, the 
best I met with in this part of Brazil : our wel 
come was free, provision well cooked (for the 
country), and tolerably clean. We dined on the 
ground, mats being first laid, and a clean cloth 
spread over them. There was plenty of earthen 
ware (a rarity here), silver spoons, and knives 
and forks hafted with the same metal. At night, 
the bedding was decent and comfortable. 

" The next morning I arose with the sun, and 
was charmed with the country surrounding the 
plantation. The house itself was encircled with 
bannanas, cotton shrubs, cocoas, and orange 
trees : diverging from them, inclosures of canes, 
mandiock, &amp;c. To the westward lay a large 
tract of herbage, reserved for grazing, irregularly 
fenced Avith native woods. On its descent to the 
river, the ground, unequal, formed some beau 
tiful hollows, patched with groups of trees, which, 
with the stream itself, and cattle on its banks, 
pictured the most delightful scene. 

" As I skirted the woods, I saw birds of the 
most brilliant plumage, one nearly the size of a 
turkey. Of these the moutou was particularly 
rich, of a deep blue, nearly approaching black, 
with a head and eye strikingly beautiful. Tou 
cans were numerous, and many others elegant 
indeed. Marmozets, both of the grey and silver 
lion colour, were in every bush ; but their pierc 
ing shriek is disagreeable, and, if near you, pe 
netrates to the very brain. I fancied I heard the 
distant growl of ounces, which are numerous, 
and fatal in their ravages, forming, with snakes, 
the chief scourge of the planters. 

" After dinner we began our return by the 
same route, passing several scattered plantations, 
situate near the river, for the better transporting 
their products to Porto Seguro, &amp;c. The whole 
land besides (extending both ways to the next 
sea-ports) is entirely neglected, although finely 
watered with small streams in every part, where 
the cane, cotton, and mandiock, would grow 
with scarcely any labour, as well as the immense 
variety of other tropical produce : in short, where 
nature spontaneously offers her gifts, and invites 



the hand of man. But this beautiful country, 
one of the finest in the world, is entirely lost 
through want of inhabitants, of cultivation, and 
of industry ; mines of wealth being buried, far 
exceeding all their mineral or metallic ores. 

" Absorbed in these reflections, I rode along, 
our party returning very silent, probably cha 
grined at their want of success in discovering the 
presumptuous vassal who had dared to touch or 
think of so prohibited an article as gold ; but 
though the bird was flown, his rich nest remain 
ed. They found out the stream on whose margin 
the gold had been discovered. Guards were di 
rectly appointed over it, and all approach to its 
banks interdicted, in the dread name of her most 
faithful majesty ; while a further sample was 
taken for accurate inspection and assay on the 
arrival of the commission at Bahia." 

On Mr. Lindley s arrival at Porto Seguro, some 
of the inhabitants, who were officiously prying 
into every corner of his vessel, observing a me 
dicine chest, immediately concluded that he be 
longed to the medical profession. This mistake 
being disseminated through the city and its neigh 
bourhood, he was immediately beset with pati 
ents of every description ; some imploring his 
assistance por amor de Deos, and others entreat 
ing him in the name of Nossa Senhora Maria to 
cure their maladies. 

Many instances are recorded by this writer of 
the ignorance of the inhabitants in the city and 
neighbourhood of Porto Seguro, as well as of 
their extreme filthiness, indelicacy, and indo 
lence. The shocking custom of searching each 
others heads for vermin, which is only practised 
by the lowest vulgar in Spain and Portugal, here 
prevails among all ranks of the community ; nor 
does the presence of strangers prove any hinder- 
ance to this disgusting operation. 

To a certain cutaneous distemper (psora), here 
termed sarna, which is regarded as an opprobrium 
by the natives of other countries, no idea of 
shame or disgrace is attached in Brazil. It is 
common to hear even ladies complain of it with 
out a blush; nor, so far as we have been inform 
ed, is its cure ever attempted in this country. 
This disorder often terminates in a scaly leprosy, 
particularly on the stomachs of the men, who 
are provided with openings in the sides of their 
shirts, for the purpose of scratching, which they 
do without the least hesitation, whatever company 
may be present.] 

PORTO-SEGURO, the capital of the above pro 
vince, of the same name, on the sea-coast, and on 
the shore of a great port ; thus called by Pedro Al- 



FOR 



FOR 



20,0 



varez Cabral, when he discovered and found it 
secure from tempests. It has, besides the parish 
church, which is very good, with the dedicatory 
title of Nuestra Senora de la Pena, the churches 
of San Sebastian, La Misericordia, Nuestra Senora 
del Rosario, and an house of entertainment of the 
Jesuits. It is situate on an eminence, and de 
fended with good fortifications, and a castle 
well furnished, in which the governor resides. 
The town is small, but handsome, rich, com 
mercial, and well peopled. Amongst the inha 
bitants are some noble and distinguished Portu 
guese families. Its climate is hot, but healthy. It 
is 92 miles s. of S. Jorge, and 286 n. n. e, of lEspi- 
rito Santo, in lat. 16 7 s. and long. 39 37 w. 

PORTO-SEGURO, a river of this province, which 
is also called Seringham. It rises in the mountain 
of Frio, runs e. and enters the sea. 

[PORT PENN, a town of Newcastle County, 
Delaware, on the w. shore of Delaware River, 
and separated from Reedy Island on the e. by a 
narrow channel. It contains about 30 or 40 
houses, and lies 50 miles below Philadelphia. 
See PENN and REEDY ISLAND.] 

PORTQUESIN. a river of the province and 
colonv of Pennsylvania in N. America. 

PORT -ROYAL, a city of the island of Ja 
maica, formerly the capital ; situate on the ex 
tremity of a long strip of land, which, running 
into the sea, forms part of the circumference of 
a beautiful port, which gives it its name, where 
1000 vessels may lie at anchor in complete secu 
rity. The quay also is such, that vessels of the 
largest size can come close up, and can lade and 
unlade with the greatest convenience. Indeed, this 
was esteemed of such importance by the inhabi 
tants, that they made this the capital of the 
island, although the soil is dry and sandy, pro 
ducing nothing, and even in want of fresh water. 
From the aforesaid advantages, however, it had 
been the constant rendezvous of pirates, who by 
their riches had made it a place of great consi 
deration. 

It contained 2000 houses of beautiful struc 
ture, the water-conveyances of which were as 
costly as those of London, and at the time of its 
achme there were few cities in the world which 
could vie with it in commerce, riches, and vicious 
habits. Thus it remained till 1692, when a ter 
rible earthquake caused it to be overwhelmed by 
the water. It was again rebuilt, but, after stand 
ing 10 years, was burnt to ashes. Notwithstand- 

B O / 7 

ing this second catastrophe, the advantageous 
situation of the port was such as to induce its 
rebuilding for the third time : but, in 1722, a 

VOL. IV. 



hurricane, the strongest that ever was known? 
reduced it to a heap of ruins ; when, being as it 
were sensible that the wrath of heaven had 
marked out this devoted city to destruction, an 
act was passed by the assembly, decreeing the 
removal of the custom-house and other public 
buildings ; forbidding any fair to be carried on 
here in future. The bay of Kingston was then 
the great rendezvous of merchants ; for it is very 
deep, and affords accommodation for careening, 
and, accordingly, the vessels lie in it in the time 
of peace ; though, in the time of war with Spain, 
at the Point of Negrillo, to the n. of the island. 
At the extremity of the long strip of land is 
situate Fort Carlos, with 126 cannon, which de 
fend the entrance of the bay. Puerto Real is at 
present reduced to only three streets, which may 
contain 200 houses. It is 10 miles from the city 
of Spanish Town, [in lat. 18 n. long. 76 45 a&amp;gt; ] 

[PORT-ROYAL, an island on the coast of S. 
Carolina, is separated from the main land on the 
w. by Broad River. It consists of about 1000 
acres of excellent land ; and on it stands the town 
of Beaufort. It has an excellent harbour, suffi 
cient to contain the largest fleet in the world. It 
is 24 miles n. e. \ e. of Tybee Light-house, at 
the mouth of Savannah River. Lat. 32 30 n. 
Long. 80 50 w. At Port Royal Entrance it is 
higher water at full and change a quarter past 
eight o clock.] 

[PORT-ROYAL, in Nova Scotia. See ANNA 
POLIS ROYAL.] 

[PORT-ROYAL, a post-town of Virginia, seat 
ed on the s. bank of Rappahannock River, in 
Caroline County. It is laid out on a regular 
plan, and contains about 200 houses, which make 
a handsome appearance, being built of brick. 
Here are three churches, viz. for Episcopalians, 
Presbyterians, and Methodists. It is 16 miles 
5. e. of Fredericksburg, and 47 above Urbanna. 
Lat. 38 13 n. Long. 77 17 X w.l 

[PoRT-RoYAL, a town and harbour in the 
island of Martinico, in the W. Indies ; which, 
with St. Peter s, are the chief places of the island. 
Lat. 14 35 n. Long. 61 8 w.~] 

[PoRT-RoYAL, in the Island of Otaheite. See 
MATAVIA.] 

[PORT-ROYAL, an inland and harbour in the 
s. w. part of the Gulf of Mexico, at the bottom 
of the Bay of Carnpeachy. The harbour is 18 
leagues s. w. by s. of Champetan ; and the island 
three miles long and one broad, lies w. of the 
harbour.] 

PORT-ROYAL, a river in S. Carolina, 15 miles 
of the Mayo, having 17 feet of water at its en- 
E E 



210 



trance at the bar at ebb tide. It forms a large, 
convenient, and secure bay for ships, and runs 
through a territory which is fertile and delight 
ful, and the best in the province. At its mouth 
is a small island of its name. 

[PORT ST. JOHN, a small town in the pro 
vince of Nicaragua, in New Spain, at the mouth 
of a river on the N. Pacific Ocean. The harbour 
is safe and capacious, 85 miles to the s. e. of the 
City of Leon. Lat. 11 25 n. Long. 85 45 a&amp;gt;.] 

[PORTSMOUTH, the metropolis of New 
Hampshire, and the largest town in the State, 
and its only sea-port, is situate about two miles 
from the sea, on the s. side of Piscataqua River. 
It is the shire town of Rockingham County, and 
its harbour is one of the finest on the continent, 
having a sufficient depth of water for vessels of 
any burden. It is defended against storms by 
the adjacent land, in such a manner, as that ships 
may securely ride there in any season of the 
year ; nor is it ever frozen, by reason of the 
strength of the current, and narrowness of the 
channel. Besides, the harbour is so well forti 
fied by nature, that very little art will be neces 
sary to render it impregnable. Its vicinity to the 
sea renders it very convenient for naval trade. 
A light-house, with a single light, stands on 
Newcastle Island, at the entrance of the har 
bour, in lat. 43 3 n. and long. 70 41 w. Ships 
of war have been built here; among others, the 
America, of 74 guns, launched November, 1782, 
and presented to the King of France, by the Con 
gress of the United States. Portsmouth contains 
about 640 dwelling houses, and nearly as 
many other buildings, besides those for public 
use, Avhich are three Congregational churches, 
one Episcopal church, one for Universalists, a 
State-house, a market-house, four school-houses, 
a workhouse, and a bank. The exports for one 
year, ending September 30, 1794, amounted to 
the value of 153,865 dollars. A settlement was 
begun here in 1623, by Captain Mason and other 
merchants, among whom Sir F. Gorges had a 
share. They designed to carry on the fishery, 
to make salt, trade with the natives, and prepare 
lumber. As agriculture was only a secondary 
object, the settlement failed. The town was in 
corporated in 1633. It is eight miles s. w. of 
York, in the district of Maine, 18 n. of Newbury 
Port, 47 n. n.-e. of Boston, and 275 n. e. by n. of 
Philadelphia.] 

[PORTSMOUTH, a township of good land on the 
n. end of Rhode Island, Newport County, con 
taining 1560 inhabitants, including seventeen 
slaves j on the road from Newport to Bristol.] 



P O S 

[PORTSMOUTH, a small sea-port town of K. 
Carolina, in Carteret County, on the N. end of 
Core Bank, near Ocrecock Inlet. Its chief inha* 
bitants are fishermen and pilots.] 

[PORTSMOUTH, a pleasant, flourishing, and 
-regularly built town in Norfolk County, Virgi 
nia; situate on the w. side of Elizabeth River, 
opposite to and a mile distant from Norfolk ; 
both which constitute but one port of entry. It 
contains about 300 houses, and 1702 inhabitants, 
including 616 slaves. It is 67 miles e. by s. of 
Petersburg. See NORFOLK. 

[PORTSMOUTH, a town on the n. w. side of the 
Island of Dominica, in the W. Indies ; situate 
on Prince Rupert s Bay, between the salt-works 
arid the coast.] 

[PORT TOBACCO, a post-town of Mary 
land, and capital of Charles County, situate 
a little above the confluence of two small streams 
which form the creek of its name, which empties 
through the n. bank of the Patowmac, at Tho 
mas s Point, about four miles below the town. It 
contains about 80 houses, and a large Episcopal 
church, not in good repair, and a warehouse for 
the inspection of tobacco. In the vicinity are the 
celebrated cold waters of Mount Misery. It is 
37 miles s. w. of Annapolis, nine from Allen s 
Fresh-, and 49 s. s. w. of Baltimore.] 

PORTUGAL, Point of, in the Island of Tor- 
tuga, opposite St. Domingo. [See TORTUE.] 

PORTUGALETE, a settlement of the pro 
vince and government of Cumana, on the coast. 

PORTUGUESA, an abundant river of the 
province and government of Venzuela in the 
Nuevo Reynro de Granada. It rises in the pa 
ramo of La Rosa, to the n. of the city of Trux- 
illo, runs in the form of an S, and, collecting 
the waters of many others, enters with a large 
stream into the A pure. 

[PORTUGUESE AMERICA, or BRAZIL, lies 
between lat. 4 n. 33 s. and between long. 35 
and 73 w. On the coast are three small islands, 
where ships touch for provisions on their voyage 
to the S. Seas, viz. Fernando, St. Barbaro, and 
St. Catherines. See BRAZIL. Since the disco 
very of the mines of Brazil, that is, within the 
last 70 or 80 years, Portugal has drawn from 
Brazil 2400 million of livres, or 100 millions of 
pounds sterling. Besides these large sums of 
money, she receives from Brazil large quantities 
of cocoa, sugar, rice, train-oil, whale-bone, cof 
fee, and medicinal drugs.] 

POSSESSION Bay, on the n. coast of the 
Straits of Magellan : thus called as having been 
one of those places on which Pedro Sarmiento 



POT 



POT 



211 



took possession of that territory. It is just within 
the entrance of the strait. In one of the capes 
forming it, the said Pedro Sarmiento built a for 
tress, called Nombre de Jesus, the ruins of which 
are still remaining : it was on the coast of this 
bay the Commander Biron saw, in 1765, the pre 
tended Patagonian Giants, of which he speaks 
in his voyage. 

POSSESSION Bay, a port of the S. Sea, in the 
province and government of Nicaragua and king 
dom of Guatemala, on the shore of which is situ 
ate the town of Realejo. 

POS1GUEICA, a large, rich, and populous 
city in the time of the gentilism of the Indians, 
of the province and government of Santa Marta 
and Nuevo Reyno de Granada. It belonged to 
the nation of the Taironas Indians, and was 
plundered and burnt in 1530 by Garcia de Lerma. 
It is at present reduced to a miserable small set 
tlement, bearing the name of San Pedro. 

POSSO, Bay of, on the w. coast of the island St. 
Domingo, of the part possessed by the French, 
between the Port of Principe and the Cayo Icar- 
nier. 

Posso, a small settlement or ward of the alcal- 
dia mayor of Guauchinango in Nueva Espana, 
annexed to the curacy of Pautepec. 

POSTA, a small settlement of the province 
and government of Cumana, situate on the coast, 
on the shore of the river Moroa. 

POT AN, a small settlement of Indians of the 
province of Ostimurie in Nueva Espana, on the 
shore of the river Hiaqui, near its entrance into 
the sea, in the Gulf of California or Mar Roxo 
de Cortes. 

POTAQUISIMO, a river of the province and 
government of the Chiquitos Indians in Peru. 
It rises between the town of San Xavier and that 
of Mato Groso, of the territory of the Portu 
guese, which bears this name. It runs s. s. e. and 
enters the Zumunaca. 

[POTATOE, a bay so named, on the s. coast 
of the island of St. Christopher s Island, in the 
W. Indies.] 

POTEL, a river of the island of Guadaloupe, 
which rises in the mountains, runs w. and enters 
the sea between the Bay of La Barque, and the 
river of Vieux Habitans. 

POTE I INGA, Point of, on the coast of the 
province and captainship of the Rio Grande in 
Brazil. It is between the Point of Martinas and 
the Bay of Smiends. 

POTICHE, a great river of the Island of 
Martinique, one of the Antilles. It rises at the 



foot of the mountain Pelada, runs from s. to n. 
and enters the sea near the settlement of Mo* 
couba. 

POTINCHAN, a settlement of the head set 
tlement of the district of Acantepec and alcaldia 
mayor of Tlapa in Nueva Espana. It is of an 
hot temperature, and contains 90 families of In 
dians, who employ themselves in cultivating and 
selling cotton. 

POTO, a large settlement of the province and 
corregimienlo of Carabaya in Peru. It is cele 
brated for the rich gold-mines which are worked 
in its territory, the most famous being that of 
the name of Ananea, two leagues distant from 
the settlement. In this settlement reside the royal 
officers, who receive the royal shares, which are 
a fifth of the metal extracted from the mines. 

POTOSI, a province and government of the 
kingdom of Peru, in the archbishopric of Char- 
cas. It was formerlv a corregimiento, and its ju 
risdiction was bounded by the curacy of Salinas 
with the province of Paria, which is to the n. e. 
the w r hole of the rest of its district being sur 
rounded by the province of Porco. It is a moun 
tainous country, full of ravines and chasms, of a 
very cold temperature, and consequently barren 
in vegetable productions. It is 10 leagues long, 
from e. to w. and seven wide. In its territory 
they breed much sheep-cattle, native sheep, and 
some vicunas. It has many mines of crystalline 
salt ; and it is irrigated by the river Piicomayo, 
into which run many tributary streams. The 
inhabitants amount to 25,000 3 and the capital is 
of the same name. 

[This province joined the new government of 
Buenos Ayres in 1810. . See LA PLATA.] 

POTOSI, this town was founded in 1545, on 
the skirts of the mountain which is also thus 
called, and near a ravine, through which passes 
a stream which irrigates the town. Its popula 
tion was formed by the people who had collected 
for the working of the mine ; [and it amounted 
in 1802 to 30,000 souls.] It has a mint, which 
was established in 1562 ; six convents of religious 
orders, namely, of San Francisco, Santo Do 
mingo, San Augustin, La Merced, and San Juan 
de Dios and Bethlehemites, which are hospitals ; 
two monasteries of religious women, the one of 
Augustines, the other of Carmelites, a college 
which belonged to the Jesuits, and a house of 
recluse women. In the town and its district 
were 19 curacies, the which were reduced, in 
1759, to seven, with the names of La Matriz&amp;gt; 
which is of Spaniards, and for the Indians those- 



P O T O S I. 



of San Pablo and San Sebastian, San Juan and 
San Martin, La Concepcion and San Christoval, 
San Pedro and San Francisco, Santiago and Co- 
pacavana, San Beneto and Santa Barbara, San 
Bernardo and San Lorenzo, and San Roque. In 
its vicinity are some hot medicinal baths, much 
famed, and called of Don Diego. Forty-five 
miles w. s. w. of Chuquisaca, in lat. 19 47 s. 
and long. 67 22 w. 

POTOSI, the mountain of which we have spoken 
in the former article, and on the skirts of which 
the city stands, is celebrated throughout the 
world for the immense riches which have been 
extracted from its inexhaustible silver-mines, 
which were discovered by chance in 1645 by an 
Indian called Huallpa; who following a vicuna, 
or native sheep, over the rough and craggy parts 
of the mountains, caught hold of a small tree 
to support himself whilst in the act of falling ; 
and tearing the same up by the roots, found 
sticking amongst the earth some small pieces of 
silver. The first person who examined this mine 
was Tomas Villaroel, in the same year. The 
mountain is three miles in circumference, and 
6000 Castillian yards high above the level of the 
sea, as it was measured by Don Luis Godin, of 
the Academy of the Sciences of Paris. It is of 
a sharp conical figure, and resemble a great pa 
vilion. In the interior it is nearly hollow from 
the excavations which have been made for so 
many years, and on the exterior it appears like 
an ant-hill, from the multitude of mouths by 
which it is entered. The richest mines are called 
La Descubridora, Del Estano, La Rica, and La 
Mendieta ; all of which are in the n. part, and 
have their direction to the s. At the beginning 
the metal w r as prepared by fusion, but lately by 
quicksilver, on account of their not being able 
to pay the miners, the allay of the silver having 
decreased, and through the want of hands for 
the working of the mines, owing to the plague 
which was experienced in 1720, when an infinite 
number of the Mitayos Indians died ; these being 
of those which every province were obliged to 
send to work for a limited time, agreeably with 
the plan established by the viceroy Don Fran 
cisco de Toledo. By this misfortune the working 
of the mines greatly fell off, until the year 1737, 
when they were again worked with some degree 
of vigour and enterprise, owing to the king s 
having lowered the rate of duty from a fifth to 
a tenth. According to the most accurate calcu 
lation, it should appear, that from the aforesaid 
year of 1545, when the mine was first discovered, 



till 1761, no less than 929 millions of dollars 
were registered, which had paid the duty, and 
if we should reckon what has been extracted in 
the contraband way, we may easily judge how 
much more considerable would be this sum. At 
present it renders only from four to six marks of 
silver in eachcaxon or compartment, all of which 
is carried down to be worked in skins peculiar 
to the country. 

[PoTosi, SAN Luis DE, an intendancy of the 
kingdom of Nueva Espana, which (observes 
Humboldt) comprehends the whole of the w. e. 
part of the kingdom of New Spain. As it bor 
ders either on desert countries, or countries in 
habited by wandering and independent Indians, 
we may say that its n. limits are hardly deter 
mined." The mountainous tract called the Bolson 
de Mapimi includes more than 300 square leagues, 
from which the Apachis sally out to attack the 
colonists of Cohahuila and New Biscay. In 
dented into these two provinces, and bounded 
on the n. by the Great Rio del Norte, the Bolson 
de Mapimi is sometimes considered as a country 
not conquered by the Spaniards, and sometimes 
as composing a part of the intendancy of Du- 
rango. The above traveller traced the limits of 
Cohahuila and Texas, near the mouth of the 
Rio Puerco, and towards the sources of the Rio 
de San Saba, as he found them indicated in the 
special maps preserved in the archives of the 
viceroyalty, and drawn up by engineers in the 
Spanish service. But how was it possible to de 
termine territorial limits in immense savannas, 
where the farms are from 15 to 20 leagues dis 
tant from one another, and where almost no 
trace of cultivation is any where to be found ? 

The intendancy of San Luis Potosi compre 
hends parts of a very heterogeneous nature, the 
different denominations of which have given 
great room for geographical errors. It is com 
posed of provinces, of which some belong to the 
Provincias internas, and others to the kingdom 
of New Spain Proper. Of the former there are 
two immediately depending on the commandant 
of the Provincias internas ; the two others are 
considered as Provincias internas del Vireynato. 
These compl cated and unnatural divisions are 
explained in the following table : 

The intendant of San Luis Potosi governs : 

A. In Mexico Proper : 

The Province of San Luis, which extends 
from the Rio de Panuco to the Rio de Santan- 
der, and which comprehends the important] 



P O T O S I. 



[mines of Charcas, Potosi, Ramos, and Ca- 
torce. 

B. In the Provincias internas del Vireynato : 

1. The new kingdom of Leon. 

2. The colony of New Santander. 

C. In the Provincias internas de la Commandan- 
cia-general Oriental. 

1. The province of Cohahuila. 

2. The province of Texas. 

It follows from the latest changes which have 
taken place in the organization of the comman- 
dancia- general of Chihuahua, that the intendancy 
of San Luis now includes, besides the province 
of Potosi, all that tract which goes under the 
denomination of Provincias internas Orientales. 
A single intendant is consequently at the head of 
an administration which includes a greater sur 
face than all European Spain. But this immense 
country, gifted by nature with the most precious 
productions, and situated under a serene sky in 
the temperate zone, towards the borders of the 
tropic, is, for the greatest part, a wild desert, 
still more thinly peopled than the governments 
of Asiatic Russia. Its position on the eastern 
limits of New Spain, the proximity of the United 
States, the frequency of communication with the 
colonists of Louisiana, and a great number of 
circumstances which we shall not endeavour here 
to develope, will probably soon favour the pro 
gress of civilization and prosperity in these vast 
and fertile regions. 

The intendancy of San Luis comprehends 
more than 230 leagues of coast, an extent equal 
to that from Genoa to Reggio in Calabria. But 
all this coast is without commerce and without 
activity, with the exception of a few small ves 
sels, which come from the W. Indies to lay in 
provisions, either at the Bar of Tampico, near 
Panuco, or at the anchorage of New Santander. 
That part which extends from the mouth of the 
Great Rio del Norte to the Rio Sabina is almost 
still unknown, and has never been examined by 
navigators. It would be of great importance, how 
ever, to discover a good port in this northern 
extremity of the Gulf of Mexico. Unfortunately, 
the e. coast of New Spain offers every where the 
same obstacles, a want of depth for vessels draw 
ing more than 38 decimeters, or 12 feet 5^ inches 
of water, bars at the mouths of the rivers, necks 
of land, and long islots, of which the direction 
is parallel to that of the continent, and which 
prevent all access to the interior basin. The 
shore of the provinces of Santander and Texas, 
from lat. 21 to 29, is singularly festooned, and 



presents a succession of inferior basins, from four 
to five leagues in breadth, and 40 to 50 in length. 
They go by the name of higunas, or salt-water 
lakes. Some of them (the Laguna de Tamiagua, 
for example) are completely shut in. Others, as 
the Laguna Madre, and the Laguna de San Ber 
nardo, communicate by several channels with 
the ocean. The latter are of great advantage 
for a coasting trade, as coasting vessels are there 
secure from the great swells of the ocean. It 
would be interesting for geology, to examine on 
the spot if these lagunas have been formed by 
currents penetrating far into the country by ir 
ruptions, or if these long and narrow islots, 
ranged parallel to the coast, are bars which have 
gradually risen above the mean level of the 
waters. 

Of the whole intendancy of San Luis Potosi, 
only that part which adjoins the province of Za- 
catecas, in which are the rich mines of Charcas, 
Guadalcazar, and Catorce, is a cold and moun 
tainous country. The bishopric of Monterey, 
which bears the pompous title of New Kingdom 
of Leon, Cohahuila, Santander, and Texas, are 
very low regions ; and there is very little undu 
lation of surface in them. This soil is covered 
with secondary and alluvial formations. They 
possess an unequal climate, extremely hot in 
summer, and equally cold in winter, when the 
north winds drive before them columns of cold 
air from Canada towards the torrid zone. 

Since the cession of Louisiana to the United 
States, the bounds between the province of 
Texas and the county of Natchitoches (a county 
which is an integral part of the confederation 
of American republics), have become the subject 
of a political discussion, equally tedious and 
unprofitable. Several members of the Congress 
of Washington were of opinion, that the terri 
tory of Louisiana might be extended to the left 
bank of the Rio bravo del Norte. According to 
them, " all the country called by the Mexicans 
the province of Texas anciently belonged to 
Louisiana. Now the United States ought to 
possess this last province in the whole extent of 
rights in which it was possessed by France be 
fore its cession to Spain ; and neither the new 
denominations introduced by the viceroys of 
Mexico, nor the progress of population from 
Texas towards the e. can derogate from the law 
ful titles of the Congress." During these de 
bates, the American government did not fail 
frequently to adduce the establishment that M. 
de Lasale, a Frenchman, formed about the year 
1685 near the Bay of St. Bernard, without having] 



2J4 



P O T O S I. 



[appeared to encroach on the rights of the crown 
of Spain. 

But on examining carefully the general map 
of Mexico and the adjacent countries on the e. 
we shall see that there is still a great way from 
the Bay of St. Bernard to the mouth of the Rio 
del Norte. Hence the Mexicans very justly 
allege in their favour, that the Spanish popula 
tion of Texas is of a very old date, and that it 
was brought, in the very early periods of the con 
quest, by Linares, Revilla, and Camargo, from 
the interior of New Spain ; and that M. de La- 
sale, on disembarking to the w. of the Mississippi, 
found Spaniards at that time among the savages 
whom he endeavoured to combat. At present, 
the intendant of San Luis Potosi considers the 
Rio Mermentas, or Mexicana, which flows into 
the Gulf of Mexico to the e. of the Rio de Sa- 
bina, as the e. limit of the province of Texas^ 
and consequently of his whole intendancy. 

It may be useful to observe here, that this dis 
pute as to the true boundaries of New Spain can 
only become of importance when the country, 
brought into cultivation by the colonists of Lou 
isiana, shall come in contact with the territory 
inhabited by Mexican colonists ; when a village 
of the province of Texas shall be constructed 
near a village of the county of the Opeloussas. 
Fort Clayborne, situated near the old Spanish 
mission of the Adayes (Adaes or Adaisses) on 
the Red River, is the settlement of Louisiana 
which approaches nearest to the military posts 
(presidios) of the province of Texas ; and yet; 
there are nearly 68 leagues from the presidio of 
Nacogdoch to Fort Clayborne. Vast steppes, 
covered with gramina, serve for common bounda 
ries between the American confederation and the 
Mexican territory. All the country to the w. of 
the Mississippi, from the Ox River to the Rio 
Colorado of Texas, is uninhabited. These steppes, 
partly marshy, present obstacles very easily over 
come. We may consider them as an arm of the 
sea which separates adjoining coasts, but which 
the industry of new colonists will soon penetrate. 
In the United States the population of the Atlan 
tic provinces flowed first towards the Ohio and 
the Tenessee, and then towards Louisiana. A 
part of this fluctuating population will soon 
move farther to the westward. The very name 
of Mexican territory will suggest the idea of 
proximity of mines ; and on the banks of the 
Rio Merraentas the American colonist will al 
ready in imagination possess a soil abounding in 
metallic wealth. This error, diffused among the 
lower people, will give rise to new emigrations ; 



and they will only learn very late that the famou* 
mines of Catorce, which are the nearest to Lou 
isiana, are still more than 300 leagues distant 
from it. 

The road from New Orleans to the capital of 
New Spain which has been opened by the inhabi 
tants of Louisiana, coming to purchase horses in 
the Provincias internas, is more than 540 leagues 
in length, and is consequently equal to the distance 
from Madrid to Warsaw. This road is said to 
be very difficult from the want of water and 
habitations ; but it presents by no means the 
same natural difficulties as must be overcome in 
the tracks along the ridge of the cordilleras from 
Santa Fe in New Grenada to Quito, or from 
Quito to Cusco. It was by this road of Texas 
that an intrepid traveller, M. Pages, captain in 
the French navy, went in 1767 from Louisiana to 
Acapulco. The details which he furnishes rela 
tive to the intendancy of San Luis Potosi, and 
the road from Queretaro to Acapulco, which 
Humboldt travelled thirty years afterwards, dis 
play great precision of mind and love of truth ; 
but, unfortunately, Mr. Pages is so incorrect in 
the orthography of Mexican and Spanish names 
that we can with difficulty find out from his de 
scriptions the places through which he passed. 
The road from Louisiana to Mexico presents very 
few obstacles until the Rio del Norte, and we 
only begin from the Saltillo to ascend towards 
the table land of Anahuac* The declivity of the 
cordillera is by no means rapid there ; and we 
can have no doubt, considering the progress of 
civilization in the new continent, that land com 
munication will be become gradually very fre 
quent between the United States and New Spain* 
Public coaches will one day roll on from Philadel- 
phia and Washington to Mexico and Acapulco. 

The three counties of the state of Louisiana, or 
New Orleans, which approach nearest to the de 
sert country, considered as the e. limit of the 
province of Texas, are, reckoning from s. to n. 
the counties of the Attacappas, of the Opelous 
sas, and of the Natchitoches. The latest set 
tlements of Louisiana are on a meridian which 
is 2o leagues e. from the mouth of the Rio Mer 
mentas. The most n. town is Fort Clayborne of 
Nachitoches, seven leagues e. from the old situ 
ation of the mission of the Adayes. To the n. e* 
of Clayborne is the Spanish Lake, in the midst 
of which there is a great rock covered with sta 
lactites. Following this lake to the s. s. e. we 
meet in the extremities of this fine country, 
brought into cultivation by colonists of French 
origin, first, with the small village of St.Landry,] 



P O T O S I. 



215 



[three leagues to the n. of the sources of the Rio 
Mermen tas ; then the plantation of S. Martin ; 
and, lastly, New Iberia, on the river Teche, 
near the canal of Bontet, which leads to the 
Lake of Tase. As there is no Mexican settle 
ment beyond the e. bank of the Rio Sabina, it 
follows that the uninhabited country which se 
parates the villages of Louisiana from the mis 
sions of Texas, amounts to more than 1500 square 
leagues.^ The most s. part of these savannas, 
between the Bay of Carcusin and the Bay of La 
Sabina, presents nothing but impassable marshes. 
The road from Louisiana to Mexico goes there 
fore further to the n. and follows the parallel 
of the 32d degree. From Natchez travellers 
strike to the n. of the Lake Cataouillou, by Fort 
Clayborne of Natchitoches ; and from thence 
they pass by the old situation of the Aadayes to 
Chichi, and the fountain of Father Gama. An 
able engineer, M. Lafond, whose map throws 
much light on these countries, observes, that 
eight leagues n. from the post of Chichi there 
are hills abounding in coal, from which a sub 
terraneous noise is heard at a distance like the 
discharge of artillery. Does this curious pheno 
menon announce a disengagement of hydrogen 
produced by a bed of coal in a state of inflam 
mation ? From the Adayes the road of Mexico 
goes by San Antonio de Bejar, Loredo (on the 
banks of the Rio Grande del Norte), Saltillo, 
Charcas, San Luis Potosi, and Queretaro, to the 
capital of New Spain. Two months and a half 
are required to travel over this vast extent of 
country, in which, from the left bank of the Rio 
Grande del Norte to Natchitoches, we conti 
nually sleep sub dio. 

The most remarkable places of the intendancy 
of San Luis are : the town of this name, Nuevo 
Santander, Charcas, Catorce, Monterey, Linares, 
Monclova, San Antonio de Bejar. 

The population of this intendancy, in 1803, 
amounted to 334,900 souls ; the extent of sur 
face in square leagues was 27,821 ; the num 
ber of inhabitants to the square league being 

rorosi, SAN Luis DE, a city and capital of 
the alcaldia mayor of the province and bishopric 
of Mechoacan in Nueva Espana ; situate in a 
level territory. 

It is of a mild temperature and of modern 
structure. The streets are wide, proportioned, 
and straight. It has six magnificent temples ; 
which are, the parish church, the convents of San 
Francisco, San Augustin, La Merced, San Juan 



de Dios, the college which belonged to the Je 
suits, and an hospital of the bare-footed Carme 
lites, a late foundation. Its population consists 
of 16,000 families of Spaniards, Mustees, Mulat- 
toes, and Indians. Its commerce is of the gold 
and silver extracted from the mountain of San 
Pedro de Potosi, which is five leagues distant 
from the city. Hither were brought the metals 
to be worked ; although this business has greatly 
fallen off from the bad allay of the silver, and 
from the want of means in the miners to meet 
the expenses of the labour. Indeed, although the 
mines are very numerous, and none of them filled 
with water, there is no one will venture to risk 
his fortune in the undertaking ; and save certain 
portions of gold and silver extracted from the mine 
of San Antonio, the inhabitants content them 
selves with the trade of small necessary articles, 
and by the slaughter of goats, deriving great 
emolument from the tallow and the skins which 
they tan in the yards of the wards of the city ; 
from all of which may be determined the reason 
of the great decay of the former resources and 
opulence of this city. 

{San Luis Potosi i&amp;, at present, the residence 
of the intendant. Its habitual population is 
12,000.] 

It is 177 miles n. by w. of Mexico, in lat. 22 n. 
long. 100 41 w. The settlements which it com 
prehends in its jurisdiction are the following : 
Tequisquiapan, Sta. Catarina Martin 

San Miguel, de Rio Verde, 

Ntra. Seiira de Gua- La Presentacion, 

dalupe, Las Lagunillas, 

San Sebastian, San Juan Tetla, 

San Christoval xlel Nombre de Jesus, 

Montecillo, Sta. Isabel del Arma- 

Tlacaxlilla, dillo, 

Santiago, San Nicolas, 

San Miguel Mexqui- Santa Maria del Rio, 
tic, San Francisco de Los 



San Pedro de Potosi, 



Pozos. 



POTOSI NUEVO, a settlement of the province 
and corregimiento of Huarochiri in Peru, close 
to the settlement of Yauli. It has in it some 
rich silver mines, which, at the beginning, were 
worked to great profit, but which are at the 
present nearly destroyed. 

POTOSI, another settlement, with the dedica 
tory title of San Pedro, which is a real of silver 
mines, in the jurisdiction and alcaldia mayor of 
its name, of the province and bishopric of Me 
choacan in Nueva Espana. It contains 110 fa 
milies of Spaniards, MusteeS) and Mulattoes, em- 



210 



P O U 



ployed in the traffic of the metals, and IB five 
leagues e. of its capital. 

POTOSI, another, in the province and govern 
ment of Pasto, in the kingdom of Quito. 

POTOTACA, a settlement of the province 
and corregimiento of Pilaya and Paspaya in Peru, 
annexed to the curacy of Paicollo. 

POTOWMACK, a large river of the pro 
vince and colony of Virginia, in N. America. 

POTRE, a river of the province and govern 
ment of Buenos Ayres; which runs e. and enters 
the Parona between those of Conchas and Ana 
Maria. 

POTRERO SECO, a settlement of the pro 
vince and corregimiento of Copiapo in the king 
dom of Chile ; on the shore of the river Mamas. 
POTRERO, a valley of this province and king 
dom, very fertile and handsome ; between the 
river Castano and the volcano of Copiapo. 

POTRERO, a river of the same province and 
kingdom ; which rises in the middle of the nar 
rowest part of the isthmus of Panama, and af 
terwards enters the Bayano. 

POTRO, a river of the province and govern 
ment of Mainas, of the kingdom of Quito ; near 
the river Cahuapanas. It runs n. e. and empties 
itself into the Maranon by the s. part, after run 
ning 21 leagues, in lat. 4 44 s. 

[POTTERS, a township of Pennsylvania, si 
tuated on Susquehanna river. See NORTHUM 
BERLAND COUNTY.] 

[POTTERSTOWN, in Hunterdon County, 
New Jersey, is about five miles e. of Lebanon, 
and about 22 n. zv. of New Brunswick.] 

[POTTSGROVE, a post-town of Pennsyl 
vania, situated on the n. bank of Schuylkill Ri 
ver, 15 miles s. e. of Reading, and 30 n. w. of 
Philadelphia.") 

[POUGHKEEPSIE, a post-town of New 
York, and capital of Dutchess County, delight 
fully situated a mile from the e. bank of Hud 
son s River, and contains a number of neat 
dwellings, a court-house, a church for Presby 
terians, one for Episcopalians, and an academy. 
Here is also a printing-office. It is about 28 
miles n. w. of Danbury, in Connecticut, 64 n. of 
New York City, 61 s. of Albany, and 123 n. e. 
by n. of Philadelphia. The township is bounded 
5. by Wappinger s Kill, or Creek, and ox. by 
Hudson s River. It contains 2,529 inhabitants, 
including 429 electors, and 199 slaves.] 

POULE Cape, a point or extremity of the s. 
coast of Newfoundland, one of those which form 
the bay of Trespassers. 



P O W 

[POULTNEY, a small river of Vermont, 
which falls into E. Bay, together with Castleton 
River, neaf Colonel Lyon s iron-works.] 

[POULTNEY, a considerable and flourishing 
township of Rutland County, bounded w. by 
Hampton in New York, which adjoins Skeens- 
burgh on the w. It contains 1121 inhabitants.] 

POUMARON, a river of the province of 
Guayana, in the part called Dutch Guayana. It 
rises in the serrania of Imataca, runs n. e. and 
enters the sea 107 miles from the mouth Grande 
or De Hanos Navios of the Orinoco. It is the 
boundary of Dutch Guayana ; is at its mouth 
half a league wide, and the territory of its shores 
is low and covered with trees. Its mouth may 
be entered by large vessels as it is 12, 15, and 18 
fathoms deep, increasing gradually to 40 to the 
distance of five leagues. The e. point which it 
forms is the Cape of Nassau, and at six leagues 
from hence the Dutch built upon its shore a fort 
with the name of Nueva Zelanda ; and a little 
higher up is the settlement of New Middleburg, 
surrounded with plantations and cultivated lands. 
The mouth of this river is in lat. 7 34 n. long. 
58 47 K). 

[POUNDRIDGE, a township in W. Chester 
County, New York, bounded s. by the State of 
Connecticut, e. and n. by Salem, and w. by Bed 
ford and Mahanus River. It contains 1062 free 
inhabitants, of whom 141 are electors.] 

POUTEOWATAMIS, a nation ,of Indians of 
Canada in N.America, who inhabited the islands 
in the Lake Huron. The father Claudius Al- 
louz, a Frenchman and a Jesuit, began to reduce 
them to the Catholic religion, and succeeded in 
bringing into the fold 300 souls, as they are of a 
docile nature, and even then venerated a Su 
preme Being, the author of all created. At 
present there are two settlements of these In 
dians : the one is between the lakes Erie and 
Michigan, on the shore of the river San Joseph, 
and having built upon it a fort for the French 
establishment of the commerce of skins with the 
Indians ; and the other by the strait which com 
municates the lakes Huron and Erie. 

[POWELL S Creek, in the State of Tennes 
see, rises in Powell s Mountain, runs s. w. and 
enters Clinch River, through its n. bank; 49 
miles n. e. of Knoxville. It is said to be navi 
gable in boats 80 miles. From its source to 
where it enters the Clinches River is not more 
than 32 miles in direct distance.] 

[POWHATAN, the ancient name of James 
River in Virginia.] 



PO Y 

[POWIIATON, a county of Virginia, bounded 
ti. by James River, which separates it from 
Goochland, and s. by Amelia County. It has it* 
name in honour of the famous Indian king of its. 
name, the father of Pocahontas. It contains 
6822 inhabitants, including 4325 slaves. The 
court-house in the above county is 17 miles from 
Carters ville, 20 from Cumberland court-house.] 

[POWLE S Hook, to the w. of New York, 
on the Jersey shore. It is a small peninsula, in 
tersected with creeks and salt meadows, but of 
late has been considerably improved by a com 
pany, who have established themselves for the 
purpose of building a city, which is to become 
the capital of the State of New Jersey, and in 
tended to rival New York. A few straggling 
buildings are all that yet appear. It was on this 
shore that General Hamilton and Colonel Burr 
evaded the laws of New York, and fought the 
duel which proved fatal to the former gentle 
man.] 

[POWNAL, a flourishing township in the 
s. s&amp;gt;. corner of Vermont, Bennington County, s. 
of the town of Bennington. It contains 1746 
inhabitants. Mount Belcher, a portion of which 
is within the town of Pownal, stands partly in 
three of the states, viz. New York, Vermont, 
and Massachusetts. Mount Anthony, also, one 
of the most remarkable mountains in Vermont, 
lies between this and Bennington.] 

[POWNALBOROUGH, the shire-town of 
Lincoln County, district of Maine, is situated on 
the e. of Kennebeck River, and is a place of 
increasing importance, and contains a Congrega 
tional church, and several handsome dwelling- 
houses. The flourishing port and post-town of 
Wiscasset is within the township of Pownalbo- 
rough. This town was incorporated in 1760, 
and contains in all 2055 inhabitants. It is 13 
miles n. of Bath, 36 n. e. of Portland.] 

[POWOW, a small river of Essex County, 
Massachusetts, which rises in Kingston in New 
Hampshire. In its course, which is s. e., it passes 
over several falls, on which are mills of various 
kinds, and empties into Merrimack River, seven 
miles from the sea, between the towns of Salis 
bury and Amesbury, connected by a convenient 
bridge, with a draw, across the river. It is na 
vigable a mile from its mouth, and many vessels 
are built on its banks. See ALMSBURY and SA 
LISBURY.] 

[POYAIS, a town of N. America, situate on 
the it), side of Black River, in the province of 
Honduras, about 110 miles w. n. w. of Secklong, 

VOL. iv. 



POZ 



217 



and 55 s. of Cape Cameron, which forms the n. 
point of the entrance of the river in the Sea of 
Honduras.] 

POYAS, a barbarous and numerous nation of 
Indians of the kingdom of Chile, in the s. part. 
Some of these tribes extend as far as the lands 
and mountains of the Straits of Magellan. The 
venerable father, Nicolas Mascardi, of the Je 
suits, was the first who attempted to reduce these 
infidels in 1670. 

POYOGASTA, a settlement of the province 
and government of Tucuman in Peru ; belong 
ing to the jurisdiction of the city of Salta, and 
annexed to the curacy of the settlement of Chi- 
quiana. 

POZIGUAI, a small province, comprehended 
now in that of Santa Marta, of the Nuevo Reyno 
de Granada. It is very fertile in maize, but 
scantily inhabited, owing to its climate, which 
is hot and sickly. It has some gold and copper 
mines, which are not worked. 

POZO, a settlement of the province and go 
vernment of Antioquia, in the Nuevo Reyno de 
Granada, on the shore of the abundant river 
Cauca, in the valley of its name, and e. of the 
city of Anserma. 

POZOLTEPEC, a settlement of the head 
settlement of the district and alcaldia mayor of 
Zultepec in Nueva Espana. It contains 160 
families of Indians, who maintain themselves by 
the commerce of salt and some seeds, and mak 
ing mats of palm trees, and spinning cotton. 
Seven leagues s. of its capital. 

POZOS, SAN FRANCISCO DE LOS, a settle 
ment and real of mines, of the alcaldia mayor 
of Potosi in the province and bishopric of Me- 
choacan. It is the head settlement of the dis 
trict, and contains 320 families of Spaniards, 
Mustees, and Mulattoes, who are engaged in 
buying silver from the mines of the mountain 
of San Pedro, and in carrying it away to found 
it in the places established for this purpose ; al 
though they have other estates wherein to breed 
cattle and raise seed. Three leagues s. of the 
capital. 

POZUELOS, a settlement of the province of 
Barcelona, and government of Cumana, at the 
division of the limits of the one and the other ; 
on the coast. 

POZUTLA, a settlement of the head settle 
ment of the district, and alcaldia mayor of Azu- 
chitlan in Nueva Espana. It is of a hot tempe 
rature ; situate in a plain, on the shore of the 
river which flows down from the real of mines of 
F F 



218 



P R I 



Zultepeque. It contains 107 families of Indians, 
22 of Mustees and Mulattoes ; and is five leagues 
n. e. of its head settlement. 

PRABARI, Cape of, on the coast of the pro 
vince and government of Guayana, and part of 
the same possessed by the Dutch. 

PRADO, S. FRANCISCO DE, a settlement of 
the province and country of Guayana, in the 
part possessed by the Portuguese ; on the shore 
of the river of Las Amazonas, and between those 
of Surubia and Curupatuba. 

[PRAIRIE DE ROCHER, LA, or THE ROCK 
MEADOWS, a settlement in the N.W. Territory, 
on the e. side of the Mississippi ; situate on the 
e. side of a stream which empties into the Missis 



sippi. 



12 miles to the s. It is 15 miles n. w. of 



Kaskaskias Village, and five n. e. by e. of Fort 
Chartres. About 20 years ago it contained 100 
white inhabitants and 80 Negroes.] 

[PRAIRIE, LA, a populous little village, with 
narrow dirty streets, on the river St. Lawrence 
in Canada. Eighteen miles n. of St. John, and 
nine s. w. of Montreal.] 

[PRASLIN Port, is on the n. side of Solo- 
mon s Islands, in lat. 7 33 s. long. 157 30 e. 
discovered and entered by M. de Surville, on 
Oct. 12, 1769. The islands which form this port 
are covered with trees, and at high water are 
partly overflowed. The artful natives entrapped 
some of Surville s men in an ambuscade, in 
consequence of which 30 or 40 of the savages 
were killed. The inhabitants of these islands 
are in general of the Negro kind, with black 
woolly hair, flat noses, and thick lips.] 

PRAYA, a settlement of the province and 
government of Darien, and kingdom of Tierra 
Firme ; near the n. coast, and on the shore of 
the river Tarena. 

PRECHEUR, a settlement, of the island Mar 
tinique, one of the Antilles ; situate on the w. 
coast. It was a curacy of the Jesuits. 

PRECHEUR, a small isle near the coast of the 
island Martinique; between the former settle 
ment and the chapel of Santa Cruz. 

PREGONERO, a small settlement of the go 
vernment of Maracaibo, in the jurisdiction of 
the city of La Grita, of the Nuevo Reyno de 
Granada ; annexed to the curacy of the settle 
ment of Guaraque. 

PRESA, a settlement of the Nuevo Reyno de 
Leon in N. America. Twenty-two leagues n. w. 
of its capital. 

[PRESCOTT, a small plantation in Lincoln 
County, district of Maine ; which, together with 
Carr s plantation, has 159 inhabitants.] 



PRESENTACION, NUESTRA SENORA DE 
LA, a settlement of the mission and conversion 
of the Chichimecas Indians, of the religious of 
San Francisco, in the jurisdiction and nlcaldia 
mayor of San Luis de Potosi in the province and 
bishopric of Mechoacan. 

[PRESQUE Isle, a small peninsula on the 
s. e. shore of Lake Erie, almost due s. of Long 
Point on the opposite side of the lake ; 23 miles 
n. from Fort Boeuf, and 60 n. by w. of Venango, 
on Allegany River. The garrison about to be 
erected by the United States at Presque Isle, 
will be upon a very commanding spot, just op 
posite the entrance of the bay. The town com 
mences 30 yards w. of the old British fort, leav 
ing a vacancy of 600 yards for a military pa 
rade and public walk. The town, which is now 
building, will extend nearly three miles along 
the lake and one mile back. It lies in about 
lat. 42 a 20 .] 

PRESTO, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Tomina in Peru. 

[PRESTON, a town in New London County, 
Connecticut; six or eight miles e. of Norwich, 
from which it is divided by Shetucket River. 
The township was incorporated in 1687, and con 
tains 3435 inhabitants, who are chiefly farmers. 
Here are two Congregational churches, and a so 
ciety of SeparatistsJ 

[PRESUMSCUT, a small river of Cumber 
land County, district of Maine, which is fed by 
Sebacook Lake, and empties into Casco Bay, e. 
of Portland. See CASCO Bay.] 

PRETO, a river of the kingdom of Brazil, 
called also De la Palma. It runs many leagues, 
making a curve to the w. and then to the s. s. w. 
and enters the Tocantines, between the rivers 
Custodio and the San Luis. 

PRETO, another river, of the same kingdom, 
which rises in the interior of the mountains, runs 
s. e. and enters the Iruquia. 

PRICKLY, one of the small islands, called, 
Of the Virgin ; situate near the n. coast of the 
Virgen Gorda, on which it depends, in lat. 18 
20 n. long. 63 W w. 

PRIETA, SIERRA, a cordillera of mountains 
of the island of St. Domingo, in the part pos 
sessed by the French. It runs s. s. e. as far as 
the s. coast. 

PRIETO, a river of the territory of Mato- 
groso, in the province and country of Las Ama 
zonas. It is that which is formed by the union 
of those of San Francisco and Santa Ana to enter 
the Paraguay. 

PRIETO, another river, in the province and 



P R 1 



P R I 



219 



captainship of Porto-Seguro in Brazil. It rises 
in the mountains of Esmeralda in the w., runs 
to this rhumb, and enters the river Verde. 

PRIETO, a sierra or cordillera of mountains 
of the province and government of Sonora in 
N. America. 

PRIMERO, a river of the province and go 
vernment of Tucuman in Peru. It rises in a fer 
tile valley, runs s. e., passes across the royal road 
between the settlements of Sincasati and Coroya 
y Jesus Maria ; it then turns n. e. and loses it 
self near the settlement of Tororal. From this 
place, it is thought to have a subterraneous 
communication with the river Dulce. 

[PRINCE EDWARD, a county of Virginia, 
between the Blue Ridge and the Tide Waters. It 
contains 8100 inhabitants, including 3986 slaves. 
The academy in this county has been erected into 
a college, by the name of " Hampden Sydney 
College." The court-house, at which a post- 
office is kept, is 28 miles from Cumberland court 
house, and 48 from Petersburg.] 

[PRINCE EDWARD S Isles. See WASHING 
TON S Isles.] 

[PRINCE FREDERICK, a parish in George 
town district, S. Carolina ; containing 8135 in 
habitants, of whom 3418 are whites, and 4685 
slaves. It sends four representatives and one 
senator to the state legislature.] 

[PRINCE FREDERICK, the chief town of Cal- 
vert County, Maryland ; three miles s. of Hunt- 
ingtown, and six n. e. of Benedict, by the road to 
Mackall s Ferry.] 

[PRINCE GEORGE, a parish of Georgetown 
district, S.Carolina; containing 11,762 inhabi 
tants, of whom 5031 are whites, and 6651 slaves. 
It sends five representatives and one senator to 
the state legislature.] 

[PRINCE GEORGE, a county of Virginia ; 
bounded n. by James River, which washes it 
about 35 miles. The medium breadth is 16 miles. 
It contains 8173 inhabitants, including 4519 
slaves ; of this number 1200 are residents in 
Blandford. There are five Episcopal churches 
in the county, one meeting for Friends, and seve 
ral Methodist meetings. The Bapists have oc 
casional meetings, and to this sect the Negroes 
seem particularly attached. It is a fruitful coun 
try, and abounds with wheat, corn, flax, cotton, 
and tobacco. Cotton here is an annual plant ; 
and, in summer, most of the inhabitants appear 
in outer garments of their own manufacture. 
The timber consists of oaks of various kinds, and 
of a good quality, sufficient to build a formidable 
navy, and within a convenient distance of navi 



gation. It has all the different species known in 
the e. states, and others which do not grow there. 
Here is also abundance of wild grapes, flowering 
shrubs, sarsaparilla, snake-root, and ginseng. 
Apples are inferior in spirit and taste to those in 
the e. states ; but peaches have a flavour un 
known in those states. The almond and fig will 
grow here in the open air, if attended to. Im 
mense quantities of pork and bacon are cured 
here, and indeed form the principal food of the 
inhabitants. Veal is excellent, mutton indif 
ferent, poultry of every kind in perfection and 
in abundance. The winters are short and gene 
rally pleasant ; and the country cannot be con 
sidered as unhealthy.] 

[PRINCE GEORGE, a county of Maryland, on 
the w. shore of Chesapeak Bay ; situate between 
Patowmac and Patuxent rivers, and is watered 
by numerous creeks which empty into those ri 
vers. The e. corner of the territory of Columbia 
borders upon the w. part of this county. It con 
tains 21,344 inhabitants, of whom 11,176 are 
slaves.] 

[PRINCE OF WALES, Cape, is remarkable for 
being the most w. point of the continent of N. 
America, and the e. limit of Behring s Straits, be 
tween Asia and America ; the two continents 
being here only about 39 miles apart. The mid 
channel has 28 fathoms water. Lat. 65 46 n. 
long. 168 15 w.~] 

[PRINCE OF WALES, Fort, in New N.Wales, 
N. America ; a factory belonging to the British, 
Hudson s Bay Company, on Churchill River. 
The mean heat here is 18 7 ; least heat 45 ; 
greatest heat 85. It lies in lat. 58 47 30" n. 
and long. 94 7 30" a&amp;gt;.] 

[PRINCE OF WALES Island, in the S. Pacific 
Ocean, is about 17 British miles long, and 12 
wide. Lat. 5 22 n. and long. 100 19 e. The 
variation of the needle in 1800 was 20 w.~] 

[PRINCE RUPERT S Bay, on the n. w. coast of 
the island of Dominica, one of the Caribbee 
Islands, where there is excellent shelter from 
the winds. It is deep, capacious, and sandy, and 
is the principal bay in the island. It is of great 
advantage in time of a war with France, as a 
fleet may here intercept all their W. India trade. 
On this bay is situate the new town of Ports 
mouth, n. of which is a cape, called Prince Ru 
pert s Head.] 

[PRINCE WILLIAM, a county of Virginia; 
bounded w. by Faquier, and e. by Patowmac 
River, which divides it from Maryland. It 
contains 11,615 inhabitants, of whom 4704 are 
slaves.] 

r r 2 



220 



P R I 



[PRINCE WILLIAM, a parish in Beaufort dis 
trict, S. Carolina.] 

[PRINCE WILLIAM S Sound, situate on the 
n. w. coast of N. America, lies e. of the mouth of 
Cook s River. At its mouth are three islands, 
Montague, Rose, and Kay. It was judged by 
Captain Cook to occupy 1 of lat. and 2 J of long, 
exclusive of its arms and branches, which were 
not explored. See Index to new matter respect 
ing MEXICO, Chap. II.] 

[PRINCE S Bay, on the s. side of Staten Island, 
in New York State.] 

[PRINCESS ANN, a maritime county of 
Virginia ; bounded e. by the Atlantic Ocean, and 
a;, by Norfolk County. It contains 7793 inhabi 
tants, of whom 3202 are slaves.] 

[PRINCESS ANN, a post-town of Maryland, 
on the e. shore of Chesapeak Bay in Somerset 
County, on the e. side of Monokin River, nine 
miles s. e. of Baltimore. It contains about 200 
inhabitants.] 

[PRINCETON, a township of Massachusetts, 
in Worcester County, 15 miles n. by w. of Wor 
cester, and 44 w. by . of Boston. The town 
ship contains 19,000 acres of elevated hilly, but 
strong and rich, land, adapted to grass and grain. 
Excellent beef, butter, and cheese, are its prin 
cipal productions. The mansion-house and farm 
of his honour Lieutenant-governor Gill, one of 
the most elegant situations and finest farms in 
the commonwealth, is in this town, and adds 
much to its ornament and wealth. A handsome 
Congregational church has lately been erected 
on a high hill, and commands a most extensive 
and rich prospect of the surrounding country. 
Wachusett Mountain, the most noted in the state, 
is in the . part of the township. Here, as in 
many other towns, is a valuable social library. 
Princeton was incorporated in 1759, and con 
tains 1016 inhabitant.] 

[PRINCETON, a post-town of New Jersey ; si 
tuate partly in Middlesex, and partly in Somer 
set counties. Nassau Hall College, an institu 
tion which has produced a great number of emi 
nent scholars, i very pleasantly situate in the 
compact part of this town. Here are about 
80 dwelling-houses, and a brick Presbyterian 
church. 

The college edifice is a handsome stone build 
ing, of 180 feet by 54, four stories high, and 
stands on an elevated and healthful spot, and 
commands an extensive and delightful prospect. 
The establishment, in 1796, consisted of a pre 
sident, who is also professor of moral philosophy, 
theology, natural and revealed ; history, and elb- 



P R I 

quence ; a professor of mathematics, natural 
philosophy, and astronomy; a professor of chy- 
mistry, which subject is treated in reference to 
agriculture and manufactures, as well as medi 
cine : besides these, two tutors have the instruc 
tion of the two lowest classes. The choice of the 
classical books, and the arrangement of the seve 
ral branches of education, of the lectures, and of 
other literary exercises, are such, as to give the 
students the best opportunity for improvement, 
in the whole encyclopedia of science. The num 
ber of students is from 70 to 90, besides the 
grammar school. The annual income of the col 
lege at present, by the fees of the students, and 
otherwise, is about 1000 currency a year. It 
has, besides, funds in possession, through the 
extraordinary liberality of Mr. James Leslie of 
New York, and Mrs. Esther Richards of Rah- 
way, to the amount of 10,000 dollars, for the 
education of poor and pious youth for the mi 
nistry of the gospel ; and the reversion of an 
estate in Philadelphia for the same purpose, of 
between 200 and ,300 per annum, a legacy 
of the late Mr. Hugh Hodge, a man of eminent 
piety, which is to come to the college at the death 
of a very worthy and aged widow. 

The college library was almost wholly de 
stroyed during the late war ; but out of the re 
mains of that, and by the liberal donations of 
several gentlemen, chiefly in Scotland, it has col 
lected one of about 2300 volumes. There are 
besides this, in the college, two libraries belong 
ing to the two literary societies, into which the 
students have arranged themselves, of about 1000 
volumes ; and the library of the president, con 
sisting of 1000 volumes more, is always open to 
the students. Before the war this college was 
furnished with a philosophical apparatus, worth 
500, which (except the elegant orrery con 
structed by Mr. Rittenhouse) was almost en 
tirely destroyed by the British army in the late 
war. 

Princeton is nine miles n. e. of Trenton, 15 
s. w. of Brunswick, 41 s. w. of New York, and 
32 n. e. of Philadelphia. Lat. 40 21 12" n. 
Long. 7444 / 45 // w.J 

[PRINCETON, a small post-town of N. Caro 
lina, three miles from Murfreeborough, and 26 
from Halifax.] 

PRINCIPE, SANTA MARIA DEL PUERTO 
DEL, a town of the island of Cuba, on the n. 
coast, and with a good port ; in an extensive 
plain where they breed much cattle. Twenty- 
five leagues n. e. of Santiago de Cuba, and as 
many from Bayamo. 



PRO 

PRINCIPE, another town, in the kingdom of 
Brazil; situate at the foot of the mountain Frio, 
near the river San Francisco. 

PRINCIPE, a cape or point of land on the 
coast, which lies between the river Plata and 
the Straits of Magellan, in lat. 47 s. ; between 
capes Blanco and S. Jorge. 

PRINCIPE, PUERTO DEL, another town, in the 
island of St. Domingo, in the part possessed by 
the French ; situate at the w. head, on the shore 
of a river. 

[PRO. See POINT LE PRO.] 
PROBAVIE, or RIVER DU CUIVRE, a river 
of Canada in N. America. It runs n. and enters 
the lake Superior, between the rivers Neovisa- 
covat and Atokas. 

PROFOND, a river of the province and co 
lony of N. Carolina, which runs s. then turns e. 
and enters the Saxapahaw. 

PROFOND, another, a small river in this pro 
vince, which runs s. e. and enters the Pedi. 

PROPHET, a river in Canada. It rises from 
the lake of Los Sioux, runs s. w. and enters the 
lake De Bois. 

[PROSPECT. Franckfort, in the district of 
Main, is now so called. It adjoins Buckston 
on Penobscot River, and is 16 miles below Or- 
rington.] 

[PROSPECT Harbour, on the s. coast of Nova 
Scotia, has Cape Sambro and Island e. and is 
two leagues n. e. of St. Margaret s Bay.] 

[PROTECTWORTH, a township in the n. 
part of Cheshire County, New Hampshire. It 
was incorporated in 1769, and contains 210 in- 
habitants.J 

PROVIDENCE, an island of the N. Sea, one 
of the Lucayas or Bahamas, and the second after 
that of Lucayoneca, to the 5. of which it lies. It 
was discovered by Christopher Columbus in his 
first voyage, in 1494 : is 25 miles long, and nine 
wide, and is the residence of the governor of 
these islands, his abode being in the city of Nas 
sau. The Indians called it Abacoa ; but Mr. 
Saile, who was twice thrown upon it by stress of 
weather, changed its name to Providence. It is 
in the midst of some hundred others, the greater 
part of which are nothing more than shoals or 
rocks rising above the surface of the water. 

This island was at first an asylum for the pi 
rates, who for a long time infested the naviga 
tion of those seas ; the which obliged the court 
of England to appoint a governor and establish 
a company of commerce for this island, about the 
middle of the sixteenth century. Its principal 
branch of trade consists in oranges, with which 



PRO 



221 



it abounds, and in victuals and provisions for 
ships, which are frequently wrecked upon its 
coast, and which, sailing for the continent of 
America, are forced to touch here for fresh sup 
plies. The provisions are brought hither from 
Carolina ; and for this purpose it has magazines 
or store-houses ; since the island of itself pro 
duces hardly any thing but oranges, salt, a little 
brazil-wood, maize, and pease, the latter being 
gathered three months after their sowing, and 
the former six weeks. The coast abounds in fish 
of various and exquisite kinds; and in some 
parts there are many trees and plants. 

The principal port is very dangerous, from a 
bar which it has at its entrance, and where there 
is only 16 feet water. The whole coast is indu 
bitably much exposed, and dangerous for vessels, 
not only from the violence and various direction 
of the currents, which are such as to confound 
the most expert pilots, but from the roughness 
of the sea, and the frequent and terrible tempests 
of thunder, lightning, and rain, when the whole 
world seems coming to an end. The multitude 
of rocks and shoals which surround this island 
are, some of them, covered with water, others 
standing out of, and others on a level with it, all 
of them presenting so many obstacles to vessels 
desiring to approach the island ; and this there 
fore is only attempted in cases of great necessity. 
The Spaniards have, on three occasions, driven 
out the English from this island : the first time 
in 1670, eight years after its establishment ; the 
second time in 1703, and the last in 1781. 

[NewProvidence,soon after it came into the pos 
session of the British government, was made the 
seat of government in the colony of the Bahamas. 
This island is situated in lat. 25 3 n. and be 
tween long. 77 10 and 77 38 w. It is about 
25 miles long and nine miles broad, narrowing 
towards the e. and w. extremities of the island. 
It has a good harbour, formed by Hog Island on 
the w. and by the main land of New Providence 
on the s. There is an entrance at each end of the 
harbour. Ships drawing 13 or 14 feet water may 
go over the bar at the w. entrance. That at the 
other end can only admit vessels of a shallow 
draught of water. A small light-house was 
erected in 1804, upon Fort Fincastle (which is 
situate on an eminence overlooking the town of 
Nassau), and there is a port of entry at Nassau, 
with a regular custom-house, which may be 
clearly discerned from vessels four or five leagues 
to the n. of New Providence. 

The Island of New Providence differs little ia 
its appearance, soil, productions, &amp;c. from the 



222 

[rest of the Bahamas. In general, the surface of 
this island is rocky and barren, but along the . 
side there are fertile and well cultivated spots. 
The town of Nassau is situate along the s. side 
of the harbour, and is perhaps one of the best 
laid out, and most picturesque situations, to be 
met with in the W. Indies. The houses are in 
general remarkably good, and the streets wide 
and airy. There are two parish churches, and an 
old fort near the w. entrance of the harbour. 
The government-house (built in 1804) is one of 
the best in the W. Indies, and is finely situate 
on a hill that commands the town and harbour. 
The public buildings, courts of justice, &amp;c. are 
likewise handsome and commodious. The bar 
racks are situate in Fort Charlotte, a little to the 
w. of Nassau, and were erected at a great ex 
pense by the late Earl of Dunmore, when gover- 

Account of Goods entered at the Custom-House, Nassau, for three Years ending 1794 ; and for 

four Years ending 1803. 



PRO 

nor of the Bahamas. There is a very good road, 
extending for a considerable way along the w. 
coast of New Providence, and there is likewise 
one across the island from Nassau to the s. Be 
sides the trade with the mother country, a very 
considerable one has been, of late years, carried 
on between the Bahama Islands and the United 
States of America, particularly in the articles of 
salt, live stock, and provisions ; which latter 
have been chiefly obtained from the more south 
ern of those States. A very considerable in 
tercourse has likewise occasionally taken place 
between New Providence and the Island of 
Cuba ; particularly to the Havannah, where 
there was a very considerable market for British 
manufactures, prize goods, &amp;c. through the fa 
cilities rendered by the license trade. 





Of what 


Number 
of 


GENERAL 


CARGOES. 




nation. 


vessels. 


Inwards. 


Outwards. 




British - 


366 


C British goods and merchandize, 
\ and American lumber. 


y Cotton, dye-woods, 
i and specie. 




American 


162 


Provisions and lumber. 


f Salt, wreck goods, 
1 &amp;c. &amp;c. 




Spanish - 


205 


387,900 dollars. 


| British goods, wares, 
(. and merchandize. 






















anrlino* 1 7Q4. 




7QQ 


















British - 


436 


As above. 


As above. 




American 


538 


As above. 


As above. 




Spanish - 


456 


3,664,570 dollars. 


As above. 


Total vessels four vears 




















&amp;lt;&amp;gt;mlin&amp;lt;r 1803 




113ft 

















Previous to May 1803, there had been granted 
in this island, by the crown, no less than 23,079 
acres of patented estates, for the purpose of cul 
tivation. In 1801 the population amounted to 
1599 whites, 752 free people of colour, and 3861 
slaves, making a total of 6212; and, in 1803, to 
1758 whites, 817 people of colour, and 2515 
slaves, the total being 5090. See BAHAMAS.] 

[PROVIDENCE, a county of Rhode Island State, 
bounded by Massachusetts n. and e. Connecticut w. 
and Kent County on the s. It contains nine 
townships, and 24.391 inhabitants, including 82 
slaves. Its chief town is Providence, and the town 
of Scituate is famous for its excellent cannon 
foundery. This establishment or plantation be 



longing to the Governor of Rhode Island, was 
founded by Roger Williams, curate of a church 
of Brownists, in the Bay of Massachusetts, but 
which was by the justice put down, from the new 
opinions and doctrines he was broaching. He 
was followed by a considerable number of people, 
and he established them here without the know 
ledge of the government, giving to his new set 
tlement the name of Providence. Here he lived 
40 years, with such prudence and able conduct, 
as to regain the favour of his compatriots, and 
was recommended to the government of Massa 
chusetts by some Englishmen of the first nobi 
lity. He wrote a treatise upon the doctrine of 
the Quakers, applied himself with particular zeal 



PRO 

to the conversion of the Indians, and made a 
very useful regulation for the government of 
Rhode Island. This plantation occupies a dis 
trict of 20 square miles, and is separate from 
Connecticut on the w. by an imaginary line 
drawn from n. to 5. and from Massachusetts by 
another line from e. to w. See article RHODE 
ISLAND.] 

[PROVIDENCE, the chief town of the above 
county, situate 22 miles n. by w. \ K. from New 
port, and 24 from the sea ; seated at the head of 
navigation of Narraganset Bay, on both sides 
of Providence River, the two parts of the town 
being connected by a bridge, 160 feet lon^ and 
22 wide. It is the oldest town in the State, 
having been settled by Roger Williams and his 
company in 1636 ; and lies in lat. 41 46 n. and 
long 71 23 X w. 37 miles s. by w. of Boston, and 
206 n. e. of Philadelphia. Ships of almost any 
size sail up and down the channel, which is 
marked out by stakes, erected at points of shoals 
and beds lying in the river, so that a stranger 
may come up to the town without a pilot. A 
ship of 950 tons, for the E. India trade, was lately 
built in this town, and fitted for sea. In 1764, 
there were belonging to the county of Providence 
54 sail of vessels, containing 4320 tons. In 1790, 
there were 129 vessels, containing 11,942 tons. 
This town suffered much by the Indian war of 
1675, when a number of its inhabitants removed 
to Rhode Island for shelter. In the late war, the 
case was reversed ; many of the inhabitants of 
that island removed to Providence. The public 
buildings are, an elegant meeting-house for Bap 
tists, 80 feet square, with a lofty and beautiful 
steeple, and a large bell, cast at the Hope Fur 
nace in Scituate ; a meeting-house for Friends 
and Quakers ; three for Congregationalists, one 
of which, lately erected, is the most elegant per 
haps in the United States ; an Episcopal church ; 
a handsome court-house, 70 feet by 40, in Avhich 
is deposited a library for the use of the inhabit 
ants of the town and country ; a work-house ; a 
market-house, 80 feet long and 40 w r ide ; and a 
brick school-house, in which four schools are 
kept. Rhode Island college is established at 
Providence. The elegant building erected for 
its accommodation, is situate on a hill to the e. 
of the town ; and while its elevated situation 
renders it delightful, by commanding an exten 
sive variegated prospect, it furnishes it with a 
pure, salubrious air. The edifice is of brick, 
four stories high, 150 feet long and 46 wide, with 
a projection of 10 feet each side. It has 48 
rooms for students, and eight larger ones for 



PRO 



223 



public uses. The roof is slated. It is a flourish 
ing seminary, and contains upwards of 60 stu 
dents. It has a library, containing between two 
and 3000 volumes, and a valuable philosophical 
apparatus. The nouses in this town are gene 
rally built of wood, though there are some brick 
buildings which are large and elegant. At a con 
venient distance from the town, an hospital for 
the small-pox and other diseases has been erect 
ed. There are two spermaceti works, a number 
of distilleries, sugar-houses, and other manu 
factories. Several forts were erected in and near 
the town during the war, which, however, are 
not kept in repair. It has an extensive trade 
with Massachusetts, Connecticut, and part of 
Vermont; with the W. Indies, with Europe, and 
lately w ith the E. Indies and China. A bank has 
also been established here, and a cotton manu 
factory, which employs 100 hands ; with which 
is connected a mill for spinning cotton, on the 
model of Sir R. Arkwright s mill. It is erected 
at Pawtucket Falls, in N. Providence, and is the 
first of the kind built in America. The ex 
ports for one year, ending September 30, 1794, 
amounted to the value of 643,373 dollars. It con 
tains 6380 inhabitants, including 48 slavesj 

[PROVIDENCE, North, a township of Rhode 
Island, in Providence County, n. of the town of 
Providence, s. of Smithfield, and separated from 
the State of Massachusetts on the e. by Paw- 
tucket river. It contains 1071 inhabitants, in 
cluding five slaves.] 

[PROVIDENCE, a river which falls into Narra 
ganset Bay on the w. side of Rhode Island. It 
rises by several branches, part of which come 
from Massachusetts. It is navigable as far as 
Providence for ships of 900 tons, 30 miles from 
the sea. It affords fine fish, oysters, and lob 
sters.] 

[PROVIDENCE, a township of New York, situ 
ate in Saratoga County, taken from Galway, and 
incorporated in 1796. j 

[PROVIDENCE, Upper and Lower, townships 
in Delaware County, Pennsylvania.] 

[PROVIDENCE, a township in Montgomery 
County, Pennsylvania.] 

PROVIDENCE, an island of the N. Sea, near 
the coast of Honduras, in the kingdom of Gua 
temala. It is 11 miles long and four wide, and 
is celebrated in the history of the buccaniers or 
pirates, who fortified it, making it their refuge 
for some years. Its w. extremity, called the 
Island of Santa Catalina, is separated from the 
rest of the island by a narrow channel, over 
which was thrown a bridge by the said pirates , 




224 



P U A 



P U C 



Notwithstanding it be small, it should be consi 
dered as one of the best of the W. India islands, 
as well from its fertility as from the salubrity of 
its climate ; to which may be added the facility 
of its fortification and defence of its coasts, the 
abundance of its fine water, and the circumstance 
of there being in it no serpent or venomous 
insect. 

[PROVINCE, an island in Delaware River, six 
miles below Philadelphia. It is joined to the 
main land by a dam.] 

[PROVINCE TOWN is situate on the hook of 
Cape Cod, in Barnstable County, Massachusetts, 
three miles n. w. of Race Point. Its harbour, 
which is one of the best in the State, opens to 
the s. and has depth of water for any ships. This 
was the first port entered by the English when 
they came to settle in New England, in 1620. It 
has been in a thriving and decaying state many 
times. It is now rising, and contains 454 inha 
bitants ; whose sole dependence is upon the cod- 
fishery, in which they employ 20 sail, great and 
small. Ten of their vessels, in 1790, took 1 1,000 
quintals of cod-fish. They are so expert and suc 
cessful, that they have not lost a vessel or a man 
in the business, since the war. The houses, in 
number about 90, stand on the inner side of the 
cape, fronting the s. e. They are one story high, 
and set upon piles, that the driving sands may 
pass under them ; otherwise they would be buried 
in sand. They raise nothing from their lands, 
but are wholly dependent on Boston, and the 
towns in the vicinity, for every vegetable produc 
tion. There are but two horses and two yokes 
of oxen kept in the town. They have about 50 
cows, which feed in the spring upon beach grass, 
which grows at intervals upon the shore ; and in 
summer they feed in the sunken ponds and 
marshy places that are found betw een the sand 
hills. Here the cows are seen wading, and even 
swimming, plunging their heads into the water 
up to their horns, picking a scanty subsistence 
from the roots and herbs produced in the water. 
They are fed in the winter on sedge, cut from 
the flats.] 

[PRIJCEROS, a cape on the coast of New 
Spain, in the S. Sea.] 

PRUDENCE, an island of the N. Sea, situate 
in the Bay of Narraganset in the province of 
Rhode Island. It is five leagues long from n. to 
s. of a triangular figure, one mile wide on one 
side and three on another, and having its w. ex 
tremity five miles from Bristol. 

PUACHUN, a settlement of Indians of the 
province and corregimiento of Itata in the king 



dom of Chile, near the river of this name and the 
coast. 

PUANAS, VALLE DE, a settlement of the 
province and kingdom of Nueva Vizcaya in N. 
America; situate between the real of mines of 
Sombrerete and the city of Guadiana. 

PUANCHU, a settlement of Indians of the 
district of Token Baxo in the kingdom of Chile, 
on the coast and on the shore of the river Budi. 

PUANTE, a river of Canada, which rises from 
the Lake Amaguntick, runs nearly due w. and 
enters the St. Lawrence. 

PUANTS, Bay of, on the w. coast of the Lake 
Michagan in Canada. It is very large, handsome, 
and convenient, is many leagues long, and in 
the form of a sack. Its entrance is full of islands, 
inhabited by Ponteoutamis Indians, and in the 
most interior part of it the French have built the 
fort called Otchagros ; also, at a small distance 
from this, a small river intervening, is the set- 
lement of Indians reduced to the faith by the 
Jesuits, of the name of San Francisco Xavier. 
[See LAKE MICHIGAN and GREEN BAY.] 
" PUANLLABQUEN, a river of the kingdom 
of Chile, which runs s. and enters the Valdivia. 
In its vicinity the Spaniards have built a fort to 
restrain the infidel Indians. 

PUCANA, a settlement of Indians, of the pro 
vince and colony of S. Carolina, on the shore of 
the river Albania. 

PUCARA, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Lampa in Peru, on the skirt of 
the cordillera of Vilcanota ; and consequently 
of a very cold temperature, and subject to tem 
pests. Near it are to be seen the ruins of a cas 
tle, which was of the heathens, of a square 
figure, and within it two reservoirs, the beds of 
which are formed of stone, some being of the 
size of three yards in length and two in width. 
Not far from hence is a fountain of warm water. 

PUCARA, another settlement, in the province 
and corregimiento of Xauja in the same kingdom, 
annexed to the curacy of Huancayo. 

PUCARA, another, of the province and corre 
gimiento of Guarochiri in the same kingdom, an 
nexed to the curacy of the settlement of Yauli. 

PUCARA, another, of the province and govern 
ment of Tucuman in the same kingdom ; and of 
the district of the city of Cordoba, on the shore 
of the river of its name. 

PUCARA, another, a river in the same pro 
vince ; it rises near the R. Primero, close to the 
settlement of Candelaria, pursues an e. course, 
laving along the s. side of the city of Cordova, 
and after a course of about 130 miles empties it* 



PUC 

^elf into a lake about 25 miles s. of the lake of 
Saladas de los Porangos. 

PUCARA, another, of the province and go 
vernment of Jaen de Bracamaros in the kingdom 
of Quito. 

PUCARA, a river of the province and govern 
ment of Tucuman, which rises in the mountains 
of the city of Cordoba, passes opposite it, run 
ning e. and enters the Salado, 

PUCARANI, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Omasuyos in Peru. In the time 
of the Indians it was called Quescamarca, which 
signifies the place of stones, from the abundance 
of these found in its mountains. Also, the Spa 
niards, when they peopled it in the time of the 
Viceroy Don Francisco de Toledo, called it Pu- 
carani, to please the Indians, and in memory of a 
fortress which they had four leagues from thence, 
to defend themselves from the Pacajes Indians. 
It is w. of Tiaguanaco, and three leagues from 
the great lake Titicaca, from whence the inha 
bitants supply themselves with plenty of fish. 
These Gentiles adored a mountain, which rises 
conspicuous amidst the others of the corderilla, 
and which is the one nearest to the settlement 
called Cacaaca, and always covered with snow. 
In this mountain the Indians have a figure of an 
Indian in stone, of half a yard high, and to this 
they sacrifice, by way of propitiation, human 
creatures, whenever they think the deity is 
angry, and at other times sheep, rabbits, and 
other animals. After the conquest of the king 
dom, there entered to preach here the fathers 
Juan Caldera de Roxas and Pedro Sanchez Ber- 
nal, most pious clergy, and zealous in the cause 
of religion. In 1576, the religious of St. Au- 
gustin left this curacy for that of Viacha, which 
is very near ; and the first curate of which was 
Fr. Juan del Canto. It has been rendered cele 
brated from the devout sanctuary of the mira 
culous image of Nuestra Seiiora de la Cande- 
laria, with the dedicatory title of Gracia, and 
commonly called Pucarani : this image was 
brought here in 1589, by the fathers Nicolas 
Ximenez and Geronimo Gamarra, and was made 
from a model of the image of Copacavana, by 
Don Francisco Tito Yupanqui, an Indian of the 
blood royal. This image has performed such 
repeated miracles, as to have acquired an extra 
ordinary devotion in all these provinces, as is 
manifested by the concourse of people, of all 
nations, coming to implore relief in their neces 
sities. This settlement is nine leagues from La 
Paz, and at a small distance from the Valley of 

VOL. IV. 



PUC 



225 



Guarina, in which was fought the battle of this 
name, between Gonzalo Pizarro and Diego Cen- 
teno, who commanded the royal army : in lat. 
17 12 s. 

PUCARE, a river of the province and govern 
ment of Mainas in the kingdom of Quito. It 
rises in the country of the Cocaimas Indians, runs 
nearly due n. and enters the Maranon, or Ama 
zon, opposite the settlement of Yameos. 

PUCATIATLA, a settlement of the province 
and corregimiento of Angaraes in Peru. 

PUCHACAY, a province and corregimiento of 
the kingdom of Chile ; bounded on the n. by the 
province of Itata, on the e. by Huilquilemu, on 
the s. by the river Bio-bio, and on the w. by the 
sea. From n. to s. it is 12 leagues in extent, 
and 23 from e. to w. It is irrigated by the river 
Andalien and several other small streams. 

[This province produces gold dust in abun 
dance, and also great quantities of strawberries, 
both wild and cultivated, which are the largest 
in Chile. Gualqui, or St. John the Baptist, 
founded, in the year 1754, upon the n. shore of 
the river Bio-bio, is properly the capital, and 
the residence of the prefect, or corregidor. This 
province comprehends the prefecturate of Con- 
cepcion, which extends a little beyond the city 
of that name. Of this we shall say a few words, 
in addition to what we have already stated, under 
its proper article. 

It is well known that it was founded by Pedro di 
Valdivia, in a dell or valley, formed on the sea- 
coast by some beautiful hills, in lat. 36 47 , and 
long. 73 9 . This city is the second in the king 
dom. At its commencement it flourished greatly, 
from the vast quantities of gold that were dug in 
its vicinity ; but after the unfortunate battle of 
Monigueno, in the year 1554, it was abandoned 
by Villagran, the governor, and the inhabitants, 
on the approach of Lautaro, the Araucanian gene 
ral, and by him taken and burned. It was, how 
ever, rebuilt in the month of November of the 
following year, after a period of six months ; but 
Lautaro returning again, rendered himself mas 
ter of it, slew in the assault the greater part of 
the garrison, and razed it to its foundations. 
Don Garcia de Mendoza, after his victories over 
Caupolican, restored it anew, and fortified it 
strongly. Having successfully resisted the at 
tempt of the Araucanians to take it, who besieged 
it for fifty days, it continued to flourish in great 
splendour until the year 1603, when, with the 
other s. cities of the Spaniards, it was taken 
and burned by the Toqui PoillamachiL It soon, 
G G 



P U C 



[however, began to rise again from its ashes, and 
resume its former lustre, in consequence of the 
great commerce which was carried on there ; and 
becoming more strong and populous than ever, 
the Araucanians ceased to molest it. But in the 
year 1730 a calamity of a new kind assailed it. 
It was almost totally destroyed by an earthquake, 
attended by an inundation of the sea, which over 
flowed the greater part, and swept away every 
thing that it met in its course. Notwithstanding 
these repeated misfortunes, the inhabitants ob 
stinately resolved to persevere, and built it anew 
in a handsome manner; but did not enjoy it long, 
for in the month of May of the year 1751, this 
devoted city was again destroyed by an earth 
quake and an influx of the sea, which entirely 
covered it. They fortunately escaped, and took 
refuge on the neighbouring hills ; but continued 
for 13 years in an unsettled state, not being able 
to agree among themselves in rebuilding the city. 
At length they resolved to abandon its former 
site, and founded a new city, at the distance of 
a league from the sea, in a beautiful plain called 
Mocha, upon the n. shore of the Bio-bio. 

The prefect, or corregidor, is at the same time, 
by the royal decree, commander of the army, 
this being the principal place for the rendezvous 
of the militia of the country. It has for many 
years been the residence of the camp-master- 
general, and of late that of the serjeant-major. 
The royal treasury in this place, from whence 
the soldiers of the frontiers, as well as those be 
longing to the city, are paid, is confided to the 
care of a treasurer, a cashier, and an inspector. 
The audienza, or royal council, was first esta 
blished in Concepcion in the year 1507 ; but was 
afterwards abolished, and re-established some 
years after in the capital of St. Jago. The pre 
sident is, however, obliged to reside in this city 
for six months, and has a palace in it built at 
the expense of the government. After the de 
struction of the city of Imperial, in the year 
1603, it was erected into a bishopric. 

Besides containing convents of all the reli 
gious orders established in Chile, it has one of 
the Sisters of the Trinity, a college which be 
longed to the Jesuits, with public schools, in 
which were taught the sciences of humanity, 
philosophy, and theology ; a college of nobility, 
which was likewise under the direction of the 
Jesuits, and a Tridentine seminary. The inha 
bitants, in consequence of so many misfortunes, 
scarcely amount, at present, to 13,000. 

The temperature of the air is at all seasons 
Very mild; the soil fertile, and the sea-coast 



abounds with every kind of fish of the most de 
licious kinds, both scaled and testaceous. The 
harbour, or bay, is spacious, extending full 3| 
leagues from n. to s. and as many from e. to to. 

The Quiriguina, a beautiful and fertile island, 
situated at its mouth, forms two entrances to it, 
the e. of which, called Boca Grande, is two miles 
wide, and the w. called Boca Chica, is but a little 
more than a mile. The harbour affords good 
and safe anchorage for vessels of any burden, 
especially in a port called Talcaguano, where 
ships at present lie, as the new city is not far 
distant.! 

PUCHACHAILGUA. See MISERICORDIA. 

PUCHUNCO, some lakes of the province and 
corregimiento of Quillota in the kingdom of Chile, 
near the coast, between the rivers Quillota and 
Ligua. 

PUCHUTLA, a settlement of the province 
and alcaldia mayor of Chiapa in the kingdom of 
Guatemala, of the district and jurisdiction of 
that city. 

PUCKANTALLA, a settlement of Indians of 
the province and colony of S. Carolina ; situate 
on the shore of the river Coussa. 

PUCIRINABIS, a settlement of the missions 
of Indians of this nation, held by the Carmelites 
of Portugal in the country of the Amazonas, on 
the shore of the river Negro. 

PUCQUIAN, a settlement of the province 
and corregimiento of Caxatambo in Peru, annexed 
to the curacy of the settlement of Mangas. 

PUCQU1N, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Lucanas in the same kingdom as 
the former. 

PUCRO, a river of the province and govern 
ment of Darien and kingdom of Tierra Firme. 
It rises in the interior of this province, runs w. 
and, turning its course to s. enters the Tuira. 

PUCTLA, a settlement of the head settlement 
of the district of Tacotepec and alcaldia mayor of 
Justlahuaca in Nueva Espana. It contains 57 
families of Indians. 

PUCULLAN, a small river of the kingdom 
of Chile, which runs n. n. w. and enters the 
Token. 

PUCUNA, an ancient province of Peru, con 
tained at present in that of Charcas to the s. of 
Cuzco. It was subjected to the empire by the 
Inca Roca, sixth monarch. The word Pucuna 
signifies, in the Mexican tongue, windy, and it 
is here well applied from the continual currents 
of air which blow from the mountains of the 
cordillera. 

PUDAGUELL, a lake of the kingdom of 



P U E 



227 



Chile in the district of the city of Santiago. It 
is two leagues long, and its shores are covered 
with trees resembling the laurel, and being called 
sauces or maitenes, and remain ng green the whole 
year round. This lake is of such depth as to be 
navigable for ships of war. It abounds in fish 
of excellent quality, and particularly in trout 
and bagres, which are easily caught. Three 
leagues from the city of Santiago. 

PUEBLA, SAN JOSEPH DE LA, a settlement 
of the head settlement of the district and alcaldia 
mat/or of Cholula in Nueva Espana. 

PUEBLA, a city in the kingdom of Nueva Es 
pana. See ANGELES. 

PUEBLA, another, in the Nuevo Reyno de 
Granada. See TORO. 

PUEBLO, EL, a settlement in the province 
and corregimiento of Coquimbo in the kingdom 
of Chile/ 

PUEBLO-LLANO,asettlementof the govern 
ment and jurisdiction of Merida in the Nuevo 
Reyno de Granada, annexed to the curacy of the 
settlement of St. Domingo. It is of a mild tem 
perature, produces much maize and papas ; con 
tains 25 housekeepers and 70 Indians, who ma 
nufacture large and small hampers, by which they 
carry on a good trade, and by which, as well as 
the sale of neat cattle and rnares, they contrive 
to live very comfortably. 

PUEBLO-LLANO, another settlement in the 
same province and kingdom as the former. It 
is small, of a hot temperature, produces much 
cotton, sugar-cane, yucas, and plantains. 

PUEBLO-NUEVO, a settlement of the head 
settlement of the district of Otzuluama and al 
caldia mayor of Tampico in Nueva Espana. It 
contains 18 families of Indians, who are free 
from tribute, inasmuch as they are bound to 
carry over passengers who trade in that descrip 
tion from one side to the other o the river which 
surrounds it, this river being equally large and 
dangerous. These Indians, therefore, carry over 
people without fee or reward, and they maintain 
themselves by some seeds, fruits, and garden- 
herbs, which they cultivate, irrigating their lands 
by the waters of the said river; four leagues from 
the settlement of Tanquiuche. 

PUEBLO-NUEVO, another settlement, with the 
dedicatory title of San Ildefonso, in the prov ince 
and corregimiento of Sana in Peru. 

PUEBLO-NUEVO, another, in the province and 
corregimiento of Tinta, or Canes and Canches, 
in the same kingdom ; annexed to the curacy of 
the settlement of Pampamarca. 

PUEBLO-NUEVO, another, of the jurisdiction 



of the city of Pedraza, in the Nuevo Reyno de 
Granada; situate at the top of a mountain. It is 
of a hot temperature, produces in abundance all 
kinds of vegetable productions of this climate, 
and is much reduced, as its population amounts 
now to only 12 housekeepers and 50 Indians. 

PUEBLO-NUEVO, another, of the head settle 
ment of the district and alcaldia mayor of Aca- 
poneta in Nueva Espana; two leagues 5. of the 
settlement of Sallula. 

PUEBLO-NUEVO, another, of the province and 
government of La Guayana, situate on the shore 
of the river Paraiba. 

PUEBLO-NUEVO, another, of the province and 
government of Santa Marta in the Nuevo Reyno 
de Granada ; on the shore of a small river which 
enters the Cesare. 

PUEBLO-NUEVO, another, of the province and 
government of Venezuela, in the same kingdom 
as the former, on the shore of the river Guaique, 
and e. of the city of Coro. 

PUEBLO-NUEVO, another, of the same pro 
vince and kingdom as the former : in the w. part 
and opposite the city of Coro. 

PUEBLO-NUEVO, another, of the province and 
government of Cartagena, in the same kingdom 
as the former, of the district of Sinii : n. of the 
town of Lorica, and distant from it a little more 
than a league. 

PUEBLO-NUEVO, another, of the same pro 
vince and kingdom as the former ; to the s. of 
the Sabana Grande. 

PUEBLO-VIEJO DELoNDREs, a settlement 
of the province and government of Tucuman 
in Peru ; on the spot where the old city of Lon- 
dres stood, and which was founded in honour of 
Queen Mary of England, who married Philip II. 
and which was afterwards translated thence with 
the name of Catamarca. 

PUEBLO- VIEGO, another settlement, in the 
province and corregimiento of Cuyo in the king 
dom of Chile, to the n. of the city of San Juan 
de la Frontera. 

PUEBLOS-NUEVOS, two settlements of the 
head settlement of the district of Xonacatepec 
and alcaldia mayor of Cuernavaca in Nueva 
Espana, built lately, and situate very near to 
each other. 

PUELA, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Riobamba in the kingdom of 
Quito. 

PUEMBO, a settlement of the corregimiento 
of the district and jurisdiction of LasCincoLeguas 
of the city of Quito. 

PUENTE ? SANTIAGO DE LA, a settlement of 



P U E 



P U E 



the head settlement of Tarimbaro and alcaldia. 
mayor of Valladolid in the province and bishopric 
of Mechoacan. It contains 25 families of Indians 
employed in the cultivation of the lands of eight 
estates of its district, and is divided from the ca 
pital merely by a river. 

PUENTE, a small river of the kingdom of Bra 
zil, which rises in a branch of the sierra of Los 
Coriges ; runs e. and enters the Tocantines be- 
tw r een those of Magues and San Antonio. 

PUER, [or more properly Peur,] a bay on 
the ^. coast, and in the part possessed by the 
French in the island St. Domingo, between the 
rivers Salado and Colorado. 

PUERCOS, MORRO DE, a very lofty mountain 
at the extremity or point of land formed by the 
coast in the province and government of Vera- 
ffua, of the kingdom of Tierra Firme in the S. 

X 

bea. 

PUERCOS, an island of the N. Sea ; one of the 
small Lucayas, between those of Providence and 
Espiritu Santo. 

PUERCOS, a small river of the island of Cuba, 
which enters the sea between the Bay of Honda 
and that of Santa Isabel. 

[PURCOS, another river in N.America; the 
country between which and the sources of the 
river Colorado is unknown.] 

PUERRES, a settlement of the province and 
government of Pastes in the kingdom of Quito. 

[PUERTO, the Spanish name for port. Names 
of this description, adopted by the Spaniards, 
will be found under PORT, or PORTO.] 

PUERTO, S.MARTIN DEL, a city of the pro 
vince and government of S. Juan de Los Llanos 
in the Nuevo Reyno de Granada : founded by 
Captain Pedro Daza in 1585, with the name of 
Medina del Torres, and, from having been de 
stroyed a second time, with the name it at pre 
sent retains, by Governor Juan de Zarate in 
1641, as being on the shore of the river and 
port of Ariari. This city has been celebrated for 
its quantity of gold and riches which it formerly 
possessed; but, at present, it is so reduced and 
poor, as scarcely to count 60 housekeepers. It 
is of a very hot and unhealthy temperature, and 
yields the same vegetable productions as the 
other settlements of this province, and particu 
larly wild cocas, which abounds greatly. Not 
withstanding the country be so sickly as we have 
just mentioned, we should remark that Doctor 
Pineros lived eurate here for 90 years, dying in 
1741. It is eight leagues from the city of S. 
Martin, and 30 from the capital of the kingdom 
of Santa Fe. 



PUERTO, another city, with the dedicatory title 
of Santa Maria, the capital of the province and 
government of Barbacoas in the kingdom of 
Quito. It is very reduced and poor. 

PUERTO, another, with the dedicatory title of 
S. Estevan, of the province and alcaldia mayor of 
Panuco in Nueva Espana ; founded by Gonzalo 
de Sandoval, by order of Hernan Cortes in 1520. 
It has a very good parish church, and a conve 
nient and safe port at eight leagues distance. 
Sixty-five leagues from Mexico. 

PUERTO-REAL, a city of the island of 
Jamaica. See PORT ROYAL. 

PUERTO-REAL, an island of the N. Sea, near 
the coast of the province and colony of S. Caro 
lina ; situate on the confines of Georgia. It has 
a very large and convenient bay of the same title, 
and capable of containing many ships. The 
island is small, but of a beautiful territory, and 
celebrated from the city of Beaufort, which stands 
in it, having been the first commercial town 
which the English had in that part of America. 

PUERTO-REAL, one of the three entrances of 
the lake of Terminos, in the province and alcaldia 
mayor of Tabasco in Nueva Espana ; formed by 
the islands of Tris. 

PUERTO-RICO, an island of the N. Sea, 
one of the Lesser Antilles, discovered by the 
admiral Don Christopher Columbus, in his se 
cond voyage in 1509. It was conquered by the 
adelantado Juan Ponce de Leon, native of Se 
ville, after many conflicts and fatigues ; since 
its natives were very valorous, and defended 
their liberty at the dearest rate, the greater part 
of them dying with the weapons in their hands. 
It was then extremely well peopled with In 
dians ; and some authors exaggerate the num 
ber of inhabitants to 600,000. [Be this as it may, 
it is certain that in 1778 it contained only 
80,660 inhabitants, of which, only 6530 were 
slaves. There were then reckoned upon the 
island 77,384 head of horned cattle, 23,195 
horses, 1515 mules, 49,058 head of small cattle, 
5861 plantations, yielding 2737 quintals of su 
gar ; 1163 quintals of cotton, 19,556 quintals of 
rice, 15,216 quintals of maize, 7458 quintals of 
tobacco, and 9860 quintals of molasses. It is 
94 miles long, and 35 wide.] 

The rains, which cause it to be unhealthy, last 
during the months of July and August ; but with 
out them the heat would be insufferable. In the 
mid-summer, or time of gathering the harvests, 
the hurricanes are very frequent ; and that ex 
perienced in 1742, was so strong as to render the 
land for a long time barren. In the former sea- 



PUERTO-RICO. 



2-29 



son great mischief is done to the plants and fruits 
by the n. e. wind. From eight in the morning 
till four in the evening the briza prevails ; but 
from six to eight in the morning, and from four 
to six in the evening-, the heat is very intense. 

The territory, which is beautified from the va 
riety of woods, hills, valleys, and meadows, is 
extremely fertile, and abundant in wild cattle, 
the same having been first brought hither by the 
Spaniards. Through the middle of the island 
passes, from e. to a?, a chain or cordillera of moun 
tains, from which descend many rivers and streams 
which water the llanuras, causing them to be 
covered with fine pastures. The hills and skirts 
of the mountains are covered with trees fit for 
ship-building and other useful purposes ; but the 
principal productions, and which form the com 
merce of this island, are sugar, ginger, cotton, 
flax, coffee, cassia, incense, and hides, of which 
are embarked annually 2000 for Europe ; also 
mules, which are much esteemed in the islands of 
St. Domingo, Jamaica, and Santa Cruz. It also 
abounds in canajistola^ rice, maize, plantains, 
pines, oranges, citrons, lemons, calabashes, po 
tatoes, melons, and many other productions, not 
to omit fine salt. Notwithstanding all these ad 
vantages the chief use made of it by the Spa 
niards was as a place for their ships to touch at 
and take in necessaries on their passage to the 
kingdoms of Tierra Firme and Nueva Espaiia, 
and this from its favourable situation and good 
ness of its port. It was thus also that there was 
established here the office of the maritime post, 
and that it w as the place where the letters for the 
aforesaid kingdoms, and for that of Granada, are 

Eut up together. This island has few towns ; 
ut the inhabitants of them should amount to 
10,000. 

[According to Humboldt the dollars imported 
into Puerto-Rico and Cuba in 1803, amounted to 
11,000,000 ; and the exports consisted of produce 
to the value of 9,000,000 dollars. Puerto-Rico 
requires annual remittances from Mexico. The 
population of Cuba in 1804 is stated, by the same 
author, at 432,000 souls ; and Le Dru makes that 
of Puerto-Rico, in 1794, 136,000.] 

PUERTO-RICO, the capital, is the city of the 
same name, with the dedicatory title of San Juan ; 
situate in a small island on the n. side of the 
island of Puerto-Rico, and united by means of a 
causeway. The port is very large and conveni 
ent, and in it vessels, however large, may lie per 
fectly safe. This city was founded by Juan 
Ponce de Leon, in 1510. It is of an hot tempe 
rature, but abounding in vegetable productions, 



and is much frequented by vessels. It has been 
the focus of a contraband trade carried on by the 
English, French, and Dutch, with the Spaniards, 
in spite of all the laws and provisions made to the 
contrary. 

It has convents of the religious of San Fran 
cisco, and St. Domingo, a monastery of nuns, 
and two hospitals ; the one with the name of La 
Concepcion, for the sick of the inhabitants ; and 
another called San Nicholas, for the troops of the 
garrison ; also an hermitage, dedicated to Santa 
Ana. 

In the s. w. part of the city is the fort and cita 
del, called San Antonio, which at the same time 
defends and commands the city ; and at the en 
trance of the fort is another strong large castle. 
It is the head of a bishopric, suffragan to the 
archbishopric of St. Domingo, erected in 1511. 
The Senor Don Charles III. whom God pre 
serve, made it in 1766 a royal garrison, as a 
perpetual banishment to criminals, who employ 
themselves in the labours of the great works 
and fortifications which are making to render it 
impregnable. Its population is composed of 
from 400 to 500 Spaniards, exclusive of the 
people of colour and the prisoners, who form 
an immense number. 

This city has been invaded several times. The 
first by Francis Drake, who burnt all the vessels 
that were in the port ; but who, not being able 
to keep it without abandoning his schemes for the 
plundering of other ports of America, did not at 
tempt to take the place of arms. The second 
attempt was in 1598, and also by the English, 
under the Duke of Cumberland, who made him 
self master of the whole island, and had thoughts 
of retaining it, as was afterwards the case with 
the island of Jamaica; but having lost 400 men 
in the space of a month by an epidemic disorder, 
he abandoned it, carrying away 70 pieces of can 
non and great wealth. The third attempt was 
by the Dutch, who sent hither a strong squadron 
in 1615, which took and sacked the city, but 
could not reduce the castle ; and it was attacked 
a fourth time in 1742, by the English, but with 
out their being able to obtain any advantage 
whatever. 

It is the native place of Miguel Henriquez, a 
celebrated Mulatto shoemaker, whose honour 
able conduct and distinguished services done to 
the crown, and in which he spent the greater 
part of his fortune, caused great distinctions to 
be conferred upon him, and the permission to use 
the title of Don before his name, also that of 
Captain, with the use of a gold medal with the 



P U E R T O - R I C O. 



king s effigy. [This city declared on the 7th of 
December 1810, for the regency of Cadiz in Old 
Spain. See MEXICO.] It lies in lat. 18 29 



n. 



Long. 66 6 / w. 



Bishops who have presided in Puerto-Rico. 

l.*Don Alonso Manso, native of Becerril de 
Campos, collegiate of San Bartolome de Sala 
manca ; of which university he was visitor, by 
order of the tatholic king, who made him also 
magistral of that church. He was chief sacristan 
of the chapel of the prince Don Juan, bishop of 
Puerto-Rico, and first inquisitor of the New 
World, retaining the dignity of canon, which, 
however, he was afterwards ordered to resign by 
the Emperor Charles V. He returned to Spain 
on ecclesiastical matters, and these being con 
cluded, he resumed his functions. He founded 
in his native place a chapel of Nuestra Senora, 
in which mass is celebrated every Saturday ; and 
he died in 1534. 

2. Don Rodrigo Bastidas, dean of St. Do 
mingo ; elected in 1539. He came to Spain on 
church affairs, and was promoted to the bishopric 
of Venezuela, which he visited ; and from thence 
to that of Puerto-Rico in 1547 : he began the 
grand chapel of the cathedral, and died there. 

3. Don Fr. Andres de Carvajal, native of the 
town of Alcantara in Estremadura, a religious of 
the order of San Francisco, collegiate in the col 
lege of San Pedro and San Pablo in Alcala, guar 
dian of the convents of Guadalaxara and of Al 
cala ; elected bishop of Puerto-Rico, and pro 
moted from thence to the archbishopric of St. 
Domingo in 1568. 

4. Don Fr. Manuel Mercado, of the order of 
San Geronimo. He was bishop in 1570. 

5. Don Fr. Diego de Salamanca, native of 
Burgos, of the order of San Augustin, and difini- 
dor of the same order. He passed over to India 
as visitor of those provinces, returned to Spain 
upon business of the three mendicant orders, and 
was elected prior of the convent of San Felipe el 
Real in Madrid, in which employ he stood when 
King Philip II. presented him to the bishopric of 
Puerto-Rico. He laid, at his own expense, the 
steps forming the ascent to the temple, and sought 
permission of his holiness to go to Rome to com 
municate to him some grave and important mat 
ters ; the same also he requested of the king; and 
he obtained his request of both, being commanded 
to leave as vicar-general a man of good character. 
He renounced the bishopric in 1587. 

6. Don Fr. Nicolas Ramos, of the order of San 
Francisco, native of Villasaba,f the bishopric of 



Placencia, collegiate in the college of San Pedro 
de Alcala, calificador of the holy office, provincial 
of his province, a consummate theologist and 
preacher, and elected bishop of Puerto-Rico in 
1588, and thence promoted to the archbishopric 
of St. Domingo. 

7. Don Antonio Calderon, dean of the church 
of Santa Fe de Bogota, nominated bishop of 
Puerto-Rico in 1592. He passed to the bishopric 
of the church of Panama in 1597. As he was 
going to the former of these bishoprics he was 
stopped by a pirate called Santa Cruz, on the island 
of this name, and on the day of the cross ; when 
the said pirate took nothing from him but a cross 
from his breast. 

8. Don Fr. Martin Vazquez de Arce (Fr. 
Lorenzo Zamora calls him Felipe), of the order 
of St. Domingo, native of Cuzco in Peru, colle 
giate and rector in the college of Santo Tomas de 
Sevilla, lecturer of arts and theology in the con 
vent of Granada, prior in those of Osuna and 
Cordoba, and master in his religion : elected to 
the bishopric of Puerto-Rico, and promoted from 
this see to that of Truxillo in 1616. 

9. Don Fr. Alonso de Monrov, of the order 
of La Merced, native of Sevilla, in which con 
vent he was comendador, as also in the convents 
of Burgos, Valladolid, and Toledo ; provincial 
of Andalucia, and visitor-general of the provinces 
of Peru. He repaired the cloisters of the con 
vent of Sevilla and the great chapel, adorning it 
with pictures and a silver lamp, and endowing it 
with a real of 400 ducats, and dedicating it to 
N uestra Senora. He also obtained of the Pope 
the same indulgences to this convent as those en 
joyed by the Basilican of San Juan de Letran in 
Rome. He was elected general of his order, in 
which he ever paid great respect to letters and 
virtue. The king, Philip III., presented him 
to the bishopric of Puerto-Rico, but before he 
received the bulls he died. 

10. Don Fr. Pedro Solier, of the order of San 
Agustin, native of Barajas ; elected bishop of 
Puerto-Rico in 1616, and promoted from thence 
to St. Domingo in 1619. 

11. Don Bernardo de Balbuena, native of Val- 
depenas in the archbishopric of Toledo. He 
studied and graduated as doctor in the university 
of Sigiienza, named abbot of Jamaica in 1608, 
and in 1620 bishop of Puerto-Rico, of which he 
took possession at the end of the year 1623. He 
Was an excellent preacher, celebrated a synod, 
and assisted at the provincial council at St. Do 
mingo : he died in 1627, leaving his estate to the 
cathedral, that on it might be built a chapel de- 



PUERTO-RICO. 



231 



dicated to San Bernardo, and leaving as an en 
dowment a lamp which was to burn the whole 
year round, and where the first Sunday of the 
month a mass might be said for the welfare of 
his soul, and another on the day of San Bernard, 
with a sermon and vespers. He wrote the poems 
entitled, " El Bernardo, El Siglo de Oro, and the 
Description of Puerto-Rico," in verse; all works 
of great merit. 

12. Don Juan Lopez Agurto de la Mata, na 
tive of Mexico, professor in its university, canon 
in that holy church, and doctor in that of La 
Puebla de los Angeles. The king, Philip IV., 
presented him to the bishopric of Puerto-Rico in 
1630, and when he received the account in the 
island of Teneriffe (of which place some will 
have him to be native), he was performing great 
acts of goodness and charity : he was promoted 
to the mitre of Venezuela in 1634. 

13. Don Fr. Juan Alonso de Solis, native of 
Salamanca. He was married, paid great atten 
tion to the study of philosophy and theology, and 
on the death of his wife, resigning the titles of his 
house, he took the habit of a religious Carmelite 
in the convent of San Andres de Salamanca; was 
master in theology, a good preacher, and of an 
excellent memory ; difinidor in his province, prior 
of the convent of San Silvestre de A vila, and pre 
sented to the bishopric of Puerto-Rico in 1635 : 
he governed till 1641, when he died ; having been 
extremely charitable, and having confirmed 
10,000 Indians. 

14. Don Fr. Damian Lopez de Aro, of the 
order of La Santisima Trinidad, native of To 
ledo. He studied in the convent of Salamanca, 
was master in theology, preacher-general in his 
province, calificador of the supreme council of 
inquisition, minister in the convents of Guardia, 
Zimora, Arevalo, Cuenca, Talaverade la Reyna, 
and twice in Madrid. In the first he made the 
cloister and erected the belfry, and rebuilt the 
sanctuary of the Santo Nino Inocente ; and in 
all the other places he performed works which 
reflected great light upon his charity : also in the 
convent of Madrid he paid off a debt of 20,000 
ducats, at the same time augmenting the estate ; 
he formed a library, and the garden, with the 
fish-ponds and fountains, and left already laid 
the foundations for an hospital, infirmary, and 
house for novices. He established the congrega 
tion of Santo Christo de la Fe, built its chapel, 
and brought thither its image with great solem 
nity. He was visitor and difinidor of his province, 
and redeemed and ransomed captives in Argel 
to the number of 200. He was commissary and 



visitor-apostolic of the province of Andalucia, 
preacher to King Philip IV., and, finding him 
self on the visitation of the convent of Toledo, 
received the cedulc for the bishopric of Puerto- 
Rico. In 1643 he entered his church, and in the 
following year celebrated orders and a synod. 
He made the visitation amongst the faithful, 
printed a treatise with the title of " Donativo 
Real," and two excellent sermons : he died in 
1618. 

15. Don Fr. Bartolome de Escaiiuela, of the 
order of San Francisco ; elected in 1657 : he 
passed to Durango in 1676. 

16. Don Juan de Santiago Garavito, native of 
the town of La Palma in Andalucia, collegiate- 
major of Cuenca in the city of Salamanca, pro 
fessor of philosophy in that university, magis 
terial-canon of Badajoz ; elected in 1676, and 
promoted the following year to the church of 
Guadalaxara. 

17. Don Fr. Francisco de Padilla, of the order 
of La Merced, native of Lima. 

18. Don Fr. Geronimo Valdes, of the order 
of San Basilic, master in theology, calificador of 
the holy office of inquisition, synodical-examiner 
of the archbishopric of Toledo, a subject of credit 
and literature ; elected bishop of Puerto-Rico in 
1703, and promoted to that of Cuba in 1706. 

19. Don Fr. Pedro de la Concepcion y Urtiga, 
of the order of San Francisco ; elected in 1706. 

20. Don Fr. Fernando de Valdivia, of the 
order of San Agustin, of the province of Anda 
lucia ; elected in 1717. 

21. Don /V. Sebastian Pizarro, of the order of 
San Basilio, preacher to his majesty, abbot and 
provincial of his religion in the province of Cas- 
tilla in 1736. 

22. Don Fr. Francisco de Bejar y Segura, na 
tive of Madrid, of the order of San Basilio, master 
of theology, thrice difinidor of the province of 
Castilla, commissary-provincial, four times abbot 
of the colleges of Salamanca, Alcala, and Madrid, 
and a public writer ; elected bishop in 1743, and 
he died in 1745. 

23. Don Francisco Xavier Gomez de Cervan 
tes, prebendary of Mexico, provisor and vicar- 
general of that bishopric; elected bishop of 
Puerto-Rico in 1745, and he died in 1747. 

24. Don Francisco Julian Antolino, native of 
Zamora, an excellent theologist, curate of his 
native place, canon-penitentiary of the church of 
Badajos ; nominated bishop in 1748, and pro 
moted to Caracas in 1753. 

25. Don Andres de Arce y Miranda, native of 
Huejozingo in Nueva Espaila, canon of La Pu- 



:&amp;gt;32 



PUG 



t&amp;gt;bla de los Angeles ; he was elected bishop of 
Puerto-Rico in 1754, and died in the following 
year. 

26. Don Pedro Martinez de Oneca, who was 
canon and provisor of the bishoprics of Balbas- 
tros, Placencia, and Tarazona ; elected to Pu 
erto-Rico in 1756, and he died in 1760. 

27. Don Mariano Marti, of the principality of 
Cataluiia, doctor in canons at the university of 
Cervera, provisor and vicar-general of the arch 
bishopric of Tarragona in 1761 ; promoted to 
Caracas in 1770. 

28. Don Joseph Duarte Buron, in 1770 : he 
died a few days after. 

29. Don Fr. Manuel Ximenez Perez, in 1771 ; 
he died in 1782. 

30. Don Felipe Joseph de Tres Palacios, na 
tive of Aviles in the bishopric of Oviedo, canon 
of the church of St. Domingo, and elected bishop 
of Puerto-Rico in 1784. 

[PUERTO, SANTO, an island on the coast of 
Peru, a league w. n. w. of the port and city of 
Santo or Santa, nearly opposite to the port of 
Ferrol, a league distant w. and nine n. w. of Gua- 
nape Island. J 

PUERTO SEGURO. See PORTO SEGURO. 

PUERTO VIEJO, a district and jurisdiction 
of the province and government of Guayaquil 
in the kingdom of Quito ; one of the six which 
compose it, and of the greatest extent of any, 
since it is in length 24 leagues, and in breadth 
18 : bounded on the side of the coast by the set 
tlement of Canoa, of the province of Esmeraldas, 
and by the inaccessible mountains of Tosagua, 
the same being covered with the finest and 
largest trees, such as amarillos, colorados, figue- 
roas, mulberry-trees and laurels, the latter as 
large as the trees called de maria^ and of the 
same strength, and not so heavy for timbers of 
vessels. 

This district is watered by rivers flowing down 
from the mountains, and called Grande and 
Chico. The same fertilize the large gardens 
found on the shores of each, as also the fruit- 
orchards and plantations of plantains, cocos, 
and tobacco, this being of the best quality of any 
in the province, as having been planted from the 
seed of the island of Trinidad. These estates 
also abound in yucas, mani, and other produc 
tions peculiar to the country. 

This territory yields 70,000 Ibs. of wax an 
nually, 80,000 bundles of tobacco, 4000 Ibs. of 
thread of pita, 1000 Ibs. of zarzaparilla ; and 
the natives make sashes, garters, and other ma 
nufactures of cotton, cords of cabuya, which they 



manufacture of the threads produced from the 
wild thistle of maguey ; and these threads being 
prepared by exposure to the sun, rain, and 
air, they twist and make of as strong contex 
ture as is the thread of hemp. They also weave 
hammocks and a sort of saddle-bags from reeds, 
which they here call linches. Here also they 
gather plentiful crops of a fungus of ceibo and 
quiriqua, two sorts of trees. The fungus of the 
former is from the flower, which is of great 
whiteness, and as soft as silk, and so spongy 
that it serves to fill mattresses without the in 
convenience of becoming matted, and so clean 
is it and open, as not to be affected or rotted by 
moisture ; although that if it be from time to 
time exposed to the dry air and sun, it becomes 
more open, and has a better chance of remaining 
sweet. The other wool is found in some round 
knobs, somewhat larger than the young almond, 
growing upon the tree ; the wood of which tree 
is as good as ebony, and in the cavities of the 
trunk of which tree lies the wool, as fine as that 
of the vicuna, of the same colour, and of greater 
ductility ; so much so, that a piece contained in 
one knob may be spread over the whole hand : 
it is with this valuable material that they stuff 
pillows, saddles, and, as a branch of trade, it 
affords a greater profit than any other article 
sold in these parts. This district contains 4000 
inhabitants, namely, 2000 Indians, 500 Spani 
ards, and 1500 Mitstees^ divided into the follow 
ing settlements : 

Manto, Jipijapa, 

Pichota, Piocaza, 

Monte Christi, Charapoto, 

and the capital, which is the settlement of the 
same, with dedicatory title of San Gregorio, and 
which was formerly the capital of the whole pro 
vince, as being one of the first establishments 
formed there, and built upon the sea shore, 
four leagues from where it at present stands ; 
having been translated to this spot in 1628, after 
that it was sacked by the English pirate, Jacob 
Hermit Clerk. It is in a beautiful plain, irri 
gated by two rivers, the Chico and Grande, and 
is very abundant in fruits. [It is 75 miles n. n. w. 
of Guyaquil, in lat. 1 2 / s. and long. 80 10 a?.] 
PUES, a settlement of the province and go 
vernment of Cartagena, in the Nuevo Reyno de 
Granada, between the sea-coast and the river 
Cauca, to the w. of the town of San Benito 
Abad. 

PUGNICO, a settlement of Indians of Nova 
Scotia in N. America, on the w. coast, near Cape 
Sable, 



P U L 



P U IN 



PUICO, a settlement of the district of Conde- 
suyos del Cuzco in Peru. 

PUIS, a settlement of the province and go 
vernment of Choco in the Nuevo Reyno de Gra 
nada, and of the district of Barbacoas, on the 
shore of the river Telembi. 

PUJILLI, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Tacunga in the kingdom of 
Quito ; celebrated as being the place where they 
fabricate jars, pitchers, pans, and other earthen 
vessels, in a very nice manner ; thus providing 
with these necessary articles the other provinces. 
Fourteen leagues from Quito. 

PUJIRRI, a river of the kingdom of Chile, 
which runs w. and enters the Valdivia. 

PULACU, a river of the province of Loca in 
the kingdom of Quito, in the n. n. e. part. It 
runs s. and by the n. enters the Zamora, in lat. 
3 55 s. 

PULARES, GRAXDE, a settlement of the pro 
vince and government of Tucuman in Peru, be 
longing to the district and jurisdiction of the city 
of Salta, and annexed to the curacy of the settle 
ment of Chiquiana. 

PULARES, another settlement in this province, 
with the addition of Chico, to distinguish it from 
the former, annexed to the same curacy as that. 

PULARES, another, with the surname of Lara, 
also of the same province and curacy. 

PULARES, a mountain of the same province, 
in the valley of Calchaqui, where there is a rich 
silver mine. 

PULARO, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Tacunga in the kingdom of 
Quito. 

PULCHES, a barbarous nation of Indians, of 
the kingdom of Chile, to the e. of the city of Vil- 
larica. They dwell in the woods at the the foot 
of the mountains of the Andes, and maintain them 
selves by the chase. 

PULGAR, a settlement of the province and 
government of Santa Marta in the Nuevo Reyna 
de Granada, on the shore and at the source of 
the river Guazos, and at the foot of the sierra of 
Perija. 

PULLO, a settlement of the province and 
eorregimiento of Parinacochas in Peru. 

PU LIN BAR A, a settlement of the province 

and government of Popayan in the Nuevo Reyno 
j /-i i 
de (jrranada. 

PULPITO, a point of land in a circular form, 
on the coast of the Gulf of California ; where 
there is a mountain of that figure, that is resem 
bling a pulpit, on the side of the Bay of Comondu. 

VOL. IV. 



PULUHIA, a settlement of Indians of the 
kingdom of Chile, on the shore of the river So 
li vinokou. 

PUMACA, a settlement of the province and 
government of Jaen de Bracamoros in the king 
dom of Quito, on the shore of the river Si- 
manchi. 

PUMACHUCO, a settlement of the province 
and corregimiento of Guanuco in Peru, annexed 
to the curacy of Santa Maria del Valle. 

PUMA-COCHA. See POMA-COCHA. 

PUMAGUAY, a settlement of the province 
and government of Tucuman in Peru, belonging 
to the district and jurisdiction of the city of 
Xuxuy, on the shore of the river Laquiaca. 

PUMALLACTA. See POMA-LLACTA. 

PUMANQUE, a settlement of the province 
and corregimiento of Colchagua in the kingdom 
of Chile ; on the shore of the river Bichuquen. 

PUMA-TAMPU, an ancient province of Peru, 
to the w. of Cuzco; conquered and united to the 
empire of the Incas by Mayta Capac, fourth em 
peror. It is at the present day confounded with 
other provinces. 

PUMPU, or BOMBON, an ancient province of 
Peru, comprehended in that of Tarma and part 
of that of Guanuco. It was one of those con 
quered by Pachacutec, tenth emperor of Peru. 
The inhabitants, who were called Pumpus, were 
very warlike, and made a great resistance against 
that prince. 

PUNA, an island of the S. Sea, in the middle 
of the Gulf of Guayaquil. In the e. part, and at 
the entrance of the port, its length is from seven 
to eight leagues from s. w. to n. e. and its width 
from three to four from s. e. to n. w. It is of a 
quadrilong figure, and was the head seat of the 
province in the beginning of its establishment ; 
and the first Spaniard who entered it was Fran 
cisco Pizarro, in 1530. It was then commanded 
by Tomala, the principal cacique and lord of the 
natives, with which it was well peopled. After 
wards was added to its jurisdiction the settlement 
of Tumbez, until the same was assigned by the 
viceroy Don Francisco de Toledo to the territory 
of the corregimiento of Piura : Puna w r as then, 
from its being in the vicinity of Guayaquil, an 
nexed as to its government with the settlements 
of Machala and Naranjal ; and through this 
runs the river Suva, which flows down from the 
sierra of Atuncanar of the province of Cuenca, 
and empties itself into the port in sight of the 
island of which we treat ; and it is by this river 
that the trade of the two provinces is carried on, 

H II 



234 



PUN 



and an interchange of their productions easily 
effected even during the winter : for the river is 
navigable for oared-boats until that it becomes 
united with the two rivers called Taura and Ba- 
lao ; from the mouths of which the navigation is 
performed by sails. They have there also a me 
thod of adding to the vessel a false keel, which 
secures it from what the sailors term capsizing ; 
and they likewise use an extraordinary kind of 
helm, which they call guare, not known in any 
other part, the same being made of a junction of 
five boards, each of live yards long, and half a 
yard wide ; and which being introduced into the 
water at mid-ships, answers the purpose of the 
regular helm, and is easily governed by a thin 
cane, thus enabling the vessel to stem without 
danger the whirlpools of the rivers and the roll 
ing- of the sea, although it is not unfrequently 
that it be loaded with from 200 to 300 arrobas, 
in sacks of flour, packages of linens and baizes, 
and chests of conserves and native fruits. 

[The method of adding false keels to vessels 
has been lately illustrated in this kingdom by 
the ingenuity of Sir Sydney Smith, as in the cases 
of the Milbrook and Netley schooners. We are 
creditably informed, that the Spaniards, who saw 
these vessels, called them the " Dev il with three 
tails."] 

The island of Puna was peopled with 20,000 
Indians, and, in 1734, by the census then taken, 
there were to be found no more than 96. This 
falling-off is generally attributed to the severity 
of the climate, and the prevalence of the small-pox 
and measles. But these Indians are exempt from 
personal service, and, therefore, notwithstanding 
what has been said of the climate, their own ac 
count of their decrease is most worthy belief; 
and that is, that the motive of their extinction 
arises from the visible chastisement of Divine 
JustJfe; for when that having relapsed into their 
errors of idolatry, the bishop of Truxillo had 
come amongst them to call them back to the fold, 
they put him to an ignominious death by poison; 
and, after having buried his body, dug it up, pu 
rified it from corruption by tobacco, and de 
voured it according to the barbarous customs 
which prevailed in the time of their earliest gen- 
tilism. 

The productions of this island are now re 
duced yearly to 6000 strait sticks of mangrove- 
trees for the manufactories of Peru, 15,000 loads 
of cacao, 200 arrobas of dried fish, by which the 
inhabitants maintain themselves ; though not 
than by supplying 1 with meat those vessels 



P U N 

which touch at the port of this island, and do 
not come close up to the city. They also derive 
some profit by careening- large vessels, which lie 
here for this operation, in preference of hazard 
ing- a passage through the shoals to the dock up 
the river. It has no other settlements than that 
of its own name, and those of Machala and Na- 
ranjal already named. The port is eight leagues 
from the city, in long. 70 58 w. lat. 2 50 *. 

PUNA, the principal settlement or capital of 
the district, in which resides the lieutenant no 
minated through the governor. It is of an hot 
climate, poor and nearly depopulated. 

PUNAMA, -a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Larecaxa in Peru, annexed to 
the curacy of Ambanii. 

PUNAN, SAN GERONIMO DE, a settlement 
of the province and corregimiento of Guarochiri 
in Peru, annexed to the curacy of Santa Olaya. 

PUNAQUEHUAR, a settlement of the pro 
vince and corregimiento of Quispicanchi in Peru; 
in which there is an image of Nuestra Seiiora do 
la Purih cacion, held in great devotion. 

PUNATA, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Cochabamba in the same king 
dom as the former, and of the bishopric of Santa 
Cruz de la Sierra ; where there is a celebrated 
sanctuary dedicated to Nuestra Seiiora, with the 
dedicatory title of Bella. 

PUNCERES, a settlement of the province 
and government of Cumana, in the interior of 
the serrania, and one of those of the missions 
which are held in that province by the Aragonese 
Capuchin fathers : on the shore of a small river 
which enters the Guarapiche. 

PUN GALA, a settlement of the province and 
government of Riobamba in the kingdom of 
Quito ; on the shore and to the e. of the river 
Guamoco, and s. e. of that of Llicto. It is very 
fertile, and its territory is pleasant : in lat. I 50 ,s. 

PUNGARAVATO, a settlement of the head 
settlement of the district and alcaldia mayor of 
Guimeo in Nueva Espana. It contains 135 fa 
milies of Indians, and in its district are four 
estates witli 34 Spaniards and Musiees, who ga 
ther in abundance cotton and cascalote, which is 
the principal ingredient for the tanning and dying 
leather, and which, mixed with copperas, makes 
the most perfect black, for which reason it is an 
herb most necessary in tanneries. Five leagues 
n. of its capital. 

PUNG [JEO, a settlement of the alcaldia mayor 
of Cinaqua in Nueva Espana. It is of an hot 
and dry temperature, and its population consist* 



P TJ N 

of 32 families of Indians, who trade in large 
cattle, wax, and maize : is 47 leagues s. e. of its 
capital. 

PUNI, a settlement of the province and cor 
regimicnto of Riobamba in the kingdom of Quito. 

PUNILLA, a settlement of the province and 
government of Tucuman in the district and ju 
risdiction of the city of Cordoba. 

PUNIQUITA, a settlement of the province 
and government of Popayan in the Nuevo Reyno 
de Granada. 

[PUNJO Bay, in East Florida. See CHAT 
HAM BAY.] 

PUNO, SAN CARLOS DE, a small town and 
capital of the province and corregimiento of Pau- 
carcolla in Peru, from the year 1686 until that 
it was demolished by the revolutions arising from 
the celebrated gold mines. It was then called 
San Juan Baptista, and now stands on the shore 
of the great lake of Titicaca, which causes it to 
be unhealthy. It is extremely rich and well- 
peopled, and contains some illustrious families. 
It has two parishes ; one for the Spaniards, the 
other for the Indians. The first is very hand 
some, and was endowed by a rich inhabitant, 
who was master of some mines. These mines, 
which are the richest of any in Peru, used to 
yield the parties concerned above 50,000 dollars 
to each annually. At the present day the mining 
is abandoned owing to the death of the aforesaid 
patron, whose name was San Roman, and who 
was universally lamented : 14 miles n. zo. from 
the city of Chucuito, in lat. 16 24 5. 

PUNOS, a settlement of the province and cor 
regimiento of Guamalies in Peru, annexed to the 
curacy of Llacta. 

PUNO VIS, a barbarous nation of Indians of 
the province and country of Las Amazonas, who 
dwell in the woods near this river in the s.- parts. 
They are descended from the Burais, by whom 
they are bounded on the to. They are but little 
known. 

PUNRUN, a large lake of Peru, in the pro 
vince of Tarma. Its length is three leagues, 
and its width two ; and from it rises the river 
Huambra, which afterwards enters the Paria. 

PUNSEGUA, a settlement of the province 
and government of Cartagena in the Nuevo 
Reyno de Granada : situate in one of the islands 
formed by the river Cauca near the town of 
Mompox. 

PUNTA, S. JUAN DE LA, a settlement of the 
head settlement of the district of Huatuzco and 
alcaldia mayor of Cordoba in Nueva Espana : it 
contains 26 families of Indians, and in some of 



PUN 



235 



the farms of its district assist some other 10 Spa 
niards, seven Mustees, and eight Mulattoes : five 
leagues e. s. e. of its capital. 

PUNTA, another settlement in the district of 
Santa Elena, of the province and government of 
Guayaquil, in the kingdom of Quito. It is situ 
ate on the coast, and has a good port, and one 
which is convenient and frequented by vessels 
carrying on illicit trade : it is the general resi 
dence of the lieutenant of the district. 

PUNTA, another, (with the surname of NE- 
GRA) of the province and corregimicnto of Copi- 
apo in the kingdom of Chile ; situate near the 
coast and the river Mamas. In the 5. part, and 
near to it, are the gold mines of Jesus Maria 
and Maray, and further on, nearly in the same 
rhumb, the mine of Monte Blanco. 

PUNTA, another, of the missions, which are 
held by the religious of San Francisco in the 
Nuevo Reyno de Leon. 

PUNT A, another, which is iheasicnto of the silver 
mines in the province and correginriento of Piura 
in Peru ; annexed to the curacy of its capital. 

PUNTA, another, with the dedicatory title of 
San Juan: called also De los Ingenios ; in the 
province and corregimiento of Sana, of the same 
kingdom as the kingdom. 

PUNTA, a city, with the dedicatory of San Luis. 
See LOYOLA. 

PUNTA, an island, in the province and corrc 
gimiento of Cuyo in the kingdom of Chile. 

[PUNTA Fort, one of the largest batteries or 
castles, and the second in order, at the mouth 
of the harbour of the Havannah in the Island of 
Cuba. It is also called Mesa de Maria, or the 
Virgin Mary s Table.] 

[PuNTA,and PUNTA BRAVA, towns of Mexico. 
See ANGELOS.] 

[PUNTA DE PIEDRAS, a cape on the n. w. ex 
tremity of the peninsula of Yucatan, in New 
Spain.] 

[PUNTA, ESPADA, the s. e. point of the island 
of St. Domingo ; 65 leagues, following the turn 
ings of the coast, e. of Nisao, and 16 from Cape 
Raphael. The s. e. part of the island consists 
chiefly of extensive rich plains.] 

[PUNTA, GORDA, a peninsula on the s. side 
of the island of Cuba, n. n. e. of Isle de Pinos.] 

[PUNTA, NEGRILLO, the a?, point of the island 
of Jamaica.] 

[PfNTA. See POINT.] 

PUNTAL, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Pasto, in the kingdom of Quito. 

PIJNTAS, CABO DE TRES, the e. extremity of 
the coast in the province and government of Cu- 

H H2 



236 



PUR 



mana. It is of the form of a T ; the superior 
part, or line, of which has three points ; and by 
the w. it forms the Gulf of Cumana, or Cariaco, 
the boundary of which is the point of Araya ; and 
by the e. is the Gulf Daria ending at the Point 
Paria, or Pina. 

PUNT AS, another cape, on the coast of the 
province and government of Honduras, between 
the gulf of this name and that of Triumfo de la 
Cruz : at the back of it, and in the bay to the 
s. s. e. where stands the settlement of Santo To- 
mas de Castilla, is the anchorage for the register- 
ships coming to this province. 

PUNTAS, a mountain thus called, also on the 
s. coast of the Straits of Magellan. It is an 
isle at the mouth of the canal of Santa Barbara. 

PUNTOS, SIERRA DE LOS QUINCE, in the 
province and government of Paraguay. 

PUNTOS, a river of the province and corregi- 
miento of Coquimbo in the kingdom of Chile, 
which runs nearly n. 

PUNUNU, a river of the province and go 
vernment of Quixos and Macas in the kingdom 
of Quito. It runs from n. c. to s. w. 18 leagues, 
and afterwards enters by the e. part into the 
Payamino, in lat. 46 s. 

PUNUTUN, a settlement of the province 
and corregimiento of Quillota in the kingdom of 
Chile, situate on the shore of the river of this 
name. 

PUPA, SAN FRANCISCO DE, a fort of the 
province and government of Florida, on the 
shore of the grand river of San Mateo. 

PUPIALES, a settlement of the province and 
government of Pasto in the kingdom of Quito. 

PUPUI, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Coquimbo in the kingdom of 
Chile, situate on the shore of the river Con 
cha! i. 

PUQUINA, a settlement of the province and 
eorregimiento of Moquehua in Peru. 

PUQUIOS, a settlement of the province and 
rorregimiento of Copiapo in the kingdom of Chile, 
situate between the river Castano and that of 
Chimiral. 

PURACE, a settlement of the province and 
government of Popayan in the Nuevo Reyno de 
Granada, situate near its capital to the e. 

PURAPEL, a small river of the kingdom of 
Chile, which runs s. and turning e. enters the 
Longomillas. 

PURARA, a settlement of the province and 
corrrgimiento of Caxamarquilla in Peru. 

PURASICAS, a barbarous nation of Indians 
of the province and government of Los Chiquitos : 



PUR 

bounded n. by those of the Borilos ; and all that 
is known of them is, that they are very warlike 
and numerous. 

PURBACHI, a settlement of the missions 
which were held by the Jesuits in the province 
of Taraumara and kingdom of Nueva V izcaya. 
It is 29 leagues s. one quarter to w. of the real of 
mines and town of San Felipe de Chiguagua. 

PUREI, a settlement of the province of Bar 
celona, and government of Cumana, on the coast. 

PUREN, a large settlement and fortified place 
of the kingdom of Chile, erected against the Arau- 
canos Indians, who besieged and destroyed it in 
1723. It was rebuilt in 1730, and has a guard of 
Spanish troops. 

PUREN, a lake of this kingdom, in the country 
and territory of the Araucanos Indians, and where 
these have always proved themselves invincible 
against the Spaniards. It is formed of the two 
rivers Curarahua and Eyoa, which afterwards 
run to enter the Imperial. 

PUREN, a large, fertile, and beautiful valley 
of the same kingdom ; celebrated for the battles 
fought there between the Spaniards and the 
Araucanians ; and it has been the theatre of the 
most glorious exploits. 

PURI, a settlement of the province and go 
vernment of Darien in the kingdom of Tierra 
Firme ; on the coast of the S. Sea, to the w. of 
the real of the gold mines of Santa Maria, a small 
river running between. 

PURIBI, a port of the river Poumaron in the 
province and government of Guayana, and that 
part possessed by the Dutch. 

PURICA, SIERRA DE. Some mountains of 
the province and government of Sonora in N. 
America. 

PURICOSA, a river of the province and go 
vernment of Jaen de Bracamoros in the kingdom 
of Quito ; which runs parallel to that of the Iram- 
bisa, and enters the Santiago. 

PURIFICACION, NUESTRA SENORA BE LA, 
a town of the province and government of Neiva 
in the Nuevo Reyno de Granada. It is of a very 
hot temperature, produces in abundance cacao, 
sugar canes, maize, yucas, and plantains ; and 
has many gold mines, which are worked, and fa- 
raderos of the same metal in the rivers of Sal- 
dana, Cuello, and Magdalena. It lias also large 
breeds of neat cattle and swine, of which great 
numbers are sent to Cartagena, Santa Fe, Honda, 
and Mompox. The natives, who amount to .500, 
are savage and uncouth, and are therefore called 
lanudos, at Cartagena and the other settlements 
of the coast ; the same name being also given to 



PUR 

the other natives of this province. It is much 
infested with insects, and particularly with that 
called the cot/a. Halfway between the cities of 
Neiva and Tocaima. 

PURIF ic ACION, a settlement of the head settle 
ment of the district and alcaldia mayor of Tez- 
coco in Nueva Espana ; between two lofty moun 
tains. It contains 280 families of Indians, who 
live by the trade of cutting wood and making 
charcoal to carry it in canoes to Mexico. One 
league e. of its capital, on the shore of the lake, 
between the rivers Papalotla and Tezcoco. 

PURIFICACION, another, of the head settle 
ment of the district, and alcaldia mayor of Teoti- 
huacan in the same kingdom. Half a league s. 
of its capital. 

PURIFIC ACION, another, of the head settle 
ment and alcaldia mayor of Tepeaca in the same 
kingdom. It contains 27 Indian families, and is 
one league from its capital. 

PURIFICACION, a settlement of the province 
and government of Venezuela in the Nuevo 
Reyno de Granada; near the coast of the river 
Ipire, on the shore of the lake Unare. 

PURIO, a river of the province and govern 
ment of Veragua in the kingdom of Tierra 
Firme. It rises in the mountains of the s. part, 
and enters the Pacific, opposite the island of 
Iguanas. 

PURISBURG. [See PURYSBURG.] 

PURNIO, a settlement of the government of 
Mariquita, and jurisdiction of the town of Honda 
in the Nuevo Reyno de Granada. It is a collec 
tion of all kinds of people, on the shore of the 
grand river Magdalena, a little below that town; 
of a very hot and sickly temperature, and un 
pleasant to dwell in, from the abundance of long- 
legged mosquitoes, and short-legged gnats. It 
has some gold mines, although they be but little 
worked, and abounds in cacao, sugar canes, and 
other productions of a warm climate. 

PURU, or GONIPAPE, a river of the province 
and country of Las Amazonas, or part of Gua- 
vana, possessed by the Portuguese. It rises un 
der the equinoctial line, in the country of the 
Tueres Indians, runs s. s. e. and enters the river 
of Las Amazonas, between that of Jagarape and 
that of Urubacuara. 

PURLJAI, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Conchucos in. Peru ; annexed to 
the curacy of Sihuas, of an extremely hot tem 
perature. 

PURUAI, a river of this province and kingdom, 
which rises near the settlement of Miraflores, 
runs n. and enters the Maranon. 



P U R 



237 



PURUANDIRO, S. JUAN DE, a principal 
and head settlement of the district of the alcaldia 
mayor of Valladolid, in the province and bishop 
ric of Mechoaciin ; situate at the foot of the sierra 
of this name, of a mild temperature; 24 leagues 
distant from its capital, Pasquaro, by the n.; and 
its jurisdiction is divided from that of the town 
of Leon, by the limits described, by an abundant 
river which rises in the jurisdiction of Metepec, 
and which runs into other provinces. It con 
tains 27 families of Spaniards, three of Mulattoes, 
and 131 of Indians, who live by the cultivation 
and tanning of leather. 

PURUA YES, an ancient nation of Indians of 
the kingdom of Quito, 5. of the province of Rio- 
bamba. They have always been warlike, bold, 
and of a subtle disposition, and have formed some 
settlements. 

PURUCHUCU, a settlement of the province 
and corregimiento of Canta in Peru ; annexed 
to the curacy of Guamantanga. 

PURUEI, a small river of the province and 
government of Guayana or Nueva Andalucia, 
which runs nearly n. and enters the Orinoco to 
the e. of the mouth of the abundant Caura. 

PURUGOTOS, a barbarous nation of infidel 
Indians, of the province and country of Guayana 
or Nueva Andalucia, who dwell near the shore 
of the Orinoco ; nothing more being known of 
them. 

PURUMAUCA, an ancient province of the 
kingdom of Chile ; bounded n. by the province 
of Coquimbo. Its natives put a check to the 
conquests of Inca Yupanqui, and gave him a 
bloody contest, which lasted three successive 
days, obliging him to retire, and to limit his do 
minions on the s. part of the river Maule. 

PURLIN, a lake of the province and corregi 
miento of Canta in Peru; on the shore of the 
river Pari. In it are some salines, in which is 
found abundance of salt. 

PURUNCHEQUARO, SAN GERONIMO DE, 
a settlement of the head settlement of the dis 
trict of Cocupao, and alcaldia mayor of Vallado 
lid, in the province and bishopric of Mechoacan, 
very near a lake. It contains 35 families of In 
dians, applied to fishing and agriculture. One 
league r0. of its head settlement. 

PURUPII, a settlement of the province and 
captainship of Seregipe in Brazil; on the shore of 
the river Grande de San Francisco ; near its en 
trance into the sea. 

PCJR US, a large and abundant river of the 
kingdom of Brazil. It runs from s. to n. through 
woods and unknown countries to the s. of the 



P U Y 



Maranon, into which it enters, between theCoari 
and the Madera, by four mouths. It is naviga 
ble, and in the woods of its borders dwell many 
infidel Indians. It laves the territory of the 
Portuguese of Para, and its principal mouth is in 
lat. 3 38 s. 

PURUTUN, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Quillota in the kingdom of Chile. 
In its district is a copper-mine. 

[PURYSBURGH, a handsome town of S. Ca 
rolina ; situate in Beaufort District, on the c. side 
of Savannah River, 23 miles from the ocean, and 
19 from the town of Savannah. It contains be 
tween 40 and 50 dwelling-houses, and an Epis 
copal church. It took its name from John Peter 
Pury, a Swiss, who settled a colony of his coun 
trymen here about the year 1733, with a view to 
the culture of silk. The mulberry trees are yet 
standing, and some attention is still paid to the 
making of silk.] 

PUSI, a settlement of the province and corre- 
gimiento of Asangaro in Peru. It has a fountain 
or stream of water, which, being left undisturbed, 
has an oil floating upon it, which is used for 
burning. It is situate on the shore of the lake 
of Chucuito. 

PUTAENDO, a large, beautiful, and fertile 
valley, of the province and corregimiento of Quil 
lota, in the same kingdom as the former river. 

PUTAGAN, a river of the province and cor 
regimiento of Maule in the kingdom of Chile. 
It runs s. s. e. and enters the Longomilla. 

[PUTAWATAMES, or POUTOOTAMIES, In 
dians, who inhabit between St. Joseph s and De 
troit, and can furnish about 500 warriors. There 
are two tribes of this name, the one of the river 
of St. Joseph, and the other of Huron. They 
were lately hostile : but at the treaty of Green 
ville, August 3, 1795, they ceded lands to the 
United States ; who in return paid them a sum 
in hand, and engaged to pay them in goods to the 
value of 1000 dollars a year for ever.] 

PUTES, a settlement of the province and go 
vernment of Popayan in the Nuevo Reyno de 
Granada; w. of the river Rumichaca, and s. of 
the Ibis, in lat. 55 n. 

PUTICA, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Vilcas Huaman in Peru ; an 
nexed to the curacy of Cangallo. 

PUTINA, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Asangaro, in the same kingdom 
as the former ; annexed to the curacy of the set 
tlement of Chupa ; on the shore of the lake Chu 
cuito. 

PUTINSA, a settlement of the province and 



corregimiento of Yauyos, in the same kingdom 39 
the former ; annexed to the curacy of Pampas. 

[PUTNEY, a thriving town in Windham 
County, Vermont ; on the w. side of Connecticut 
River, s. of Westminster. Inhabitants 1848.] 

PUTUGANTI, a river of the province and 
government of Darien in the kingdom of Tierra 
Firme. It rises in the mountains of the n. part, 
and enters the sea to the w. of the island of 
Pinos. 

PUTUMAYO, a large, abundant, and navi 
gable river, called also Iza, of the kingdom of 
Nueva de Granada. It rises in the serranias of 
the province of Pasto to the e. and to the w. 
of Sibundoy. It runs more than 300 leagues 
from n, n. w. to ,&amp;lt;?. s. e. collecting in its course 
the waters of more than 30 other rivers ; the 
principal of which are, the San Pedro, Guinchoa, 
Plato Vides, Quino, Pischilin, Yaca, Guames, S. 
Miguel, and an arm of the Great Caqueta. Its 
shores were peopled with many nations of infidel 
Indians, called Yurunas, Guaticus, Yacatiguaros, 
Parianas, Ziyus, Atucais, Cunas, and Oma- 
guaisietes, which means true Omaguayes. The 
greater part of these have retired to the woods, 
where the religious of S. Francisco of the pro 
vince of Quito have established some missions 
for their conversion. This river carries along 
with its currents much gold from the mines 
through which it passes ; and some pieces of this 
metal are found in its sand. It enters the Ma 
ranon in lat. 3 9 s. 

PUTUMAYO, a settlement of the province and 
government of Mainas, in the kingdom of Quito; 
a reduction of Indians of the missions which were 
held there by the Jesuits ; on the shore of the 
former river. 

PUXAQUERAN, a settlement of the heaoV 
settlement of the district of Zanguio, and alcal- 
dia mayor of Zamora in Nueva Espana ; on the 
top of" a lofty mountain, in the middle of the 
Great Lake or Sea of Chapala, the which forms 
a delightful prospect. It contains 30 families of 
Indians, who maintain themselves by fishing and 
cultivating some few seeds and fruits in their gar 
dens. Eight leagues s. of its head settlement. 

PUXMECATAN, a settlement and head set 
tlement of the district of the nlcaldia mayor of 
Villalta in Nueva Espana. It is of a warm tem 
perature, contains 74 families of Indians, and is 
24 leagues w. of its capital. 

PUYEGUA, a large lake of the country and 
lands of Magellan. In its vicinity, it is said, 
dwell some Indians of the Cesares. 

PUYUCj a river of the province and country 



QUA 

of Las Amazonas ; which runs from n. to s. and, 
uniting itself with Pintucyacu, forms the Guin- 
cos ; which follows the same course till it enters 
the Pastaza by the n. part, and to the e. of the 
Canincha el Viejo, in lat. 1 42 s. 

PUYZOCAS, a barbarous nation of Indians 
of the kingdom of Peru ; bounded by the nation 



QUA 



2.39 



of the Chiquitos : discovered by Father Lucas 
Caballero, of the Jesuits, in 1711, who, having 
entered amongst these Indians to instruct them 
in the faith, met his death at their hands ; as did 
all the other unhappy Spaniards and converted 
Indians, who accompanied him, to the number of 
26 persons. 



Q 



QUACHICHILES, a nation of Indians, of the 
Chichimecas in Nueva Espana. They were most 
brutal in the time of their gentilism, and lived 
wandering through the woods and mountains, 
maintaining themselves by the chase, which they 
exercised equally against the Christians and the 
wild beasts ; nor did they show any marks of 
rationality until the time of the viceroy Don Luis 
de Velasco, Marquis of Salinas. They were re 
duced through the medium of a Mustee, called 
Caldera, son of a Spaniard and a Chichimecan 
Indian woman, and who had lived many years 
amongst these Indians. Also further to civilise 
them there were sent some Indians of the pro 
vince of Tlaxcala, who might settle amongst them, 
accompanied with Fr. Geronimo de Mendieta, 
monk of the order of San Francisco ; who, after 
having catechised and baptised many, founded 
the settlements of the real of mines of San Luis 
de Potosi in the province of Zacatecas, San Mi 
guel de Mezquitic, and Colotlan in the province 
of Guadalaxara ; the king being put to great ex 
pense in maintaining these Indians, whilst they 
were instructed in labour and agriculture. 

QUADE, Cape of, on the n. coast of the Strait 
of Magellan, opposite the mouth of the channel 
of St. John. 

QUADOGHE, a settlement of Indians of Ca 
nada, near the s. coast of the lake Michigan. Its 
territory was sold by the six nations of the allied 
Indians to the English in 1701, and the act of the 
sale was ratified in 1726 and 1744. 

[QUADRA, or VANCOUVER S Island, lies on 
the n. w. coast of N. America, between Queen 
Charlotte s Sound and the Straits of Juan de 
Fuca. Nootka Sound lies on the 5. w. side of 
this island.] 

QUAHUACAN, an ancient province of Nova 
Scotia, now comprehended in that of Tezcoco, 



[QUAKER Town, in Buck s County, Penn 
sylvania, lies 25 miles n. w. of New Town, and 
33 n. n. w. of Philadelphia.] 

[QUAMPEAGAN Falls, at the head of the 
tide on Newichwanock River, which joins Pisca- 
taqua River, 10 miles from the sea. The natives 
give the Falls this name, because fish was there 
taken with nets. At these Falls are a set of saw 
and other mills : and a landing-place, where great 
quantities of lumber is rafted on scows. Here 
the river has the English name of Salmon Falls 
River, from the plenty of salmon there caught. 
In the memory of people who lived 50 years ago, 
these fish were so plenty as to be struck with 
spears on the rocks; but none now alive remem 
ber to have seen any there. The saw mills where 
the dam crosses the stream are the sure destruc 
tion of that species of fish. Tom -cod or frost- 
fish, smelts, and ale-wives, abound here. The 
place called Salmon Falls is covered with useful 
mills. Above these we meet with the Great 
Falls, where saw-mills are continued to great ad 
vantage. On many places from Quampegan to 
the pond, from whence it issues, are mills for 
boards and corn.] 

QUANAXTIT LAN, a settlement of the head 
settlement of the district of San Luis, of the coast 
of the alcaldin mayor of Tlapa in Nueva Espana. 
It is of an extremely hot temperature, and pro 
duces only maize and rice. It contains 34 fami 
lies of Indians, and is two leagues n. w. of its 
head settlement. 

QUANESEE, a settlement of Indians of N. 
Carolina ; \\hcre the English have an establish 
ment on the shore of the river Euphasee. 

QUANNES, a city of the province and colony 
of Maryland ; on the river Patuxent and on the 
shore of the bay of the Chesapeak. 

QUAPAN, SAN FRANCISCO DE, a settlement 



240 



QUA 



of the head settlement of the district, and alcaldia 
mayor of Cholula in Nueva Espana. It con 
tains 72 families of Indians, and is a little more 
than a league from its capital. 

QUAPILOLLAN, an ancient province of 
Nueva Espana ; conquered and united to the 
empire by Ahuitzotl, eighth emperor of Mexico. 
After the entrance of the Spaniards it became 
confounded in the division which these made. 

QUAQUACUYUTI, a river of the province 
and government of Buenos Ayres, which runs 
n. n. e. and enters the river Grande de los Por 
tugueses. 

QUAQUALA, a settlement of the head settle 
ment of the district, and alcaldia mayor of Cuquio 
in Nueva Espana ; two leagues from the same. 

QUAQUES, Bay of, on the S. Sea, and pro 
vince and government of Esmeraldas, formed by 
the cape or point of Palmar to the s. and the 
point of Pedernal to the n. distant only lat. 2 
from the equinoctial line. 

QUARA, a settlement of the island and go 
vernment of Trinidad, on the e. coast, near the 
port of Guasima. 

QUARA VAGUAZANAS, a barbarous and 
warlike nation of Indians of the province and 
country of Las Amazonas, who live in the woods 
close to the river Negro. They maintain them 
selves only by the chase and fishing, and used en 
venomed arrows. They are not numerous. 

QUARCI,a river of the province and govern 
ment of Buenos Ayres, which rises in some moun 
tains between the rivers Negro and Ibicuy, runs 
w. and enters the Uruguay opposite the river 
Itu. 

QUAREPORIQUE, a river of the province 
and government of Paraguay, which runs w. and 
enters the river of this name, between those of 
Xexuy and Ipuigta. 

QUAREQUA,an ancient province of the king 
dom of Tierra Firme ; now confounded with the 
province of Darien : discovered by Basco Nunez 
de Balboa, and from a mountain of it may be seen 
the S. Sea. It was governed by the cacique Ta- 
recha, who perished in a battle with many of the 
natives. These Indians were extremely barba 
rous, though warlike, and, amongst their other 
vices, were much addicted to sodomy ; on which 
account Balboa ordered some of them to be burnt 
by way of a terror to the rest. Here also the 
Spaniards discovered the first Negro slaves, 
without being able to ascertain from whence they 
came. 

QUARTO, a large river of the province and 
government of Tucunuin in Peru. It rises in 



QUA 

the sierras of Champanchin, near the city of 
Cordoba, runs to the w. by the s. part of the 
province, and after a course of more than 60 
leagues, terminates in a lake which is formed by 
its waters. 

QUATEPEC, SAN NICOLAS DE, a principal 
and head settlement of the district of the alcaldia 
mayor of Marinalco in Nueva Espana. It con 
tains 120 families of Indians, who occupy them 
selves in sowing- maize, barley, and other seeds ; 
and here are also some breeds of small cattle. 
They fabricate large trays of basket work, and 
they cut wood for building of coaches, the which 
they carry for sale to Mexico. It is eight leagues 
n. of its capital, the road to which, although 
mountainous and rocky, is covered with trees, 
such as cocos and oaks, of a very large size. 

QUATRO EVANGEMSTAS. [See EVANGE- 

LISTAS.] 

QUAUHNAHUAC, or CUERNAVACA, as it 
is vulgarly called, a province and alcaldia mayor 
of Nueva Espana, belonging to the estate of the 
Marquisate del Valle, which was ceded to Her- 
nan Cortes by the Emperor Charles V. It is of 
tolerable extent, very fertile, and abounding in 
vegetable productions, cotton, and ginger, with 
which it maintains a lucrative commerce; as also 
in coal, fuel, and woods, which are carried for 
sale to Mexico ; nor less does it afford in maize, 
and fish, caught in a lake here, and held in high 
estimation. It produces also sugar-canes, of 
which they make sugar. It is one of the most 
populous jurisdictions in all the kingdom, and 
consists of the following settlements: 

San Joseph Caltengo, S. Luis Amaticlan, 
SanGeronimoCocotz- S. Bartolome Cholo- 



ingo, 

S. Gaspar Tetela, 
Santa Maria de Ahu- 

acates, 
San Lorenzo Chamil- 

., P a 

San Salvador Ocote- 

, P ec . 

San Nicolas Ahuacate- 

^ P ec . 

San Miguel Chapulte- 

. pec, 

San Diego Acapazin- 

co, 

S. Antonio Analco, 
Iluitzilaque, 
Guaxomulco, 
Santiago Huitepec, 
San Vicente Zaqualpa, 



apa, 
Asuncion de Tetemal- 

^zingo, 
Xochitepec, 
Acatlipa, 

S. Agustin Tetlama, 
S. Sebastian Quente- 

P ec 
S. Francisco Ahuehue- 

: zingo, 

Santa Maria Alpuyeca, 
Chalcaxingo, 
Clancac, 
Mazatepec, 
San Francisco Tete- 

cala, 

San Gaspar Coaclan, 
S. Miguel Cuantla, 
Guizinclan, 



QUA 

San Juan Tetelpa, Santo Domingo, 

San Juan Panchimal- San Juan, 
Goastepec, 



CO, 



Natividad de Tlaten- Pazulco, 

chi, Ayacapixtla. 

San Miguel Xoxutla, Ticoman, 
Tlacultenango, Tlaltizapon, 

Tlayohualco, Ixtolucan, 

Nexpa, Atlacahualoya, 

Tetecala, Clalistac, 

Teocalzingo, Xantetelco, , 

Ixtla, Amacuica, 

Tehuijdla, Huichiluya, 

Cuauchinola, Xacapistla, 

Amacazaque, San Sebastian Archi- 

Yautepec, dipisco, 

S. Juan Maticlan, Hatenango, 

Santiago Maticlan, Xonacatepec, 
Xalostoc, Amacuitlapilco, 

S. Francisco Texcala, Atotonilco, 
Guacalco, Tepantzingo, 

Tepoxtlan, Tetela, 

San Andres, Acoxchiapa, 

Santa Catalina, San Agustin Xochit- 

Santiago, Ian. 

Amatlan, 

The capital of this province is the city of the 
same name ; situate in a craggy spot, but of a 
mild temperature, very fertile and pleasant, 
from the abundance of its waters, which were 
communicated, in antient times, by several aque 
ducts, of beautiful architecture. 

The parish church, which is the convent of the 
religious order of San Franciso, although of an 
cient fabric, is arched all over, and magnificently 
adorned with precious silver ornaments. Close 
to it is the venerable Orden Tercera, composed 
of the most noble of the population, and con 
sisting of 314 families, the greater part of In 
dians, and the rest of Mustees and Mulattoes ; 
also 622 of Indians, who are divided into nine 
wards, which surround the town, and which are 
reputed as settlements. In a chapel here, is ve 
nerated an image of Nuestra Senora de la Con- 
cepcion; of the origin of which we have the fol 
lowing account, namely, that in the time of 
Hernan Cortes, there arrived at a certain estate 
two strangers, of handsome appearance, at the 
house of a virtuous woman, called Agustina, 
who carried with them a closed chest, the which 
they left in the care of the said woman to keep ; 
who, with the consent of her guests, tried, but 
in vain, to open it ; and at last, despairing of so 
doing, and looking in vain for the return of her 
guests, moreover, struck with the soft niusic 

VOL. IV. 



QUA 



which issued as it were from the chest, she gave 
a full account of all that had happened to the 
curate and ale aldia mayor; he accordingly ppened 
the box, in the presence of many of the inhabi 
tants, and found in it the image of Our Lady, of 
foreign manufacture. 

This city was, in the time of the Indians, very 
strong, from the works which they had for its 
defence. It was gained to Hernan Cortes 
through the valour of a Tlaxcaltecan Indian, 
one of his allies, who, by virtue of his great 
strength, forced his May, and was followed by 
some Spaniards, when the cacique immediately 
surrendered obedience to Cortes, and aided him 
in the conquest of the capital ; and on this pre 
text it was that the Mexicans of the provinces of 
Maliralco and Cohuixco declared war against this 
cazique ; but Cortes sending to his succour 80 
Spaniards, under the Captain Andres de Tapia, 
a battle ensued, and the Indians were entirely 
routed. Quanahuac is 32 s. of Mexico, in lat. 
18 54 10" n. and log. 99 6 30" zo. 

QUA.UHQUECHOLLA, a large population 
in the time of the Indians of Nueva Espaiia in 
their gentilism ; situate in the Valley of Atrisco. 
It was peopled by the Teochichimecas, who were 
governed by Xelhua, eldest son of Ixtac Mix- 
cuatl, Lord of Siete Cuevas, this name having 
been taken from a very beautiful bird found 
here, and thus called. It was situate in a llanura, 
surrounded by a wall of nine yards high and 14 
feet wide, with a good parapet, which ended in 
a sierra, inaccessible from its being so extremely 
craggy. It had only two gates ; to enter which 
it was necessary to ascend some steps. It had 
beautiful edifices, and many gardens, as its ter 
ritory was very fertile : its market was celebrated, 
and its inhabitants consisted of 5000. Moc- 
tezuma besieged and took it, taking away 3200 
prisoners. Here it was that the Mexicans formed 
a conjunction to carry on war against Tlaxcala. 
They sought assistance from Hernan Cortes, 
and became, by this means, victorious over their 
enemies. 

QUAUHQUETZPALTEPEC, a settlement 
of the province and alcaldla mayor of Panuco in 
Nueva Espana, situate near a creek. 

QUAUHQUETZPALTEPEC, a river of this pro 
vince and kingdom, which enters the Paloapan 
or Alvarado. It is said that it washes down from 
the mines much gold. 

QUAUHTITLAN, a settlement of the pro 
vince of Mexico in Nueva Espana : conquered 
and united to the empire by Izcohuatl. It was 
a large and populous city, and gained by Her- 
I i 



242 



QUA 



Q U E 



nan Cortes, who found it depopulated, when he 
besieged Mexico. Its natives had the barbarous 
custom, in their feasts to their deities, of deca 
pitating the Indian women slaves, and then two 
Indian men would cover themselves with the 
skins of these women, performing a thousand 
ceremonies. They used to fix upon six very 
lofty stakes, firmly set in the ground so many 
prisoners, which they had taken in the war, and 
let them fall to the ground before they were 
dead, in order to pluck out their hearts, and 
they would then deliver the heads to the priests, 
but parted the body amongst themselves to eat. 
There is in this settlement a great stone cause 
way, built by the Spaniards, and which reaches 
as far as Mexico ; from whence the settlement is 
four leagues distant. 

QUAUHTINCHAN, a settlement of the pro 
vince and alcaldia mayor of Tepeaca in Nueva 
Espana. It was at the first a large and numer 
ous population. Its natives put to death two 
children of Tlaxcala, educated in the catholic 
religion, who accompanied the monks Fr. Ber 
nardino Minaya and his companion, out of re 
venge for their having found some idols and 
burnt them ; but these same executioners were 
hung at Mexico, together w ith their cacique, for 
this fault. This settlement was a doctrinal es 
tablishment of the religious of San Francisco, 
and these, by a disposition of the Bishop of La 
Puebla, being changed for the religious of St. 
Domingo, the former set their face against the 
resolution, but were appeased when there was 
built for them a convent and church, the best in 
all the kingdom. There is by this convent a 
fountain, which irrigates the garden belonging 
to it ; and the water of this fountain forms a crust 
of stone in the aqueducts through which it passes. 
It is four leagues from the city of La Puebla 
de los Angeles. 

QUAUHTOCH0, a port of the S. Sea in 
Nueva Espana. The Spaniards call it Guau- 
tulco. [See this article.] 

QUAUILOTLATZALA, a settlement of the 
head settlement of the district an&amp; alcaldia mayor 
of Tlapa in Nueva Espana. It contains 55 fa 
milies of Mexican Indians, who employ them 
selves in cultivating seeds, cochineal, and cot 
ton. 

QUAUTLAMAYAN, a settlement of the 
head settlement of the district and alcaldia mayor 
of Zochicoatlan, in the same kingdom as the 
former. It is of a cold temperature ; situate 
amongst mountains and deep glens ; contains 16 
families of Indians ; and is the last settlement of 



this jurisdiction by that part : two leagues e. of 
its capital. 

QUAUTLAZINCO, SAN JUAN DE, a settle 
ment of the head settlement of the district and 
alcaldia mayor of Cholula, in the same kingdom 
as the former. It contains 132 families of In 
dians, and is half a league . of its capital. 

QUAXINICUILAPA, a settlement of the 
province and corregimiento of Tutiapa in the 
kingdom of Guatemala ; annexed to the curacy 
of that of Esclavos. 

QUAZINTLA, a settlement of the head set 
tlement of the district and alcaldia mayor of Pa- 
pantla, in the same kingdom as the former. It 
contains 25 families of Indians, and is five leagues 
n. w. of that head settlement. 

QUAZOQUITENGO, a settlement of the 
head settlement of the district of San Luis, of 
the coast and acaldia mayor of Tlapa in the same 
kingdom as the former. It contains 59 families 
of Indians, who trade in nothing but maize, the 
only production of its territory. Seven leagues 
from its head settlement. 

QUCHUCABI, a volcano of the kingdom of 
Chile, situate in the mountains of the Cordillera, 
in lat. 42. 

QUE, a valley in the province and corregi- 
micnto of Coquimbo and kingdom of Chile ; be 
tween the coast and the river of Los Puntos. 

QUEACHES, a barbarous nation of Indians 
of the province of Yucatan. After the conquest 
made by the Spaniards, they rose, committing 
great atrocities in some of the settlements in 
which they resided ; and were suppressed by the 
entrance of the alcaldia mayor of Chiapa, Don 
Diego de Vera Ordonez de Villaquiran. In 1684 
its reduction was also attempted by the governor 
Don Juan Bruno Tello de Guzman, who made 
a road from the province of Yucatan to those of 
Guatemala, a distance of eight leagues, and a 
redoubt or fort for its defence : but both the one 
and the other have fallen to decay ; neither was 
the reduction of these Indians accomplished. 

QUEBEC, a large and handsome city of Ca 
nada in N. America : founded in 1608, by Mr. 
Samuel de Champlain, by order of the court of 
France, to establish the commerce of skins, which 
the Company of the Indies carried on with the 
natives of that country. It is situate on the 
shore of the river St. Lawrence, and at the mouth 
where this is entered by that of St. Charles, and 
where the former river is narrowest, from whence 
it has the name of Quebec; this, in the Indian 
Algonquinian language, signifying strait. 

The city is divided into high and low; the 



QUEBEC. 



243 



former being on the top of a mountain, the latter 
at the foot of the same, in a territory which has 
been left by the river, which at the founding of 
the city reached as far as the skirts of the moun 
tain. The buildings are large, and well con 
structed ; especially the episcopal palace, the 
city-house, that of the Knights of St. John of 
Jerusalem, of a square figure, which cost 
40,000; and, above all, the palace, the resi 
dence of the governor, and where the assembly 
was held. The cathedral is small, and of bad 
architecture, and not corresponding with its 
steeple and belfry, which are lofty, and well de 
signed. It has attached to it a coliegial seminary, 
which has been rebuilt three times, from having 
been twice consumed by fire ; the first in 1703, 
and afterwards in 1705. The Recoletan fathers 
have a beautiful church and convent here ; and 
there is another of Ursuline Nuns, which, like 
the seminary, has been twice burnt, and, in con 
sequence, very poor. The Jesuits had here a 
magnificent college. There is in this city two 
hospitals : one called of God, in which are two 
great wards, the one for men and the other for 
women, assisted by the hospital-monks of St. 
Augustin, of the congregation of the Mercy of 
Jesus, whose founders passed from Dieppe; and 
the other a general hospital, situate in the ter 
ritory formerly occupied by the Recoletan fa 
thers, and which was bought by the bishop, M. 
de Saint Vallier, who in this work spent immense 
sums of money. It is defended towards the river 
by a platform flanked with two bastions, which, 
at high water and spring tides, are almost level 
with the surface of the water. A little above 
the bastion, to the right, is a half bastion cut 
out of the rock ; a little higher a large battery, 
and, higher still, a square fort, in which the 
governor resides. The port is very convenient, 
and secure, for many vessels, however large 
they may be, and which may here lie at anchor 
close to the shore. The inhabitants amount to 
8000 souls, amongst these, are many persons en 
riched by the flourishing commerce continually 
carried on here. 

The English, commanded by David Kerl, a 
Frenchman, and native of Dieppe, and a Cal- 
vinist, who passed over hither, took it in 1628. In 
1690 they returned to besiege it, commanded by 
General Piphy ; but who was obliged to retire, 
with the loss of his best troops. Again, in 1759, 
the English took it under General Wolfe, who 
gloriously died in that action ; after which these 
became possessed of the whole of Canada. [In 



December, 1775, it was attacked by the Ameri 
cans under the command of the brave General 
Montgomery, who was slain, and his army re 
pulsed. For account of the present misunder 
standings between the British Government and 
United States, see UNITED STATES.] 

This city was erected into a bishopric in 1670, 
by his Holiness Clement X. after great solicita 
tion by the court of France ; and, although this 
court presented M. St. Vallier to be first bishop, 
then abbot of that church, his holiness reserved 
the appointment entirely to himself. It is 320 
miles from the sea, or entrance of the river 
St. Lawrence, in long. 71 12 6" w. lat. 46 48" 
39" n. 

[A more specific account of whatever relates to 
this interesting colony must be most desirable to 
every British subject. We have happily found 
many and authentic sources, to which to refer ; 
and, independently of some tables of exports, 
&amp;c. with which we have been supplied from 
sources of unquestionable authority, we have 
made a free use of the valuable works of Mr. 
Hugh Gray and Mr. Lambert, both of whom had 
visited these regions, and whose accurate obser 
vations will be found no less curious than im 
portant. As in all cases of multiplied extracts, 
for the convenience of reference, we divide the 
following information into chapters and heads,viz. 

CHAP. I. 

1. Official account of the province of Quebec in 
1764. 2. Further description of the town and 
environs. 3. Provisions. 4. Navigation of the 
St. Lawrence. 5. Mode of travelling in the 
summer. 6. Nature of the seigneuries, fyc. 
7. Winter. 8. Travelling in that season. 9. 
Provisions not dear during this season. 10. A 
sudden thaw. 11. Method of warming the 
houses. 12. Breaking up of the winter. 

CHAP. II. 

1. Description of the inhabitants. 2. Exports 
and Imports from Quebec from 1802 to 1809, 
both inclusive, but not including those from 
Gaspe or New Carlisle. 2. Importation of 
teas and tobacco from the United States compared 
with that from Britain. 3. Exports, imports, 
tonnage, $r. of Quebec, in 1810. 4. Exports, 
ftc. in the year 1811. 5. Duties payable in 
Canada, on importation, under several acts of 
the British parliament. 6. Allowances at the 
Custom-house. 7. Post-office regulations. S.I 



244 



QUEBEC. 



[Official declaration as to the boundaries of the 
Hiver St. Croix. 

For some other memorials, petitions, and offi 
cial documents, relative to the British Colo 
nies, see NEW BRUNSWICK, PASSAMAQUODDY 
BAY, and NOVA SCOTIA ; also CANADA, 
UNITED STATES, and WEST INDIES. 

1. Official account of the province of Quebec 
in 1761. The first document we discover, 
of any importance, respecting- this province, is 
the following letter, which was written by Ge 
neral Murray, soon after his arrival in England, 
in 1766, in which year he left the government of 
Canada. As it is an official paper, its accuracy, 
of course, may be depended on. We therefore 
avail ourselves of the opportunity to lay it be 
fore our readers, as it affords a better picture of 
the situation of affairs in the province at that 
period, than any other account we have met 
with. 

" MY LORDS, 

" In Mr. Secretary Conway s letter to me of 
the 24th October, 1764, I am ordered to prepare 
for my return to England, in order to give a 
full and distinct account of the present state of 
the province of Quebec ; of the nature and ac 
count of the disorders which have happened 
there ; and of my conduct and proceedings in the 
administration of the government. In obedience 
to that command, I have the honour to report as 
follows : and first, the state of the province : 

" It consists of 110 parishes, exclusive of the 
towns of Quebec and Montreal. These parishes 
contain 9722 houses, and 54,575 Christian souls ; 
they occupy, of arable land, 955,754 arpents. 
They sowed, in the year 1765, 180,300| minots 
of grain, and that year they possessed 12,546 
oxen, 22,724 cows, 15,039 young horned cattle, 
27,064 sheep, 28,976 swine, and 13,757 horses, 
as appears by the annexed recapitulation (re- 
censement) taken by my order, in the year 1765. 
The towns of Quebec and Montreal contain 
about 14,700 inhabitants. The Savages, who 
are called Roman Catholics, living within the 
limits of the province, consist of 7400 souls : so 
that the whole, exclusive of the king s troops, do 
amount to 76,275 souls ; of which, in the pa 
rishes are 19 Protestant families ; the rest of that 
persuasion (a few half-pay officers excepted) are 
traders, mechanics, and publicans, who reside 
in the low toAvns of Quebec and Montreal. Most 
of them were followers of the army, of mean 
education, or soldiers disbanded at the reduction 



of the troops. All have their fortunes to make, 
and, I fear, few are solicitous about the means, 
when the end can be attained. I report them to 
be, in general, the most immoral collection of 
men I ever knew ; of course, little calculated to 
make the new subjects enamoured with our laws, 
religion, and customs ; and far less adapted to 
enforce these laws, which are to govern. 

" On the other hand, the Canadians, accus 
tomed to arbitrary, and a sort of military govern 
ment, are a frugal, industrious, and moral race 
of men, who, from the just and mild treatment 
they met with from his majesty s military officers, 
that ruled the country for four years, until the 
establishment of civil government, had greatly 
got the better of the natural antipathy they had 
to their conquerors. 

" They consist of a noblesse, who are numer 
ous, and who pique themselves much upon the 
antiquity of their families, their own military 
glory, and that of their ancestors. These no 
blesse are seigniors of the whole country, and 
though not rich, are in a situation in that plen 
tiful part of the world, where money is scarce, 
and luxury still unknown, to support their dig 
nity. Their tenants, who pay only an annual 
quit-rent of about a dollar for 100 acres, are at 
their ease, and comfortable. They have been 
accustomed to respect, and obey their noblesse ; 
their tenures being military in the feudal man 
ner, they have shared with them the dangers of 
the field, and natural affection has been increased 
in proportion to the calamities which have been 
common to both, from the conquest of the coun 
try. As they have been taught to respect their 
superiors, and are not yet intoxicated with the 
abuse of liberty, they are shocked at the insults 
which their noblesse and the king s officers have 
received from the English traders and lawyers, 
since the civil government took place. It is na 
tural to suppose they are zealous of their reli 
gion. They are very ignorant : it was the policy 
of the French government to keep them so : few 
or none can read. Printing was never permitted 
in Canada till we got possession of it. Their 
veneration for the priesthood is in proportion to 
their ignorance : it will probably decrease as 
they become enlightened, for the clergy there 
are of mean birth, and very illiterate; and, as 
they are now debarred from supplies of ecclesi 
astics from France, that order of men will be 
come more and more contemptible, provided 
they are not exposed to persecution. The state 
of the Roman clergy I have already described, in] 



QUEBEC. 



245 



[my report to jour lordship s office, in the year 
1763, it will therefore be superfluous to say 
more on that subject here, as no alteration has 
happened since that time. 

" I am really ignorant of any remarkable dis 
orders which have happened in the colony, while 
I commanded tliere ; the outrage committed on 
Mr. Walker, magistrate at Montreal, excepted. 
A thorough detail of that horrid affair I have al 
ready laid before the king s servants, in my let 
ter to the lords of trade, of the 2d March, 1765. 
I have annexed a copy of that letter, in case it 
may not have fallen into your lordship s hands. 

" Disorders and divisions, from the nature of 
things, could not be avoided, in attempting to 
establish the civil government in Canada, agree 
able to my instructions ; while the same troops, 
who conquered and governed the country ibr 
four years, remained in it. They were com 
manded by an officer, who, by the civil establish 
ment, had been deprived of the government of 
half the province, and who remained, in every 
respect, independent of the civil establishment. 
Magistrates were to be made, and juries to be 
composed, out of 450 contemptible settlers and 
traders. It is easy to conceive how the narrow 
ideas and ignorance of such men, must offend 
any troops, more especially those who had so 
long governed them, and knew the means from 
which they were elevated. It would lie very 
unreasonable to suppose, that such men would 
not be intoxicated with the unexpected power 
put into their hands ; and that they would not 
be eager to shew how amply they possessed it. 
As there were no barracks in the country, the 
quartering of the troops furnished perpetual op 
portunities of displaying their importance and 
rancour. The Canadian noblesse were hated, be 
cause their birth and behaviour entitled them to 
respect ; and the peasants were abhorred, be 
cause they w r ere saved from the oppression they 
were threatened with. The resentment of the 
grand jury at Quebec, put the truth of these re 
marks beyond doubt. The silence of the king s 
servants to the governor s remonstrances in con 
sequence of their presentments, though his se 
cretary was sent to them on purpose to expedite 
an explanation, contributed to encourage the 
disturbers of the peace. 

" The improper choice and numbers of the 
civil officers sent out from England, increased 
the inquietudes of the colony. Instead of men 
of genius and untainted morals, the very re 
verse were appointed to the most important of 
fices: and it was impossible to communicate, 



through them, those impressions of the dignity 
of government, by which alone mankind can be 
held together in society. The judge fixed upon 
to conciliate the minds of 75,600 foreigners to 
the laws and government of Great Britain, was 
taken from a gaol, entirely ignorant of civil law, 
and of the language of the people. The attor 
ney-general, with regard to the language of the 
people, was not better qualified. The offices of 
secretary of the province, register, clerk of the 
council, commissary of stores and provisions, 
provost martial, &amp;c. were given by patent to 
men of interest in England, \\ho let them out to 
the best bidders ; and so little did they consider 
the capacity of their representatives, that not 
one of them understood the language of the na 
tives. As no salary was annexed to these patent 
places, the value of them depended upon the 
fees, which by my instructions I was ordered to 
establish, equal to those of the richest ancient 
colony. This heavy tax, and the rapacity of the 
English lawyers, were severely felt by the poor 
Canadians ; but they patiently submitted, and 
though stimulated to dispute it by some of the 
licentious traders from New York, they cheer 
fully obeyed the stamp act, in hopes that their 
good behaviour would recommend them to the 
favour and protection of their sovereign. 

" As the council books of the province, and 
likewise my answers to the complaints made 
against my administration, have been laid before 
your lordships, it is needless to presume to say 
anything further on that subject, than that I glory 
in having been accused of w r armth and firmness 
in protecting the king s Canadian subjects, and 
of doing the utmost in ray power to gain to my 
royal master, the affections of that brave, hardy 
people, whose emigration, if ever it should hap 
pen, will be an irreparable loss to this empire ; 
to prevent which, I declare to your lordships, I 
would cheerfully submit to greater calumnies 
and indignities (if greater can be devised) than 
hitherto I have undergone. 

" I have the honour to be, &amp;c." 

From the contents of this letter, it appears evi 
dent that much cordiality could not exist between 
the French inhabitants and the British settlers. 
The former were a people who prided themselves 
on their ancestry, and consequently despised the 
latter, who were of mean birth, and possessed 
of still meaner abilities. The mutual disgust 
and jealousy which were thus created, tended 
very considerably to depreciate the state of the 
colony for some years : commerce declined ra 
ther than increased, nor did she raise her droop-] 



246 



QUEBEC. 



[ing head till order and regularity were intro 
duced. 

2. Further description of the town and environs. 
Quebec is most properly denominated the key 
of the river St. Lawrence, for the river contracts 
suddenly opposite to the city, being there only 
about a mile in breadth ; whereas the basin of 
Quebec, immediately below, is from four to five 
miles in breadth ; and the river widens imme 
diately above the city. The grand battery of 
Quebec is opposite to the narrowest part of the 
river, and is an extensive range of very heavy 
ordnance, besides some 13-inch mortars, which, 
if properly served, must destroy any vessels 
which might attempt to pass, or come near enough 
to injure the town. 

The river opposite to Quebec is about 100 
feet in depth, and affords good anchorage : for a 
considerable way above Quebec it is navigable 
for ships of any size. Indeed, large ships g - o as 
high up as Montreal, w r hich is near 200 miles 
above Quebec. 

The site of Quebec seems to have been destined 
by nature for the capital of an empire. The 
surrounding country is magnificent ; and it is 
seen to great advantage from Cape Diamond, 
which overlooks the great river, and is the ter 
mination of the Plains of Abraham. 

The general course of the river St. Lawrence 
is from s. w. to n. e. Above the island of Orleans, 
the St. Lawrence expands, and a basin is formed 
by the junction of a river called the St. Charles, 
which comes from a lake of the same name, situ 
ated amongst the mountains towards the n. After 
passing an Indian village, about 10 miles from 
Quebec, called Loretie, situated upon elevated 
ground, the St. Charles takes its course through 
a plain, which is separated from the great river 
by a ridge of high land, about nine miles in 
length, extending from a place called Cape 
Rouge to Cape Diamond. The general breadth 
of this ridge is from one to two miles. Cape 
Diamond is a bold promontory, advancing into 
the river St. Lawrence, of an elevation of 350 
feet above the river, nearly perpendicular ; and 
the bank, the whole way to Cape Rouge, is nearly 
of the same elevation, rising from the river al 
most perpendicular : the ridge slopes towards 
the n. till it reaches the valley, through which 
the river St. Charles runs. This ridge of land 
has every appearance of having been an island, 
surrounded by the great river. The valley is 
full of large round stones, and other matter, 
which indicate the presence of water at no very re 
mote period, and the operation of a strong current. 



On the n. e. or lower end of the peninsula. 
Quebec is situated ; and the line of its fortifica 
tions runs from the river St. Charles, across to 
the top of the bank which overlooks the St. Law 
rence ; the distance is about half a mile : and 
from the line of fortification to the point of Cape 
Diamond the distance is about a quarter of a 
mile : within this space stands the city of Quebec. 
It consists, as Alcedo has observed, of an Upper 
and Lower Town : the Upper Town may be said 
to be situated on Cape Diamond, at least upon 
the side of it which slopes towards the river St. 
Charles. It is elevated about 15 feet above the 
Lower Town, and separated from it by a line of 
steep rocks, which run from the cape towards the 
river St. Charles. Formerly the river St. Law 
rence, at high water, came up close to these 
rocks ; but as the tide rises and falls here about 
15 feet, it gave an opportunity of taking from 
the river a considerable space ; wharfs were built 
at low w r atermark, and even at some places be 
yond it, and the intermediate ground filled up to 
such a height that it remained dry at high water. 
Upon this situation streets were laid out, and 
houses built. These streets run from the upper 
side of Cape Diamond down to the river St. 
Charles, a distance of about half a mile; they are 
of considerable breadth, and the houses are large 
and commodious ; those next the river have at 
tached to them very extensive warehouses (called, 
in the language of Quebec, hangards), and ves 
sels come close to the wharfs to discharge their 
cargoes ; at some of them the vessels remain 
afloat at low water, at others, which are not car 
ried so far out, or where the river does not 
deepen so suddenly, the vessels lie dry at low 
water. 

The Lower Town is not included in the forti 
fications, but the passes to it are commanded by 
the batteries in the line of fortification which 
surrounds the Upper Town ; so that the approach 
by land to the Lower Town will hardly be at 
tempted by an enemy. It is true the Americans 
attempted it in the winter of 1775, but they were 
repulsed with great slaughter. 

The communication from the Lower Town to 
the Upper Town is by a winding street, at the 
top of which is a fortified gate. On entering 
this gate, you find on the right-hand a large area, 
in which is situated the house (dignified with the 
title of a palace) in which the bishops of Quebec 
formerly resided ; at present it is used for public 
offices, and accommodates the supreme council 
and house of assembly. Beyond the palace you 
have the grand battery, on which are mounted] 



QUEBEC. 



247 



["many pieces of heavy artillery, beside? mortars, 
which certainly command the channel of the great 
river. 

Turning to the left, soon after entering the 
gate, you find yourself in another area or square ; 
on the side next the river you see the Chateau 
de St. Louis, in which the governor resides. It 
is situated on the brink of a precipice, and you 
have the Lower Town of Quebec under your 
feet. The view from the gallery at the back of 
the chateau is extensive and grand. Opposite to 
the chateau, on the other side of the square, you 
have the English church, a very elegant build 
ing ; and the court-house, where elegance is not 
so conspicuous. On the n. side of the square 
you have a very handsome building, erected for, 
and used as, a tavern, hotel, and assembly- 
room. 

In the neighbourhood of this square you find 
towards the n. an extensive area, in which is 
situated the Upper Town market-house ; a build 
ing perfectly unique in its kind. One does not 
know which to be most astonished at, whether 
the want of taste in the architect, or that his. 
plans met with approbation : suffice it to say, 
that on a building one story high, you have a 
dome as large as that of St. Paul s in London. 
Never were the rules of architecture and com 
mon-sense more outraged. 

From the area of the market-place different 
streets diverge, leading to the different gates of 
the city, viz. Hope Gate, Palace Gate, St. John s 
Gate, and St. Lewis s Gate, besides the gate 
leading to the Lower Town ; these streets con 
stitute the Upper Town. Outside of St. John s 
and Palace Gates there are extensive suburbs, 
which are increasing in size daily. 

There is nothing in the appearance of Quebec 
itself which strikes one as being very different 
from an English town, except, perhaps, the roofs 
of the houses ; they are generally covered with 
boards or shingles, and you always see on the 
roofs several ladders, for the sake of easy access 
in case of fire. 

A shingle roof so much resembles a slate one, 
that when they are painted a slate colour, you 
cannot know the one from the other ; the only 
evil attending them is, that they are liable to 
catch fire : from this circumstance, Quebec has 
formerly suffered greatly from fires. A law has 
been passed, encouraging the covering houses 
with boards in place of shingles, and, indeed, 
prohibiting the latter altogether. 

The dread of fire in Quebec is greater than in 
most other places; but when it is considered 



how much they formerly have suffered from it, 
one ceases to be surprised. 

A society has been formed, called the Fire 
Society : they elect a president and other office 
bearers annually. The object of this society is 
to assist in the extinguishing of fire, for which 
purpose they have several engines and firemen : in 
deed, in case of fire, almost every man may be said 
to be a fireman, for every body lends his assist 
ance : poor people who have been very active 
receive pecuniary reward from the society. Their 
funds are raised by annual voluntary subscription. 

Many of the best houses and most valuable 
warehouses are covered with tin plates, which 
make not only a very beautiful and very durable 
roof, but are also a complete security against 
fire. The reason that fire has spread so rapidly 
in Quebec has been, that the shingles, when once 
inflamed, being extremely light, were blown bv 
the wind to an incredible distance, and operated 
on other shingle roofs like a shower of fire. 
Now, the tin plates receive the burning shingles 
with impunity : it might be imagined that the 
tin plates would rust, but this is not the case. 
Some of the roofs are near 40 years old, and they 
not only remain perfectly bright, but have never 
required any repairs ; so that although somewhat 
expensive at first, a tin-plate roof will be a saving 
in the end. 

Quebec, on the ., n. e. 7 and s. sides, is so 
strongly fortified by the nature of the ground, 
that little has been left for the engineer to do ; 
what was necessary, however, has been done : 
and as the great river and the river St. Charles 
surround, in a manner, the fortifications in these 
directions, and in some places come very near 
the bottom of the rocks, no enemy, if a common 
degree of vigilance is observed, can hope to 
succeed by an attack on these quarters. 

The least defensible part of Quebec is towards 
the 5. zo.j where the line of fortifications extends 
from one side of the peninsula to the other, en 
closing the city and highest part of Cape Dia 
mond. There a cavallier battery has lately 
been erected, which commands the ground to a 
considerable distance from the walls. 

The ground, for a great extent to the s. to. of the 
city of Quebec, is called the Plains of Abraham, 
famous for the battle in which General Wolfe 
beat the French. These plains are nearly on a 
level with the fortifications, and widen as you 
retire from them to the extent of from one to 
two miles, preserving the level nearly through 
out, but sloping a little both ways, particularly 
toAvards the river St. Charles on the n. On] 



248 



QUEBEC. 



[the side towards the St. Lawrence the bank 
is of great height ; almost pependicular, and 
generally covered with wood where the slope 
will admit of it, which is not always the case. 
Notwithstanding the difficulty of ascent, General 
Wolfe, with infinite labour, contrived to carry 
his little army, and a few small field-pieces, to 
the top of the bank, and took his stand on the 
Plains of Abraham. 

The French were astonished, on looking out in 
the morning, to find him there ; they came out 
of the city and gave him battle. He beat them, 
and followed them close up to the walls of the 
town. 

It was very unaccountable, that the French 
should resolve to come out of a strong fortifica 
tion (where they might long have resisted the 
assailants), and put themselves on a footing with 
their enemies. Besides the troops in the city of 
Quebec, the French had 10,000 men encamped 
at Beauport, within a few miles of Quebec. If 
an arrangement had taken place with those 
troops, that they should attack Wolfe at the mo 
ment the garrison sallied forth, his little army 
must have been cut to pieces. To this error we 
owe Quebec. 

The French general, Montcalm, as well as the 
brave Wolfe, fell in the engagement ; very dif 
ferent, however, must have been their feelings 
in their last moments. The conduct of the 
Frenchman, in rashly sacrificing his troops and 
the interests of his country, could not bear re 
flection. Wolfe saw his troops triumphant; 
they had beaten the enemy : he died in the arms 
of victory. 

On the spot where Wolfe fell, a stone is 
shown on which it is said he was laid. It is 
very much mutilated, from the curiosity of 
strangers who wish to carry off a bit of it, as a 
kind of relic. One cannot help feeling a good 
deal interested in traversing a field of battle ; 
the glory which we attach to the death of the 
hero who falls in his country s cause, sanctifies 
the ground on which he fell. 

The Upper Town of Quebec being on a great 
elevation, enjoys fine air, and a commanding- 
view of the surrounding country, which affords 
the most sublime scenery in nature. Those who 
have seen most of the fine views in Europe, 
have said they do not surpass, or even equal, 
that from the flagstaff of Quebec on Cape Dia 
mond. 

The majestic St. Lawrence under your feet, 
receives the waters of the river St. Charles, and 
forms the basin of Quebec, from three to four 



miles across ; further on you see the river di 
viding itself into two branches, forming the 
beautiful island of Orleans : on the opposite side 
of the great river, a finely wooded country, ter 
minating at Point Levi, conceals the course and 
bed of one of the branches of the river ; the 
island of Orleans, the falls of Montmorency, 
strike the observer ; and the villages of Beau- 
port, Charlebourg, and Lorrette, appear at a 
distance, and render the woods in which they 
are embosomed more interesting. The eye fol 
lows the n. branch of the St. Lawrence till it is 
lost amongst the distant mountains. To the .?. 
you look over a level country for upwards of 60 
miles, till the view is bounded by mountains. 
This extensive tract is still in a great measure in 
a state of nature ; nothing to be seen but the 
stately forest in all its majesty. 

In this prospect it is difficult to imagine a 
more happy blending of art and nature ; villages, 
country houses, cottages, corn fields, are com 
bined with primeval woods, fine rivers, beauti 
ful islands, magnificent waterfalls, towering hills, 
and lofty mountains. 

From the scenery which surrounds Cape Dia 
mond let us return to the Cape itself. In the 
whole extent of the ridge, from Cape Diamond 
to Cape Rouge, what generally prevails is a 
coarse incomplete sort of schistus, the lamina? 
of which, when exposed to the operation of the 
atmosphere, moulder into a dark brown-coloured 
earth ; it never can be used for building to any 
advantage, unless it is defended from the action 
of the air. 

Cape Diamond abounds with very fine speci 
mens of quartz, or rock crystals. They are dis 
covered from the brilliancy of their reflecting 
surfaces : they sparkle like the diamond, and 
hence the place had its name. On examination, 
they will generally be found to be pentagons, 
terminating in a point, and possessing naturally 
much of the brilliancy and polish of a cut dia 
mond; and they are so hard, that, like a diamond, 
they cut glass. 

But there are some buildings in this city, which 
it would be improper to pass over without fuller 
notice. 

The residence of the governor is a large plain 
stone building, erected, we believe, by General 
Haldimand, and forming one side of the open 
place or square called the Parade. Opposite to 
it stands the English cathedral church and the 
court-house, both handsome buildings of modern 
construction. The other sides of the Parade are 
formed by the Union Hotel, in a line with some] 



QUEBEC. 



249 



[large dwelling-houses, and opposite by a row of 
buildings which form the commencement of St. 
Louis Street. 

The old chateau, or castle of St. Louis, is 
built upon the verge of an inacessible part of 
the rock, and separated by a court -yard from the 
new building which fronts the parade. 

It was formerly occupied by the governor for 
his residence ; but on the erection of the other 
was converted into public offices. It has lately 
undergone considerable improvements, for the use 
of Sir James Craig : it was then raised one story 
higher, and the expenses were to be defrayed by 
the colony, agreeable to an act passed for that 
purpose by the provincial parliament. It is now 
finished, and thought to possess every requisite for 
the abode of the most distinguished person in the 
colony. Its situation, for fine prospects and ex 
tensive views of the river and surrounding coun 
try, cannot be surpassed in any part of the Upper 
Town. Behind the building is a large stone 
gallery or balcony, even with the lower apart 
ments. This gallery, which serves as a very 
agreeable promenade, is situated more than 250 
feet above the level of the river, and commands 
a beautiful panorama view of the Lower Town, 
the shipping in the river, Point Levi, the island 
of Orleans, shores of Beauport and distant moun 
tains, a scene as grand and extensive as it is 
possible for the imagination to conceive, or the 
eye to survey. 

The college of the Jesuits is situated in the 
market, and now makes very excellent barracks 
for the soldiers. As the Jesuits in Canada, as 
well as in different parts of the world, were once 
a very powerful body of men, and possessed more 
influence for a time over the people among whom 
they lived, than even the sovereigns themselves, 
it may be amusing, and perhaps instructive, to 
describe them as they existed in that country 
about 60 years ago, at which period their power, 
though on the decline, was yet considerable. At 
this day not an individual of that society is alive 
in Canada, the British government having pro 
hibited the religious male orders, the priests ex- 
cepted, from augmenting their numbers. The 
government faithfully allowed the orders to en 
joy the whole of their revenues, as long as there 
existed a single individual of the body ; but on 
his death the property reverted to the crown. 

The building in which the Jesuits resided is 
well laid out ; and when occupied by them, and 
in good order and repair, must have been the 
handsomest building in Canada. It consists of 
stone, and is three stories high, above which are 

VOL. IV. 



garrets, with a sloping roof covered with slate, 
even at this day in a good state of preservation ; 
a circumstance which it is surprising has not in 
duced the inhabitants to cover their houses with 
slate, as they could import it from Scotland 
cheaper than tin. The college is built in a 
square form, and includes a large court-yard 
within. In every story there is a long walk, on 
both sides of which the brethren had their pri 
vate cells or rooms, exclusive of the public halls, 
refectory, library, apothecary s shop, and other 
apartments for general use. A large orchard 
and kitchen-garden was situated on the s. side 
of the building. A part of the trees in the for 
mer were the remains of the forest which covered 
the mountain when the French began to build 
the city, and are in existence at the present day. 

The interior economy of the college was well 
regulated. The Jesuits used to dine in a great 
hall, around which were placed long tables with 
seats between them and the walls, but not on the 
opposite side. On one side the refectory was a 
pulpit, in which, during meals, one of the fathers 
used to read some religious book ; but when 
visitors dined with them, this practice was omit 
ted ; the time being generally employed in con 
versation. Their dinners were always good; and 
when company was present, their dishes were as 
numerous as at a great feast. They never per 
mitted a woman to reside among them. All 
were fathers or brothers, the latter of whom 
were young men brought up to bo Jesuits ; they 
used to prepare every thing for dinner in the 
hall, and bring it on table ; the common servants 
not being admitted. 

The revenue of the Jesuit Society was very 
considerable, being upwards of 12,000 per an 
num at the ; time it reverted to the crown. It 
had been for several years enjoyed solely by an 
old father, who had survived all the rest. This 
Jesuit, whose name was Jean Joseph Casot, 
was a native of Switzerland, and born in 1728. 
In his youth he was no more than porter to the 
college ; but having considerable merit, he was 
promoted, and in the course of time received 
into the order. He had the character of pos 
sessing an amiable and generous disposition, and 
employed his large income in charitable pur 
poses. He died a few years ago at a very ad 
vanced age. For some time previous to his 
death, he shut himself up in his apartments, and 
became inaccessible to all but his attendants. 
The crown, on his demise, came into possession 
of the property, for the management of which 
commissioners have been appointed. The lands] 
K K 



250 



QUEBEC. 



[which belonged to that body, as well indeed as 
to the religious orders in general, are by far the 
best in the country, and produce the greatest 
revenues. 

The French seminary, or college, at Quebec, 
is situated close to the French cathedral, be 
tween the market-place and the ramparts. The 
building is spacious, and substantially built, 
though, like most of the public edifices in Que 
bec, it has suffered much from fire. It was 
burned down in 1703, and again in 1705, when 
just rebuilt. At the back of the seminary there 
is a very extensive garden, well laid out, and 
possessing every requisite that can contribute to 
the recreation of the students. It commands a 
beautiful view of the river, the island of Orleans, 
and the opposite shores. The seminary was 
originally instituted to bring up students for the 
priesthood. No funds were allowed for the edu 
cation of youth in general ; but since the con 
quest, it has admitted scholars without limita 
tion of number, for an acknowledgment of 5*. 
per annum for out-pensioners, and .12 10s. for 
boarders. The boys educated there at present 
are numerous, and chiefly the children of the 
French inhabitants. Those intended for the 
church remain there till their education is com 
pleted, or till a parish can be given them. 

The nunneries have not been restricted by go 
vernment, consequently they are in general well 
filled, The Hotel de Dieu is a large building, si 
tuate, with its gardens, near Palace Gate. It was 
founded in 1638 by the Duchess d Aiguillon, 
who sent from the hospital at Dieppe three nuns, 
for the purpose of commencing this charitable 
institution. It consists of an hospital for the 
sick, who are received here, and attended by the 
nuns, without any expense to the patients. The 
invalids of both sexes are comfortablV lodged in 
wards, and every attention paid to them by the 
sisters, of whom there are about 27, with a su 
perior. 

The convent of Ursulines was instituted in 
1639 by a rich young widow in France, Ma 
dame de la Peltrie, for the education of female 
children. It belongs to a superior and 36 nuns, 
who instruct the girls in reading, embroidery, 
and fine work ; no men are allowed to visit this 
or any of the convents without permission from 
the bishop. The sisters of St. Ursula are more 
strict and recluse than those of the other con 
vents. They have a large garden adjoining their 
house, which supplies them with a variety of 
fruits, herbs, and vegetables, a portion of which 
they sell to the inhabitants ; for their institution 



is not very rich. They also employ themselves 
with embroidery, pickling, and preserving of 
fruits and vegetables, which are disposed of for 
the benefit of the society. This convent, like 
the rest of the public buildings in Canada, has 
suffered twice or three times by fire. It is now 
substantially built of stone, and the roof covered 
with tin. 

The general hospital, which is situated some 
distance out of the town, on the banks of the 
river St. Charles, surrounded by meadow lands, 
is the third convent belonging to Quebec. It 
was founded about the year 1693 by M. de St. 
Vallier, bishop of Quebec, for the purpose of 
affording support and relief to the infirm, the 
aged, the sick, and wounded poor, of both sexes, 
and in this charitable and praiseworthy service it 
continues to this day. A superior and 37 sisters 
fulfil the duties of the institution in a manner 
that does them the highest honour, and entitles 
them to the gratitude and thanks of the public. 
Their religious duties are performed without re 
laxing those of humanity, and their leisure mo 
ments are spent in useful and ornamental works, 
the profits of which assist the revenues of the 
hospital. 

We cannot quit this cursory notice of the 
female religious institutions at Quebec, without 
paying them tribute of applause to which they 
are justly entitled. Few, it is true, go into those 
holy receptacles, but such as are tired of the 
world. 1 hey are cither satiated with its plea 
sures, or disgusted with its cares. But the ob 
jects for which they leave the world, are not to 
live in easy idleness, or careless indifference. 
Two out of three institutions bestow their time, 
attention, and property, upon the sick and aged 
poor. The other devotes the services of its sisters 
to the education and instruction of young females. 
Such are the charitable offices performed by the 
Canadian nuns, whose religious duties are equally 
meritorious. The existence, therefore, of these 
religious orders, we conceive to be highly advan 
tageous to the people of Canada, and serviceable 
to the government. In a Catholic country, go 
verned and regulated by the liberal constitution 
of England, those institutions are rendered of 
the utmost public utility. 

To conclude, the Upper Town is certainly the 
most agreeable part of Quebec, both in summer 
and winter. In the former season, the heat is 
not so intense as in many parts of the Lower 
Town, nor in winter is it so dreary and dull. 
The cold is, however, severer by several degrees. 
Even between Cape Diamond and the Upper] 



QUEBEC. 



251 



[Town, there is frequently a difference in the 
weather of nearly 10 degrees. The thermometer 
in February 1807 was 20 degrees below 0. in St. 
Louis Street, and on the Cape 30 below 0. The 
latter being elevated upwards of 70 feet above 
the former. 

The streets in the Upper Town are not re 
markable for width ; but many of them are tole 
rably paved, yet a considerable part of the town 
remains without that beneficial improvement. 
A fortified town, confined like Quebec to the 
summit and base of a steep rock, is not very well 
adapted either for convenient streets or elegant 
buildings. They must always be regulated by 
the localities of its situation. But much more 
might certainly have been effected for general 
comfort and convenience, had this place fallen 
into the hands of any other than a Roman Ca 
tholic people, whose numerous religious institu 
tions have occupied nearly one-half the town. 
Their large buildings and extensive gardens were 
not of so much consequence in the early settle 
ment of Quebec; but when population increased, 
those who would otherwise have lived within the 
walls, were obliged, for want of room, to reside 
without ; and have formed what are called the 
suburbs of St. John, St. Rocque, &amp;c. 

Since the conquest, improvements have gone 
on but slowly, owing to the fluctuating state of 
commerce ; from which source alone the means 
can be provided. 

3. Provisions. The markets are supplied with 
beef, mutton, pork, and veal, by the Habitans, 
as well as the butchers ; though the latter gene 
rally feed their own cattle, and kill them for sale 
as they want. Their meat is frequently better 
than that of the country people. The fattest 
pork that can be procured is bought by the lower 
order of the Canadians, who scarcely eat any 
other meat. The Habitans, in particular, live 
for months upon pork ; a small piece of which, 
boiled down with some peas or beans into a soup, 
constitutes their chief dish. The veal sold by 
the Habitans is in general very young, as red as 
beef, and does not eat well. 

During Lent, the French people live upon fish 
and vegetables, which they contrive to dress in 
the most palatable manner. The day after Good 
Friday the butchers make a show of their meat, 
somewhat similar to our butchers before Christ 
mas. The former decorate their meat with flowers 
and ribbons in order to tempt their customers, 
though one would think that but little induce 
ment was necessary to invite them to eat after so 



long a fast. The Catholics, at the close of Lent, 
have a regale, and the butchers do not neglect to 
take advantage of that propitious moment. The 
finest quarters and joints are ticketed with the 
names of those happy people, who are alert 
enough to rise at three or four o clock in the 
morning and get to market before their neigh* 
bours. 

The dogs in little carts, which are mentioned 
by Mr. Weld and former writers, are now not 
much in use, except by boys ; every thing is 
brought to market in carts, or sleighs, drawn by 
horses. The markets of Quebec are well sup 
plied with every thing the country affords. In 
summer the following articles are brought to 
market by the Habitans and generally sold at the 
price affixed to them, in sterling money. 

Meat. 

Beef per Ib. \\d. to 4rf. 
Mutton per Ib. 4d. to 6d. 
Lamb per quarter 3s. 6d. to 4,9. 6d. 
Veal 6d. to Id. per Ib. 
Pork 5d. to 6d. per Ib. 
Sausages. 



Poultry and Game* 

Turkies per couple 3s. 6d. to 
Fowls do. 

Chickens do. 
Geese do. 

Wild do. do. 
Partridges do. 
Pigeons per doz. 
Hares, each 



. 3d. to 2s. 
Id. to lOd. 
2s. 6d. to 4s. 6d. 



Wd. to I5d. 
Is. 6d. to 4s. 
6d. to 9d. 

Fish. 



Eels, price according to the size 

Trout do. 

Perch do. 

Poisson Doree do. 

Maskinonge do. 

Shad, each Id. to 2d. 

Sturgeon x 

Achigan i 

Black bass f Of various prices, according to the 

Salmon V size. At some periods cod and 

Fresh Cod I salmon are as dear as in London. 

Salt Cod 1 

Catfish / 

Vegetables. 

Potatoes I8d. to 2Qd. per bushel. 
Cabbages Id. to 2d. each. 
Onions per hundred lOd. 
Leeks per bundle 4rf. 

KK 9 



252 



QUEBEC. 



("Carrots but very little cheaper than in London. 

Turnips do. 

Peas do. 

Beans do. 

Beet do. 

Celery do. 

Salad do. 

Asparagus per bundle. 

Cotonnier do. 

Parsnips. 

Boiled Corn, Herbs, &amp;c. 

Fruit. 

Apples ISs. per barrel 

Pears but few at market 

Strawberries about 6d. per quart 

Currants 

Gooseberries 

Raspberries 

Blueberries 

Blackberries 

Plums 

Melons. 

Sundries. 

Maple sugar 2c?. to 3d. per Ib. 

Flour per cwt. 18s. to 25s. 

Lard 6d. to 9d. per Ib. 

Tallow 9d. to Wd. do. 

Tobacco 9d. do. 

Butter 9d. to Ud. do. 

Oats per minot 2s. 6d. to 3s. 

Hay per bundle 6d. to Id. 

Straw per do. 2d. to 3d. 

Wood per cord 12s. to 15s. 

Stinking Cheese, Soap, Mogasins, Furs, &amp;c. 

In winter a portion only of the above articles 
are brought to market. As soon as the river be 
tween Quebec and the island of Orleans is frozen 
over, a large supply of provision is received from 
that island. The Canadians at the commence 
ment of winter kill the greatest part of their 
stock, which, as has been before observed, they 
carry to market in a frozen state. The inhabi 
tants of the towns then supply themselves with a 
sufficient quantity of poultry and vegetables till 
spring, and keep them in garrets or cellars. As 
long as they remain frozen, they preserve their 
goodness, but they will not keep long after they 
have thawed. 

Walnuts and filberts are by no means common 
in Canada, and are procured principally by im 
portation from England. Hickory and hazel 
nuts are met with in the forests. The English 



walnut trees do not thrive well in Canada; and 
it has been remarked by naturalists, that the 
European trees were always more forward in 
their leaves and flowers, than the native trees of 
America ; in consequence of which they were very 
often blighted, by the cold nights, which are fre 
quent in the early part of the spring ; while the 
American trees, which did not leaf or flower so 
soon, were generally preserved. 

Cherries are seldom seen in the markets ; they 
are the production only of gentlemen s gardens. 
Two sorts of wild cherries are plentifully scat 
tered over the country. They are, probably, 
mere varieties, though they diner materially in 
flavour. They are called choke cherries by the 
inhabitants, and seldom applied to any other pur 
pose than the making of liquor. The berries 
with their stones are bruised, and put into bot 
tles of rum, brandy, or gin, with sugar ; and, 
in the course of a fortnight, they make a very 
agreeable liquor, resembling noyau. 

Melons of various kinds are cultivated in great 
plenty in Canada. The water and musk melon 
are most general. They do not thrive so well 
about Quebec as at Three Rivers and Montreal. 
They are sown frequently on hot-beds, but oftener 
in the open fields and gardens, and the summer 
heat is sufficient to ripen them without the aid of 
glasses. A species of yellow fly is often very de 
structive to the early plants, and sometimes to 
tally destroys them. 

4. Navigation of the river St. Lawrence. Que 
bec seems admirably situated to become the capi 
tal of an empire. The uninterrupted navigable 
part of the St. Lawrence is of great extent ; 
near 500 miles, which is the distance between 
the Gulf of St. Lawrence and Montreal, where, 
are found vessels of from 300 to 400 tons burden. 
In its course it receives a number of fine rivers, 
which open a communication with the country 
on both sides. The lake Champlain, 120 miles 
in length, communicates with the St. Lawrence 
by means of the river Sorel (or Chambly, as it is 
sometimes called), and is the natural channel for 
the produce of the fine country surrounding this 
lake. 

Although the ship navigation ends at Mon 
treal, another species . of navigation commences, 
suitable to the waters to be navigated, and to 
the commodities to be transported. Bateaux, 
and canoes, convey to Upper Canada, and the 
country round the lakes, and to the n. w. terri 
tories, the European commodities they want ; and 
with the aid of scows, floats^ and rafts, carry] 



QUEBEC. 



253 



[down to Montreal and Quebec the surplus pro 
duce of these immense regions, as yet of trifling 
amount it is true, compared with the commerce 
of Europe ; but when one reflects on the variety 
of climate, of soil, and of productions, which these 
extensive countries display; and the facility 
given to the transportation of goods by means of 
so many fine rivers and large lakes ; one cannot 
help concluding that it is destined at some future 
period to be one of the most commercial coun 
tries on earth. 

The river St. Lawrence must ever be the grand 
outlet to the ocean for the productions of all that 
tract of country between the United States and 
Hudson s Bay, including the lakes Erie, Ontario, 
Michigan, and Lake Superior. Although the 
lakes are not immediately connected with the 
Atlantic by any other river than the St. Law 
rence, yet there are several rivers that fall into 
the Atlantic, which rise so near the sources of 
others that run into the lakes, and each navigable 
for boats so near their sources, that by means of 
them, and of a very short land carriage, trade 
may be carried on between the Atlantic and the 
lakes. There are three channels for this trade 
which particularly demand attention ; the first by 
the Mississippi and Ohio, and thence up the Wa- 
bash, Miami, and Muskingum, from the heads of 
which there are portages of from one to 15 miles, 
to the rivers which fall into the Lake Erie : se 
condly, along the Patowmack river (which flows 
past Washington City), and from thence into the 
Cayahoga, Bigbeaver, and Yahogany, to Presque 
Isle, on Lake Erie : thirdly, along Hudson s Ri 
ver (which falls into the Atlantic at New York), 
and the Mohawk River, Wood Creek, Lake 
Oneida, and Oswego River, which falls into 
Lake Ontario. In the course of time there will 
be a competition amongst the settlers on these 
different routs, which shall have most of the trade 
of the western territory, but they must all yield 
to the St. Lawrence, which commands a decided 
preference, because the distance to a port where 
vessels from the ocean can load, is shorter than 
by any of the other routs, and the portages are 
not so long; and besides, during the summer 
months, the rivers in the United States have so 
little water near their sources, that the length of 
the portages must be greatly increased. In the 
St. Lawrence they are always the same. 

When we consider the many millions of acres 
which communicate with this river and surround 
the lakes, where, at present you have only the 
stately pine, the hardy oak, and many other te 



nants of the forest; and where in course of time 
w r ill be seen the golden harvest, the lowing herd, 
the bleating flock, and the sons and daughters of 
industry and innocence : the heart expands with 
secret pleasure, and tastes in anticipation the hap 
piness in reserve for posterity. 

Man in civilised society is naturally a commer 
cial animal ; he is seldom satisfied with what he 
possesses ; he must be changing one thing for an 
other ; he is prompted to it by his wants, and 
when he can find in any one place such things as 
he may desire to have, thither he resorts. This 
formerly gave birth to fairs ; and it has made 
some cities perpetual fairs. It has made London 
the first city in the world ; and it will continue 
Quebec as the first city in the Canadas ; perhaps 
it may become the first in America, for it has a 
much more extensive communication with the in 
terior of America than the new city of Washing 
ton, or any other city of America. Neither the 
Patowmac, Chesapeake, Delaware, nor Hudson s 
River, are at all to be compared to the St. Law 
rence, either in magnitude or extent of back 
country. It is worthy of notice, that a person 
may go from Quebec to New Orleans, at the 
mouth of the Mississippi, by water the whole 
way, except about the space of one mile from the 
source of the Illinois River, to the source of a 
river which falls into Lake Michigan. 

Quebec is already considerably extended be 
yond the walls : there may in time be as much 
difficulty in finding out the old walls and old 
city of Quebec, as there is in finding the bounds 
of the old city of London. The river St. Charles,, 
which at present covers unnecessarily a great 
deal of ground, may be confined to a narrow 
channel, and will be a fine situation for extend 
ing the Lower Town as far as Beauport. Wharfs 
and quays will of course arise : the situation is 
excellent for dry and wet docks ; and warehouses 
without number may be eligibly situated. It is 
thought the French had this in contemplation^ 
and even went so far as to make a plan of it. 

5. Mode of travelling in the summer. Travel 
ling in Canada is certainly not altogether so plea 
sant as travelling in England. The Canadian 
calesh is a very sorry vehicle, compared to the 
English post-chaise ; nor are the auberges quite 
so comfortable as English inns. A person who 
had been accustomed to travel only in England, 
would say, that a Canadian calesh, with its two 
wheels and single horse, without springs, and 
without cushions, was not fit for a Christian to 
be put into : and as to the auberges, or innsj 



254 



QUEBEC. 



[that they were such filthy places, that you might 
lodge in a hog-stye without your olfactory nerves 
being more offended. 

There is certainly great room for improve 
ment, both in the form of the calesh, and the 
comforts and accommodations of the inns. It 
adds greatly, however, to the comfort of travel 
ling in Canada, that you are every where treated 
with the greatest politeness and attention. A 
Canadian aubergiste (landlady) the moment you 
stop, receives you at the door with a degree of 
politeness and urbanity which is as unexpected 
as it is pleasing. Voulez vous bien, Monsieur, 
avoir la complaisance (fentrer ; voila une chaise, 
Monsieur ; asseyez vous s il vous plait. If they 
have got any thing you want, it is given at once 
with a good grace. If they have not, they tell 
you so in such a tone and manner, as to shew 
that they are sorry for it. Je n en ai point, Mon 
sieur , J en suis mortifiee. The Canadian inn 
keeper is frequently a farmer also, or a shop 
keeper. Indeed, you need never be at a loss for 
a house to stop at. There is not a farmer, shop 
keeper, nay nor even a seigneur, or country gen 
tleman, who, on being civilly applied to for ac 
commodation, will not give you the best bed 
in the house, and every accommodation in his 
power. The Canadians seem to have brought 
the old French politeness with them to this coun 
try, and to have handed it down to the present 
generation. One is more surprised to find here 
courtesy and urbanity, from the little likelihood 
that such plants would exist, far less flourish, in 
the wilds of Canada. 

During the months of July and August travel 
ling in Canada is very uncomfortable from the 
great heat of the weather. The thermometer 
generally shews near 80 : however, where the 
occasion is very urgent, the inconvenience is not 
so great as to prevent you. In September the 
heat is more moderate, and travelling becomes 
pleasant. 

From Quebec to Montreal the distance is 
about 180 miles. You may either hire a calesh 
to go the whole way, or take a calesh from post- 
house to post-house. If you proceed direct, they 
generally make 24 posts ; and you get into Mon 
treal on the morning of the third day, without 
travelling in the night time. The usual charge 
for posting is Is. 3d. a league, which is much 
cheaper than posting in England. Indeed, it 
ought to be so, considering the nature of the ve 
hicle, and your having only one horse ; besides, 
hay and corn are much cheaper here than in Eng 



land, and there is no post-horse duty. In the 
course of the journey to Montreal you are now 
and then tempted to stop, or to go a little out of 
your way, for the purpose of seeing a few places 
of note. You behold, every where, fine interest 
ing scenery ; the road runs the whole way along 
the river St. Lawrence ; its banks and islands 
vary their appearance every hour, and keep the 
mind continually occupied and amused. 

The road differs from all others, inasmuch as 
it may be said to be almost a continued street ; 
one house succeeding another so quickly, as that 
there is scarcely a mile without one. Except the 
town of Trios Rivieres (Three Rivers), you have 
scarcely any place that deserves the name of a 
town : but every parish church has a village in 
its neighbourhood ; and of these there are, be 
tween Quebec and Montreal, upwards of 20. In 
these little villages we see the beginnings of, per 
haps, large county towns ; for here the parishes 
contain as much ground as many of the counties 
do in England. 

6. Nature of the seigneuries, SfC. The quick 
succession of houses on this road arose from the 
manner in which the lands were granted. The 
whole course of the river on both sides, from its 
mouth to within about 30 miles above Montreal, 
was divided by the French king into a certain 
number of seigneuries, or lordships, which were 
given to those who had influence enough to pro 
cure them : but they were bound to concede them 
in certain lots, to such of the inhabitants of the 
country as might apply for them ; who were, at 
the same time, bound to settle upon the lands, 
and clear them of the woods; keep open the 
highways, and perform certain other services. 
The lots ran along the course of the river, a cer 
tain number of yards in front, by so many in 
depth. In front they were very narrow, gene 
rally but three square acres ; however they run 
back into the country a considerable way, gene 
rally about 80 square acres. The side of a square 
acre is about 70 yards. 

The first thing to be done was to build a house, 
and open a road to communicate with their next 
neighbours. Thej then, by degrees, cleared and 
cultivated their land. In this way a road was 
made, and the country cleared by the sides of the 
river, where even now the great bulk of the po 
pulation of Canada is found. The first settlers 
had additional reasons for clearing the lands, and 
settling along the course of the river. It en 
abled them to communicate with Quebec easily 
by means of canoes ; and in winter, when the] 



QUEBEC. 



255 



[heavy snows fall, their settling near each other 
enabled them to keep open the communication, 
by uniting their efforts, which is still the case. 

We are told, that, after a fall of snow, one man 
drives his sledge to his next neighbour (a very 
difficult matter sometimes), who joins him with 
his cattle in going to the next, and so on, till 
a path is trodden sufficiently hard to bear the 
horses. 

The cultivated land does not extend far back 
in general. When the seigneurs, or lords of the 
manor, had granted, or, as it is called here, con 
ceded those Tots of their seigneurie, or lordship, 
which fronted the river, they made fresh conces 
sions (behind the first) of the lands which re 
ceded still further. On the first grants, or con 



cessions, there is always left a certain portion 



of wood for domestic purposes, and for fuel ; this 
tract of wood forms a boundary between the first 
and second concession. When the soil happens 
to be good, or the situation to be attended with 
very favourable circumstances, four or five con 
cessions have taken place ; and they are now in 
creasing in the ratio of the population. But 
tracts of primeval wood are still preserved be 
tween the different concessions, or grants ; from 
which circumstance the country retains, and will 
long retain, a wooded wild appearance. 

When you meet with rivers which run into 
the St. Lawrence, you see cultivation carried up 
their banks much further. Indeed, it is on the 
banks of such rivers where the best land is gene 
rally found ; such as the river Ouelle, river De 
Sud, river Chambly or Sorel, river De Loup, &amp;c. 

The Canadians are, on the whole, but poor 
farmers. It is true the land is the property of 
those who cultivate it : but their capitals are ge 
nerally so limited, and, their farms so small, that 
they cannot afford to make experiments : and 
when, to this, you add their total want of educa 
tion, and consequent ignorance of every thing 
that does not come within the scope of their own 
limited observation, you cease to be surprised 
that the country should be so badly cultivated. 

The Canadian farmer is not sufficiently aware 
of the value of manures, and of artificial grasses: 
nor does he seem to reflect, that it is more ad 
vantageous to have a small farm of good land in 
high cultivation, than a large farm half-laboured 
or neglected. He ploughs the same field, and 
sows in it the same sort of grain, 20 times over ; 
he does not think of a routine of crops, nor does 
he renovate the exhausted soil by the addition of 
manures ; the only remedy he knows for land so 
exhausted as to yield little or no return, is, to 



let it lie fallow for some time. It is in vain to 
endeavour to convince him of his error : nothing 
but example will produce any good effect. This 
they begin to have. Some of the farmers are a 
little more enlightened than the generality of 
them : they have ventured to listen to reason, 
and to reflect upon the comparative value of dif 
ferent modes of treating their lands ; and they 
begin to make innovations in their ancient sys 
tems of farming. 

One of the principal causes of the poverty, not 
only of the Canadian farmer, but also of all ranks 
amongst them, is the existence of an old French 
law, by which the property of either a father or 
mother is, on the death of either, equally divided 
amongst their children. Nothing seems more 
consonant to the clearest principles of justice 
than such a law; yet it assuredly is prejudicial 
to society. 

In this country (or indeed in any other) an 
estate, with a good house upon it, convenient 
and appropriate offices, and a good stock of cat 
tle, may be well cultivated, and support, credit 
ably, a numerous family. If the head of the fa 
mily dies, leaving half a dozen children, the 
estate and whole property is divided amongst 
them, which happens here every day. Each of 
the sons takes possession of his own lot, builds a 
house, marries, and has a family. The value of 
the whole property is very much lessened. He 
who gets the lot, with the dwelling-house and 
offices, which served for the whole estate, gets 
what is out of all proportion to the means he rrow 
has of employing them : he can neither occupy 
them, nor keep them in repair. The other lots 
are generally too small to supply the expenses 
of a family, or enable their owners to support 
that state of respectability in the country which 
their father did ; so that, instead of one respect 
able and wealthy head of a family, who could 
protect and assist the younger branches, giving 
them a good education, and putting them forward 
in the world, you have half a dozen poor dispU 
rited creatures, who have not energy or power 
to. improve either their lands or themselves. 
Without great industry, and some capital, new 
lands cannot be brought into cultivation, nor 
can those already cleared be made very pro 
ductive. 

The law alluded to might do very well in 
such a country as Canada for a few generations, 
while the new grants continued very large : but 
the divisions and subdivisions must, in time, be 
come too minute, and be a check on the improve^ 
ment of the country, in an agricultural point of J 



QUEBEC. 



[view ; and also, as a natural consequence, retard 
the increase of population. This division of pro 
perty is extremely prejudicial to the interest not 
only of the landholder but also to that of the 
merchant, shopkeeper, and mechanic. 

When one of the parents dies, an inventory is 
made of the property, and each child can imme 
diately insist on the share of the property the 
law allows. The French law supposes that ma 
trimony is a co-partnership ; and that, conse 
quently, on the death of the wife, the children 
have a right to demand from their father the 
half of his property, as heirs to their mother. 
If the wife s relations are not on good terms with 
the father, a thing that sometimes happens, they 
find it no difficult matter to induce the children 
to demand a partage, or division, which often oc 
casions the total ruin of the father, because he 
loses credit, equal, at least, to his loss of pro 
perty, and often to a greater extent. His powers 
are diminished, and his children still have a claim 
on him for support. One effect of this law, and 
not one of the least material, is, that the affec 
tion between parents and children is likely to be 
destroyed by it : and, in fact, it is remarked, 
that in this country the instances of unfeeling 
conduct between parents and children are ex 
tremely frequent, and a spirit of litigation is ex 
cited amongst them. One is at a loss to account 
for such unnatural conduct, until an acquaint 
ance with the laws and customs of the country 
gives a clue to unravel the mystery. 

The law, making marriage a co-partnership, 
and creating a communite de bien, is sanctioned 
by the code of French law, coutume de Paris, 
which indeed is the text book of the Canadian 
lawyer ; the wife being by marriage invested with 
a right to half the husband s property ; and, 
being rendered independent of him, is perhaps 
the remote cause that the fair sex have such 
influence in France ; and in Canada, it is well 
known, that a great deal of consequence, and 
even an air of superiority to the husband, is as 
sumed by them. 

British subjects coming to this country are 
liable to the operation of all these Canadian or 
French laws, in the same manner that the Cana 
dians themselves are. They are not always 
aware of this circumstance ; and it has created 
much disturbance in families. A man who has 
made a fortune here (a thing by the bye which 
does not very often happen), conceives that he 
ought, as in England, to have the disposal of it 
as he thinks proper. No, says the Canadian law, 
you have a right to one-half only ; and if your 



wife dies, her children ; or, in case you have no 
children, her nearest relations may oblige you to 
make a partage, and give them half your pro 
perty, were it 100.000 guineas, and they the 
most worthless wretches in existence. Nothing 
can prevent this but an anti-nuptial contract of 
marriage, barring the communite de bien. 

7. Winter. A Canadian winter is truly a sub 
ject of curiosity to the natives of Britain, or of 
any of the s. countries of Europe. It presents a 
view of nature perfectly new, and a variety of 
phenomena so highly interesting, that they can 
not fail to arrest the attention of any one at all 
conversant in natural philosophy. 

In Canada there cannot well be said to be 
more than two seasons of the year, summer and 
winter. The earth hath scarcely laid aside her 
mantle of snow, when you begin to feel the force 
of summer heat ; and although the weather in 
September is mild and pleasant, it partakes more 
of the summer than of the autumn of temperate 
climates. The season of vegetation seems kindly 
prolonged, till surprised in a manner at once by 
the return of winter, without much of what may 
be called autumn weather. 

Frost is felt in October, but the sun still re 
tains enough of power to make the weather, dur 
ing the day, tolerably warm. During the month 
of November the frost becomes daily more se 
vere, and snow begins to fall. Your house is 
now put upon the winter establishment ; stoves 
are put up in your rooms, and in your passages ; 
the windows are well secured and made tight ; 
and you lay aside your summer dress, and adopt 
flannels and furs. One snow storm now suc 
ceeds another, till the whole face of the country 
is covered. The eye in vain looks for a bit of 
ground to rest upon, the trees alone remain vi 
sible, the chilling grasp of winter is every where 
felt, and every precaution is taken to resist its 
effects. 

There is something very awful and terrific in a 
Canadian snow storm. A heavy fall of snow is 
generally accompanied by a violent gale of wind, 
which driving along the snow with immense ve 
locity, and forming a thousand eddies and turn 
ings, according to the inequalities of the surface, 
and resistance consequent thereon, you are able 
to form an idea of the velocity of the wind ; it 
becomes, as it were, visible. The most severe 
snow storms they experience in Canada, come 
from the n. e., the frozen regions of Hudson s 
Bay and Labrador. 

During summer the woods of Canada abound 
with birds of a great variety of sorts and sizes ; J 



QUEBEC. 



257 



[partridges, woodcocks, pig-eons, and singing birds 
without number. The lakes and rivers abound 
with aquatic birds, such as ducks, geese, snipes, 
&amp;c. Some of these pass the whole summer in 
Canada ; others, such as the pigeons, are only 
found at certain seasons, as they pass from the 
5. to the more n. parts of the American continent, 
and vice versa. No sooner does the frost set in, 
than almost all the feathered tribes take the 
alarm, and leave the country ; even the hardy 
crow is obliged to take himself off. A species of 
partridge, called the pine partridge, (from its 
living on certain parts of the pine-tree, of which 
it tastes very strongly), alone remains ; but it is 
very rarely seen. Few quadrupeds are to be 
seen ; some hares are found, but to see them is 
difficult, for they have changed their colour to as 
pure a white as the snow in which they lie ; a 
kind precaution in nature to conceal them from 
their enemies. Many other quadrupeds, no doubt, 
remain in this country during the winter. Like 
the bear, they probably do not change their lodg 
ings while the snow is on the ground, but remain 
stationary, and in a torpid state. 

The Canadians change their appearance as 
much as a complete change of dress can do. The 
hat and bonnet rouge are laid aside, and they use 
fur caps, fur cloaks, fur gloves, and worsted hose, 
over, as well as under boots. Thus defended, 
they venture with impunity into the severest 
frost. 

The snow soon covers the ground to the depth 
of several feet, and wheel carriages can no longer 
be used : the wheels would sink so deep, that it 
would be impossible to advance a step. In place, 
therefore, of wheel carriages, a sort of sledge is 
used, which in Canada is called a cariole. It 
passes over the snow without sinking deep. It 
is placed on what they call runners, which re 
semble in form, the irons of a pair of skaits, and 
rise up in front in the same manner, and for the 
same purposes. The cariole is generally from 
nine to 12 inches above the snow. Some, called 
high runners, are about 18 inches. The body of 
the cariole varies in shape, according to the fancy 
of the owner. It is sometimes like the body of 
a phaeton, sometimes like a chair or gig, some 
times like a vis-a-vis, and sometimes like a family 
coach or chariot. The cariole, in short, is the 
name for all sorts of vehicles used in winter, from 
a market cart, up to a state coach. 

The generality of them are light open car 
riages, drawn by one horse. The snow, after 
being trodden on for some time, becomes com 
pact enough to bear the horse, and gives very 

VOL. IV. 



little resistance to the cariole. The inequalities 
formed in the snow by the carioles, the Cana 
dians call cahots (from the French word cahoter, 
to jolt), and they certainly are very well named, 
for you are jolted as if you crossed a field w ith 
very deep furrows and high narrow ridges. The 
motion is not unlike rowing in a boat against a 
head-sea : a thing that requires to be only once 
tried to be disliked. 

As no other sort of carriage can, however, 
be used in this country, custom and example re 
concile one to it : all ranks use them, of one sort 
or other. Sometimes you see them conveying a 
dashing buck up one street and down another at 
a gallop, to the no small annoyance of people 
who are fond of keeping their bones whole, a 
thing those gentlemen seem very careless about. 
Sometimes you see the close covered family ones, 
conveying an old lady quietly and steadily to 
church, or to have a little gossipping with a friend ; 
and sometimes you see them coming in from the 
country conveying beef and mutton, turkies and 
geese, for the supply of the market. 

When the navigation of the St. Lawrence be 
comes impracticable, little business is done by 
the merchants, who then appropriate a consider 
able part of their time to amusements. It is ne 
cessary to do something to give a little variety 
to the sameness of a six months winter. They 
have parties of pleasure in town, and parties of 
pleasure in the country, in which you have danc 
ing, music, and the social enjoyments of convi 
viality. 

There is a public assembly once a fortnight, 
which is very well attended. If you are fond of 
dancing, you have an opportunity of indulging 
in it ; if you like a sober rubber, you find very 
good whist players. The civil and military gen 
tlemen mix very cordially together. Such of the 
Canadians as can afford it, and have an inclinar 
tion, join in the amusements that are going for 
ward, particularly the assemblies and dancing 
parties ; and, indeed, they are an acquisition, as 
many of the ladies want neither beauty nor the 
accomplishments necessary for their gracing an 
assembly. 

One should naturally suppose that very bad 
consequences would be likely to arise from being 
heated by dancing in so cold a climate. This, 
however, is not the case : both the ladies and 
gentlemen in the coldest weather, are dressed in, 
the assembly-room as thinly as they are in Eng 
land in summer ; and the rooms are very com 
fortable, being kept moderately warm by a stove 
Immediately after dancing, and while very warm,] 



QUEBEC. 



[the company go into the open air in the middle 
of the night while the cold is extreme (from 20 
to 30 below the freezing point), without next 
day feeling the least inconvenience. It is true, 
they take every precaution necessary, by clothing 
themselves very warmly. 

People are less liable to suffer from cold in 
Canada than they are in England, notwithstand 
ing the greater severity of the weather. Many 
reasons are assigned for this fact. The Cana 
dians take care not to expose themselves to the 
external air without being warmly clothed ; par 
ticular attention is paid to keeping the feet, the 
hands, and the head warm. 

The air is extremely dry in winter, being de 
prived of its moisture by congelation ; the in 
tense frost causes naturally a deposition of the 
aqueous particles, in the shape of hoar frost. 
Now, it has been accurately ascertained and 
proved by experiments, that cold dry air is not 
so good a conductor of heat from our bodies as 
cold moist air ; it follows, therefore, that the 
thermometer may shew a very low temperature 
in cold dry air, such as we have here, without our 
being sensible of a great degree of cold ; and, 
that in cold moist air, such as you have in Eng 
land, the thermometer may not be under the 
freezing point, and yet the quantity of caloric or 
heat carried off from your body, be greater than 
if the thermometer shewed a temperature many 
degrees below freezing. Were the effect of the 
cold here on one s feelings, to increase in propor 
tion as the thermometer falls, and go as far be 
yond what it is in England, as the real quantum 
of caloric in the atmosphere is more there than 
here, it would be impossible to exist in this coun 
try ; but the evil carries its cure along with it, 
the frost deprives the air of its moisture, and 
consequently decreases its power of carrying off 
from our body the heat it contains. If we wish 
to know how the weather is to affect us, we 
should consult a hygrometer as well as a ther 
mometer. 

When the cold dry air of this country enters 
your apartment, and is warmed by the heat of 
the stove, its drying power becomes very great. 
To be convinced that this is the case, it is only 
necessary to observe how much the furniture of 
the house suffers from it. The very pannels of 
the doors shrink so much as almost to fall out of 
the frame, and the frame itself shrinks to such a 
degree that the bolt loses its hold. 

An Englishman can with difficulty form an 
idea of the cold of Canada, or of its effects, till 
he feels and sees them. The coldest weather is 



generally during the month of January. The 
medium temperature in December and January 
is about 22 degrees below freezing. About the 
beginning of December all the small rivers are 
frozen so completely, and covered with snow, 
that bridges for passing them are no longer ne 
cessary, and very little attention is paid to keep 
ing in the summer roads. Where they are hol 
low, or where there are fences, the roads are so 
completely filled up with snow, that they are on 
a level with the fields on each side. 

The country people, who first form the winter 
roads on the snow, direct their carioles by the 
nearest course where the snow is most level ; 
arid they go in as straight a line as possible, to 
the place to which they are destined. They put 
up branches of trees on each side the new track, 
as a direction to others who wish to go that way. 
These they call des ballses, or beacons. When 
they can conveniently follow the course or bed 
of a river, it is generally done, because the sur 
face is evener than over the fields, and there is 
less on them, as they do not freeze till after a 
considerable quantity of snow has fallen on the 
fields. 

Even the great river St. Lawrence is ar 
rested in its course. It freezes completely 
over a few leagues above Quebec, and serves 
occasionally as a road to Montreal. It seldom 
freezes over, opposite to Quebec, or in the 
bason. As the river narrows here, the current 
is increased, and the tide sets up and down with 
such force, that it generally keeps the floating 
masses of ice in motion. When the river freezes 
over opposite to Quebec, it is called, in the lan 
guage of the country, a pont, because it answers 
the purpose of a bridge to the people who live 
below Quebec, and who then bring up provi 
sions and fire-wood in great quantities. 

A variety of circumstances must combine to 
form a pont: when many very large masses of 
ice happen to come in contact, and fill the whole 
space between one side of the river and the 
other, they become stationary. If this happens 
at neap tides, and in calm weather, the frost 
fixes the whole, and it becomes a solid mass be 
fore the rising tides derange it; when it has stood 
a few days, it generally acquires strength enough 
to resist every impulse it may receive, till the 
warmth of the April sun affects it. All these, 
circumstances so seldom happen at the same time 
that it is about once in 10 years that the river 
takes opposite to Quebec. When such, however, 
is the case, you see, for the distance of eight 
miles, an immense sheet of ice, as smooth as a] 



QUEBEC. 



25i) 



[mirror. Thousands of people crowd upon it 
every day, and booths are erected for their en 
tertainment. In one quarter, you see numbers 
of people enjoying the amusement of skaiting ; 
in another, you see carioles driving in different 
directions ; for the ice is so strong, that horses 
go on it with the greatest safety. Sometimes 
you see cariole races : they go over the ice with 
great swiftness. In short, when the pont takes 
(as they term it), it occasions a kind of jubilee in 
Quebec. 

In one point of view, it is a subject of real re 
joicing to the city ; it is accompanied with sub 
stantial advantages. Provisions of all kinds, and 
firewood, a no less necessary article in this 
country, fall in price, from an increase in quan 
tity, as soon as the pont enables the people in 
the country, below Quebec, to bring their sur 
plus stock to market, in their carioles, without 
the expense and risk of passing the river in 
canoes. These canoes are not such as are used 
in the n. w. trade. They are one solid piece of 
wood, the trunk of a large tree scooped out, and 
formed in the outside something like a boat ; 
some of them are very large, carrying easily 15 
or 20 people. 

The passing of the St. Lawrence in canoes, in 
the middle of winter, is a very extraordinary 
operation. The time of high water is chosen, 
when the large masses of ice are almost sta 
tionary. The canoe is launched into the water, 
where there is an opening : the people are pro 
vided with ropes, boat-hooks, and paddles. 
When they come to a sheet of ice, they jump 
out of the canoe upon it ; draw the canoe up 
after them ; push it to the other side of the sheet 
of ice ; launch it into the water ; paddle till 
they come to another sheet of ice ; again haul 
up the canoe, cross the ice, and again launch 
and so on till they reach the other side. You 
see 20 to 30 canoes crossing in this way at the 
same time ; and you cannot help trembling for 
them, when you see two immense masses of ice 
coming together, and they between, apparently 
in the greatest danger of being crushed to 
pieces ; but the people extricate themselves with 
great dexterity. Custom has taught them to 
avoid the danger which seems to threaten them 
with destruction : they dexterously jump upon 
the first piece of ice with which they come in 
contact, and haul the canoe after them. 

8. Travelling in that season. In travelling in 
Canada during the winter, you must wrap yourself 
up in various vestments. In addition to the 
usual number of coats and waistcoats, it is neces 



sary to have a very large double cloak, a large 
fur cap, and fur tippet; and, what will add 
greatly to your comfort and defence against the 
cold wind, a very large muff, in which you will 
be often obliged to bury your face when the 
wind blows keen ; for you will recollect, that as 
the cariole is an open carriage, it affords no de 
fence from the cold. With all the clothing and 
coverings you can put on, still you can with dif 
ficulty keep yourself warm. 

Wnen a journey of any extent is to be made, 
a cariole must be used : but if you wish to de 
viate from the public beaten track, or to go into 
the woods, or cross fields, either from necessity 
or for amusement, you must use what are called 
snow-shoes. They are made of a kind of net 
work, fixed on a frame, shaped like a boy s 
paper kite ; they are about two feet long, and 
18 inches broad, and therefore take in so much 
of the surface of the snow, that you sink but a 
very few inches. The military, in Canada, are 
all provided with snow shoes, and are marched 
out on them, that it may be no novelty in case 
of their taking the field in winter. For the same 
reason they are sometimes encamped amongst the 
snow. 

You can take a great deal of exercise in win 
ter, without being fatigued, and can walk with 
ease and agility under a load of waistcoats and 
coats, under which you would sink in summer. 
The winter travelling in Canada is sometimes 
very expeditious. It is surprising with what 
speed a good Canadian horse will travel, draw 
ing a cariole over the ice. There have been in 
stances of a single horse having drawn a cariole, 
with two people in it, no less than 90 miles in 12 
hours; which is more than the English mail-coach 
rate, with all their changes. When this happens, 
the roads must be very smooth and hard, which 
is generally the case when a severe frost has suc 
ceeded a thaw. 

The Canadian horse is a remarkably hardy 
animal : his best pace is a trot. He is accus 
tomed to a great deal of bad usage and hard 
work, and he is the most willing creature in the 
world (as the jockeys term it), for he never re 
fuses the draught. You will see them brought 
from the country into Quebec, in the coldest 
weather, and left standing in the open air with 
out covering, for hours together, while their 
owners are transacting their business, or drink 
ing in a public-house ; and they seem not to be 
the worse for it. In the winter time the Cana 
dian horse, like all the other quadrupeds of the 
country, acquires an increased quantity of fur] 
L L 2 



*260 



QUEBEC. 



[to protect him from the cold ; and the Canadians 
never use the currying comb. 

The great difference, in point of beauty, be 
tween the winter and summer scenery is most 
striking;. Instead of the fine variety, which, in 
summer, presented itself, in tracing the course 
of the river, the gaiety, the liveliness of the 
moving waters, and passing vessels the fine 
tints of the forest, and of the corn-field the 
labourer employed in the business of the farm 
every surrounding object reflected from the sur 
face of the river ; nothing now is to be seen but 
one continued solid plain one indiscriminate 
field of snow; no rivers no waters no ships 
not an animal in view, man nor beast, except 
now and then a muffled-up traveller, hurrying 
along, as if anxious to get to a place of shelter. 
Which way soever you direct your attention, 
nothing presents itself to your observation but 
ice and snow ; so that you may suppose there can 
be very little variety in a winter journey. Alter 
the first day, your curiosity is perfectly satisfied. 

The country people pass their time in winter 
very idly. "Their only care seems to be to keep 
themselves warm ; and their principal occupa 
tion is cutting and bringing home firewood. 
They make a journey to Quebec or Montreal 
occasionally, to dispose of any surplus provisions 
they may have, and procure some of the com 
forts of life ; such as replenishing their rum bot 
tle, and renewing their stock of snuff, pipes, 
and tobacco. Those who live on the banks of 
the St. Lawrence, where the tide ebbs and flows, 
occupy themselves occasionally in fishing, or 
catching a species of fish, which come up the 
river in the winter time in great abundance, and 
form a seasonable supply for those who will take 
the trouble to attend to it. These fish are from 
four to nine inches long, and resemble a cod in 
every respect, except size. The Canadians call 
them petite morut; the English call them Tommy 
cod. Some people think that it is a different 
fish from the cod, since they are found full of 
spawn ; which, it is alleged, could not be the 
case with cod at so early an age, and so small a 
size. It is not, we believe, ascertained at what 
age or size the codfish begins to propagate ; and 
we have yet to learn why this may not take place 
when the fish is six inches long, as well as when 
it is a foot, or two or three feet, long. If size 
were the criterion, is it not as extraordinary that 
a fish, which grows to the length of three or four 
feet, should propagate when at the length of one 
foot, as that it should do so at the length of six 
inches. 



The manner of catching these fish is to cut 
holes in the ice, and put down either nets or 
lines. Between Quebec and Three Rivers im 
mense quantities are taken. They are easily pre 
served without salt ; the frost answers the pur 
pose ; and you may see them piled upon the ice 
in large quantities, all frozen. It is a remark 
able thing, that the Canadian horses eat them. 
One can scarcely help smiling at the idea of a 
horse eating fish, but such, we are assured by 
travellers, is indisputably the fact. 

Great quantities of these fish are caught at 
Quebec, with lines. The manner of doing so is 
odd enough : a hole is dug in the ice, and a tem 
porary house is built over it, large enough to 
hold half a dozen people, and a stove to keep 
them warm. Those who cannot afford to pur 
chase deals to make a house, substitute large 
pieces of ice, with which they form a kind of de 
fence from the weather. The middle of the night 
is the best time for fishing. They place a strong 
light near the hole, which attracts the attention 
of the fish, and brings them round the hole in 
large quantities ; so that they are caught as fast 
as they can be pulled in. These houses are 
erected on the river St. Charles, in great num 
bers, and have a curious appearance in a dark 
night, particularly those made of ice, the trans 
parency of which gives them the effect of so many 
lanterns. 

It is a singular fact, that these fish, if not 
bruised, will, when put into cold water, several 
days after they are caught, return to life, and 
swim about as well as ever. At the time they are 
caught they are thrown into a basket, and in the 
course of a minute or two they become frozen 
stiff. When carried home, and put into cold 
water, they become thawed, and begin to swim. 
How long they would continue out of the water 
in the frozen state, and afterwards shew signs of 
life, we cannot determine ; but some that have 
been taken, and been in a frozen state for eight 
days, when put into water, have not been found 
to recover, or shew any signs of life. 

In all countries, people pass their leisure hours 
pretty much alike ; that is, they dedicate them 
to amusement. In Canada, as most of their 
winter hours are leisure hours, there is, of 
course, some ingenuity necessary to give such 
variety to their amusements as may prevent them 
from becoming insipid by frequent repetition. 
Hence, in Quebec and Montreal, to the regular 
town parties, are added, irregular country par 
ties. Pic-nic feasts, where every one carries with 
him a ready- dressed dish, are very common ;] 



QUEBEC. 



[and as the place of rendezvous is generally a 
few miles out of town, the ladies and gentlemen 
have the pleasure of a little carioling before 
dinner; the roads, it is true, are often abomi 
nably bad, being a constant succession of cahots, 
in which you are jolted most unmercifully ; not 
to say any thing of carioles being very frequently 
upset, and their contents, ladies, gentlemen, 
soup, poultry, or roast beef, tumbled into the 
snow, to the no small amusement of the rest of 
the party. It is also any thing but excessively 
pleasant ; after having dined, danced, supped, 
and passed the evening in festive glee, enlivened 
by the song and the catch, to drive home in the 
middle of the night, let the wind blow, and the 
snow drift, as much as they please. Besides, 
there sometimes come on such dreadful storms, 
that neither man nor horse can shew their face 
to them. The consequence is, the party remain 
all night; the fiddlers again strike up the merry 
dance, and the whist players again cut for part 
ners. Day-light comes at last, and enables the 
party to take the road homeward without the 
danger of losing their way, which most probably 
would have been the case with some of them, 
had they attempted it in the course of the night. 
The little hardships, disasters, or inconveniences 
of these country parties, give a zest, however, 
to the more elegant amusements of the town. 

A stranger in Canada, who has had a respect 
able introduction, is well received. 

The difficulties attending a winter s journey 
from Quebec to the United States, are most 
striking. Mr. Gray, (to whom we are indebted 
for most of the information contained in this ar 
ticle), thus describes it : 

" I procured one of the Yankie sleighs, as 
they are usually termed, and left Montreal in a 
very cold, hazy morning. Our first stage was 
from Montreal cross the St. Lawrence to Lap- 
rairie, a distance of about nine miles. After 
travelling about two hours on the river, we be 
gan to think it was more than time to reach the 
other side. We continued our course for half an 
hour more ; still HO appearance of the place of 
our destination. In fact, we had lost our way. 
The weather was so thick and hazy, we could 
see but a very short space, and our driver had 
struck into a wrong track. There were a variety 
of tracks on the river, formed by the people 
coming from different parts of the opposite side, 
with fire-wood, &amp;c. for Montreal. Indeed, I 
reckoned from two to 300 sleighs on that part of 
the* river alone, all directing their course to 
Molitreal. 



" On inquiring of some of these people, we 
found that instead of crossing the river we had 
taken a direction upwards, and were very near 
the rapids, a little below a part of the country 
inhabited by a tribe called the Caghnawaga In 
dians, at a considerable distance from Montreal. 
We had to retrace our steps ; and, in about two 
hours more, we arrived at Laprairie. 

" This circumstance is trifling in itself; I 
mention it merely to shew you the liability to go 
astray, when travelling over a level surface of 
snow. You can hardly imagine any thing more 
easy than to cross from one side of a river to 
another, over a track which we had been accus 
tomed to look at every day, and yet, we went a 
considerable way out of our road, in a very short 
space of time. It was a good lesson for us, as 
we had to go on Lake Champlain ; where, if we 
once lost ourselves, it might be long enough be 
fore we again found out the right road. 

" After leaving Laprairie, we very soon got 
into a primeval forest, through which a road has 
been cut as far as the American boundary line ; 
and it is continued onwards to Lake Champlain. 
This is the principal communication in this dis 
trict, between Canada and the United States. 
For many miles the country is very level, and 
completely covered with large timber, princi 
pally pines. I saw no cross roads, so that it is a 
kind of pass, that might be defended with very 
few men. 

" The vicinity of Montreal to the United 
States, encourages the soldiers occasionally to 
desert, by the road we passed ; to prevent which, 
a few invalids are stationed in the wood ; they 
live in log-houses, not the most comfortably in 
the world. There is another road by way of St. 
John s, but the deserters avoid it, on account of 
the garrison or fort. As we approached the 
American boundary, we found a few settlements, 
what the Americans call a pitch. They cut 
down some trees, make a log-house, sow some 
corn ; next year they cut down more trees, and 
sow more corn, and so on, till they produce 
something in the style of a farm, instead of 
cutting down the trees, the Americans very fre 
quently ring them, as they term it, which is cut 
ting a section of the bark quite round : soon after 
which the tree decays. We saw several potash 
manufactories as we approached the lake, and 
the woods are continued close to the water. We 
found near the lake a kind of public-house, where 
we stopped during the night. 

" Next morning we could not proceed, be* 
cause, during the whole night it had blown very] 



QUEBEC. 



[fresh, accompanied with a heavy fall of snow, 
which continued till near mid-day ; and as every 
track on the lake was covered, we could not ven 
ture to go upon it, our conductor not being well 
acquainted with the different bearings of the land 
marks. 

" The lake, though 120 miles long, is not 
broad, seldom above 10 or 15 miles ; and there 
are a great many islands and head-lands, which 
direct the course of the pilot in summer, and the 
cariole or sleigh driver in winter. 

" So soon as the weather moderated, we set 
out on the lake; and took a guide for some 
time, till we should fall in with some one going 
our way, or discover a track in the snow to 
direct us. 

" Travelling on Lake Champlain, is, at all 
times, really dangerous ; and I would not adv ise 
any one to attempt it, if it can be avoided ; which 
may generally be done by lengthening the route. 
Instead of going on the lake to Burlington, or 
Skeensboro, you may go by way of St. John s, 
Windmill-point, and Sandbar, to Burlington, and 
from thence to Skeensboro. 

" It is very common, for sleigh, horses, and 
men, to fall through the ice, where the water is 
some hundred feet deep ; and you have no warn 
ing of your danger till the horses drop in, pulling 
the sleigh after them ; luckily, the weak places 
are of no great extent ; you extricate yourself 
from the sleigh as quickly as possible, and you 
find the ice generally strong enough to support 
you, though it would not bear the weight of the 
horses. You instantly lend your aid in pulling 
out the horses, and in endeavouring to save 
them, which is done in a manner perfectly 
unique, and which will require the greatest 
stretch of your faith in my veracity, to believe 
the horses are strangled, to save their lives. 

" When the horses fall through the ice (there 
are almost always two in an American sleigh), 
the struggles and exertions they make, serve only 
to injure and sink them ; for, that they should 
get out of themselves, is, from the nature of the 
thing, perfectly impossible. When horses go on 
the lake, they always have round their necks a 
rope, with a running noose. I observed that our 
horses had each of them such a rope ; and, on 
inquiiy, found out for what purpose it was in 
tended. The moment the ice breaks, and the 
horses sink into the water, the driver, and those 
in the sleigh, get out, and catching hold of the 
ropes, pull them with all their force, which, in 
a very few seconds, strangles the horses ; and no 
sooner does this happen, than they rise in the 



water, float on one side, are drawn out on strong- 
ice, the noose of the rope is loosened, and re 
spiration recommences ; in a few minutes the 
horses are on their feet, as much alive as ever. 
This operation has been known to be performed 
two or three times a day, on the same horses ; 
for, when the spring advances, the weak places 
in the lake become very numerous, and the 
people, whose business leads them often on it, 
frequently meet with accidents. They tell you, 
that horses which are often on the lake, get so 
accustomed to being hanged, that they think no 
thing at all of it. 

" Though this manner of saving horses, and 
getting them out of the water, appears extraor 
dinary, yet the thing is very common, and known 
to every one who has been accustomed to travel 
on the lakes and rivers of this country, during 
winter. The attempt, however, does not always 
succeed. It sometimes happens, that both sleigh 
and horses go the bottom ; and the men too, if 
they cannot extricate themselves in time. There 
was an instance of it on Lake Champlain, a few 
days before I crossed it. 

" These weak places of the ice, which prove 
so treacherous, have been later in freezing than 
the surrounding ice. In all lakes, and large 
bodies of fresh water, there are some places 
which never freeze ; and some which freeze 
much later than others. It is to be accounted 
for, probably, in this way : the great body of 
the water is of a higher temperature than the 
atmosphere, although the surface has been cooled 
down below the freezing point, and become ice. 
The water is constantly giving out its heat to 
the atmosphere, at some particular place, which 
thereby is kept from freezing for a considerable 
time ; by and by, when the frost becomes very 
intense, that place at length freezes, but does 
not acquire the strength necessary to support the 
horses. 

" There is another source of danger to the 
traveller on the lakes, which it is difficult to ac 
count for : viz. large cracks or openings, which 
run from one side of the lake to the other ; some 
of them six feet broad at least. I had not pro 
ceeded many miles on the lake before I met with 
a crack ; but, instead of an opening, I found that 
at this place the ice had shelved up to the height 
of several feet ; and I learned that this was an 
indication of there being an opening further on. 
At the distance of eight or 10 miles from this 
place, I was surprised to observe the driver put 
his horses to their full speed : I could see. no 
cause for it. In a few minutes, however, I saw] 



QUEBEC. 



203 



[the crack, or opening, about five feet broad : we 
were at it in a moment ; it was impossible to 
check the horses, or to stop and consider of the 
practicability of passing, or of the consequences ; 
the driver, without consulting any one, had 
made up his mind on the subject, the horses 
took the leap, and cleared the opening, carrying 
the sleigh and its contents with them. The con 
cussion on the opposite side was so great, however, 
that the runners of the sleigh were broken, and 
there was a great chance of our being thrown, 
by the violence of the concussion, out of the 
sleigh, into the gulf we had crossed : this had 
very nearly taken place ; but I was fortunate 
enough to regain my seat. By the help of some 
cords we repaired our damage, and proceeded on 
our journey. We met with several other cracks, 
but as they were not in general above a foot or 
two in breadth, we passed them, without fear or 
accident. When the ice is cleared of snow, 
which was frequently the case, I could see that 
it was about a foot in thickness ; yet it made a 
crackling noise as we went along, and seemed to 
give to the weight of the sleigh and horses, as 
we advanced, which produced sensations not very 
pleasant. 

" There are a great many islands in Lake 
Champlain, which are generally inhabited ; you 
find inns on them, too, where you can get pro 
visions and beds, if necessary." 

9. Provisions not dearer during that season. 
The severity of the cold, in this country, has its 
advantages as well as disadvantages. The quan 
tity of snow with which the ground is covered, 
renders it necessary for the farmer to house all 
his cattle and sheep, and to put his hay, straw, 
and corn, under cover. So soon as the ground 
is covered, and the frost completely set in, the 
cattle and sheep, which are destined for winter 
use, are killed ; and also poultry of all kinds, 
before they have lost any of the fat they had 
acquired during the summer and autumn. Little 
or no salt is necessary to preserve them : they 
only require to be exposed to the frost for a 
short time, and they become as hard as ice. 
When in this state, the poultry, and indeed the 
beef and mutton too, are packed in casks or 
boxes amongst snow, and at the end of four or 
five months are still perfectly sound and good. 
Frozen meat is thawed by keeping it in cold 
water about twelve hours warm water would 
render it useless. After the meat is hard frozen, 
the principal thing to be attended to, is to pre 
serve it from the external air, when the tempe 
rature is above the freezing point, which is fre 



quently the case in March and April. Snow be 
ing a good non-conductor of heat, answers this 
purpose : blankets, too, are frequently used. 
The frost not only preserves beef, mutton, and 
poultry, but also fish, so long as you can keep 
it in a temperature below freezing. The fish 
market, during winter, is pretty well supplied, 
owing, not a little, to the great industry of the 
people of the United States, who come even 
from Boston to Montreal, a distance of 420 
miles. 

Provisions of all kinds are more plentiful, and 
consequently cheaper, in winter than in summer. 
The market is supplied from a greater extent of 
country. The lakes and rivers being frozen, and 
the people without work, they bring to market 
all sorts of meat and poultry, from a great dis 
tance. Being hard frozen, it can be stowed in 
their carioles without receiving the least injury 
from the great length of carriage. 

Good beef and mutton are then sold at from 3d. 
to4d. per lb.; good fat fowls at 20d. to 2s. per 
couple ; turkeys 2s. to 2s. 6d. each ; geese and 
ducks in proportion : so that the expense of 
housekeeping, in these articles, is not great in 
winter. In summer, as meat is supplied in the 
towns by the town butchers alone, the price ad 
vances considerably. The great heat of summer 
renders it impossible to bring meat from any 
considerable distance. 

It is a fortunate thing for the people in the 
towns of Canada, that provisions are cheaper in 
winter than in summer ; for the winter subjects 
them to a heavy expense for firewood, which is, 
as you may well believe, a sine qua non in this 
climate. 

The expense of fuel to a family in Quebec or 
Montreal, is fully equal to what the same family 
would require in London ; and it is to be re 
gretted, that there is no prospect of its becoming 
cheaper. On the contrary, in proportion as the 
woods are cut, and the distance of carriage in 
creased, the price is augmented ; so that in time 
it will be cheaper to import coals than purchase 
wood. Firewood is generally laid in during the 
summer. It is brought to Quebec and Mont 
real on the river, in immense rafts. The wood 
is cut into junks, and piled upon a float sub 
divided into compartments of a certain size, con 
taining so many cords. In winter, it is brought 
from the country in sleighs, and sold at so much 
per cord, or per sleigh load. No coal has yet 
been found in Canada; probably, because it has 
never been thought worth searching after. It is 
supposed that coal exists in the neighbourhood] 



QUEBEC. 



[of Quebec; at any rate, there can be no doubt 
that it exists in great abundance in the island of 
Cape Breton, which may one day become the 
Newcastle of Canada. 

At present, coals are to be purchased very 
cheap in Quebec. Many of the vessels from 
Scotland, and from the north of England, take 
in coals as ballast, and sell them very cheap, 
sometimes as low as 17s. per chaldron. Even 
the kennel coal, which is difficult to be be met 
with in many parts of England, is sold at 36s. 
per chaldron, which is not above half the price 
of Newcastle coal, in winter, in the neighbour 
hood of London. People who have been accus 
tomed to burn wood, do not like to burn coal. 
They tell you that the smell is extremely disa 
greeable to them, and, besides, that coal does 
not answer for stoves so well as wood. This 
prepossession against coals, accounts for their 
being proportionably cheaper than wood. 

It is well, however, that they have either 
wood or coal, for the effects of frost in this 
country are with difficulty guarded against, and 
are often in themselves very curious. 

10. A sudden thaw. In thus having endea 
voured to afford some of the striking features of 
the Canadian winter, we ought not to have 
omitted that, during the most severe cold in 
January, a great and very sudden change takes 
place almost every year, and continues for a day 
or two. From a most severe frost, when the 
thermometer shews 60 degrees below the freez 
ing point, it suddenly becomes so warm, that 
the thermometer shews three degrees above 
freezing. In short, the weather will sometimes 
change in a few hours, from nearly the greatest 
degree of cold that ever was known here, to a 
complete thaw. Such a great and sudden change 
is productive of very unpleasant sensations. The 
stoves and winter clothing are quite oppressive ; 
and yet, it is dangerous to dispense with either, 
for you, every hour, look for a return of the 
cold weather. Fortunately, it does not in gene 
ral continue many days ; sometimes, however, 
it has been known to last 10 or 14 days ; and, 
when this is the case, it is of very serious injury 
to the country, in a variety of ways. It is ex 
tremely prejudicial to the health of the people. 
The streets are so inundated with water, from 
the melting of the snow, that you cannot walk 
out ; and the roads become so soft, and the 
rivers so full of water, that you cannot use a 
cariole, or travel, indeed, in any mode. But, 
what is a much more serious evil than all these 
things, the provisions which were destined to 



serve through the winter, become thawed, and 
are either destroyed altogether, or greatly in 
jured. 

It is surprising, that although this circum 
stance has occurred frequently, and the people 
are subject to it every year, yet there is not 
much attention paid to putting the provisions 
in such a situation, and packing them up in such 
a manner, as to effectually prevent their being 
accessible to the warm air, during the thaw. It 
might be done very easily : let them be packed 
in a tight box or cask, after being completely 
frozen, and this box or cask put into another, 
large enough to admit of its being surrounded 
with pounded ice and snow, which would act as 
a perfect non-conductor of heat, and preserve 
the contents of the inner box in their frozen 
state for a great length of time. The outer box 
should have holes in its bottom, to allow any 
water to run out, which might arise from the 
melting of the snow. This method has, we be 
lieve, been tried with success ; but it is by no 
means in general use. 

During the thaw, a very extraordinary effect 
is produced, sometimes, on the trees. The Ca 
nadians call it a ver-glass. The tree, from the 
trunk to the point of the smallest branch, be 
comes incrusted with pure ice. There may be a 
small degree of frost during the night, which 
will freeze the moisture that covered the trees 
during the day ; and, it is probable, that the ex 
ternal parts of the trees themselves, being cooled 
down below the freezing point, by the extreme 
cold of the previous weather, freeze the vapour 
the moment it comes in contact with them ; in 
the same way that the glass of a window in win 
ter becomes incrusted with ice, by the freezing 
of the moisture in the air of a room. The 
branches become at last so loaded with ice, that 
they can with difficulty support the weight of it ; 
and if there happens to come a storm of wind, 
which is not unfrequent, the branches infallibly 
break off, and the destruction amongst trees of all 
sorts is immense. Through the effects of some of 
the ver-glass, branches of trees, from six to 12 
inches in diameter, are seen every where hang 
ing from the trees, completely broken down. 
We are told, that there can be nothing more 
curious or beautiful than one of those ice-in- 
crusted trees, when the sun shines upon it. In 
deed, one can easily conceive that it must have 
the appearance of fairy work, or enchantment. 

1 1 . Method of warming the houses. In Quebec 
the rooms are heated by stoves. The principal 
advantage arising from this practice, is the uni-J 



QUEBEC. 



265 



[form heat which is kept up, so that the walls of 
the room become warmed, and communicate their 
warmth to the air which comes into the room, 
and gets in contact with them. In a room, the 
walls of which are cold, if the air is heated and 
rarefied, it will be cooled and condensed the mo 
ment it comes in contact with the cold walls ; 
and as by condensation it becomes heavier, it 
it will rush downwards, producing a current of 
air towards the floor, which will be felt by those 
sitting close to the wall. 

The Canadians keep their houses very hot; and 
they themselves, while excessively warm, go im 
mediately into the cold air, without seeming to 
feel any inconvenience from it ; which would in 
duce one to believe, that the sudden transition 
from a hot room into the cold air, if the person 
be properly clothed, were not so dangerous as is 
generally imagined. This is further illustrated 
by the instances we have already mentioned, of 
ladies and gentlemen going into the cold night 
air, out of a warm ball-room, without suffering 
any inconvenience from it. 

We are disposed to join in the opinion of those 
who think that the living in a warm room, so 
far from weakening and making you delicate, as 
it is termed, and- rendering you unfit to bear 
cold, is the best preservative against the bad 
effects of cold, when you may be under the ne 
cessity of exposing yourself to it. 

It has been observed by an eminent philoso 
pher, that if, during the time we are sitting still, 
the circulation of the blood is gradually and in 
sensibly diminished by the cold which surrounds 
us, it is not possible that we should be able to 
support a great additional degree of cold, without 
sinking under it. We should be like water, 
which, by exposure to moderate cold in a state 
of rest, has been slowly cooled down below the 
freezing point ; the smallest additional cold, or a 
small degree of agitation, changes it to ice in an 
instant ; but water, at a high temperature, will 
support the same degree of frost, for a consi 
derable time, without appearing to be at all af 
fected by it. 

In Canada, the walls of the houses are usually 
plastered on the outside, to preserve the stone 
from moisture, and the consequent destructive 
effects of the frost. They find it, however, a very 
difficult matter to get plaster to adhere ; parti 
cularly if exposed to the e. wind, which, in 
one winter, destroys almost any plaster they 
can use. A composition has lately been tried, 
which promises to answer better. About a couple 
of pounds of Muscovado sugar are mixed with 

VOL. IV.. 



a bushel of lime ; and it makes a very hard and 
durable mixture for rough casting. In places 
the most exposed to the e. wind, it has remained 
hard and fast, after a fair trial. 

12. Breaking-up of the winter. No part of 
the Canadian winter is more interesting than the 
conclusion of it, when the snow begins to dis 
appear, and the ice in the rivers to break up, 
which is the case in the end of April. One would 
naturally suppose, that six months frost and snow 
would have become insufferably tiresome to a 
stranger : but this is not the case. The winter 
may be divided into three seasons, or portions, 
as it were : for two months at the beginning the 
snow is falling, and the frost becoming daily more 
severe. The middle two months of severe frost 
is not without interest ; for then is to be seen 
winter in all his majesty, after he has bound up 
the lakes and rivers in fetters of ice, and covered 
the earth as with a mantle. The last two months 
are interesting, because there is then an anxiety 
to see by what means, and in what manner, such 
an immensity of snow and ice is to be got rid of. 

The influence of the sun is little felt in 
February. In March, however, you are sensible 
of its power ; and, during this month, the wea 
ther in general is very beautiful ; the frost is still 
sufficiently severe to keep the roads hard and 
good ; the sky is clear, the sun shines bright ; it 
is pleasant to get into a cariole, and drive a few 
miles into the country. During the month of 
April the influence of the sun has been so great, 
as powerfully to affect all nature. The snow has 
nearly disappeared about the first week in May ; 
the ice in the lakes and rivers is broken up by 
the increase of water from the melting of snow, 
and it is floated down to the great river St. Law 
rence, where it accumulates in immense quanti 
ties, and is carried up and down with the tide. 

At this time the St. Lawrence presents one of 
the most extraordinary scenes in nature. It is 
impossible to form an adequate idea of it without 
being a spectator. From bank to bank it is quite 
choked up with immense masses and sheets of 
ice ; some of them from 400 to 500 yards in dia 
meter. The tide forces them on one another, 
breaks them into smaller pieces, and raises them 
in shelving and fantastic forms considerably 
above the surface. This mass of moving ice fills 
the whole basin, and is seen as far up the river 
as your eye can reach, a distance altogether of 
12 to 15 miles. 

In the fall of the year the risk of shipwreck 
is greatly increased, from the snow-storms pre 
valent at that time. These storms not only pre- 1 
M M 



266 



QUEBEC. 



[vent the sailors from seeing the coast and the 
landmarks, and consequently from directing their 
course properly ; but the cold is then so severe, 
that the men cannot remain exposed to it. The 
cordage becomes incrusted with ice, so that it 
cannot run through the blocks, and the sails be 
come frozen in such a manner, that there is no 
possibility of working the ship; besides, so much 
ice gets about the rudder that it becomes im- 
moveable. Many vessels have been lost from 
these circumstances, and almost every winter, 
some vessels sail in expectation of getting out of 
the river; but, being caught in a snow storm, are 
very fortunate if they escape destruction, by get 
ting into some bay or place of shelter, where 
they remain fixed for the winter. 

No sooner is the influence of the April sun 
felt, than you see birds of various kinds returning 
to their summer quarters ; and vegetation, about 
the 10th of May, is very strong. The snow is 
nearly gone, and the frost is sufficiently out of 
the ground to allow the farmer to commence his 
operations. This takes place after the snow is 
gone, sooner than one would imagine. The frost 
does not penetrate so deep into the ground, as 
from the intenseness and long continuance of the 
cold might be expected. 

In countries where you have six months frost, 
were the soil exposed to its influence all the 
while it would have penetrated so deep, that it 
is a question if the heat of a whole summer 
would eradicate it. But Providence has here 
furnished a remedy : it has kindly decreed, that 
when water is cooled down to 32 it shall freeze, 
and be converted into ice and snow. The rivers 
become covered with ice, the surface of the earth 
becomes hardened, snow falls to a considerable 
thickness, and by these means the water and the 
land are protected from the influence of that im 
mense volume of cold, dense atmosphere, which 
presses on from the polar regions towards the s. 
when the sun retreats after the solstice. The 
natural heat of the earth is about 42 ; the ther 
mometer stands at this point in the deepest mines 
that have been sunk. This natural heat, as well 
as the heat accumulated in the earth and water 
during summer, is prevented, by the ice and 
snow, from making its escape ; and as soon as 
the return of the sun has brought warmth enough 
to banish the frost from the atmosphere, the 
latent heat of the earth and water lends its aid 
in dissolving the snow and ice, and forwarding 
vegetation. Snow is peculiarly well calculated 
for preserving warmth in the earth ; because it is 
full of air, which is known to be a very bad con 



ductor of heat, and will of course the more ef 
fectually prevent its escaping from the surface. 
It is a thing very well ascertained here, that ve 
getation has made some progress under the snow, 
before it has deserted the ground. 

The long continuance of winter in Canada is 
certainly a circumstance which must retard its 
progress in improvement, and the increase of its 
trade. Some people pretend to say, that it must 
ever prevent its becoming a great, populous, and 
trading nation. We cannot go so far. We have 
seen Russia in the course of a century, become 
a great, populous, and trading nation. We have 
seen a splendid capital city, and many respecta 
ble towns, raised by the magical powers of com 
merce and domestic industry ; and yet the Russian 
winter is as long as the Canadian winter. The 
communication of the Russians, by water, with 
the rest of the world is cut off", and that element 
confounded, as it were, with the land, from the 
27th of November to the 19th of April (upon an 
average calculation of 15 years), which is nearly 
five months. Now vessels sometimes leave 
Quebec as late as the beginning of December, 
and arrive sometimes in the end of April, so that 
the Neva is as long shut up as the St. Lawrence ; 
yet nobody ever doubts that Russia is a rising 
country, and may become the most powerful in 
Europe. 

It is worthy of remark, and not a little sur 
prising, that so large a river as the St. Lawrence, 
in lat. 47, should be shut up with ice as soon, 
and continue as long shut up, as the compara 
tively small river, the Neva, in lat. 60. 

CHAP. II. 

1. Description of the inhabitants. The popula 
tion of Quebec, according to the census of 1784, 
amounted to 6472 souls. The towns of Quebec 
and Montreal, including their suburbs, are said 
to contain at present about 12,000 inhabitants 
each, nearly three-fourths of whom are French. 
In speaking of the society of Lower Canada, we 
shall confine our remarks chiefly to the city of 
Quebec, which as it is the capital, and the man 
ners of its inhabitants are in every respect similar 
to those of Montreal, will serve as a general view 
of society among the higher orders throughout 
the country. 

The British inhabitants of Quebec consist of 
the government people ; the military ; a few per 
sons belonging to the church, the law, and medi 
cine ; the merchants, and shopkeepers. 

The French comprise the old noblesse and 
seigniors, most of whom are members of the go-J 



QUEBEC. 



207 



[vernment ; the clergy ; the advocates and nota 
ries ; the storekeepers. 

These different classes form three distinct di 
visions of society, which contrive to keep at a 
respectable distance from each other. The first 
is composed of the highest orders next to the 
governor, comprehending the members of the 
government : the honourable professions ; and a 
few of the principal merchants. These are ad 
mitted to the chateau. 

The second division is composed of the in 
ferior merchants, the shopkeepers and traders; 
together with the subordinate officers of the go 
vernment, the army, the law, and the church ; 
the practitioners in medicine, and other British 
inhabitants. 

The third division consists of the .French in 
habitants, most of whom, except the few who 
are members of the government, associate almost 
entirely together, unless that a public entertain 
ment, or the annual assemblies, bring some of 
them into company with the British. A very 
small proportion of the British Canadians were 
born in the colony, and consequently very little 
difference in person, dress, or manners, is dis 
cernible between them and the inhabitants of the 
mother country. The French have also assimi 
lated themselves so nearly to the British in dress, 
manners, and amusements, especially the younger 
branches, that if it was not for their language, 
there would be little to distinguish their respec 
tive coteries. 

The Creoles of Canada (or the descendants of 
Europeans born in Canada), both French and 



English, who inhabit the towns, are generally of 
a middle stature, rather slender than robust, and 
very rarely possess the blooming and ruddy com 
plexion of the British; a pale, sallow, or swarthy 
countenance, characterises the natives of Canada, 
and with few exceptions, the whole of the Ame 
rican continent. It is rather singular, that a 
foggy atmosphere should be conducive to that 
bloom of health which glows on the cheek of a 
British islander ; yet the fact is corroborated by 
the appearance of the inhabitants of Newfound 
land, of the shores of Nova Scotia and the New 
England states ; who, enveloped in fogs more 
than one-half the year, enjoy the same ruddy 
complexion as the English ; while those who live 
in the interior, under a clear sky, are universally 
distinguished by sallow or swarthy complexions. 
Lower Canada cannot boast of much superlative 
beauty among its females ; but there are many 
who possess very pleasing and interesting coun 
tenances. Montreal is allowed to have the ad 
vantage over the other towns for female beauty. 
The country girls, who are nearly all French 
(with the exception of those who reside in the 
back townships), are pretty when very young, 
but from hard work and exposure to the sun, 
they grow up coarse featured and swarthy, and 
have all the siurdiness but none of the beauty of 
our Welch girls. Upon the whole, if the gene 
rality of the Canadian females are not remark 
able for beautiful faces or elegant figures, there 
is nothing in either that can offend, and both are 
certainly as much as the men are entitled to. 
See CANADA.] 



M 



[2. Exports 



QUEBEC. 



[2. Exports and Tonnage from Quebec, from 1802 to 1809, both inclusive, but not including those 
from Gaspe or New Carlisle ; transmitted by the Committees of Trade at Quebec and Montreal, 
to their Agent in London, Nathaniel Atcheson, Esq. 



Years. 


Vessels. 


Tonnage. 


Wheat. 


Flour. 


Biscuit. 


Pease. 


1802 - -i 


197 


32,999 


Bushels. 
1,010,033 


Barrels. 

28,301 


Cwt. 

22,051 


Bushels. 

424 


1803 - :&amp;.* 


175 


30,483 


360,892 


15,432 


17,581 


1,605 


1804 - - 


173 


26,883 


201,543 


14,319 


21,255 


286 


1805 - - 


170 


26,506 


22,016 


18,590 


26,462 


4,155 


1806 - - 


193 


33,996 


96,908 


10,997 


23,659 


6,191 


1807 - - 


239 


42,295 


231,543 


20,442 


28,047 


7,181 


1808 - - 


334 


70,275 


186,708 


37,441 


32,587 


52,934 


1809 - - 


434 


87,825 


228,016 


20,726 


35,860 


60,776 



Years. 


Barley. 


Indian Corn. 


Flax Seeds. 


Oats. 


Beef. 


Pork. 


1802 - 


Bushels. 

5,535 


Bushels. 
1,009 


Bushels. 

5,102 


Bushels. 

1,898 


Tierces. Barrels. 
r&amp;gt;*s 
M 


Tierces. Barrels. 
s-^&amp;gt; 

65 


1803 - 


457 


128 


8,225 


1,462 


1,047 1,908 


6 1,924 


1804 - 


4,253 


1,342 


10,775 


2,981 


593 908 


17 1,926 


1805 - 


6,911 


1,211 


6,522 


5,016 


10 1,564 


74 696 


1806 - 


5,158 


2,781 


3,577 


2,734 


808 


26 1,077 


1807 - 


5,010 


3,802 


8,680 


1,500 


830 


108 1,043 


1808 - 


5,994 


3,467 


13,830 


3,000 


1,509 


179 1,732 


1809 - 


3,478 


313 


35,333 


7,540 


40 1,797 


157 2,683 



Years. 


Tongues 


Hams. 


Essence. 


Seal Oil. 


Pickled Fish. 


Dry Fish. 




Kegs. 


Barrels. Bales. 


Spruce. 


Tuns. Gallons. 


Tierces. Barrels. 


Casks. Cwt. 


1809 






f 79 boxes, \ 


88 103 


/ ^49^ 


415 








i 10 hhds. j 


OO J. wC/ 


T-v/ 9 


Tt M.\J 


1803 - 


18 


4, 


98 casks. 


548 219 


586 355 


460 


1804 - 


81 


10 5 


42 ditto. 


194 219 


579 325 


2,825 


1805 - 


17 


10 


62 ditto. 


79 91 


610 751 


3,118 


1806 - 


20 


5 


183 ditto. 


70 81 


769 1,462 


1,904 


1807 - 


23 


11 


101 ditto. 


106 176 


424 331 


976 


1808 - 


45 


14 


f 80 casks, j 
i 70 boxes. 3 


36 188 


794 1,087 


2,949 


1809 - 


202 


r 3 26 1 

|500lbs.loose j 


r 9 ditto. ) 
; 18 casks. I 
J. 63 hhds. j 


1,784 


1,577 


4,006] 



QUEBEC. 



2G9 



[Years. 


Smoked Fish. 


Butter. 


Hog s Lard. 


Tallow. 


Soap. 


handles. 


Beer. 




Casks. Boxes. 


Firkins. 


Kegs. 


Ibs. 


Kegs. 


Boxes. 


Boxes. 


Hhds. 


1802 - 


^26 


... 


_ 


95 





346 


92 


162 


1803 - 


i- 4 


95 


. 


7,200 





221 


101 


Hhds. 


i Hhds. 


1804 - 


. 


242 


. 





20 


252 


873 


275 


42 


1805 - 


. 


199 


- 





46 


1,576 


,-rn . 


152 


19 


1806 - 


2i. 10 


186 


. 





12 


645 


464 


230 





1807 - 


6 4 


... 


502 








249 


214 


123 


22 


1808 - 


- 


2,600 


443 





1 


1,142 


886 


42 


34 


1809 - 


; |- l f - | 


f 285 | 

I 2,198kegs| 


142 


3 Puns. 


1,149 


630 


C 28 
i 12 


Casks. 




Walnut, 


Oak Staves and 






Years. 


Oak Timber. Pine Timber. Cherry-tree, 
&amp;c. 


Heading. 


Stave Ends. 


Masts. 




Pieces. Pieces. Pieces. 


Pieces. 


Pieces. 


Pieces. 


1802 


1,607 1,035 - - - 


586,949 


10,113 


34 


1803 


3,819 3,153 93 


763,968 


830 


283 


1804 


4,229 873 11 


1,123,988 


836 


115 


1805 


4,535 896 ... 


1,043,994 


17,832 


103 


1806 


8,178 2,130 287 


1,808,234 


13,688 


333 


1807 


11,195 3,333 738 


1,783,890 


47,810 


973 


1808 


12,372 14,510 182 


1,824,861 


62,453 


3,994 


1809 


10,540 24,102 257 


3,255,335 


27,467 


3,080 


Years. 


Bowsprits. 


Pine Spars. 


Handspikes. 


Lath wood. 




Pieces. ! 


Pieces. 


Pieces. 


Pieces. 


1802 




194. 








-lOV/ * 

1803 






1/2** 

254 


18,354 










1804 






60 


12,713 










1805 - - - 


21 


141 


11,174 




M 


1806 - - - 


22 


189 


1,694 


1 


,778 


1807 - - - 


90 


315 


2,064 


11J579 


1808 - - - 


373 


1,612 


4,144 


130,915 


1809 - - - 


271 


2,638 


6,848 


154,967 



Years. 


Red Cedar. 


Oak Plank. 


Pine Boards and 
Plank. 


Scantling. 


Oarsi 


1802 - - 

1803 


Pieces. 

8 


Pieces. Feet. 

2,000 
680 
135 
369 
885 
1,274 
209 


Pieces. 

104,735 
124,197 
78,391 
42,220 
66,116 
106,663 
194,467 
282,099 


Pieces. 

6,833 
6,156 

2,880 
4,251 
2,426 
227 


Pieces. 

401 
618 
836 
188 
207 
88 
6,723 
8,596] 


1804 - - 




1805 - - 
1806 - . 
1807 - - 


571 
201 


1808 - - 
1-809 - - 


7 









270 



QUEBEC. 



[Years. 


Hoops. 


Shingles. 


Wool and Hemp. 


Salt. 


Pot and Pearl Ashes. 








Bales. 
H. W. 




Casks. 


Cwt. 


1802 - /- 


57,250 


78,900 








16,920 








1803 - - 


92,875 


34,150 






5,147 









1804 - - 


10P.800 


4,000 




8,808 


6,273 







*805 - - 


119,625 


3,000 






7,925 









1806 - - 


140,000 


16,000 


10,457 


L 1 .- . 


10,717 





1807 - - 


88,250 


29,000 


19 25 


1,500 


13,215 





1808 - - 


215,500 


60,500 


12 8 


3,000 


30,830 











9 Bushels. 














15 Bales. 








1809 - - 


134,850 


3,900 


407 


2,300 


33,782 









Years. 


Canada Balsams. 
:-... ; I 


Staves, Cast 
Iron. 


Horses. 


Horned 
Cattle. 


Sheep. 


Hogs. 


1802 - 
1803 - 
1804 - 
1805 - 
1806 - 
1807 - 
1808 - 

1809 - 


Casks. 
1 

8 


Ibs. 

740 
3,164 
1,780 
1,001 
889 


56 
40 
224 

164 
127 

158 


139 
115 
85 
85 
139 
5 
60 

25 


11 

2 
6 

7 
4 
1 
30 

8 


38 
17 
20 
37 
26 
17 
213 


g 
10 

13 
6 


2 


Bottles. 

36 



Years. 


Potatoes. 


Apples and Onions. 


Cranberries. 


Capillaire. 


Madeira. 




Bushels. 




Casks. 


Ibs. 


1 Pks. Pun. Hhds. 
Packs. 1 Tier. Bar. 

5Q3 


1803 - 


. 


j. . 


23 


1,603 


1,191 


674 






A. 0. 










1804 - 


48 


59 






1,728 


1,547 








1805 - 


140 


344 -r- -..* - - 


10 


156 


4,909 


863 


IftOfi 








556 


2,046 


1,102 


1807 - 


_ 


477 181 


20 


2,557 




3,575 


1808 - 


. - - 


396 83 


" i 


17 Pun. 
9 Casks. 


I 2,026 


1,469 






O. A. 










1809 - 


- - 1 


241 302 
1,800 loose. 


} &amp;gt;&amp;lt;&amp;gt; I 


30 Do. 
1 Bale. 


| 3,622 


120] 



QUEBEC. 



271 



[Years. 


Men Navigating. 


Beaver. 


Martin. 


Otter. 


Minx. 


1802 - 





143,139 


23,808 


19,855 


11,148 


1803 - 


1,573 


97,778 


31,141 


17,465 


12,062 


1804 - 


1,390 


111,448 


23,796 


20,267 


11,567 


1805 - 


1,342 


92,003 


14,275 


15,246 


11,431 


1806 - 


1,603 


119,748 


55,687 


12,297 


14,872 


1807 - 


2,039 


114,363 


46,801 


8,390 


9,214 


1808 - 


3,330 


126,927 


9,530 


7,130 


9,108 


1809 - 


- - - - 


105,454 


382 


5,562 


2,010 



Years. 


Fish. 


Fox. 


Bear. 


*Deer. 


Racoon. 


1802 - 


6,397 


7,337 


18,923 


184,388 


147,582 


1803 - 


7,326 


9,788 


23,369 


200,979 


152,333 


1804 - 


5,767 


8,891 


17,417 


249,050 


178,479 


1805 - 


3,882 


7,228 


19,426 


313,843 


124,319 


1806 - 


6,578 


8,863 


15,977 


212,037 


125,622 


1807 - 


5,512 


1,547 


10,660 


166,366 


79,174 


1808 - 


3,866 


1,038 


1,298 


103,875 


223,307 


1809 - 


3,048 


103 


561 


8,4,270 


52,246 



Years. 


Cased and Open Cat. 


Elks. 


Wolves. 


Wolvereens. 


Carcajeuxs. 


1802 - - - 


17,377 


1,482 


4,562 


1,432 


___. 


1803 - - - 


13.214 


637 


5,596 


1,408 





1804 - - - 


14,607 


1,100 


8,234 


1,318 


1,323 


1805 - - - 


8,803 


1,324 


4,558 


1,032 





1806 - - - 


5,286 


783 


1,016 


205 





1807 - - - 


6,147 


1,045 


23 


93 





1808 - - - 


5,718 


662 


18 


39 





1809 - - - 


5,591 


86 


- 


455 






Years. 


Badger. 


Musquash. 


Kitts. 


Buff Robes. 


Squirrels. 


1802 




26,289 
78,625 
90,199 
66,127 
16,847 
1,750 
6,513 
16,996 


5,719 
2,000 

-i^ 


1 


3,356 
2,799 
3,128 
3,260 
946 
843] 


1803 




1804 




1805 - - - 




1806 - - - 
1807 


183 


1808 




1809 - - *-!,! 


167 



272 



QUEBEC. 



[Years. 


Tiger. 


Lynx. 


Carreboux. 


Weasels. 


1802 - l - J 


__ 








1203 - - -i 








_ 





1804 - - - ; 











_ 


1805 - - - 





__ 





__ 


1806 - - - 














1807 - - - 


1 


11 


41 


4 


1808 - - - 











~ 


1809 - - - 















Years. 


Castorum. 


Seal Skin. 


Ox Hides. 


Gensing. 




Kegs. 


Ibs. 






Ifos. 


1802 - - - 


. . . 


204 


... 


- 


366 


1803 - - - 


- - 


143 


2,644 


. . . 


192 


1804 - - - 


... 


248 


... 


... 


72 


1805 ... 





&amp;gt; 











1806 - - - 





. 


_ 








1807 - - - 

















1808 - - - 


" - 


9 Kegs 


- . . 


. 


71 


1809 - - - 


- 


264 


91 


- 


32 



Souchong tea, so much used in England, is 
scarcely known at Quebec ; execrable bohea sells 
from 2s. to 3s. 6d. Teas are brought in large 
quantities from the United States. In 1807 the 
importation of that article was 42,000 Ibs. ; while 
the importation from England was only 4500 Ibs. 
This is occasioned by their procuring teas cheaper 
from the United States than from England, 
though they are greatly inferior in quality. 

Coffee and chocolate are drank principally by 
the French inhabitants. The quantity imported 
in 1807 was 19,598 Ibs. of coffee from Great Bri 
tain and her colonies, and 8070 Ibs. chocolate 
from the United States, where manufactories of 
it are established. Both these articles are of in- 
ferior quality, and are retailed upon an average 
at 2s. per Ib. 

Manufactories of soap and candles are esta 
blished at Quebec, and those articles are sold 
nearly at the same price as in London ; if any 
thing, rather higher. The country-people make 
their own soap and candles. 

Tobacco, notwithstanding it is cultivated by 
almost every farmer in Canada, yet is imported 
in large quantities both from England and the 



United States. In 1807, the following quantity 
was imported from those countries : 

From Great Britain and her colonies, 

Leaf Tobacco - - 15 1,578 Ibs. 

Manufactured do. - 1,145 



From the United States, 
Leaf Tobacco - - 120,747 Ibs. 
Manufactured do. - 51,082 
Snuff 16,058 



152,723 



Difference in favour of the United States 35,164 



Thus it appears, that the United States have 
had the advantage of Great Britain in the expor 
tation of manufactured tobacco and snuff, to the 
amount of 65,995 Ibs., and upon the whole article 
of tobacco to the amouut of 35,164 Ibs. Leaf 
tobacco sells from 9d. to Is., and the manufactured 
from Is. 6d. to 2s. 

Salt is procured chiefly from Liverpool. In 
1807, upwards of 220,000 bushels were imported. 
The preceding winter there was a great scarcity 
of that article ; and the last ship which, arrived] 



QUEBEC. 



273 



[with it, sold her cargo at 7*. Gd. per bushel. At 
one time during- the winter it was as high as 12s. 
and 14s. ; but the next spring it fell to 3s. 6d. 
which is generally the price at which it is re 
tailed. Ships from Liverpool are most com 
monly balasted with salt ; and during the season 
of their arrival at Quebec, some of the merchants 
purchase it from Is. 3d. to Is. 8d. per bushel, and 
monopolize it until the season is over, when no 
more supplies can be procured till the following 
spring. 



A considerable quantity is annually exported 
to the United States. The Vermontese, on the 
confines of Canada, depend wholly on that coun 
try for their supply of salt, as they procure it 
much cheaper than from the sea-port towns in 
the New England states. These people salt large 
quantities of beef, pork, and butter: a great part 
of which they export to Canada. More than 
250,000 Ibs. were received in 1807 from the 
United States. 



4. Exports, Imports, Tonnage, 8?c. of Quebec in 1810. 



Ships. Tonnage. 

Vessels cleared out which entered 635 138,057 
New vessels built there 26 - - 5,836 


661 143,893 


EXPORTS. 


. s. d. 


170,860 Bushels of Wheat, 7*. 6d. 


64,072 10 


40 - Cribblings, 4s. 


800 


12,519 Barrels Flour, 50s. 


31,297 10 


16,467 Quintals Biscuit, 30s. - - - 


24,700 10 


18,928 Bushels of Pease, 6s. ... 


5,678 8 


866 - - - Oats, 2s. Gd. --------- 


108 5 


16 - - - Barley, 4s. 


340 


98 - Indian Corn, 5s. ------- 


24 10 


8,584 - - - Flax Seed, 4s. Gd. 


1,931 8 


1,626 Minots of Salt, 2s. - ._.____ 


162 12 


33,898 Pieces Oak Timber, 70s. 


118,293 


69,271 - - Pine, 27s. Gd. - - 


95,247 12 


137 - - Walnut, Maple, &amp;c. 40s. 


274 


6,977 Masts and Hand Masts, 180s. - ______ 


62,793 


678 Bowsprits, 180s. - __._ 


6,102 


3 354 Spars 80s - _ _ _ - ^ ._ 


13,416 




3,887 ,306 Staves and Heading, 3,000,000 stand .45 


135,000 


47,515 Stave-ends, 38 m. 60s. - _______ 


114 


312,423 Pine Boards and Planks, per 100, 130s. 


20,307 9 11 


13,623 Handspikes, 9d. 


510 17 3 


30,301 Oars, 3s. - - 


4,545 3 


167,389 Pieces of Lathwood, 3rf. 


2.092 7 3 


130:516 West India Hoops, per m. 140s 


913 12 3 


80,000 Shingles, 15s. - _ . 


60 


100 Pieces Scantling, 2,000 feet, per piece, 5s. - 


25 


55 Butt ? AT i i V 30s. --____ 
5,497 Pipe | Madeira Packs - ] ^ gQd _ 


82 10 

7,558 7 6 


1,301 Half-Pipes 7 , T , . v . H4s. 

rr&amp;lt;~^ r\ jv* f Madeira Packs - &amp;lt; 
7/1 Quarter ditto 3 ( 9s. - 


910 14 
346 19 


288 Tierce Packs ----_-_____ 


102 12 o 


27,407 Bbls. of Pot and Pearl Ashes, 106,584cwt. 2qrs. lib. 40s. - 


213,169 4 


30 Bales Cotton Wool, 8,1811bs. Wd. 


340 17 6 


8 Horses, 400s. - 


160 


4 Tierces ? ~T&amp;gt; i /150s. _--_-__- 
4,628 Barrels J 1105s. 


30 
24,297 0] 


VOL. IV. N N 





274 



QUEBEC. 



Barrels of Beef, 65s. 
Half of ditto, 35s. - 
Tubs } 

Barrels ( Rounds of ditto, 35 at 30s. 

Ha^f ditto } 

TJ, i f Smoked and hung 

Barrels 1 

Half ditto &amp;gt; Salted Tongues 

Kegs 3 

TieTce 60 " 8 } Hams 17 000 &amp;gt; Wd 

Tierces J pj. s Cheeks, 700 Ibs. Is. 
Kegs 3 

Firkins ? Tripe, 62 Ibs. 15s. 

I\.f s "*S i 

Bbls. and 21 Kegs Sausages 
Boxes Soap, 40s. 

- Candles, 50s. 

Firkins and Kegs Butter, 30s. - 
Bbls. ^ - C 160s. 

Firkins &amp;gt; Hog s Lard - &amp;lt; 40s. 
Kegs ) - i 

Bibls. Oil, 1 tun, 196 galls. 200s. 

Tierces ? c i f 75s. 

D-UI c Salmon i en 
Bibls. j I 50s. 

Casks and 483 Bbls. Pickled Fish, 15s. 
Quintals dry Cod Fish, 12s. 6d. 



17 Puncheons bottled ditto, 120s. 

5 Casks Cider, 40s. 

71 Hogsheads -\ 250s. - 
62 Casks - / 100s. - 

&amp;gt; Essence of Spruce 

10 Boxes - i 15s. 

4 Kegs - J 25s. - 

6 Casks Canada Balsam, 200s. 

44 Bales Capillaire, 7,375 Ibs. 9d. - 
1 Case Oil of Peppermint - 

7 Puncheons and 3 Casks Genseng, 2,3441bs. 2s. 6d. 
31 Casks Clover Seed 

1 Ditto Bird - ditto - 
26 Pockets of Hops, 80s. 

5 Bbls. of Apples, 50s. 
87 Ditto of Onions, 15s. 
17 Casks Potatoes, 10s. 

6 Barrels Bees Wax, 150s. 
1 Cask Snuff, 100s. 

11 Keggs of Ditto, 40s. 

58 Sides Sole Leather, 20s. - 
195 Metal Stoves, 80s. - 

72 Links of Pipe, 2s. 



- * d. 

9,675 5 

3 10 

127 10 

50 

125 

708 6 8 

35 

46 10 

120 

2,140 

2,952 

633 

320 

108 

106 

17 19 

1,008 15 

242 10 

373 10 

188 15 

196 

102 

10 

887 10 

310 

7 10 
500 

60 

276 11 3 

15 

322 6 

110 

300 

104 

12 10 

66 5 

8 10 
45 

500 

22 

58 

780 

740] 



QUEBEC. 



[ 3 Barrels of Feathers, 100s. 
18 Boxes containing a Model of Quebec. 



SUNDRIES IMPORTED AND RE-EXPORTED. 



29 

40 

1 

14 

85 

58 

1 

6 

4 

15 

16 

720 

1 

22 

18 

150 

144 

20 

8 

2 

2 

60 

271 

12 

12 

24 

4* 

1 

2 
2 
24 
2 
3 
4 
1 
2 
2 
1 
1 
3 
I 
3 
4 
5,836 



Casks of Turpentine, 405. 

Kegs of Paint, 15s. - 

Hogshead 6 Bbls. Lamp Black 

Casks and 37 Bbls. Red Ochre, 10s. - 

Grindstones, 2s. Gd. 

Chaldrons of Coals, 25s. - 

Hogshead 6 Crates Glass Ware 

Bags 1 Package broken Glass - 

Crates Earthen Ware, 150s. 

- - - Mustard, 20s. 

Boxes of Tin, 80s. 

Iron Shovels, Is. 

Cask Swords 

Ditto of Nails, 110s. 

Copper Kettles, 10s. 

Tin - Ditto, 2s. 6d. 

Scythes, 2s. Gd. 

Bags Shot, 12s. Gd. 

Kegs Gunpowder, 50s. 

Gigs and Harness 

Bundles and 501bs. Steel - 

Tons 14cwt. 3 qrs. and 4 Ibs. Iron, 360s. 

Bars of Ditto, 3s. 4rf. 

Cwt. and 6 Sheets of Ditto, 40s. 

Ditto 1 qr. 211bs. old Copper, 100s. 

Barrels of Tar, 25s. 

Tons Fustick, 200s. 

Quarter Cask } 

Bbl. and &amp;gt; Vinegar 

Jars 3 

Chests of Tea, 300s. 

Puncheons, ? r&amp;gt; a*- * rAn 
IT , &amp;gt; Rum 2o at 640s. 

Hogsheads, j 

Pipes -j 

Hds. &amp;gt; Madeira Wine at 5| .60 

Qr. Cask J 

Pipes Spanish Wine, .25 

Pipes 7 

Qr. Cask } 

Pipe I 

Qr. Casks 3 

j^ &amp;gt; of Molasses 

Casks leaf Tobacco 
Tons new Ships, .14 



Port, .60 
Teneriffe ditto .32 



98,523 Beaver skins, 17s. Gd. 

554 Martins, 3s. 4&amp;lt;/. 
2,645 Otters, 15s. 



FURS, &amp;C. EXPORTED. 



H N 2 





275 


* 


6 


58 





30 





20 





25 


10 


10 


12 6 


72 


10 


30 





2 





30 





15 





64 





36 





10 





121 





9 





19 


17 6 


18 





12 


10 


20 





90 





10 





1,093 


6 2 


45 


3 4 


24 


2 


62 


3 9 


30 





45 





3 





30 





800 





315 





50 





135 





56 





25 





125 





81,704 





86,207 


12 6 


92 


6 8 


1,983 


15 0] 



276 



QUEBEC. 



[ 169 Minx, 2s. 
2,536 Fisher, 4s. 
82,551 Deer, 3s. 9d. 

9,971 Musquash, Is. 6d. 
39,521 Racoon, Is. 6d. 
10,721 Bear and Cub, 20s. - 

1 Fox, 20s. 
2,428 Cased and open Cat r 5s. 

19 Wolf, 17s. 6d. 
534 Elk, 15s. 
517 Woolvereen, 5s. 
1,833 Swans, 4s. 
2,634 Hares, Is. 
327 Lynx, 7s. 6d. - 
59 Seals, 4s. 

1 Puncheon of Hides, ,.25 
24 CalfSkins, 5s. 

o K C ^, S j Castorum, 265ilbs. 5s. 

2 Casks 3 



* 

Disbursements for Provisions, Ships, Stores, and repairs, 661 vessels, 

average about ,.350 sterling each 

Besides exports, via St. John s, to the United States, and Shipments 
from Gaspie Bay and Chaleur, amount not ascertained. 



Total Exports . 



. s. 


d, 


T6 18 





507 4 





15,478 6 


3 


747 16 


6 


2,964 1 


6 


10,751 





1 





607 





7 2 


6 


400 10 





129 5 





366 12 





11 3 


8 


122 12 


6 


11 16 





25 





6 





66 7 


6 


1,062,838 


9 


231,350 





1,294,188 


9 



IMPORTS DUTIABLE, &amp;C. 

8 Buts 
147 Pipes 
37 Hhds. 
57 Qr. Casks 

4 Chests bottled 
232 Pipes Port, 65 
2 Hhds. ditto, 32 10s. 



Madeira Wine, 20,087 Gall. 10s. 



137 Casks and Chests Port 
74 Butts Spanish Wine 
1,426 Pipes, ditto 

332 Hhds. ditto - 
15 Hhds. Malaga 
20 Qr. Casks, ditto - 

412 Pipes Teneriffe - 

178 Hhds. ditto - 
10 Hhds. French 



6 Cases, ditto 





36 
25 
12 
15 
7 

32 
16 
25 
10 



s. 



10 


10 







29,944 gallons, 8s. Qd. 



226 Cases of Brandy 

25 Ditto Geneva . 
496 Casks Molasses, 46,874 gallons, 4s. 
6.976 Puncheons ) T* nQR -QJ ^ O n^ r 
188 Hogsheads } Rum /26 34 S allons 



10,043 10 

15,080 

65 

25,188 10 

1,400 

2,664 

35,650 

4,150 

225 

150 

13,184 

2,848 

250 

60 

12,726 4 

9,374 16 

199,796 17 0] 



QUEBEC. 



277 



[ 290 

928 

180 

1,738 

14 

83 

11 

1 



1,685 

8,323 
710 



34,741 

58,575 

141 

2,330,842 

65,285 

396,674 

6,053 

21,565 

4,525 

562 

3,325 

192,170 

222,236 

70 

1,328 

3,500 

40 

82 

2,168 

1,154 

6,535 

151 

1-,188 

1,320 

63 

22 

848 



Hhds. refined Sugar, 268,449 Ibs. Is. - 

Hhds. } 

Tierces f Muscavado Sugar, 1,478,890 Ibs. at 8d. 

Bbls. 3 

Tierces ) 

Bbls &amp;gt; Coffee, 26,258 Ibs. Is. 4&amp;lt;/. 

Bags 3 

Leaf Tobacco, 928 Ibs. 9d. 

Casks manufactured ditto, 366 Ibs. Is. 

Snuff, 6 Ibs. 2s. 

Playing Cards, packs, 14,544, Is. 6d. 

Minots of Salt, 81,621, 2s. 6d. - ._ 

Ibs. Hyson Tea, at 6d. 7s. 6d. 

Ibs. Souchong, at 4c?. 6s. 8d. 

Ibs. Bohea, at 2rf. 2s.- 





Besides dry goods, and other articles on which no duties are payable, the 
amount whereof cannot be exactly ascertained, but supposed to exceed 

Total Imports . 

4. Exports, SfC. -of the Port of Quebec, in the Year 1811. 



. s. d. 
13,422 9 

49,296 6 8 



1,750 10 8 

36 16 6 

18 6 

12 

1,090 16 

10,202 12 6 

631 17 6 

2,774 6 8 

71 



386,963 6 



600,000 



986,963 6 



532 Vessels cleared, 37 of which were 
116,687 tons, 
5,553 men. 
Pieces Oak Timber. 

- Pine do. 

- - Walnut, Maple, &amp;c. 

- - Staves and Heading. 

- - Stave Ends. 

- - Boards and Planks. 

- - Handspikes. 

- Oars. 

- - Masts. 

- - Bowsprits. 

- - Spars. 

- Hoops. 

- - Lathwood. 

- - Battens. 

- - Capstan Bars. 

- Treenails. 

- Oak Stauntions. 

- - Boat-hook Handles. 

- - Window Slides. 

- - Deal Ends. 
Pipe -I 
Puncheon | 
Hogsheads ! 
Quarter Cask j 
Tierce 

Barrels J 

Bushels Wheat. 



built this year, containing 12,688 tons. 



Bushels Cribblings. 

- Pease. 

- Indian Corn. 
~ - Oats. 

- Flax Seed. 
Barrels Flour. 
Cwt. Biscuit. 
Barrels ^ 

Half Barrels / Crackers. 
Kegs 3 

Kegs Barley. 

Do. Rice. 
Tierces ? p i 
Barrels j 




Tongues. 






Rounds Beef, &amp;c, 



Kegs 

Barrels ~\ 

Half do. / 

Kegs 

Tubs 

Kitts 

Puncheons 

Hogsheads /Pigs Cheeks. 

Barrel 3 

Kegs Tripe. ] 



278 



QUEBEC. 



[ 5 

59 

487 

9 

57 

26 

11 

1 

2,858 

744 

1,347 

3 

5 

1 

7 

50 

18 

6 

60 

8 

20 

2 

3 

100 

21 

317 

375 

12 

1,962 
6 

21 

182 

5 

115 

339 

1 

7 

146 

225 

2 

155 



Casks ") 

Barrels f Hogs Lard. 

Kegs 3 

85T ] Sausa - s - 

Puns 1 

Barrels &amp;gt; Haras, &amp;c. 

Box 3 

Firkins and Kegs Butter. 

Boxes Soap. 

Do. Candles. 
Casks ") 

Boxes &amp;gt; Cheese. 
Keg J 
Loose Do. 
Horses. 
Sheep. 
Turkies. 

Casks, 50 Jars Oil. 
Barrels Tar, and 5 Barrels Turpentine. 
Barrels, 5 Kegs Tallow. 
Tierces ) 
Barrels ? Hides. 
Loose 3 
Sides Leather. 
Tierces") 

Barrels &amp;gt; Salmon. 
Boxes J 
Barrels ) TT 
Half Barrels j Hemn S s - 

Boxes/ Smoked Herrings. 

Barrels Mackarels. , 

Barrels Chad. 

Ditto Pickled Fish. 

Barrel Trout. 

Puncheons 

Hogsheads 

Casks 

Boxes 

Cwt. loose 



jj-jrj 
and dried Cod 



10 

16 

6 

33 
14 
43 
24 
99 
17 
22 
10 
38 
15 
2 
1 

13 
300 
3 
4 
4 
4 
8 
2 
1 
9 
6 
1 

105 

335 

115 

2 

1 

2 

2 

22,734 

1 
1 
2 



p 



Barrels 

Boxes 

Puncheons ) 

Hogsheads ( 

Casks ( 

Barrels J 

Bales Hops. 

Casks -\ 

Hogsheads / 

Boxes V Essence of Spruce. 

Cases I 

Kegs J 

Canada Balsam. 
Kegs 3 

Cask Snuff. 

Barrels 1 

Kegs &amp;gt; SnufF. 

Pounds } 

Tierces 

Hogsheads 

Casks 

Barrels 

Bales Cotton Wool. 

Hogsheads Flax. 

Barrel Bees Wax. 

Barrels Feathers. 

Boxes Mustard. 

Puncheon Deer Horns. 

Stoves. 

Barrels Apples. 

Ditto Onions. 

Puncheons^ 

Hogshead / 

Barrels &amp;gt; Cranberries. 

Kegs 

Bushels 

Casks, Pot and Pearl Ashes, weight 

77,497 cwt. 4 Ib. 
Cask} 

Case &amp;gt; Castorum, 146 Ibs. weight. 
Kegs) 



i 



FURS AND PELTRIES. 



80,123 Beaver Skins. 

77,218 Deer 

28,249 Racoon 

4,176 Swan 

2,501 Fisher 

2,153 Otter 

1,887 Musquash. 

400 Bears Cub. 

273 Fox 



292 Elk Skins. 
98 Martin 
45 Seal 
21 Cat 

4 Weasel 

2 Parchment, Deers. 

2 Buffalo. 

1 Wolf. 

1 Mountain Goat.] 



QUEBEC. 



279 



SUNDRIES IMPORTED AND EXPORTED. 



[ 5 Pipes 1 

11 Hogsheads &amp;gt; Wine. 

2 Quarter Cask) 
20 Puncheons Rum. 

I Ditto Whiskey. 

6 Barrels ) 
13 Kegs f Sugar. 

1 Box } 
16 Keg Molasses. 
269 Tierces 
5,722 Minots 
62 Bales 
13 Barrels 
23 Cases 
84 Pieces ) 

1 Case Hosiery. 

1 Cask Hats. 
57 Kegs Paint. 



Salt. 



8 Barrels Lamp-black. 
2 Tierces ^ 

2 Hogsheads &amp;gt; Earthenware. 

1 Cask 3 
1\ Tons 7 T 
72Cwt. j lron " 
35 Bolts 7 n 

10,000 Pounds | PP er - 

3 Casks old Copper and Brass. 
3 Cwt. Steel. 

14 Casks Nails. 

2 Kegs Copper ditto. 
12 Lanthorns. 

92 Cases Shot. 

45 Barrels Gunpowder. 

34 Coils Rope. 

24 Grindstones. 



QUEBEC. 

Imports of Dutiable Goods, 1811. 



495 Vessels entered. 




7,641 Puncheons RunTi 


107,075 Tons. 




216 Hhds. ditto. f Gallons 


4 Butts 




7 Barrels, ditto ( Rum 810,971 


172 Pipes 




227 Boxes Noyau ) 


55 Hhds. 


Madeira Wine, con- 


10 Puncheons B. Brandy, 1,089 Gallons 


46 Qr. Casks 


&amp;gt;- taining 22,604 gal 


10 Pieces Brandy 1 , ogi p n 


2 Half ditto 


lons. 


5 Pieces Geneva 3 3 ^ 


* Casks 7 bottled 
7 Cases 3 j 




615 Puncheons, 7 Gallons. 
57 Hhds. 3 Molasses, 59,346 


309 Pipes ) 


N 




342 Hhds. refined Sugar, 278,948 lbs. 


30 Hhds. J. 


Port ditto. 




2,178 Hhds. J 


17 Cases bottled 3 






461 Tierces f Muscovado and clayed Su- 


1 Pipe \ 
1 Hhd. J 


Lisbon ditto. 


CC 


3,371 Barrels f gars, 3,573,580 lbs. 
29 Boxes 3 


315 Pipes ) 
92 Hhds. 


Teneriffe ditto. 


c 
_o 


OOQ Paektj "&amp;gt; 
J60 V_dhHS 1 r o flp pp 9QQ 49] IKo 

909 Bags 3 e Jyj ^ 1 


30 Qr. Caks ) 




- - 

o 


60 Casks Leaf Tobacco, 60,926 lbs. 


83 Pipes ) 


% 


1 Cask manufactured ditto, 370 lbs. 


24 Hhds. 


Spanish ditto 



00 


22 Pounds Snuff. 


2 Qr. Casks _) 




r\ 


15,972 Packs Playing Cards. 


25 Pipes - - - 


Marcella ditto. 


^H 


100,755 Minots Salt. 


6 Pipes ~) 
2 Qr. Casks 3 


Malaga ditto. 




11 Chests Hyson ) 
19 - - Black \ Teas. 


39 Pipes - - - 


Sicilian ditto 




2 - - Bohea 3 


42 Pipes - - - 


Sardinian ditto. _, 




50 Bags Pimento. 


35 Casks ^ 




10 Barrels 1 ^ 


5 Hhds. &amp;gt; French ditto. 


40 Bags } Cocoa J 


140 Cases. } 







280 



QUEBEC. 



[ Exports from Gaspe, 1811. 
Cleared 10 Vessels, 831 Tons. 

11,552 Cwt. Cod Fish. 
25 Barrels Herrings. 

Exports from New Carlisle in 1811. 
Cleared 15 Vessels, 1,381 Tons. 



15,192 Cwt. Cod Fish. 

425 Barrels ) . 

70 Half ditto I Herrings. 

325 Barrels Salmon. 

149 Barrels 7 c , , 

iKn r&amp;gt; f Smoked Herrings. 

150 Boxes J 

239 Barrels Pickled Fish. 



9 Barrels Trout. 
1 1 Barrels Mackarel. 
266 Tons Pine Timber. 
3,318 Feet Boards. 
200 Pounds Butter. 
120 Minots Oats. 
120 Gallons Oil. 



Valuation of Exports and Imports from Quebec in 1811, viz. 

Exports in Grain, Flour, Timber, Lumber, Ashes, &amp;c. 

- - in Furs 

- - in Seals, Swans, and Castorum 

- - in Articles imported and re-exported 

- - in 12,688 Tons, new Ships, at 15 

Disbursements for Provisions, Ships Stores, and repairs of 532 Vessels 



Imports at Quebec in 1811, viz. 

Articles paying duty - 

Goods not dutiable, supposed 



.412,250 7 10 
550,000 



. 493,906 5 6 

89,738 5 2 

2,133 10 

12,500 

190,320 

186,500 

.974,798 8 



.962,250 7 10 

In 1806, there was 1,400 tons of shipping built in Canada; in 1807, 2,300; in 1808, 3,700; in 
1810; 5,837: in 1811, 7,800. Generally speaking, all the shipping that clears into the country, 
with a very few exceptions, clears out. 

5. Duties payable in Canada, on Importation, under several Acts of the British Parliament. 

Sterling. 
6 Geo. II. c. 13. 



Foreign Sugars, per cwt. 

4 Geo. III. c. 15. 
Ditto, white or clayed, per cwt. 
Foreign Indigo, per Ib. 
Ditto, Coffee, per cwt. 
Madeira ~) 

Fayal Wines, per tun 

Teneriffe 3 
Portugal, Spanish, and other Wines, from Great Britain, per tun 

6 Geo. III. c 35. 
British plantation Coffee, per cwt. 
Molasses, per gallon 
British Pimento, per Ib. 

14 Geo, HI. c. 88. 

Brandy, or other Spirits, manufactured in Britain, per gallon 
Rum, or other Spirits, imported from the W. Indies, per gallon 



. s. d. 
050 

1 2 
006 

2 19 9 

700 
10 



7 











QUEBEC. 



f Rum, from Colonies in America 

Brandy, or other foreign Spirits, imported from Britain 

Rum, or spirit, the produce of Colonies in America, not under the 

dominion of his Majesty, imported from any other place than 

Great Britain 

Molasses, in British bottoms 
Ditto, in any other 



281 



Sterling. 
s. d. 
009 
010 



1 
003 
006 



Additional Duties laid on by the Provincial Parliament. 

c. 9. and 41 Geo. III. 



Acts 33. Geo. III. cap. 8. 35 Geo. Ill- 
c. 14. 



Foreign Brandy, or other foreign Spirits, per gallon 

Rum, per gallon - 

Molasses and Syrups, per gallon - 

Madeira Wine, by one act 4d. and by another 2d. 

Other Wines, by one act 2rf. by another Id. 

Loaf, or Lump Sugar, per Ib. 

Muscovado, or Clayed Sugar, per Ib. 

Coffee, per Ib. 

Leaf Tobacco, perlb. 

Playing Cards, per pack 

Salt, per minot 

Snuff, per Ib. 

Tobacco, manufactured in any other way 



3 
3 
3 
6 
3 
1 

01 

2 

2 

4 

4 

4 

3 



Duties imposed by a Provincial Act, for building Gaols, to continue Six Years, fom the 

25th March, 1805. 



Bohea Tea, per Ib. 

Souchong, black, per ditto 

Hyson 

Green Teas 

Spirits, or other strong Liquors, per gallon - 

Wines - 

Molasses and Syrups 

Goods sold at auction, 2f per cent, on amount of sales. 



6. Allowances at the Custom House. 

Deduction of Weight. 

On coffee, in bales or bags, 3 Ibs. for every 
cwt. 

in casks, - 12 Ibs. per ditto. 
Loaf sugar, in casks or boxes, 15 Ibs. per cwt. 
Leaf tobacco, in casks, 12 Ibs. per cwt. 
Leakage on wines, spirits, and molasses, 

3 gallons on every hundred. 
For waste of articles, subject to duty by 
weight, an allowance of 3 Ibs. on every 
hundred pounds. 

On salt, an allowance of 3 minots per hundred. 

The import duty on salt is 4d per minot. Salt 

landed below the e. bank of the river Saguenay, 

on the n. side of the St. Lawrence, and below 

VOL. IV. 



the e. bank of the river Grand Mitis, on the s. 
side, is not subject to duty. There shall be 
drawn back, at the Custom House, 4o?. on every 
bushel of salt exported from the port of Quebec, 
to any place beyond the above limits ; 7d. on 
every tierce of salmon ; and 4&amp;lt;#. on every barrel 
of salted beef or pork, or salted fish of any sort, 
exported from this province. 

7. Post Office Regulations. 
At the beginning of every month a packet sails 
from Falmouth for N. America, having on board 
a mail for Quebec. In the summer months she 
puts in at Halifax, in her way to New York, and 
there delivers the mail for Canada. From Hali 
fax they are forwarded by land to Quebec. In 
the months of November, December, January,] 
o o 



Q U E 



[and February, the packets pass Halifax, and de 
liver the mails for Canada, to the agent for British 
packets at New York, who forwards them through 
the United States by post to Montreal. 

A mail for England is dispatched from Quebec 
once every fortnight in summer, and once a 
month in winter, to be sent by first packet for 
England. 

A mail for Burlington, in the United States, is 
made up at Quebec every Thursday, and at Mon 
treal every Saturday, by which conveyance let 
ters may be sent for Europe, under cover, to a 
friend at New York, on paying the Canadian 
postage. The post for Montreal leaves Quebec 
every Monday and Thursday, and leaves Mon 
treal for Quebec on the same days. Post arrives 
at these places on Wednesdays and Saturdays. A 
monthly communication, by post, between Lower 
and Upper Canada, has been lately opened. 

8. Official Declaration as to the Boundaries of the 
Jtiver St. CroLr. 

Thomas Barclay, David Howell, and Egbert 
Benson, commissioners appointed in pursuance 
of the fifth article of the Treaty of Amity, 
Commerce, and Navigation, between his Bri 
tannic Majesty and the United States of Ame 
rica, finally to decide the question, " What ri 
ver was truly intended under the name of the 
river St. Croix, mentioned in the Treaty of 
Peace between his Majesty and the United 
States, and forming a part of the boundary 
therein described." 

DECLARATION. 

We, the said commissioners, having been sworn 
impartially to examine and decide the said ques 
tion according to such evidence as should respec 
tively be laid before us, on the part of the British 
government and of the United States, and having 
heard the evidence which hath been laid before 
us by the agent of his Majesty, and the agent of 
the United States respectively appointed, and 
authorized to manage the business on behalf of 
the respective governments, have decided, and 
hereby do decide the river hereinafter particu 
larly described and mentioned, to be the river 
truly intended under the name of the river St. 
Croix, in the said treaty of peace, and forming a 
part of the boundary therein described ; that is 
t&amp;lt;&amp;gt;- say, the mouth of the said river is in Passam- 
quoddy Bay, at a point of land called Joe s Point, 
about one mile n. from the n. part of St. Andrew s 
Island, and in lat. 45 5 5" n. and in long 
67 12 30" w. from the Royal Observatory at 



Q U E 

Greenwich, in Great Britain, and 3 54 15" e. 
from Harvard College, in the University of Cam 
bridge, in the State of Massachusetts ; and the 
course of the said river, up from its said mouth, 
is n. to a point of land called the Devil s Head, 
then turning, the said point is w. to where it di 
vides into two streams, the one coining from the 
w. and the other coming from the n. having the 
name of Chiputnatecook, or Chibnitcook, as the 
same may be variously spelt, then up the said 
stream so coming from the n. to its source, which 
is at a stake near a yellow birch-tree hooped 
with iron, and marked S. T. and I. H. 1797, by 
Samuel Titcomb and John Harris, the survey 
ors employed to survey the abovementioned 
stream coming from the northward : and the said 
river is designated on the map hereunto annexed, 
and hereby referred to as further descriptive of 
it by the letters A. B. C. D. E. F. G. H. I. K. 
andL.; the letter A. being at its said mouth, 
and the letter L. being at its said source : and 
the course and distance of the said source from 
the island, at the confluence of the above-men 
tioned two streams, is, as laid down on the said 
map, n. 5 and about 15 X , w. by the magnet about 
48 miles. 

In testimony whereof we have hereunto set 
our hands and seals, at Providence, in the State 
of Rhode Island, the 25th day of October, in the 
year 1798. 

Thomas Barclay , (L.S.) 
David Howell) (L.S.) 
Egbert Benson^ (L.S.) 
(Witness) Edward Winslow, 

Secretary to the Commissioners. 

For some other memorials, petitions, and of 
ficial documents, relative to the British colonies 
in N. America, see NEW BRUNSWICK, PASSA- 
MAQUODDY BAY, and NOVA SCOTIA ; also the 
articles CANADA, UNITED STATES, and W.IN 
DIES.] 

QUEBRACHO, a small river of the province 
and government of Buenos Ayres, which runs 
$. 5. w. and enters into another, just before this 
runs into the Uruguay. 

QUEER ADA, a settlement of the province 
and government of Darien, and kingdom of Ti- 
erra Firme ; situate near the river Pirri, and the 
coast of the S. Sea. 

QUEBRADA, another settlement, in the pro 
vince and government of Maracaibo, and Nuevo 
Reyno de Granada, which is the district and ju 
risdiction of the city of Merida; n. n. w. of this 
city, in the road which leads to Santa Fe. 

QUEBRADA, a river of the provinces and go- 



Q U E 

vernment of Tucuman in Peru, which rises in the 
mountains of the valley of Calchaqui, runs e. and 
enters the Grande del Salado, between those of 
Arias and Guachipe. 

QUEBRADA HONDA, a settlement of the pro 
vince and corregimiento of Tomina in Peru ; an 
nexed to the curacy of La Laguna. 

QUEBRADA SECA, a settlement of the jurisdic 
tion of the town of Honda, in the Nuevo Reyno 
de Granada ; situate in a mountainous and craggy 
country, full of swamps, and very unhealthy. It 
is of an hot temperature, but fertile and abound 
ing in tobacco, cotton, plantains, yucas, potatoes, 
and sugar-canes. It suffers an incredible epi- 
demy of mosquitoes, toads, snakes, and spiders ; 
and a great scarcity of flesh-meat from want of 
cattle and pastures : and thus it is only inhabited 
by some mountaineers and uncivilised beings, 
who should amount to about 200. 

QUEBRADA SECO, another settlement, in the 
province and government of Maracaibo in that 
kingdom. It belongs to the jurisdiction of the 
city of Barinas ; is of an hot temperature, very 
poor and miserable, producing only cacao, to 
bacco, sugar-canes, maize, and yucas, of which 
the natives make cazave. It is situate on the 
shore of the river Paragua, to the e. of the city of 
Pedraza. 

QUEBRADAS, River of the, in the island of 
St. Domingo. It is small, runs in in the e. head, 
and enters the sea in the bay of Barbacoas. 

QUECAS, a barbarous nation of Indians of 
the Nuevo Reyno de Granada, who dwell to the 
e. of the ancient province of Guatavita, in a ter 
ritory very hot but fertile. Their customs and 
qualities are altogether unknown. 

QUECHITALLA, a settlement of the pro 
vince and corregimiento of Parinacochas in Peru ; 
annexed to the curacy of Salamanca, in the pro 
vince of Condesuyos de Arequipa. 

QUECHOLAC, a valley of the province and 
alcaldia mayor of Tepeaca in Nueva Espana : 
peopled by Popolocas Indians, who have a tra 
dition that their ancestors killed, without know 
ing him, at the beginning of the conquest of the 
kingdom, the Licentiate Juan Diaz, a clergyman, 
who accompanied Hernan Cortes, and who was 
the first ecclesiastic in that kingdom who exer 
cised the office of curate. 

QUECHOLLAN, a settlement of the pro 
vince and alcaldia mayor of Guazacoalco in Nueva 
Espafia. Its natives rose against the Spaniards, 
after that they had entered into a friendly alli 
ance with them, and when they had found them- 



Q U E 



283 



selves under the necessity of departing from 
Mexico, through the death of Moctezuma ; but 
they were conquered and reduced to obedience 
by Gonzalo de Sandoval. 

QUECHUA, a very numerous nation of In 
dians of the kingdom of Peru in the time of the 
Incas. It comprehended all the provinces on 
either shore of the river Amancay, which the 
Spaniards call Abancay ; and was conquered and 
subjected to the empire by the Inca Capac Yu- 
panqui, fifth emperor, and proved itself so faith 
ful in the conquest of the Chancas, that when 
Viracocha commanded the army of his father 
Yahuarhuaca, they marched out to his succour 
without being called together ; and thus have 
they obtained the privilege that their caciques 
should use their ow r n tiara ; although they were 
to go bald and use ear-rings, with other certain 
restrictions to distinguish them from the Incas. 
The general idiom of Peru took its name from 
this nation of Quechuas ; the same being gene 
rally spoken throughout that kingdom. 

QUECHOLTENANGO, a settlement and 
head settlement of the district, and alcaldia mayor 
of Chilapa in Nueva Espana. It contains 31 fa 
milies of Indians, and is six leagues w. of its 
capital. 

QUECHULA, a settlement and head settle 
ment of the district of the alcaldia mayor of Te* 
peaca in Nueva Espana ; situate in a beautiful 
llanura^ near a mountain. It is very scarce of 
water, and that which is drank is provided from 
a well, but which, although thick, is wholesome. 
It has besides the parish-church a convent of the 
religious of San Francisco. The population is 
composed of 112 families of Spaniards, 200 of 
Mustees, 20 of Mulattoes, and 400 of Indians. 
In its district are various cultivated estates ; and 
it is four leagues e. of its capital. 

QUEDO, a small river of St. Domingo, which 
rises in the mountains to the s. of the city of La 
Vega, runs n. and enters the Camu. 

[QUEECHY, a river of Vermont, which emp 
ties into Connecticut River at Hartland.J 

[QUEEN ANNE, a small town of Prince 
George County, Maryland; situated on the w. 
side of Patuxent River, across which a wooden 
bridge is built. The town is small, but is laid 
out in a regular plan, at the foot of a hill. Here 
are a few stores, and two warehouses for the in 
spection of tobacco. It is about 13 miles e. s. e. 
of the city of Washington, 14 s. w. of Annapolis, 
and 26 s. by w. of Baltimore.] 

[QUEEN ANNE S, a county of Maryland; 
o o 2 



284 



Q U E 



bounded w. by Chesapeak Bay, and n. by Kent 
County. It contains 15,463 inhabitants, includ 
ing 6,674 slaves. Chief town, Centerville. Kent 
Island belongs to this county ; 14 miles in length 
from n. to s., and 6 in breadth from e. to w. It 
is low, but fertile land, and its e. side is bordered 
with salt marsh.] 

[QUEEN CHARLOTTE S Islands,on the n.w. coast 
of N. America, extend from lat. 52 to 54 20 n. 
and from long. 130 40 to 133 18 w. from 
Greenwich, ft is named Washington Isle by 
American navigators.] 

[QUEEN S, the middle county of Long Island, 
New York. Lloyd s Neck, or Queen s Village, 
and the islands called the Two Brothers and Hal- 
lett s Islands, are included in this county. It is 
about 30 miles long, and 12 broad, and contains 
six townships, and 16,014 inhabitants, including 
2039 slaves. Jamaica, Newtown, Hampstead, in 
which is a handsome court-house, and Oyster 
Bay, are the principal towns in this county. The 
county court-house is eight miles from Jamaica, 
10 from Jericho, and 20 from New York.] 

[QUEEN S, a county of Nova Scotia, compre 
hending a part of the lands on the cape, on the s. 
side of the Bay of Fundy. The settlements are 
as follow : Argyle, on the s. side of the Bay of 
Fundy, where a few Scotch and Acadians reside : 
next to this is Yarmouth, settled chiefly by emi 
grants from New England ; Barrington, within 
the island called Cape Sable, settled originally 
by Quakers from Nantucket. Besides these are 
Port Raisoir, so called by the French, and origi 
nally settled by the North Irish ; Liverpool and 
Port Roseway, settled and inhabited by emi 
grants from New England.] 

[QUEENSBURY, a township in Washington 
County, New York; bounded e. by Westfield 
and Kingsbury, and s. by Albany County. It 
contains 1080 inhabitants, of whom 122 are 
electors. I 

[QUEENSTOWN, in Queen Anne s County, 
Maryland, a small town on the e. side of Chester 
River, six miles s. w. of Centerville, and nearly 
21 e. of Annapolis.] 

[QUEENSTOWN, in Upper Canada, lies on the 
w. side of the Straits of Niagara, near Fort Nia 
gara, and nine miles above the falls.] 

QUEHUE, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Tinta, or Canes and Canches, in 
Peru ; annexed to the curacy of Checa. 

QUELENDANA, a chain of mountains, and 
part of the cordillera of the Andes, in the province 
and corregimiento of Tacunga of the kingdom of 



Q U E 

Quito. It runs to e. w. e., and to s. c. of the vol 
cano of Cotopaxi. These mountains are extremely 
lofty, and covered all the year with snow. 

QUELENES, Mountains of, in the province 
and alcaldia mayor of Chiapa, and kingdom of 
Guatemala, very lofty and craggy ; and although 
some pass them in their rout to Nueva Espana, 
yet this is not without exposing themselves to 
the dangers of great precipices, as also to the 
very strong winds which prevail in these parts. 
From them flow down many streams and rivulets 
which fertilize and render pleasant and fruitful 
the ssettlement of Tapanatepeque, which is si 
tuate on their skirt. One of these mountains is 
much loftier than the rest ; and it is that by 
which the road passes, called Maquilapa, near 
the settlement of its name, which in the idiom of 
the Indians signifies Bald-pate, a name very pro 
perly applied to it. Thomas Gage, an Irish 
monk, who wrote the voyage which he made to 
this part of America, exaggerates the dangers 
which he suffered in passing these mountains. 
These mountains are about 40 miles to the s. of 
the city of Chiapa. 

QUELEPA, SANTIAGO DE, a settlement of 
the province and alcaldia mayor of S. Miguel in 
the kingdom of Guatemala ; annexed to the cu 
racy of S. Alexo of the valley of Moncagua. 

QUELLCA, a great llanura of the province 
and corregimiento of Santa in Peru, which ex 
tends itself from n. to s. by the coast of the Pa 
cific or S. Sea. It is unpeopled, as being barren 
and of a very hot climate. 

QUEMA, a river of the province and country 
of Las Amazonas, in the part possessed by the 
Portuguese. It runs e. and enters the Puru or 
Cuchwara, opposite the arm of the Paratani. 

QUEMADA, a small island of the S. Sea; si 
tuate within the bay of the island Malvini or 
Falkland. The French call it Pingovins. 

QUEMA DO, a small port on the coast of the 
S. Sea, of the province and corregimiento of lea, 
and kingdom of Peru ; five leagues distant from 
that town : the road to it being most delightful, 
and through pleasant meadows. At this port 
touch small vessels coming from Chile and Cal- 
lao. In lat. 14 20" s. 

QUEMADO, another port, also in the S. Sea, of 
the province and government of Darien, and 
kingdom of Tierra Firme, close to the Bay of 
Palmar. 

QUEMAHONING, a small river of the pro 
vince of Virginia in N. America, which runs w* 
and enters the Loil-hanning. 



Q U E 

QUEMARA, or QUEMARU, according to the 
engineer Francis Bellin, a small lake of the pro 
vince and country of Las Amazonas, in the ter 
ritory possessed by the Portuguese. It is formed 
by the waste water from the river Maranon, on 
the side of another lake, between the rivers Coari 
and Cuchivara. 

QUEMARA, a river of the same province as the 
former lake ; an arm which runs from the Purii 
or Cuchivara, and enters the Maranon. 

QUEMES, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Lipes, and archbishopric of Char- 
cas in Peru ; annexed to the curacy of the settle 
ment of San Christoval. 

QUENDI, a small river of the province and 
government of Paraguay, which runs w. and en 
ters the Parana, between those of the Ibida and 
Capui. 

QUENE, a fort of Canada, in the territory of 
the Eries Indians, and on the confines of Penn 
sylvania; built by the French on the shore of 
the river Ohio in 1754. 

QUENEBANG, a river of the province of 
Massachusetts in N. America ; one of the four 
which form New England. It rises from a small 
lake, runs s. and enters the sea opposite the e. 
head of Long Island. 

QUENEQUE, a settlement of the province 
and corregimiento of Carabaya in Peru ; annexed 
to the curacy of its capital. 

QUENTEPEC, SAN SEBASTIAN DE, a settle 
ment of the head settlement of the district of 
Huitepec, and alcaldia mayor of Quauhnahuac or 
Cuernavaca in Nueva Espana ; containing 62 In 
dian families. 

QUENTO, a lake of the province and country 
of the Iroquees Indians. It is formed from the 
waste water of that of Toronto, in its mid-course 
to enter the Ontario. 

QUEPE, a river of the district of Boroa in 
the kingdom of Chile. See PLAL. 

QUEPETI, a river of the province and go 
vernment of Darien in the kingdom of Tierra 
Firme. It rises in the mountains of the n. coast, 
and enters the N. Sea in the Bay of Mandinga, 
opposite the isle of Broquel. 

QUERACOTO, a settlement of the province 
and corregimiento of Caxamarca in Peru; an 
nexed to the curacy of Huambos. 

QUERCO, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Castro-Virreyna in the same 
kingdom as the former ; annexed to the curacy 
of Cordoba. 

QUERETARO, a province and corregimiento 
of Nueva Espana; of a^benign temperature, very 



Q U E 



285 



S. Juan de Guedo, 

San Pablo, 

Santa Maria Tequis- 

quiapan, 

S. Miguel de Thi, 
San Pedro Tholimanj 
San Antonio. 



fertile, and abounding in wheat, maize, barley, 
and other fruits, of which it gathers very large 
crops, in 96 estates within its district ; where 
also it has 23 workshops ; in which the natives 
fabricate very fine cloths, serges, coarse cloths, 
and various other woollen commodities, from the 
number of sheep which graze in its fields. Also 
from the skins of other animals they make very 
good leather, and maintain in all the above arti- 
ticles a great commerce with the other provinces 
and districts. This province was called in the 
time of the gentilism of the Indians, Othomi and 
Chichimeca, as it was peopled by these two na 
tions, who were conquered by the Spaniards in 
1531, after that they had defended themselves 
valorous, until their ultimate defeat in a battle 
which, as the tradition goes, was carried against 
them, by the apostle St. James in person. 

The population consists of the following settle 
ments : 

San Juan del Rio, 

San Sebastian, 

Sta. Maria Amealco, 

San Miguel, 

Tholimanejo, 

San Pedro Ahuatlan, 

San Bartolome del 
Pino, 

QUERETARO, the capital, is the city of the 
same name, with the dedicatory title of Santiago; 
situate on the skirt of a mountain plain, called 
the Cerro de Santa Cruz, and extending, as to the 
greater part of its population, to the e. part. It 
is one of the most beautiful and opulent cities in 
all the kingdom, and the largest after Mexico, 
[to the intendancy of which it belongs.] From 
n. to s. it is sheltered by a mountain ; and from 
thence begins its celebrated glen, where the de 
lightful fields and shady groves are irrigated by 
a large river ; the waters of the same being in 
troduced by means of hidden aqueducts, which 
are reduced to twelve currents running from the 
mother stream ; the water being thus let in upon 
2000 houses, to the which are attached gardens, 
abounding in a thousand kinds of fruits and 
flowers, as well European as American. It has 
three grand squares ; from the which extend all 
the streets, running to the four cardinal points. 
Here is also one celebrated channel for carrying 
the water to the city, upon more than 40 arches 
of 35 yards high, a work which owed its execu 
tion to the diligence of the Marquis of Villar 
del Aguila, and in which 1 14,000 dollars were 
spent. 

The parish church is magnificent and very rich , 



286 



Q U E 



and one of the curacies, the most flourishing of 
any in the kingdom, and having annexed to it 
two other chapels of ease. It is further adorned 
by another most sumptuous temple of Nuestra 
Seiiora de Guadalupe, in which the principal 
altar is entirely of silver ; and there is also in 
this church the chapter. Here are three con 
vents of the religious of San Francisco ; one of 
the Observers, another of the Bare-footed Re- 
coletans of St. Diego, and the third of Santa 
Cruz, which is the apostolical college of the mis 
sionaries ; also the convents of San Agustin, 
Nuestra Seiiora de las Mercedes, the Barefooted 
Carmelites, and a college which belonged to the 
Jesuits, where the public hall and schools were. 
Here are a royal hospital, and a convent of San 
Hipolito, of the order of La Caridad ; and three 
monasteries of nuns, which are of Santa Clara, 
Las Capuchinas, and Santa Rosa. The principal 
convent of San Francisco is the parish of the In 
dians, and has five chapels of ease, and different 
hermitages and minor chapels. 

This city is inhabited by 3000 families of Spa 
niards, Mustees, and Mulattoes, and nearly as 
many more Otomies Indians ; so that its popula 
tion is reputed at 47,000 souls, amongst whom 
are many illustrious and rich families. [Hum- 
boldt states its habitual population at only 35,000. 
It contains 11,600 Indians, 85 secular ecclesias 
tics, 181 monks, and 143 nuns. The consump 
tion of Queretaro (observes the same author) 
amounted in 1793 to 13,618 cargas of wheaten 
flour, 69,445 fane gas of maize, 656 cargas of 
Chile (capsicum), 1770 barrels of brandy, 1682 
beeves, 14,949 sheep, and 8869 hogs. Its height 
is 1940 metres.] 

In this city are many work-shops, in which are 
fabricated fine cloths, baizes, serges, &amp;c. a great 
number of shops and stalls furnished with all 
sorts of provisions ; and also tanneries, in which 
they dress leather and make belts. This city is 
also filled with orchards and gardens, which 
make it rich and abundant in every thing that 
can supply to the necessities or luxuries of life. 
Ninety-five miles n. w. from Mexico, in lat. 20 
38 X n. and long. 100 11 w. 

QUERO, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Riobamba in the kingdom of 
Quito, belonging to the district and jurisdiction 
of the asiento of Ambato ; situate s.e. of the river 
Pachanlica. Its woods abound in cedar trees of 
excellent quality, the which, and the singular 
genius and application of its natives in imitating 
whatsoever they see, have made them perfect ar 
tificers of tables, saddles, writing desks, bureaus, 



Q U E 

and other articles of furniture, in a manner such 
as to vie with the same articles of English manu 
facture ; and with these they supply the whole 
kingdom. In its district are two large and flou 
rishing estates, called Mumul and Gruayamo, in 
lat. l26 ,y. 

QUERO, another settlement, in the province 
and corregimiento of Caxamarquilla in Peru ; an 
nexed to the curacy of the settlement of Chila. 

QUEROBAMBA, a settlement of the pro 
vince and corregimiento of Lucanas in Peru. 

QUEROMACA, a settlement of the province 
and government of Jaen de Bracamoros in the 
kingdom of Quito. 

QUESALTENANGO, a province and alcaldia 
mayor of the kingdom of Guatemala in N. Ame 
rica. It is of limited extent, but very populous 
in Indians. The greater part is a serrania y in 
the which are found mines of alum, and very fine 
sulphur ; of which the Spaniards made use in the 
conquest of the kingdom for manufacturing gun 
powder. The Indians of this province were sub 
jected by Captain Pedro de Alvarado, by order 
of Hernan Cortes, in 1523, after many combats, 
as they were very valorous. 

The settlements of which this jurisdiction con 
sists are the following: 

Sta. Catalina Sunil, 

San Pedro, 

Santa Maria, 

San Mateo, 

Cantel, &amp;lt;*..: 

San Juan Ostumalco, 

Chiquirichapa, 

San Martin, 

San Miguel, 

San Christoval de Ca- 
brican, 

Valle de Sixa, 

Santiago Tejutla, 

In all the which there are near 12,000 Indians of 
different nations. 

QUESALTENANGO, the capital, is the settle 
ment of the same name, with the dedicatory title 
of Espiritu Santo, and being the residence of the 
alcalde mayor. It was a curacy of the religious 
of San Francisco, until that the king ordained 
that there should be none but the regular clergy 
in America. 

QUESCOMATE, SANTA MARIA DE, a settle 
ment of the head settlement of the district of 
Santa Isabel, of the alcaldia mayor of Cholula in 
Nueva Espaiia. It contains 110 families of In 
dians, and is half a league w. of its head settle 
ment. 



Tajumulco, 

Ixtaguacan, 

Tuttuapa, 

Zicapaca, 

San Pedro Zacatepe- 

que, 

San Antonio, 
San Christoval, 
Santiago Catepeque, 
San Pablo, 
Santa Lucia, 
Comitan. 



Q U E 

QUESNE, a fort of the French, built by the 
Marquis of Quesne, who gave it his name ; on 
the shores of the river Ohio, in the territory of 
the province of Pennsylvania, 232 miles w. of 
Philadelphia. The English army, commanded 
by General Braddock, was routed in 1755, nine 
miles from this fort ; the which was taken from the 
French in 1760, notwithstanding the many forti 
fications which the former had made ; and its 
name was then changed to Pittsburg. In lat. 40 
26 30" n. Long. 80. w. See PITTSBURG. 

QUETZALA, SAN JUAN DE, a settlement of 
the head settlement of the district of Escateopan, 
and alcaldia mayor of Zaqualpa in Nueva Espana. 
It contains 86 families of Indians. 

QUETZALAPA, a settlement of the head 
settlement of the district, and alcaldia mayor of 
Igualapa in the same kingdom as the former. 
One league n. of its capital. 

QUElTZALAPAN, a settlement and head set 
tlement of the district, and alcaldia mayor of Teu- 
tila in the same kingdom as the former. It is of 
an hot temperature, contains 20 families of In 
dians, who trade in woven cotton fabrics, and is 
16 leagues s. of its capital. 

QUETZUAPA, a settlement of the head set 
tlement of the district and alcaldia mayor of Tlapa 
in Nueva Espana. It contains 50 families of 
Mexican Indians, who cultivate some seeds, co 
chineal, and cotton. 

QUEULE, a river of the kingdom of Chile, 
which runs s. of the city Imperial ; 18 leagues 
from this city, and the boundary of its territory 
and jurisdiction by that part. It makes a ser 
pentine course, and enters the sea to the n. of the 
city of Valdivia. 

QUEULE, a point of land, which is one of those 
formed by the above river in its entrance into 
the sea. 

QUXEMIS, a river of the province and go 
vernment of Guayaquil, in the kingdom of Quito, 
which disembogues itself into the S. Sea. 

QUEZALTEPEC, S. MIGUEL DE, a settle 
ment of the head settlement of the district of Co- 
atlan, and alcaldia mayor of Nexapa in the same 
kingdom as the former. It contains 212 families 
of Indians, who trade in cochineal, cotton, chile, 
and seeds. Two leagues n. of its head settle 
ment. 

QUEZALTEPEC, another settlement, in the pro 
vince and alcaldia mayor of S. Salvador, in the 
kingdom of Guazacoalco in Nueva Espana : one 
of those which took up arms against the Spaniards 
after the death of Moctezuma : conquered and re 
duced to obedience by Gonzalo de Sandoval. 



Q U I 



287 



QUEZALUTIA, a province of the kingdom 
of Guatemala, in the time of the Indians. The 
Spaniards call it, at the present day, Los Desa- 
lados ; and it is near the Lake of Terminos. 

QUEZATLAPAN, a great and navigable 
river of the province and alcaldia mayor of Ta 
basco in Nueva Espana. It is the same as that 
which was discovered by Juan de Grijalba, who 
gave it his name. By it the Spaniards used to 
go down to bring victuals and succour to Hernan 
Cortes, when he made the journey of Honduras, 
to chastise Christoval de Olid, who had risen 

against him. This river enters the Tabasco to 
. 

run into the sea. 

QUIABAYA, a settlement of the province 
and corregimiento of Larecaxa in Peru. 

QUIABISLAN, a settlement and capital of 
the district of this name, which is bounded by the 
province of Zempoala in Nueva Espana. In 
this place abode Hernan Cortes with his people, 
when he undertook the conquest of Mexico, and 
was amicably received by its cacique. It was 
situate on an eminence of rocks, which made it 
very strong, and was only accessible by some 
narrow passages. In this town Hernan Cortes 
took the commissaries of Moctezuma, who were 
collecting tribute ; and he gave them up to their 
cacique, on account of their admitting the Spa 
niards without permission from the emperor. 

QUIACA, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Carabay in Peru ; annexed to 
the curacy of the town of San Juan del Oro. 

QUIAMARE, a settlement of the province 
of Barcelona and government of Cumana, in the 
kingdom of Nueva Andalucia ; one of those 
which are under the care of the religious ob 
servers of San Francisco, the missionaries of Pi- 
ritu ; situate on the shore of the river Neveri. 
having been founded in 1746 by Fr. Lucas Ma- 
garinos, who catechized 58 Caribes Indians, 
whose numbers afterwards increased. He chose 
the spot which was called Quiamare, from a ca 
cique who lived there in former times ; this be 
ing a word corrupted from Piamare, and having 
added to it the dedicatory title of La Virgen de 
los Dolores. Its territory is very fertile, woody, 
and abounding in vegetable productions. It had 
the misfortune of being destroyed by fire a little 
after its foundation ; but it was afterwarde re 
built, and is 14 miles n. n. e. from the settle 
ment of San Mateo, and 27 s. of Barcelona. 

QUIANNA, a settlement of the province of 
Moqui in the kingdom of Nuevo Mexico. 

QUIATORI, a principal and head settle 
ment of the district of the alcaldia mayor of 



288 



Teutitlan in Nueva Espana. It is of a mild 
temperature, but of a territory uneven, and full 
of mountains, plains, and deep glens : situate at 
the distance of a musket shot from the line 
which divides this jurisdiction from that of Te- 
huantepec. It contains 300 families of Indians, 
who trade in cochineal, maize, French beans, 
and fruit. Fourteen leagues e. of its capital. 

[QUIBBLETOWN, a village in Middlesex 
County, New Jersey, six miles n. of New 
Brunswick.] 

QUIBDO, SAN FRANCISCO DE, a settlement 
of the province and government of Darien and 
kingdom of Tierra Firme : on the n. coast, on 
the shore and at the mouth of the river Atrato, 
where this enters the sea in the Gulf of Darien. 

QUIBI, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Canta in Peru ; annexed to the 
curacy of that of Arahuay, where is preserved a 
small and poor chapel, which was the house in 
which resided Santa Rosa de Lima for many 
years. 

QUIBILLIA, a great manufacturing place of 
the province and corregimiento of Huamalies in 
Peru ; where they fabricate many baizes, and 
woollen cloths. It is inhabited by many people. 

QUIBIQUIAS, or QUIBIQUIES, a barbarous 
nation of Indians of Peru, who dwell to the e. 
of the river Apare, or San Miguel : bounded by 
the nation of the Chiquitos. It is not well 
known, and we have little real information of 
their customs. 

QUIBO, an island of the S. Sea : opposite 
the coast of the province of Verragua and king 
dom of Tierra Firme, and of the cape or point 
of land of Santa Maria, which is the most w. 
part of the bay of Panama. It is a desert, not 
withstanding the convenience it offers for vessels 
which are accustomed to enter it to take in water 
and fuel, for close up to where the high tide 
runs the shore is covered with trees ; and in the 
interior of the port a torrent of fresh water flows 
down by the strand. 

The whole of the island, with the exception of 
one small part, is of a moderate height, and con 
sists entirely of a wood, which is continually 
green. Amongst the trees which form this wood 
are many chesnuts : here are also abundance of 
birds, and particularly of parrots, parroquets ; 
also of stags, tigers, monkies, and alligators ; 
and of a species of snake of a very singular 
kind, which they call the sierpe violante; the 
which darts itself down with violence from the 
branches of the trees upon men or animals, who 
may pass beneath : their bite produces instant 



Q U I 

death ; nor has there to this time been found any 
antidote whatever against their poison. The sea 
likewise is infested with alligators, and with a 
very large flat fish, called manta or cloak, which 
envelopes and suffocates those who are diving 
for pearls, although some have a knack of de 
fending and liberating themselves, by a double- 
edged and sharp pointed knife. The port of this 
island is called Canal Bueno, and is six miles 
long, and 30 feet deep. 

The territory is very fertile, and would, if 
cultivated, produce abundantly ; as it is well 
irrigated by streams and rivulets. In the part 
looking to the n. e. is a natural cascade, superior 
to any thing that could be formed by art. It is 
a river of excellent water, of about 40 feet wide, 
which rushes down a declivity of 150 feet. The 
channel into which it falls is very irregular ; as 
being composed of rocks and large stones, both 
as to its sides and bottom. These afford fre 
quent interruptions to the course of the water, 
so that this is seen in many parts to move in a 
serpentine course, though nevertheless with 
great impetuosity and smoothly ; and in other 
parts to precipitate itself over rocks in a perpen 
dicular fall. 

This current is surrounded by a beautiful 
wood, and even upon the rocks whicli form the 
channel are to be seen large trees ; so that the 
winding of the water, and the varied succession of 
the foliage, form a prospect enchanting in itself; 
but rendered still more so by a variety of birds, 
whose plumage could vie with the colours of 
the rainbow. It is really to be regretted that 
no one has ever thought to settle in this beauti 
ful island, with the great advantage it has of be 
ing so near to the continent. Its port, which is 
on the e. side, is in long. 71 33 30" w. and in 
lat. 70 27 30" n. 

QUIBON, a settlement of the province and 
government of Venzuela in the Nuevo Reyno 
de Granada ; of the district and jurisdiction of 
the city of Baraquisimieto, to the w. | s. of the 
same. 

QUIBUNDOI, a river of the province and 
government of Atacames or Esmeraldas, in the 
kingdom of Quito. It enters the Guailla- 
bamba. 

QUIBURIO, a settlement of the province 
and government of Sonora in Nueva Espana : 
on the shore of a river in the country and terri 
tory of the Apaches Indians. 

QUICAPONS, a settlement of Indians of 
New France or Canada ; situate on the shore of 
the river La Roche. 



Q U I 

QUICAPONS, a river of this province, which 
runs e. and enters the Mississipi. 

QUICARO, a small island of the S. Sea, 
near the coast of the province and government 
of Veragua in the kingdom of Tierra Firme. 

QUICHAYA, a settlement of the province 
and government of Popayan in the Nuevo Reyno 
de Granada. 

QUICHE, S. ANDRES DE, a settlement and 
head settlement of the district of this name, in 
the kingdom of Guatemala. It contains 740 In 
dians, and was a curacy of the religious of St. 
Domingo, before the establishment of the clergy. 

QUICHES, a settlement of Indians of the pro 
vince and government of Luisiana, on the shore 
of the river Trinidad. 

QUICHUAI, a settlement of the province and 
eorregimiento of Xauja in Peru, annexed to the 
curacy of S. Geronimo. 

QUICUIMA, a river of the province and 
eorregimiento of Panches in the Nuevo Reyno de 
Granada. It rises near the settlement of Co- 
caima, and enters the river Grande de la Mag- 
daleno. 

QUIDICO, a small river of the kingdom of 
Chile, which runs e. and enters the sea between 
the Lleullen and the Tirhua. 

QUIEBRA-HERMOSA. See MAURICIO. 

QUIEBRA-LOMA, a settlement of the pro 
vince and government of Popayan in the Nuevo 
Reyno de Granada. 

QUIEBRA-OLLAS, a small isle near the 
coast of the kingdom of Chile, in the province 
and eorregimiento of Concepcion ; at the mouth 
or entrance of the port of this name, opposite 
the island Quinquina. 

QUIEBRAS, a settlement of the province and 
government of Buenos Ayres in Peru, on the 
shore of the river La Plata, at a small distance 
from the capital. 

QUIECHAPA, SAN PEDRO DE, a settlement 
and capital of the alcaldm mayor of Nexapa in 
Nueva Espana; situate on some lofty and ex 
tensive plains, surrounded on all sides by various 
mountains of an inaccessible height. It is of a 
cold temperature, and very subject to noxious 
air. It contains a convent of the religious of St. 
Domingo, and 113 families of Indians, who em 
ploy themselves in cultivating and selling cochi 
neal, wheat, maize, and fruits, which are pro 
duced in abundance in its territory ; this being 
well irrigated by the streams flowing from the 
mountains. It is 105 leagues s. e. of Mexico. 

QUIEGUELANI, SANTA MARIA DE, a prin 
cipal and head settlement of the district of the 

VOL. iv. 



Q U I 



same alcaldia mayor as the former ; situate in the 
plain of a deep glen. It contains a convent of 
the religious of St. Domingo, and 113 families of 
Indians, who every Sunday, throughout the year, 
keep a market, which in their idiom is called 
Tianguis ; at which meet all the inhabitants of 
the greater and smaller of sierra of this jurisdic 
tion and of the other neighbouring sierras., to sell 
clothes and fruits, and European and native com 
modities. 

[QUIINDY, a parish of the province and 
government of Paraguay, situate on a plain, 
about 48 miles 5. e. from Asuncion, in lat. 25 
58 26" s. and long. 57 14 49" a&amp;gt;.] 

QUILOUNAN, a bay of the s. coast of Lake 
Superior in Canada, at the back of the point of 
this name. 

QUILACOIA, a very rich and abundant gold 
mine, of excellent quality, in the province and 
eorregimiento of Concepcion and kingdom of 
Chile. 

QUILAQUILA, a settlement of the province 
and eorregimiento of Yamparaes in Peru, and of 
the archbishopric of Charcas. 

QUILCA, a settlement of the province and 
eorregimiento of Camana in Peru, annexed to the 
curacy of its capital. It is situate near the sea, 
and has a port or creek, in which much fish is 
caught ; by which, and by some talc-mines, in its 
vicinity, its natives carry on a trade. 

QUILCA, another settlement, in the province 
and eorregimiento of Ibarra and kingdom of 
Quito. 

QUILCA, another, of the province and govern" 
ment of Guayaquil in the same kingdom as the 
former, belonging to the district of Babahoyo, 
and inhabited by many Indians. 

QUILCATA, a settlement of the province and 
eorregimiento of Parinacochas in Peru, annexed 
to the curacy of Pararca. 

QUILICHAO, a settlement and asiento of 
gold-mines of the province and government of 
Popayan in the Nuevo Reyno de Granada. It 
was formerly a city, and called Jamaica ; but 
now reduced to a miserable state. Its climate is 
hot, and its water very unhealthy. It has a plan 
tation of plantains, the fruit of which, as no one 
can tell its origin, or to whom it belongs, are 
taken by all, though it is never cultivated. 

QUILIFAYES, a barbarous nation of Indi- 
ans&amp;gt; of the Nuevo Reyno de Granada, descended 
from the nation of the Betoyes : bounded e. by 
that of Los Malifilitos ; and they dwell in the 
woods near a lake, by the fish of which they 
maintain themselves. 

p P 



290 



Q U 1 



QUILIMARI, a settlement of the province 
and corregimiento of Quillota in the kingdom of 
Chile. 

QUILIMARI, a river of this province and king 
dom, which runs ztf. and enters the sea between 
Point Coronel and that of Matagorda. 

QUILIMARI, some gold-mines, celebrated for 
their richness and metal of fine quality, in the 
same province and kingdom. 

QUILETEN, a settlement of the province 
and government of Cartagena in the Nuevo 
Reyno de Granada ; near the coast, and at the 
point of Tigua, nearly opposite the islands of St. 
Bernard. 

QUILLA, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Vilcas Huaman in Peru, annexed 
to the curacy of Huancapi. 

QUILLACOLLO, a settlement of the pro 
vince and corregimiento of Cochabanba, in the 
same kingdom as the former. 

QUILLACOYA, or QUILLACOCHA, which 
signifies the lake of the moon in the Chilian 
tongue. It is a very abundant gold-mine of the 
kingdom of Chile in the district of the corregi 
miento and province of Concepcion ; from whence 
it is four leagues distant. It is of metal of the 
best quality known here, and was discovered in 
1552, and has been always moderately worked 
through want of sufficient hands. 

QUILLAI, SANTO TOMAS DE, a settlement of 
the province and corregimiento of Chachapoyas in 
Peru. 

QUILA-SINGAS, a barbarous nation of In 
dians, antiently of the province and corregimi 
ento of Pasto m the kingdom of Quito. They 
are now very few, and dwell in the woods and 
forests to the e. 

QUILLE, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Chilques and Masques in Peru, 
annexed to the curacy of the settlement of 
Omacha. 

QUILLEN, a river of the district of Guada- 
labquen in the kingdom of Chile ; which runs 
n. n. w. and enters the Valdivia. 

QUILLIMSA, a river of the province and 
government of Tucuman in Peru ; which rises 
in the sierra of Campanchin, runs e. and enters 
the river Tercero. 

QUILLIN, a celebrated port of the kingdom 
of Chile ; between the Spanish territory and the 
country of the Araucanos Indians, and where the 
peace was concluded between the principal ca 
ciques of the latter and the Marquis of Baides, 
Count of Pedroso, governor of that kingdom, in 
1641. 



Q U I 

QLJILLO, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Santa in Peru, annexed to the 
curacy of Huambacho. 

QUILLOTA, a province and corregimiento oi" 
the kingdom of Chile : bounded s. e. by the juris 
diction of Santiago ; s. by the provinces of Meli- 
pilla and Valparaiso ; w. by the sea, and extend 
ing n. e. as far as the cordillera^ leaving to the 
s. the province of Aconcagua, and to the n. that 
ofCoquimbo. Its length is 25 leagues from w. 
to s. and its width is 21 from e. to w. On its 
coast are found the ports of Choapa, La Herra- 
dura, La Ligua, Quintero, and El Papudo. It 
is watered by the rivers Choapa, Longotoma, 
Ligua, and Limache ; which flow dow n from the 
cordillera to enter the sea. Towards the mouth 
of the former river is a large lake, abounding in 
fish ; and it is to be observed, that from the port 
of Ligua to that of Coquimbo there are no fish 
in the rivers ; although this be not the case from 
Santiago southward. 

They cultivate in this province all kinds of 
grain, and vines; nor is there any want of cattle. 
It abounds in mines of gold and copper; and to 
wards the heights of Titil is the celebrated mine 
of Dormida, and to the s. that of Colliguay, 
which now render some gold ; as do also those 
of the valley of Ligua, and many others, which 
only want hands to work them. The natives fa 
bricate much rigging, cords, and thread ; also 
soap, from the great abundance of glass-wort, 
and of these articles consists their commerce. 
The inhabitants are 14,000, and the capital is 
the town of the same name, called also San Mar 
tin de la Concha, [which is situated in lat. 32 50 
s. and long. 71 18 w.~] 

[This province contains also the cities of 
Piazza, Plazilla, Ingenio, Casablanca, and Pe- 
trorea. This last is very populous, in conse 
quence of the great number of miners who resort 
thither, to work in the gold mines in its vicinity. 
It is situate between the river Longotoma and 
Qualimari, in lat. 31 45 s. and long. 76 56 w. 
Quillota contains a number of ports, and, besides 
those already mentioned, namely, Papudo, Quin- 
tiro, Herraaura, and Ligua, it has that of Con- 
con., and that, to be preferred before the rest, of 
Valparaiso. 

The four first are not frequented ; whereas 
Valparaiso, or, as it is sometimes called, Val- 
paradiso, is the most commercial port of Chile, 
from whence all the trade to Spain and Peru is 
carried on. It is in latitude 33 2 s. and long. 
71 19 w. The harbour is very capacious, and 
so deep that ships of the largest size can lie close 



Q U I 

to the shore. Its convenience for traffic, and the 
salubrity of its atmosphere, have rendered it a 
place of considerable population. A governor 
from Spain resides there, who has. the command 
in the civil and military departments, and is 
amenable only to the President of Chile. Besides 
the college, which formerly belonged to the Je- 
suits, Valparaiso contains a parish church, and 
several convents of monks. Upon the shore 
which forms the harbour is a well peopled town, 
three miles distant from Valparaiso, called 
1 Almendrab. 

In this province is a plain of extraordinary 
beauty and fertility. We read, in Molina, that 
there is to be found in it an abundance of 
peaches, and other European fruits, growing as 
line as in their native country.] 

QUILLOTA, the river above mentioned, which 
runs w. and enters the sea between Port Quin- 
tero and the creek of Rebero. 

[QUILLOTA, a gold-mine of the above pro 
vince and government, in which is found a curi 
ous spar of an hexagonal form, transparent, and 
crossed with fine golden filaments, which give it 
a most beautiful appearance. See Index to ad 
ditional history of CHILE.] 

QUILPOLEMU, a settlement of the province 
and district of Chanco in the kingdom of Chile ; 
situate near the lake of Lonquen. In its district 
is a large estate called Tegualemu. 

QUILLUNZA, a settlement of the district of 
Condesuyas of Arequipa in Peru; annexed to 
the curacy of the settlement of Catahuasi. 

QUILME, a settlement of the province and 
government of Buenos Ayres in Peru ; situate 
on the shore of the river La Plata, between the 
capital and the bay of Barragan. 

QUILME, another, in the province and go 
vernment of Tucuman, belonging to the district 
of the city of Salta, and annexed to the curacy of 
Chiquiana. 

QUILMO, a small river of the kingdom of 
Chile, which runs close by the river Chilian, and 
at last enters it. 

QUIMBAYA, a province and small corregi- 
miento of the government of Popayan in the 
Nuevo Reyno de Granada. It is 15 leagues long 
and 10 wicle, from the river Cauca to the cor- 
(Jillera. 

QUIMECAS, an antient and barbarous na 
tion of Indians of Peru ; bounded by the w. part 
by the nation of the Chiquitos, and n. by that of 
Los Peiioquis. These Indians, united with the 
Quimecas, and other nations, gave battle to 
Juan Borallo de Almada, a Portuguese, and 



Q U I 



201 



Captain of the Mamclucos of San Pablo, in 1685, 
when they were defeated by him. The country 
which they occupy is very hot and moist, but 
abounding in palms. 

QUIM1, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Sicasica in Peru ; annexed to 
the curacy of Mohosa, in the province of Co- 
chabamba. 

QUIMIAC, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Riobamba in the kingdom of 
Quito. It has in the n. part two estates called 
Ixmal and Nabuso. 

QUIRIMI, a settlement of the province and 
government of Tarma in Peru, belonging to the 
missions of Caxamarquilla, on the n. shore of the 
Tapo, which they call also Tarma. It is six 
leagues from the capital, and in it was a fortress 
on the confines of the province, to restrain the 
Infidels, especially those of the Chunchos In 
dians, who made themselves masters of the capi 
tal, assisted by the rebel .Juan Santos, in the 
vear 1742. A short time after they abandoned 
it ; but in the following year, 1743, after a siege 
of many days, they took possession of it again, 
putting to death the Spaniards whom they found 
in it, and again retired from it. It is at present 
much better fortified and garrisoned than for 
merly. 

QUIMISTACAS, a settlement of the province 
and corregimienlo of Moquehua in Peru, annexed 
to the curacy of Puquina. 

QUIMIXTLAN, S. JUAN DE, a settlement 
and head settlement of the district of the alcal- 
dia mayor of St. Juan de los Llanos in Nueva 
Espaiia. It contains 390 families of Indians, in 
cluding those of the wards of its district ; and is 
six leagues n. w. of its capital. 

QUIMOS, a barbarous nation of Indians, of 
the kingdom of Peru, bounded e. by that of the 
Chiquitos, and n. by that of the Piiioquis or Pi- 
nocas. In the territory of these Indians the Spa 
niards of Santa Cruz de la Sierra attacked An 
tonio Ferraes, Captain and Chief of the Mame- 
lucos of San Pablo, in 1691, obtaining a com 
plete victory, routing their enemies, whose chief 
they put to death. 

QUIMANCIPE, a settlement of the jurisdic 
tion of the city of Muzo, in the province and 
corregimiento of Tunja and Nuevo Reyno de 
Granada : annexed to the curacy of Yacopi, and 
as reduced and poor as this is. 

[QUINABAUG, a river formerly called Mo- 

hegan, which rises in Brimfield, Massachusetts, 

and is joined at Oxford by French river, which 

has its source in Sutton, Worcester County. It 

p p 2 



292 



Q U I 



Q U I 



runs a s. course, and empties into Shetucket, as well from intense cold as from their difficult 
about three miles above Norwich Landing, in passes. 

QUINEL, a settlement of Indians of the pro 
vince and corregimiento of Itata in the kingdom 
of Chile ; on the skirt of the mountain Negro. 

[QUINEPAUGE, or EAST RIVER, in Con 
necticut, runs a s. course, and empties into the 
n. e. corner of New Haven Harbour.] 

QUININANCHO, a settlement of the pro 
vince and government of Valdivia in the same 
kingdom as the former; between the river Me- 
quin and the mountain Bonifacio. 

QUINJULCA, a settlement of the province 
and corregimiento of Chachapoyas in Peru, an 
nexed to the curacy of the settlement of Chiliquin. 

QUINO, a small river of the province and 
corregimiento of Pasto in the kingdom of Quito : 
it enters a little after its source into the Futu 
re ay o. 

QUINOA, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Huanta in Peru. 

QUINOALOMA, a very lofty mountain of 
the cordillera of the Andes, in the kingdom of 
Quito. 

QUIN OTA, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Chumbivilcas in Peru. 

[QUINSIGAMOND, WORCESTER, or LONG 
POND, is a beautiful piece of water in the form 
of a crescent, about four miles in length, and 
from 60 to 100 rods broad. It is situated on the 
line between the towns of Worcester and Shrews 
bury ; but the greater part of it is in the latter. 
It is interspersed with a number of islands, one 
of which is upwards of 200 acres in extent.] 

QUINTA, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Riobamba in the kingdom of 
Quito ; n. of this town, and on the shore of the 
river Lluczin. 

QUINTAI, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Caxatambo in Peru, annexed to 
the curacy of the settlement of Sayan in the pro 
vince of Chancay. 

QUINTERO, a port of the S. Sea in the 
province and corregimiento of Quillota of the 
kingdom of Chile ; one of the most pleasant and 
delightful there. It had a fort built by the Dutch 
pirate,. George Spilberg, who disembarked in it 
to refresh his people, and to take in water and 
fuel ; but the Spaniards made him abandon it. 
At the present day it is only inhabited by some 
poor fishermen. 

QUINTERO, a settlement in the province and 
government of Mariquita in the Nuevo Reyno 
de Granada ; on the shore of the river Grande 
de la Magdelna. 



Connecticut.] 

QUINARA, a large and beautiful llanura of 
the province and corregimiento of Loxa in the 
kingdom of Quito, and of the district of the set 
tlement of Malacatos to the s. It is celebrated 
for an antient tradition, that there was here in 
terred by Quinara, the captain of the Inca Ata- 
hualpa, the treasure which he was carrying to 
Francisco Pizarro for the redemption of the 
Inca,when he (Quinara) had found that the Spani 
ards had put the Inca to death. Thus the place 
was called Quinara ; and it is in the possession 
of Piscopampa, in lat. 4 18 s. 

QUINCHAMALI, BALSAS DE, some lakes of 
the kingdom of Chile, in the province and cor 
regimiento of Italata, near the river of this name, 
and where it unites with the Nuble. It has its 
name from a celebrated herb or plant thus called, 
found here in abundance, and on the virtues of 
which many have written. 

QUINCHE, a settlement of the kingdom of 
Quito, in the district and jurisdiction of Las 
Cinco Leguas de la Capital, to the n. of the set 
tlement of Yaruqui ; situate in a lofty spot of 
a cold climate. It is celebrated for the sanctuary 
of a miraculous image of Our Lady of this title; 
to the reverence of which all the kingdom as 
semble as the protectress of the capital ; the Ca- 
bildos, ecclesiastical and secular, going in formal 
procession to deposit it in the cathedral in cases 
of danger and emergency : four leagues from the 
capital ; in lat. 7 / s. 

QUINCHIAS, a barbarous and numerous na 
tion of Indians, of the jurisdiction of Anserma 
of the Nuevo Reyno de Granada : discovered by 
l Juan de Vadillo in 1537. They were cannibals ; 
are at present very few, and live retired in the 
mountains. 

QUINCOAI, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Yauyos in Peru, annexed to the 
curacy of the settlement of Ayaviri. 

[QUINCY, a post town of Massachusetts, in 
Norfolk county, taken from Braintree, 10 miles 
s. of Boston, nine w. of Hingham, and 360 n. e. 
of Philadelphia. In this town is the seat of the 
present president of the United States. See 

DRAINTREE.l 

QUINDIO, some rough and very lofty moun 
tains in the province and government of Popayan 
and Nuevo Reyno de Granada. They are passed 
in going to Anserma and other places ; but the 
road is impassable in the winter ; and even in 
the summer they are dangerous and troublesome. 



Q U 1 

QUINTI, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Guarochiri in Peru, annexed 
to the curacy of the following. 

QUINTI, another, with the dedicatory title of 
San Lorenzo, in the same province and kingdom. 

QUINTIN, S. a settlement of Indians, and 
a reduction of the missions which were held by 
the Jesuits in the kingdom of Nueva Vizcaya of 
N. America: 11 leagues distant of the capital, 
surrounded by very fertile arid luxuriant estates 
irrigated by several rivers. 

OUINTO, a river of the province and go 
vernment of Tucuman ; which rises in the pro 
vince of Cuyo of the kingdom of Chile, close to 
the city of San Luis de la Punta or De Loyola, 
run s. s. e. and loses itself in a lake. 

QUINTOQUE, a settlement of Indians of 
the district of Tolten ; between the mouths of 
the rivers Collico and Pucullun. 

QUINTZIO, a settlement of the head settle 
ment of the district of Siguinam and alcaldia 
mayor of Valladolid in the province and bishopric 
of Mechoacan. It contains 18 families of In 
dians, and is two leagues from its head settle 
ment. 

QUINU, a river of the kingdom of Chile, 
which runs n. n. o&amp;gt;., and, changing its name to 
Colpi, unites itself with the Raponulake to enter 
the Imperial. 

QUINUALLA, a barbarous and ancient na 
tion of Indians of the province of Chinchayuso 
in Peru : subjected to the empire of the Incas 
by the prince Yahuarhuacac, first born of the 
Inca Roca, sixth emperor. 

QUIOTEPEQUE, a settlement of the head 
settlement of the district and alcaldia mayor of 
Cuicatlan in Nueva Espana. It contains 42 fa 
milies of Lapotecas Indians, who trade in seeds 
and fruit ; and is five leagues s. e. of its capital. 

QUIOVECOVET, a river of the province 
and government of Luisiana in N. America; 
which runs s. w. between the Paquitanet and 
Noire, and enters the Mississippi. 

QUIPAMA, a settlement of the jurisdiction 
of the city of Muzo and corregimiento of Tunja 
in the Nuevo Reyno de Granada, annexed to the 
curacy of the settlement of I toco. It is very re 
duced and poor. 

QUIPAN, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Canta in Peru, annexed to the 
curacy of Huamantanga. 

QUIPARACRA, a settlement of the province 
and government of Tarma in the same kingdom 
as the former ; annexed to the curacy of the set- 



Q U I 



293 



tlement of Paucartambo. It has a fort built by 
the Spaniards to restrain the infidel Indians of 
the mountains. 

QUIPAS, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Huamalies in Peru, annexed to 
the curacy of Banos. 

QUIPAI-PAN, a spacious spot not far dis 
tant from the city of Cuzco, in the n. part, cele 
brated for the battle fought by Atahualpa. king 
of Quito, against his brother Huascar-lnca, em 
peror of Peru. In this battle, accor. ing to his 
torians, and the tradition of the Indians, 30,000 
were killed, the emperor being taken prisoner. 

QUIPOLEMU, a settlement of the province 
and corregimiento of Chilian in the kingdom of 
Chile; situate near the coast of the S. Sea. 

QUIPOS, a settlement of the province and 
government of Costarica in the kingdom of Gua 
temala ; on the shore of the S. Sea, and at the 
mouth of the river Estrella. 

QUIQUIBE, a river of the province and 
country of the missions of Apolabamba in Peru^ 
It rises in the cordillera, runs nearly due w., and, 
turning to n. n. e., enters the Cobitii of the coun 
try of the infidel Indians of the Gran Paititi. 

QUIQUIBOUGH, a small island of the N. 
Sea, situate near the coast of Nova Scotia, and 
to the e. of that of St. John. 

[QUIQUIHO, a parish of the province and 
government of Paraguay, situate on the river 
Alboyapey, about 65 miles s. e. from Ascencion, 
in lat. 26 18 13" s. and long. 57 50" o&amp;gt;.] 

QUIQUIJANA, a settlement of the province 
and corregimiento of Urcos or Quispicanchi in 
Peru. It is divided into two parts by a large 
river which passes through the middle of it ; and 
to pass this is a bridge of cords and wood. At 
the entrance of the town is a chapel of Nuestra 
Senora de la Concepcion, or Virgin del Cabiido, 
her image being painted on a wall, behind which 
was another image, and which was made mani 
fest by a stroke of lightning : this chapel is as 
sisted by 12 Indian nuns of the order of S. Fran 
cisco, and who live by alms. In the vicinity of 
this settlement are some streams of white water, 
which they call Parupuquio, which are of such a 
petrifying quality, that the aqueducts through 
which they pass are frequently opened by the 
pick-axe, to make way for the current. The 
straw and wood lying in it are also covered with 
a crust of stone ; and this, although it is found 
that the water is in no way prejudicial to the 
Indians, who continually drink it. In 1715 a 
great earthquake was experienced here, which; 



294 



Q U I 



was repeated afterwards for three years succes 
sively : [28 miles ,v. e. from Cuzco, on the Royal 
Road from this city (Cuzco) to La Paz.] 

QUIRABAS, a barbarous nation of Indians 
of the province and country of Las Amazonas ; 
who dwell on the n. shore of the river Maranon. 
It is descended from the nation of the Curinas, 
and is at continual war with the Aguas. 

QUIRANDIES, a barbarous nation of Indians 
of the province and government of Buenos Ayres. 
Upon the entrance of the Spaniards, it is said 
these Indians were of great stature, and so nim 
ble as, in running, to equal the deer, and even to 
catch them. They were cannibals, and went 
naked. They are now extinct. 

QUIRAPUI, a small river of the province 
and government of Paraguay ; which runs e. and 
enters the Parana between those of Yaguay 
and Tembey. 

QUIRERECHES, a settlement of the pro 
vince and government of Luisiana in N. America, 
on the shore of the river Rouge. 

QUIRI, a s. unknown land, called also De 
Quiros and land of Espiritu Santo : discovered 
by Fernando de Quiros in his first voyage with 
Alvaro de Mendaiia, in 1595 ; and for the second 
time in 1606, and afterwards by William Show- 
ten, in 1618; although neither the one nor the 
other disembarked on the coast. 

QUIRI, another, with the dedicatory title of 
Santo Tom as, a settlement of the head settle 
ment of the district and alcaldia mayor of 
Nexapa in Nueva Espana. It is inhabited by 
28 families of Indians, and is situate between 
two mountains ; being six leagues from its ca 
pital. 

QUIRIN, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Huamalies in Peru, annexed to 
the curacy of the settlement of Huacarachuco. 

QUIRINIRE, or QUIRIMIRI, some lakes of 
the province and country of Las Amazonas, in 
the part possessed by the Portuguese : formed 
by different channels or arms of the Maranon, 
according to the engineer Bellin, in his History 
of Guayana: they are three, and all communicate 
with one another. 

QUIRIPUI, a small river of the province and 
colony of Surinam, or part of Guayana possessed 
by the Dutch. It joins various others to enter 
the Cuyuni by the s. side. 

QUIRIQUINA, or AVIQUIRINA, (as some of 
the Indians call it,) a small island in the S. Sea, 
at the entrance of the bay of Concepcion, in the 
province and corregimiento of this name and 



Q U I 

kingdom of Chile. It is a little more than a 
league long from n. to s., and is a quarter of a 
league distant from the continent : iirlat. 36 38 s. 
[The coast of this island is famous from the abun 
dance of large and well-tasted muscles found 
upon it.] 

QUIRIQUIRIPAS, a barbarous and Caribee 
nation of Indians, who dwell s. s. e. of the river 
Orinoco, near the mountains to the n. w. of tilt- 
province of Dorado ; bounded by the Mapoyos, 
the Arvacas, and Mediterranean Caribees, who 
keep them as it were besieged in the serranias, 
and without permitting them to sally forth from 
their retreats, or even entering amongst them to 
make them prisoners, as is customary among the 
other nations, from the interest they have ac 
quired from the industry of these poor miserable 
people, who weave hammocks from cotton, and 
make fine blankets. 

QUIROS, a river of the province and corrc- 
gimiento of Piura in Peru. It is large and abun 
dant, rises in the mountains of Ayavaca in the e. 
of the province of Jaen, runs KJ., and, uniting 
itself with others, enters the Catamayu or Colan : 
its mouth is in lat. 4 33 21" s. 

QUIROTOA, a large lake of the kingdom of 
Quito ; in the middle of which burst forth a vol 
cano in 1739, and again in 1743. Its waters are 
sulphureous and bituminous. 

QUIRPON, an island of the N. Sea, near the 
e. coast of Newfoundland; at the entrance of 
the strait of Belle-Isle. 

QUIRRULAS, a barbarous nation of Indians 
of the Nuevo Reyno de Granada : they dwell 
to the 5. of the capital of Santa Fe in the vicinity 
of the river Orinoco : bounded e. by the country 
of the Maipures ; and live scattered amongst 
those woods like wild beasts, maintaining them 
selves by the chace and fishing. They go en 
tirely naked, and paint their bodies of different 
colours. 

QUIRUE, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Porco in Peru; distant 18 leagues 
from the town of Potosi. 

QUISAHUARA, a settlement of the province 
and corregimiento of Castro- Virreyna in Peru, 
annexed to the curacy of the settlement of Cor 
doba. 

QUISAPINCHA, a settlement of the asienlo 
and jurisdiction of Ambato and corregimiento of 
Riobamba in the kingdom of Quito. In its dis 
trict is a large estate called Chulapii. 

QUISEO, a settlement of the head settlement 
of the district and alcaldia mayor of La Barca in 



Q U I 

the kingdom of Nueva Galicia : it is close to its 
capital to the w. 

QUISHUARES, a settlement of the province 
and corregimiento of Quispicanchi in Peru, called 
thus from the abundance of some shrubs of this 
name found in its district. 

QUISMES, a settlement of the province and 
government of Buenos A jres ; situate e. of the 
capital, and on the shore of the river Plata. 

QUISOPANGO, a settlement of the province 
and corregimiento of Caxamarquilla in Peru. 

QUISPICANCHI, a province and corregi 
miento of Peru ; bounded n. e. by the province of 
Paucartambo ; e. by the cordillera of Vilcanota 
and province of Carabaya, s. zo. by the province 
of Canes and Canches, and s., in some degree, 
by that of Chumbivilcas, and that of Chilques 
and Masques ; by the which it is also bounded 
on the w. Its length is 35 leagues from n. to s,, 
and its width more than 30. 

Its temperature is various, and that of the 
valley of Oropesa, which is the most immediate 
to Cuzco, very mild and pleasant ; so that it has 
many inhabitants of distinction residing in its city. 
Also, its religious communities have various 
estates of maize, wheat, and other seeds, fruits and 
garden herbs, as also beautiful houses for recrea 
tion, and orchards and gardens in the said valley. 
Nearly all the rest of the province is cold ; but 
in many parts they gather wheat, maize, and 
other seeds ; and in the heights are various herds 
of large and small cattle for the supply of Cuzco, 
especially towards the e. part of the province, 
through which runs the cordillera of Vilcanota ; 
a tcrminary which divides the jurisdiction of the 
two audiences of Lima and Charcas. 

In the last-mentioned part of the cordillera 
stands the mountain called Andes de Cuchoa, 
from which runs a large river named Araza, 
which, growing larger afterwards, penetrates the 
mountains of the infidel Indians, and, joining 
others, empties itself, after running more than 
150 leagues, into the Maranon. 

In a mountain called Camanti, near this river, 
is a gold mine, and in those precints are various 
estates of cocoa, where they gather also plantains, 
pine:- , papayas, lemons, pomegranates, and vari 
ous other wild fruits; and in the mountains are 
found many venomous reptiles. As a defence 
against the irruption of the barbarian Indians, 
those interested in the mine keep an armed force. 

They fabricate in this province much cloth of 
the country, such as broad cloths, baizes, and 
serges. Here are baths of warm water, which 
were used by the Indians, and some mines of 



gold and silver, which, although abundant for 
merly, are not now worked, owing to the poverty 
of the inhabitants. 

This province is watered by two considerable 
rivers, which yield some fish ; as also by some 
streams ; the one of these rivers is the Huatavay, 
which passes through Cuzco, and from thence 
pjroceeds in a very large body, and empties itself 
into the Vilcamayo, which runs by the n. to the 
province of Calca and Lares, and enters that of 
Canes and Canches : the other river is called 
Rimac, and passes through the extremity of the 
province by the s. w. There is another, also, 
formed of two lakes which are in Vilcanota, and 
which enters the province of Caxatambo. 

At half a league from the settlement of Oro- 
pesa, in the n. part, is a lake, which they calJ 
Mohima, of more than half a league long, and a 
quarter wide, in which grows quantities of rushes, 
and in which are some fish and water fowl. A 
point of this lake is just at the foot of a moun 
tain called Rumicolca ; where there are to be 
seen the ruins of the palace of the Inca Huascar. 
There is a tradition that, in the centre of this 
mountain are hidden the immense riches of the 
eleven Emperors ; and in the endeavour to find 
the same, very large fortunes have been spent in 
vain ; nothing having been discovered but some 
caves and holes, called chinganas, in the interior 
of the mountains, and certain channels for con 
veying the water. 

From the year 1715 till 1718, many shocks of 
earthquakes were felt, and continued to be felt 
till 1723 in Quiquijana and Urcos. Close to 
the settlement of Urcos is the lake into which 
has been said to be thrown that great chain of 
gold made at the birth of Huascar, and which so 
many have with useless diligence searched for. 
It is presumed that this lake is formed artificially 
by aqueducts, by which it is regularly emptied 
and filled ; since, subsequent to the conquest, it 
has always maintained itself at one particular 
height. It is not more than 500 yards in length, 
and 300 in Avidth, and its depth in the centre is 
56. There are in this province, besides this, 
some other small lakes, and a large one called 
Pomacanchi, of three leagues long and more than 
one wide. 

In the s. part are some saline earths, by which 
a commerce is carried on with the other provinces; 
also here is a mountain of loadstone. The rivers, 
which intersect the high road to Potosi, Chuqui- 
saca, and other settlements of the sierra, are 
passed by bridges of hurdles. The capital is the 
settlement of Urcos, and the inhabitants of the 



296 



Q U I 



province amount to 7200 ; and before the plague 
of 1720, amounted to 30,000 ; this dimininution 
having also equally prevailed in the other pro 
vinces of the sierra. The corrcgidor had a re- 
partimiento of 146,350 dollars; and it paid an 
alcavala of 1170 annually. 
The other settlements are, 
Oropesa, Acos, 

Quiquijana, Marcaconga, 

Papres. Pomacanchi, 

Cuyotamba, Marcapata, 

Acomayo, Ocongate, 

Sangarara, Huarco, 

Acopia, Punaquehuar. 

San Juan Saihua, Cormo, 

Pueblo Nuevo, Zanca, 

Andahuailas, Huaiqui, 

Quishuares, Yanampampa, 

Pirque, Santa Lucia, 

Rondocan, Camanti. 

QUISPIS, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Chachapoyays in Peru ; annexed 
to the curacy of the settlement of Corobamba. 

QUISQUE, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Yauyos in the same kingdom as 
the former ; annexed to the curacy of Pampas. 
In its district is a lake called Huarmicocha, which 
is two leagues long and a quarter wide ; also a 
vegetable called myrcas, w r ith which the Indians 
dye their clothes red. 

QUISQUIS, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Santa in the same kingdom as 
the former ; annexed to the curacy of the settle 
ment of Huambacho. 

QUISU, a river of the kingdom of Chile, 
which runs w. and enters the Colpi. 

QUITA-CALZON, a settlement of the In 
dians of the district of Guadalabquen in the king 
dom of Chile ; on the shore of the river Calla- 
calla. 

[QUITAPAHILLA, a branch of the Swetara, 
which falls into theSusquehannah at Middleton. 1 
QUITA-SUENO, a bank of sand and shoals 
of the N. Sea, opposite the cape of Gracias de 
Dios, of the coast of the kingdom of Mexico. It 
has this name from the vigilance and care ob 
served by the pilots when they pass in its vicinity, 
from the danger attending it ; and on it many 
vessels have been wrecked. It is 45 miles long, 
in lat. 14 20 n. Long. 81 w. 

QUITA-SUEXO, another shoal of isles and 
rocks, near the e. coast of the province and go 
vernment of Yucatan; opposite the Bay of Espi- 
ritu Santo. 

QUIT AT UE. Some settlements of Indians 



Q U I 

of the district of Tolten Alto in the kingdom of 
Chile, on the shore of the river Donguill. 

QUITEPEC, a settlement of the province and 
alcaldia mayor of Zedales in the kingdom of Gua 
temala. 

QUITLABACA, a settlement of the province 
and corregimiento of Mexico in Nueva Espana ; 
situate in the road and causeway which leads 
from Tezcuco to Mexico. Hernan Cortes tarried 
here the night before he, for the first time, en 
tered into Mexico ; and here he was, together 
with his army, most hospitably entertained by 
the cazique of the place. 

QUITLAGUZE, a settlement of the alcaldia 
mayor and jurisdiction of Chalco in Nueva Es 
pana, where there is a flood-gate and wall, which 
divides the lake. 

QUITO, a kingdom of S. America, subject to 
the jurisdiction of the viceroy of Santa Fe, by 
which it is bounded on the n. on the shores of 
the river Negro ; bounded also 5. by the pro 
vince and corregimiento of Piura and Chachapo- 
yas of Peru; w. by the strands of Machala of 
the S. Sea, and e. by the river Maranon, until it 
touches the line or meridian of demarcation of 
the Portuguese dominions. It is in length 400 
leagues from n. to s., and 600 in width from e. 
to w. 

This kingdom was conquered by Inca Tupac 
Yupanqui, the army being commanded by Prince 
Huaynacapac, with whose consent that emperor 
ceded it to his own son Atahualpa, on condition 
that he married one of the daughters of the last 
king of Quito ; in whose time it was discovered by 
Pizarro, and was ultimately conquered by Sebas 
tian de Belalcazar. 

It enjoys different climates, although for the 
most part of a mild and benign temperature. But 
in the deserts and mountains of the Cordillera, 
which are the loftiest in the whole world, and 
which are continually covered with snow, the 
cold is most intense. It is situate below the 
equinoctial line ; and for this reason, the days are 
equal with the nights the whole year round, the 
season being that of a constant summer, as the 
trees are always covered with leaves and fruits, 
and it thus being known through the whole of 
Peru by the name of siempre verde Quito (ever 
green Quito.) 

It is fertile and abundant in every kind of ve 
getable production, as well those known in both 
the Americas as those of Europe, and to such a 
degree that, as we are informed by a celebrated 
author, they never need cultivation. Here are 
infinite breeds of cattle of all classes, and of their 



QUITO. 



wools arc made, in many workshops, large quan 
tities of natives clothes, such as cloths, baizes, 
and serges, by which formerly were supplied all 
the provinces of Peru, and a great traffic was 
carried on, not to mention the trade in the linen 
and cotton fabrics, so fine and beautiful as to vie 
with the most excellent of England. It has mines 
of gold, silver, copper, and other metals, but 
these are not worked ; and the same is the case 
with some mines of quicksilver, rubies, amathists, 
emeralds, rock-crystal, and some marbles of the 
finest quality. 

This province is watered and fertilized by in 
numerable rivers, some of them extremely large, 
and which have neither bark nor bridge, but are 
passed en taravita, or by slings. All these rivers 
run to encrease the stream of the Maranon, and 
swell it to a monstrous size. 

This kingdom is governed by a president, who 
is governor and commandant-general of it, and 
by a tribunal of royal audience, and comprehends 
the provinces of Pasto, Jaen de Bracamoros, Es- 
meraldas, Quixos and Macas, Mainas, Mocoa, 
Sucumbios, Xibaros, Ibarra, Tacunga, Ambato, 
Riobamba, Cuenca, Loxa, Zamora, Chimbo, 
Alausi, and Guayaquil ; some of which are go 
vernments, and others corrcgimjentos ; and it for 
merly included the provinces of Popayan, Choco, 
and Raposo, which were afterwards separated 
from it : but of all these a proper account will 
be found under their proper articles. In these 
provinces are 16 cities, four towns, two asientos, 
or large populations, without this title, and 260 
settlements, which include 552,800 Catholic in 
habitants, not to mention an incredible multitude 
of barbarian Indians composed of infinite nations. 
It is very subject to eruptions of its volcanoes, 
and to frequent earthquakes, which have destroyed 
some cities and settlements. The natives of the 
country are industrious, addicted to labour, and 
much given to mechanical arts, in which they 
labour with extraordinary ingenuity. They are 
docile, affable, liberal, charitable, and of very 
acute genius. The principal trait in the charac 
ter of the nobility is a love of luxury and ease, 
and of the Indians and Mexicans habits of in 
ebriety. 

Catalogue of the principal places and barbarous 
nations of the kingdom of Quito. 
Nations. Ayacoras, 

Abixiras, Barbacoas, 

Ancuteres, Becavas, 

Apichiquies, Canaris, 

Ardas, Caranguis, 

VOL. iv. 



Chavelos, 

Cherinas, 

Chufias, 

Cofanes, 

Cungies, 

Encavellados, 

Frascavinas, 

Gayes, 

Inuris, 

Ipapuisas, 

Malaguas, 

Mantas, 

Oas, 

Peguas, 

Pichunsis, 

Pimampiros, 

Plateros, 

Purvayes, 

Xibaros, 

Icahuates. 

Cities. 
Archidona,. 
Avila, 
Ambato, 
Baeza, 
Barbacoas, 
Borja, 
Cara, 
Cuenca, 
Ecija, 
Guamboya, 
Guayaquil, 
Jaen, 
Logrono, 
Loyola, 
Loxa, 
Macas, 
Manta, 
Maspa, 
Ona, 
Pasto, 

Puerto Viejo, 
Quito, 
Riobamba, 
Tacunga, 
Tena, 
Valladolid, 
Zamora, 
Zaruma, 
Ibarra. 

Mountains. 
Alter, 
AvitahUa," 



Azuay, 

San Lucas, 

Caruayrasu, volcano 

Caxanuma, 

Cayambe, volcano 

Cequin, 

Chima, 

Chimborasu, 

Collanes, 

Corazon, 

Cotacache, 

Cotopaxi, volcano 

Cumbal, volcano 

Elenisa, volcano 

Guacaya, 

Llanganate, 

Mohanda, 

Pandomine, 

Pichinche, volcano 

Pillachiquir, 

Pintac, 

Sinchulahua, 

Quelendana, 

Rumi-navi, 

Saldana, 

Sangay, volcano 

Sara-urcu, volcano 

Supay-urcu, 

Tolonta, 

Tungurahua, 

Uritusinga, 

Yana-urcu, 

Imbabura. 

Rivers. 
Aquarico, 
Alaques, 
Alpayacu, 
Aulapi, 
Ayrunu, 
Azuela, 
Balso, 
Beleno, 
Benerisa, 
Bobonasa, 
Bogota, 
Bolas, 

Bombasicaro, 
Buisaco, 
Cacachavi, 
Caluma, 
Capaguari, 
Caqueta, 
Cascabeles, 
Caspi-yacu, 



Q Q 



298 



QUITO. 



Cata-mayu, 

Cevadas, 

Chaca-yacu, 

Chamangue, 

Chamba, 

Chambo, 

Chequehue, 

Chinchipe, 

Chiuloaya, 

Chones, 

Cipre, 

Coca, 

Colopo, 

Condache, 

Copa, 

Coquindo, 

Cosanga, 

Cotopasa, 

Cotuche, 

Curaray, 

Dacino, 

Daule, 

Duino, 

Durango, 

Granoble, 

Guanambu, 

Guanca-bamba, 

Huahuy, 

HuapantCj 

Huaitara, 

Huelmambi, 

Jama, 

Jubones, 

Lluzin, 

Machara, 

Machangara, 

Mataje, 

Min, 

Mira, 

Moximo, 

Nambacasa, 

Namballe, 

Napo, 

Noesino, 

Otalliic, 

Ozogoche, 

Paba-vae, 

Pacas-mayu, 

Palanda, 

Pastaza, 

Patate, 

Patia, 

Pato, 

Paute, 

Pelingara, 



Perdomo, 

Pita, 

Puja-jacu, 

Quinindi, 

Quiros, 

Rotuno, 

Sangalla, 

San Francisco. 

Santiago, 

Sarayacu, 

Sardinas, 

Savanillas, 

Simanchi, 

Esmeraldas, 

Suno, 

Tango, 

Tasagua, 

Telembi, 

Tinguiza, 

Tululvi, 

TuribunOj 

Umuc, 

Veriel, 

Vichy, 

Iscans6. 

Promontories. 
Amapulu, 
Arrastradero, 
Arenas, 
Ballenas. 
Blanco, 
Bocaca, 
Galera, 
Jaca, 

Mandinga, 
Manglares, 
Mariana, 
Mero, 
Pejonal, 
Palmar, 
Pedernal, 
Salahonda, 
Same, 

San Francisco, 
San Lorenzo, 
Santa Elena, 
Sua, 
Viejo, 
Venado. 

Ports. 
Charapoto, 
Guayaquil, 
Quaques, 
Atacames. 



Gulfs. 
Charapoto, 
Guayaquil, 
Quaques, 
Sardinas. 



Islands. 
Gallo, 
Gorgones, 
Palmas, 
Puna, 

Santa Clara, 
Tumaco. 



Mocos, 
Pichaviiiac, 
Quirotoa, 
Sachahuaca-urcu^ 
San Pablo. 
Ucuicia. 
Lakes. 

Copocui, 

Chimbuza, 

Colay-cocha. 

Colta, 

Cuvillu, 

Cuy-cocha, 

Balzas, 

Mactallan-cocha, 

[For a Table of the Longitudes and Latitudes 
of the most important places in this kingdom, see 
the end of the General Preface.] 

QUITO, the province and corregimiento of this 
name, is a part of the same kingdom, which, al 
though it be confounded with the district of Las 
Cinco Leguas de la Capital, is in some degree of 
greater extent, and is bounded s. by the province 
of Tacunga. The whole of it is covered with, 
estates, some situate in plains, others in the spa 
cious windings of the ravines, and others in the 
paramos. The vegetable productions are ac 
cording to the disposition of its territory. The- 
estates in the llanos produce maize, the crops of 
which are very abundant, and those of the que- 
bradas or deep ravines, where the temperature is 
hot, produce sugar-cane, of which they make 
much sugar, the hard scrapings of which serve 
as sweetmeats for the common people ; also 
honey and brandy. With the fruits peculiar to 
this climate they make here a variety of sweet 
meats, which they call rallados, and of which the 
consumption is very great. This cane is of very 
slow growth in the temperate parts of this corre 
gimiento, since, although there be some places 
rather hot, yet they are not sufficiently so for the 
ripening of this fruit ; and it is, consequently, 
not fit to cut till three years after its plantation, 
nor does it even then produce more than once, 
and one shoot is sufficient for its regeneration. 

The estates of the paramos, or deserts, which 
enjoy a variety of temperatures, some colder 
than others, produce corn, barley, papas, and 
all kinds of necessary grain. In its mountain 
plains feed very large flocks of sheep, which with 
their wool furnish materials for the manufactures 
of this province. Others of these plains serve 
as pastures, wherein neat cattle breed, princi 
pally used for their milk, of which are made 
butter and cheese : again, other estates are com- 



posed of manufacturing places, where, besides 
the culture of cattle and seeds, the natives at 
tend to the making- of native cloths, baizes, and 
serges. 

From what has been said, it must be clear 
that the temperature of this province is undeter 
minable, since in proportion to its height it is 
more or less cold, as also more or less hot ; and 
it is by this variety of climate that it produces a 
corresponding proportion of different kinds of 
fruits and seeds ; and thus it is, that by half a day s 
journey, you may leave a country, where, from 
the heat, you might perceive yourself to be un 
der the torrid zone, and may enter another 
country where all is frost and snow : but what, 
in all this, is most to be wondered at, is, that no 
alteration, with respect to the several parts, 
takes place the whole year round : but that the 
place which is cold is always cold, and that 
which is hot is always hot. In the paramos alone 
some change is to be perceived ; for the coldness 
which generally reigns there is increased by the 
winds, although the manner in which these pa 
ramos are affected, and what be considered the 
peculiar characteristic of their climate, is a dense 
cloud ; which almost constantly envelopes them, 
and which, when it happens to fall in the shape 
of small hail, snow, or mist, makes them so in 
sufferably cold, as to render life precarious. 
With all this, however, in the parts in which 
.there are no paramos , and where the wind is mo 
derate, and the rays of the sun can penetrate 
the earth, the climate is very supportable. 

The greater part of the settlements of this 
corregimiento, which are in number 25, have little 
formality in their disposition. The church and 
house of the curate, which, although he be a 
clergyman, they call a convent, from having been 
at its origin under the charge of some religious, 
is the principal building here ; and all those of 
the other settlements are reduced to hovels of 
mud, covered with straw, and scattered amongst 
the fields, where every native has his chacarita, 
or piece of land, which he cultivates himself. 
The inhabitants of this province are, for the most 
part, composed of Indians, who dwell in many 
of the settlements, when they are not tributary ; 
but there are also here some Mustee inhabitants, 
in some parts even exceeding the former ; nor 
are there wanting amongst both some families of 
poor Spaniards, although these are very few. 
f- The whole of the regular troops intheNuevo 
Kevno de Granada (as appears by the Foreigner s 
Guide, published in Spain, in 1802) amounted 
to 3290, in which number is comprehended the 



QUITO. 299 

garrison of the province of Quito, together with 
those of Panama, Cartagena, Popayan, &amp;c.] 

The settlements of this province are the fol 
lowing : 

San Juan Evangelista, Yaruqui, 
Santa Maria Magda- El Quinche, 

lena, Guaillabamba, 

Chillogalle, Machache, 

Conocoto, Aloasi, 

Zambisa, Aloa, 

Pintac, Uyumbicho, 

Sangolqui, Alangasi, 

Amaguana, Pomasque, 

Guapulo, S. Antonio de Lulu- 

Cumbaya, bamba, 

Coto-collao, Perucho, 

Puernbo y Pifo, Tumbaco. 

Cola-cali, 

The capital is of the same name, with the de 
dicatory title of San Francisco ; founded by the 
Indians and the court of their kings, and rebuilt 
by Sebastian de Belalcazar in 1534, and in 1541 
endowed by the Emperor Charles V. with the 
title of very noble and very loyal city, and for 
arms, with a castle upon two mountains, and 
above the same a cross, with two eagles, each 
holding the cross with one claw. It is situate at 
the skirt of the mountain and volcano of Pichin- 
cho, and has on the e. part the cordillera of the 
Andes. It is large and well built, though irre 
gular from the inequality of the territory, well 
peopled, and one of the best cities of S. Ame 
rica. On its entrance to the s. is a spacious 
llanura, called De Turu-bamba; but which 
rightly should be Turu-pampa, meaning the 
plain of mud ; and to the n. is another, with the 
name of Ina-quito, celebrated for the battle 
which was fought there by Gonzalo Pizarro, 
against the royal troops commanded by Blasco 
Nunez Vela, first viceroy of Peru, ancl who lost 
his life there. 

To the e. of Turubamba and the right of 
Chimba-calle, and to the left of the settlement 
of Santa Maria Magdalena, is a small mountain 
called El Panecillo, from its figure being that of 
a truncated cone, resembling a sugar-loaf, of 100 
toises high, and having at its foot on the w. side 
some small streams of delicate water; which, 
united to others which flow down from Pichin- 
che, form the river Machangara, which laves 
the city on the s. 

The principal square is large ; and in one of 
its fronts is the palace of the president, just op 
posite to the city-house, in the third the cathe 
dral, and in the fourth the bishop s palace, and 
Q Q2 



300 



QUITO. 



in the middle is a beautiful fountain. The houses 
are lofty, and of handsome appearance, and the 
churches and convents the best in America; 
especially the front of the convent of San Fran 
cisco, which is of excellent architecture ; and 
not less so is the college which belonged to the 
Jesuits. It has six parishes of so many wards 
into which the city is divided, which are called 
El Sagrario, Santa Barbara, San Bias, San Se 
bastian, San Roque, San Marcos, and Santa 
Prisca. It has also two convents of the religious 
of St. Domingo, three of San Franciso, with the 
college of San Buenaventura, two of La Merced, 
one of San Agustin, another of the Bethlemite 
Fathers, and a college and novitiate of the Je 
suits ; five monasteries of nuns, two of Carme 
lites, one of La Concepcion, another of Santa 
Clara, another of Santa Catalina de Sena, an 
other, a house for retired women, called the 
Beaterio, with the title of Santa Marta, under 
the direction of the fathers of La Merced. This 
capital is adorned by two universities ; the one 
of San Gregorio Magno, which was of the Je 
suits, and the most illustrious, founded by Don 
Felipe II. in 1586, and enriched with the same 
privileges as that of Salamanca in 1621 ; the other 
of St. Tomas de Aquino, of the Dominican fa 
thers : also two royal colleges, the one of San 
Luis Rey de Francia, with the title of Colegio 
Mayor, granted by Don Felipe V. ; likewise a 
seminary, which was founded by the Bishop Don 
Luis Lopez de Solis, of the order of San Agus 
tin, in 1594, and consigned to the Jesuits, who 
governed it till their expulsion. This college 
has produced many archbishops, bishops, and 
men renowned for their literature. It is now 
governed by an ecclesiastic, and its rector is a 
canon of that holy cathedral church. The other 
college is of San Fernando, King of Spain, under 
the direction of the religious of St. Domingo. 
The Capuchin Fathers have the college above- 
named of San Buenaventura, and the Augustins 
the academy of San Fulgencio, wherein they 
confer the degree of doctor. Here are two hos 
pitals, the one for men, and the other for wo 
men ; the latter having been built by Sefior 
Ochoa, and both being under the care of the 
Bethlehemite fathers. The tribunal of the Royal 
Audience was erected in 1563, extinguished in 
1718, and re-established in 1739; and, besides 
this tribunal, here are those of the Royal Rents 
of Crusade, and of the Holy Inquisition, depen 
dent upon Lima. 

Besides the above temples are two chapels : 
one within the town, under a large arch of stone, 



of fine architecture, dedicated to the Reyna de 
los Angeles, with this title ; and the other with 
the title of Vera Cruz, in the llano of Anaquito, 
the place wherein is interred the Viceroy Blasco 
Nunez Vela. 

In one of the suburbs is a fort, and a narrow 
bridge, by which to pass the river Machangera, 
of fine construction, although the builders of the 
same are not known. It is a head settlement of 
a bishopric, erected in 1545, suffragan to the 
archbishopric of Santa Fe. In 1736 were sent to 
this city, by the Academy of the Sciences of 
Paris, in order to make astronomical and physi 
cal observations, Luis Godin, Peter Bouguer, 
Charles Condamine, and others ; the same having 
been accompanied by the naval officers Don 
Jorge Juan and Don Antonio de Ulloa; and 
these, having finished their labours, perpetuated 
the memory of them by an inscription, which 
was engraved in alabaster, and fixed on a wall 
of the church of the Jesuits, and which is as 
follows : 

" Observationibus Ludovici Godin, Petri 
Bouguer, Caroli Mariae de la Condamine, a Re- 
gia Parisiensi Scientiarum Academia, inventa 
sunt Quiti, latitudo hujusce templi australis 
grad. 0. inin. 3 sec. 18. longitude occidentalis 
ab observatorio Regio grad. 81 min. 22. Decli- 
natio acus magnetic* a borea ad orientem, ex- 
eunte anno 1736, grad. 8. min. 45, anno 1742, grad. 
8. min. 20. Inclinatio ejusdem infra Orizontem, 
parte boreali, conchce, anno 1739, grad. 12. 
Quiti 1741, grad. 15. Altitudines supra libellara 
maris geometrice collectae in exapedis Parisien- 
sibus spectabiliorum nive perenni hujus Provin- 
cise Montium, quorum plerique flammas evo- 
muerunt : Cota-cache 2567, Cayambur 3028, 
Antisana 3016, Cotopaxi 2952, Tunguragua 
2623, Sangay etiam nunc ardentis 2678, Chimbo- 
raso 3220, Illinisa 27 17, Soli Quitensis in foro ma- 
jori 1462, Crucis in proximo Pichincha mentis 
vertice conspicuae 2042, acutioris ac lapidei cacu- 
minis, nive plerumque operti 2432 ut &amp; niyis 
infimae permanentis in montibus nivosis : media 
elevatio mercurii in barometro suspensi in Zona 
Torrida, caque parum variabilis in ora maritima 
pollicum 28. linearum 0. Quiti poll. 20. lin. 
in Pichinche ad crucem poll. 17. lin. 7. ad nivem 
poll. 16. lin. 0. spiritus vini qui in thermometro 
Rraumuriano a partibus 1000 incipiente gelu ad 
1080 partes in aqua fervente intumescit : dilatio, 
Quiti a partibus 1008 ad partes 1018 juxta mare 
a 1017 ad 1029 in fastigio Pichinche a 995 ad 
1012. Soni velocitatis unius minuti secundi in- 
tervalo hexapedarum 175. Penduli simplicis 



QUITO. 



30* 



equinoctialis, unius minuti secundi temporis me- 
dii, in altitudine Soli Quitensis Archetypus. 



(Mensurae naturalis exemplar, utinam &amp; uni- 
versalis). 

QEqualis -?-?&amp;gt; Hexapeclae, seu pedibus 3. pol- 
licibus 0. lineis 6-^75- major in proximae maris 
littore jVg- I* 11 - minor in apice Pichinche -j- 1 ^ 
I m. Refractio Astronomica Orizontalis sub 
^Equatore media, juxta mare 27 min. ad nivem 
in Chimboraso 19 51"; ex qua et aliis ob- 
servatis Quiti 22 50". Limborum inferiorum 
Solis in Tropicis Dec. 1736 &amp; Junii 1737, 
distantia instrumento dodecapedalia mensurata 
grad. 47. min. 28 sec. 36. ex qua positis dia- 
metris Solis. min. 32. sec. 37 &amp; 3V 33". Re- 
fractione in 66 grad. altitudinis / 15" . Paral- 
laxi vero 4 40" eruiter obliquitas Eclipticse, 
circa Equinoctium Martii 1737, grad. 23. min. 
28. sec. 28, Stellae triem in Baltheo Orionis me 
diae (Bayero E) declinatio Australis Julio 1737. 
grad. 1. min. 23. sec. 40. Ex arcu graduurn 
plusquam trium reipsa dimenso gradus Meridi- 
ani, seu latitudinis primus, ad libellam maris 
reductus Hexap 56650. Quorum memoriam ad 
Physices, Astronomiee, Geopraphiae, Nautice in- 
crementa hoc marmore parieti Templi Collegii 
Maximi Quitensis Soc. Jcsu affixo, hujus et 
posteri JE\i utilitati V. D. C. Spissimi Observa 
tories Anno Christi, 1742." 

Don Carlos de la Condamine discovered also 
the meridian in the terrace of the college of the 
Jesuits, but, having made it upon brick, it was 
lost by time ; and in 1766 another meridian was 
established upon stone, in the same spot as be 
fore, the following inscription being affixed on 
a piece of marble, on a wall close by. 

" Ab Academicis Parisien lateritio inaequali 
solo. A. 1736. Superinducta linea Meridiana tem- 
porum injuria, Gnomone avulso, plane deleta, 
hanc stratis lapidibus incisam, Magnetica Acu 
10 grad. ad orientem declinante XII. Kal. Jan. 
1763, Gnomone restitute, produxere, &amp; Helio- 
rologium quadrifons, 13. rnin. 17. sec. in boream 
inciinans, in hac Rectorali Area VIII. Kal 
Majas 1766, Spirali columnar lapideaB communi 
studio AA. PP. id est Academici Picliiachenses 
ijnposuere." 

This same Pichinchensan academy projected 
and built the beautiful pass without the city, at 



the entrance of the Santa Prisia, in the llanura 
of Anaquito, putting in the inner front of the 
gate, or entrance, the following inscription, on 
a marble slab. 

" The Idea of the Senor Lieutenant Colonel 
Don Juan Antonio Zelaya; President of the 
Royal Audience, Governor and Commandant- 
General of this province, &amp;c. The work of the 
Seiiores the Ordinory Alcaldes, Don Clemente 
Sanchez, Knight of the order of Santiago, Mar 
quis de Villa-Orellana, Viscount of Antesana, 
&amp;c. and Don Miguel de Olmedo, Commissary 
of war, &amp;c. who at their private expense offer 
this to the public. Anno 1767." 

The population of Quito is composed of 
58,000 inhabitants, Spaniards, Creoles, people 
of colour, and Indians. Amongst the former are 
six titles of marquises, one of count, and many 
knights of military orders, and several illustrious 
families. The Creoles are docile, humane, cour 
teous, liberal, attached to foreigners, inclined 
to piety, and of an acute genius and capacity. 
The Indians are the most civilized of the king 
dom, extremely dexterous in all arts and offices, 
and particularly in painting and sculpture. [The 
population, in 1802, had increased to 70,000 
souls the greater part of them are Indians, and 
it has been suggested, by persons well acquaint 
ed with the country, and disposed to favour the 
new order of things establishing there, that the 
town should be called "the capital ofthe Indians."] 

The temperature is so benign, that the com 
mon clothing, the whole year round, is nothing 
but a mixture of silk and wool. It abounds in 
all kinds of the most exquisite vegetable produc 
tions, with which it furnishes the settlements and 
cities of its jurisdiction : so that its market-place 
affords an immense collection of fruits, flowers, 
birds, garden herbs, and whatever the imagina 
tion may solicit, for the luxury of life ; and all 
being very cheap. It formerly had a lucrative 
commerce, but which has fallen off considerably. 
With all the above advantages, it has always 
been much afflicted with earthquakes, which 
have caused the greatest mischief; as was most 
particularly the case in that of 1755. It has a 
body of militia, which was established after the 
insurrection of the people in 1765. It is the 
native place of many persons illustrious for their 
virtues, military and literary talents; and such 
are, 

The venerable mother Madriana de Jesus,. 
Florez y Paredes, called La Azuzena de Quito,, 
whose canonization is in agitation. 



302 



QUITO. 



The mother Sor Mariana de Jesus. 

Fr. Bernardo Bohorques, a religious Merce- 
narian, who died with the fame of sanctity. 

The fathers Pedro de Alcocer y Christoval de 
Cevallos of the Jesuits, apostolical and zealous 
missionaries in the province of Mainas. 

Don Fr. Domingo Valderrama, archbishop of 
St. Domingo. 

Don Fr. Luis de Armendarig, Bernardino 
monk, bishop of Jaca, archbishop of Tarragona, 
and viceroy of Cataluna. 

Don Fr. Gaspar de Villaroel, of the order of 
San Agustin, bishop of Santiago of Chile, and of 
Arequipa, a celebrated writer. 

Don Juan Machado de Chaves, bishop of Po- 
payan, author of the work called the Perfecto 
Confesor. 

Don Vasco de Contreras Valverde, commissary 
of Crusade, a subject of great literature. 

Fr. Joseph Maldonado, of the order of San 
Francisco, commissary-general of his order, and 
author of many works. 

Don Joseph de Peralta y Mendoza, professor 
at Salamanca. 

Don Martin de Peralta, oidor of Quito, and 
of Mexico ; an example to ministers for his in 
tegrity and intelligence. 

Don Pedro Maldonado y Sotomayor, a young 
man of the most consummate learning, both in 
mathematics and physics ; so as to have become 
professor of the sciences at Paris, and in the 
Royal Society at London ; chamberlain to his 
majesty, and governor of Esmeraldas. He died 
in London, in the flower of his age. 

The Inca Atahuallpa, last Emperor of Peru. 

Don Lope de Armendariz, first Marquis of 
Cadreita, General of Galleons. And besides 
the above are many others, which we have no 
room to enumerate; although those already 

Juoted serve to show how Quito was adorned. 
t is 304 leagues from Santa Fe, the capital of the 
Nuevo Reyno de Granada ; 200 from Lima, and 
80 from the coasts of the S. Sea, in long. 298 
18 45" from the meridian of Teneriffe, and in 
lat. 13 . 

Bishops who have presided in Quito. 

1. Don Garci Diaz Arias, first bishop, elected 
in 1545, and consecrated at Lima. He died in 
1562. The Master Gil Gonzalez Davila says, 
that he was not consecrated, and that his election 
was in 1550 ; but in the above dates he appears 
to have erred, at least according to the archives 
of that city. 



2. Don Pedro de la Pena, of the order of St. 
Domingo, native of Covarrubras, in the arch* 
bishopric of Burgos. He was collegiate in the 
college of San Gregorio de Valladolid, passed 
to the Indies in 1550, was professor in the uni 
versity of Mexico, a zealous missionary in the 
conversion of the Indians, and presented to the 
bishopric of Vera Paz, and from thence pro 
moted to Quito in 1563. He assisted and pre* 
sided at the council which was celebrated at 
Lima, at the death of Fr. Geronimo de Loaisa ; 
founded the convent of the nuns ofLaConcepcion, 
and in his native place a house for debtors, and 
at Lima a chapel ; and died in this city, during 
the council of 1588. 

3. Don Fr. Antonio de San Miguel y Solier, 
of the order of San Francisco, a Creole of Peru : 
illustrious in sanctity and merits, and an excel 
lent preacher. He was provincial, confessed 
himself three times a day, one time to say mass, 
the second after mass, and the third at night. 
The king, Philip II. in reward for his virtue, 
presented him to the bishopric of Chile, and in 
this quality he assisted at the provincial council 
celebrated at Lima, by Don Fr. Geronimo de 
Loaisa. He sought a licence to renounce the 
bishopric, but, instead of meeting his wish, he 
was promoted to Quito in 1590, and died at 
Riobamba, three days before he arrived at the 
aforesaid city, in 1591. 

4. Don Fr. Luis Lopez de Solis, of the order 
of San Agustin, native of Salamanca. He passed 
to Peru in 1546, graduated as master, and was 
professor of vespers, and prime in the university 
of Lima, calificador of the holy tribunal, con- 
suitor to the Viceroy Don Francisco de Toledo, 
and presented by Philip II. to the bishopric of 
Rio de la Plata ; afterwards translated to that of 
Paraguay, and being nominated to that of La 
Paz, promoted to Quito in 1593. He founded 
three parishes, and as many convents for nuns, 
in different settlements ; celebrated two synods, 
consecrated 203 altars, confirmed at Lima, Trux- 
illo, and Quito, 122,873 souls: and endowed, 
at his convent at Lima, the festival of San 
Agustin, giving a golden cup for the same; 
visited his bishopric, and bestowed much alms, 
and one very considerable endowment to the 
convent of San Augustin de Salamanca, to repair 
the loss it had sustained by a fire ; and was at 
length promoted to the archbishopric of Charcas 
in 1600, and died before he entered Lima, with 
the fame of sanctity. 

5. Don Fr. Salvador de Ribera, of the order 



QUITO. 



303 



of St. Domingo, native of Lima, son of the cele 
brated Nicolas de Ribera, who was one of the 
conquerors of Peru, and peoplers of Lima, where 
he was three times prior, and where he built 
the magnificent convent of his order; twice pro 
vincial, professor in the university of that capi 
tal, calificador of the holy office, and an excel 
lent preacher ; elected bishop of Quito in 1607. 
He died in 1612. 

6. Don Fernando Arias de Ugarte, of whom 
we have treated in the series of the archbishops 
of Santa Fe, whither he was promoted in 1617. 

7. Don Fr. Alonso de Santillana, of the order 
of St. Domingo, native of Sevilla. At the death 
of his brother he was heir to the mayoralty, but 
preferred rather to follow a religious life. He 
was master in his religion, and prior of the con 
vents of the orders of Alcaraz, Marchena, and 
Almagro ; provincial of the province of Anda- 
lucia, and elected bishop of Quito in 1618. He 
was extremely charitable, gave to the convent 
of San Pablo de Sevilla many pictures of saints 
of the order, which stand above the seats of the 
choir; many books and ornaments, and 6000 dol 
lars to rebuild the chapel, in which are interred 
his ancestors, in the college of San Salvador ; 
also founding a chapel, with an endowment of 
eight reals for each mass. He died in 1620. 

8. Don Fr. Francisco de Sotomayor, of the 
order of San Francisco, native of Santo Tome, 
in the bishopric of Tuy. He was guardian of 
the convents of Monforte and Salamanca, difini- 
dor in the general chapter which was celebrated 
at Rome ; presented by Don Philip IV. to the 
bishopric of Cartagena of the Indies, and tran 
slated to the bishopric of Quito in 1623. He 
gave to his church a frontal of silver, which cost 
4000 ducats, and to the poor infinite alms. He 
was promoted to the archbishopric of Charcas in 
1628, and, before he arrived, died at Potosi; 
from whence his body was translated to his 
native place, which he had endowed with a rent 
of 400 ducats. 

9. Don Fr. Pedro de Oviedo, monk of San 
Bernardo ; of whom we have spoken amongst 
the archbishops of St. Domingo and of Charcas. 

10. Don Agustin de Ugarte y Saravia. He 
passed from the bishopric of Arequipa, governed 
four years, and died in 1650. 

11. Don Alonso de la Pena Montenegro, na 
tive of the town of Padron in the kingdom of 
Galicia. He studied in the university of San 
tiago, where he was professor of arts, collegiate 
in the college of its university, afterwards in 
that of San Bartolome de Salamanca, magisterial 



canon of the church of Mondoiiedo, and after 
wards of Santiago ; presented by Philip IV. to 
the bishopric of Quito in 1652 ; he governed 
that church, with great zeal, for 26 years ; wrote 
the celebrated work entitled " Itenerario para 
Parrocos de Indies," which has been, and con 
tinues to be, the principal guide of the curates, 
and died in 1688. 

12. Don Sancho de Andrade y Figueroa. He 
passed from Guamanga to be auxiliary bishop to 
the former, through the advanced age of the 
same, and at his death took possession of the 
bishopric, in the aforesaid year, governing that 
diocese till 1702, when he died. 

13. Don Diego Ladron de Guevara, who was 
also promoted from the bishopric of Guamanga 
to this of Quito, and thence destined to be vice 
roy of Lima in 1710. He died at Mexico, upon 
his return to Europe, in 1718. 

14. Don Luis Francisco Romero, promoted 
from the church of Santiago de Chile in 1722, 
and from this of Quito to the archbishopric of 
Charcas in 1726. 

15. Don Juan Gomez de Frias, who was pro 
moted from the bishopric of Popayan, and died 
in 1729. 

16. Don Juan de Escandon, who was pro 
moted from the church of La Imperial of Chile, 
and, before he entered Quito, to the archbishop 
ric of Lima, in 1732. 

17. Don Andres de Paredes Polanco y Armen- 
dariz, native of Lima; elected bishop of La Im 
perial of Chile, and, before he took possession, 
promoted to Quito in 1734. He died in the set 
tlement of Sangolqui, in 1745. 

18. Don Juan Nieto Polo del Aguila, native 
of Popayan. He passed from the bishopric of 
Santa Marta in 1749, and died in 1759. 

19. Don Pedro Ponce y Carrasco, native of 
Sevilla, bishop of Adramite, and auxiliary bishop 
of Cuba. Elected to Quito in 1762, took pos 
session in 1764, and died in 1776. 

20. Don Bias Sobrino y Minayo ; elected bi 
shop of Cartagena de Indias, and promoted to 
the church of Quito in 1776. 

21. Don Joseph Perez Calama, native of Sala* 
manca, dean of the holy church of Valladolid of 
Mechoacan ; elected bishop of Quito in 1788. 

Presidents, Governors, and Commandants- 
general, of the kingdom of Quito. 

1. The Licentiate Canaveral, first president? 
according to the archives : he died in 1586. 

2. The Doctor Miguel Barros de San Millan : 
he entered in 1588, was separated from the pre- 



004 



Q U I 



sidency, and called to Lima by the viceroy of 
Peru in 1589. 

3. The Licentiate Maranon, who took posses 
sion in 1592, and died in 1593. 

4. The Licentiate Miguel de Ibarra, in 1595 : 
he died in 1597. 

5. The Licentiate Martin de Recalde ; pro 
moted from being oidor of Santa Fe to this pre 
sidency. 

6. Don Antonio de Murga, who passed as 
oidor from Mexico, and died in 1603. 

7. The Licentiate Juan de Lizarazu, knight of 
the order of Santiago : he was promoted from 
the presidency of Charcas to this of Quito in 
1613, and died in 1619. 

8. Don Martin de Arriola, knight of the order 
of Alcantara : he entered in 1623, and died in 
1626. 

9. Don Pedro Vazguez de Velasco, who was 
promoted from the presidency of Charcas. 

10. Don Antonio Fernando de Heredia, knight 
of the order of Santiago. 

11. Don Diego del Corro Carrascal, first in 
quisitor of Cartagena of the Indies : he died 
there. 

12. The Doctor Don Alonso de la Pefia Mon 
tenegro, bishop of that diocese ; nominated pre 
sident in 1658, which he exercised till 1663. 

13. Don Lope Antonio de Munive, knight of 
the order of Alcantara in 1664 : he died in 1670. 

14. Don Mateo de Mata, of the same order as 
the former, in 1672. 

15. Don Francisco Lopez Dicastillo, knight of 
the order of Calatrava in 1688, till 1706. 

16. Don Juan de Sosaya, of the order of San 
tiago, in 1711 : he died in 1713. 

17. Don Santiago de Larrain, of the order of 
Santiago, nominated provisionally in 1715, con 
firmed by the king in 1721 : he finished his reign 
in 1726. 

18. Don Dionisio de Alcedo y Herrera, who 
entered Quito in 1728 : he governed till 1736. 

19. Don Joseph de Araujo y Rio : he took 
possession in 1743. 

20. The Doctor Don Fernando Sanchez de 
Orellana, Marquis of Solanda, in 1745, till 1753. 

21. Don Juan Pio de Montufar y Fraso, Mar 
quis of Selva Alegre, knight of the order of San 
tiago, and of the council of the Indies : he took 
possession in 1761. 

22. Don Juan Antonio Zelaya y Virgara, 
lieutenant-colonel of the royal armies : he passed 
from the government of Guayaquil in 1766, and 
governed till 1767. 

23. Don Joseph Angel Diguja y Quinones, a 



Q U I 

colonel : he was promoted from the government 
of Cumana in 1767, and reigned till 1777; when 
the presidency was suppressed, and he remained 
in quality of regent. 

24. Don Joseph Garcia de Leon y Pizarro, 
who governed till 1783 ; when he was promoted 
to a place in the council of the Indies. 

25. Don Juan Joseph de Villaluenga y Marfil, 
who governed as regent from 1783. 

QUITO, a river of the province and govern 
ment of Choco in the Nuevo Reyno de Granada. 
It rises from a lake close to another, from whence 
the river San Pablo takes its rise, in the province 
of Novita; and at a small distance from this lake 
these rivers unite and form the Atrato. 

QUIVA, a province of California in N. Ame 
rica, very thinly peopled with barbarian Indians, 
and consequently but little known : between lat. 
30 and 35 n. 

QUIVIO, a settlement and asiento of silver 
mines, of the province and corregimiento of Chum- 
bivilcas in Peru* 

QUIVIQUINTA, a settlement of the head 
settlement of the district and alcaldia mayor of 
Acaponeta in Nueva Espana. Eight leagues n. 
of its capital. 

QUIVIRA, a province of New Mexico in N. 
America, discovered by Francisco Vazquez Coro- 
nado, native of Salamanca, through the order of 
the viceroy of Nueva Espana, Don Antonio de 
Mendosa, in 1542. It is a plain country, with 
out trees, stones, or any thing whatever. It was 
very thinly peopled, and its natives go naked, 
covering only the parts of shame with leather ; 
of which substance they also make shoes. The 
women have the vanity of wearing their hair very 
long. They have no bread of any sort, and their 
principal aliment is flesh, which they most fre 
quently eat raw, as they have no fuel or any 
thing to make fire, save cow-dung; the fat of 
which animal they eat immediately from the 
beast, and the blood of which they drink whilst 
warm. They wander about in great tribes, and 
often change their abode, like the Moors, being 
directed in this by the pastures which they may 
find for their cattle, their only source of wealth. 
These oxen are as large as those of Europe, al 
though their horns are shorter ; they have a large 
lump on the front of the head, and on their fore- 

Earts is a very long wool ; so that in front the 
air hanging in knots, has the appearance of a 
long beard. The neck is long and hairy in the 
extreme. They are nimble but ugly to behold ; 
and from them the Indians provide themselves 
with food, drink, clothing, shoes, &amp;c. Of their 



Q U I 

akins also they make ropes ; of their bones, bod 
kins; of the muscles and hair, thread; of the 
horns, stomach, and bladder, vessels for drink 
ing ; of the dung, fire and candle ; of the calves, 
vessels for holding water ; and, in short, from 
them altogether they derive every thing neces 
sary to their mode of life. There are also in this 
province other animals as large as horses, but 
which, from having horns and wool, they call 
sheep ; also dogs of an immense size and fierce 
ness, which vie with a bull, and carry loads of 
two arrobas weight when the Indians go out to 
the chase, or proceed to change their residence. 

This country produces many fruits ; such as 
cherries, mulberries, nuts, melons, and grapes. 
When the Spaniards arrived here the governor 
was the cacique, called Tatarras ; and the names 
of the chief persons who arrived were, Andres 
Decampo, a Portuguese ; Fr. Juan Padilla, of 
the order of S. Francisco, and another religious ; 
also 12 converted Indians of Mechoacan. But 
the Quivirenses having put to death some of 
these, the rest escaped ; the Portuguese, how 
ever, remaining prisoner and not effecting his 
escape till 10 months afterwards, by the protec 
tion of two dogs ; arriving at Mexico with his 
hair and nails excessively grown : and from this 
time it has never been attempted to reduce the 
natives of this province. In lat. 42 n. ; of a 
mild climate, and abounding in water. 

QUIXE, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Lucanas in Peru ; annexed to 
the curacy of the settlement of Querobamba. 

QUIXOS Y MACAS, a province and go 
vernment of the kingdom of Quito; bounded n. 
by the province of Pastes, s. by that of Cuenca, 
w. by those of Tacunga and Ambaro, from the 
which it is divided by the cordillera of mountains 
of Cotopaxi and Cayamburu, and e. by the go 
vernment and missions of Mainas. It is a country 
extremely mountainous, full of ravines, and 
abounding in rivers, some of which are verv 
large, and all running into the Ma rail on. This 
territory is impassable, except on foot ; and thus 
it was traversed by the missionaries, who at the 
expense of great labours and fatigues entered 
Mainas. Its temperature is cold, and it pro 
duces much cotton and tobacco, which is par 
ticularly esteemed in Peru, whither it is carried 
by Guayaquil and Piura. The cultivation of 
these fruits is the cause why little attention is 
paid to wheat, maize, and barley, of these only 
as much being sown as are barely sufficient for 
the wants of the inhabitants : not but that the 
llanuras and ravines are extremely fertile. Here 

VOL. IV. 



Q U I 



305 



are minerals of gold and of blue dust, and a resin 
which they call here estoraque, and which is, in 
fact, very fine. Cinnamon is produced here in 
abundance, and would, if properly cultivated, 
be as good as that of Ceylon, although what 
there is, is in great estimation and of great con 
sumption in the provinces of Peru. 

This country was discovered by Gonzalo Diaz 
de Pinada, in 1536, who was sent by Sebastian 
de Belalcazar, from Popayan, to investigate the 
embouchure of the grand river Magdalena, and 
to acquire information respecting the countries 
bordering upon it : and with advices thus re 
ceived Gonzalo Pizarro, governor of Quito, in 
1539 ; but the bad success and perils of this jour 
ney did not suffer their views to be realized ; and, 
accordingly, the territory remained uncultivated 
until 1559, when Don Andres Hurtado, Marquis 
of Canete, Viceroy of Peru, sent Gil Ramirez 
Davalos to conquer and settle it ; as he really ef 
fected, reducing the natives. This province is at 
present divided into two districts; which are 
those of Quito and Macas. It is bounded e. by 
that of Mainas, s. by the government of Braca- 
moros and Yaguarsongo, and a), by the cordillera 
of the Andes. In both these districts the inha 
bitants are continually infested with incursions 
from the infidel Indians, who surround the said 
districts on all sides ; and thus each settlement 
has a certain set of savages to molest it continu 
ally ; and should the inhabitants of the said set 
tlements issue out against these troublesome in 
vaders, the only advantage they obtain is put 
ting them to flight for a time and taking a few 
prisoners, whilst the rest return, after a certain 
period, with fresh vigour ; although they never 
form any thing like a regular settlement, but 
merely wait about the regular settlements for a 
convenient opportunity for plunder, the sole ob 
ject of their lives. This harassing state to which 
the settlements have constantly been exposed, is 
the principal cause, not to mention the climate, 
why the population is in such a state of decrease. 

The cities and settlements of this province are 
the following : 

In the district of Quixos, 

Cities. Settlements. 

Baeza, the capital, La Concepcion, 

A rchidona, Loreto, 

Avila. San Salvador, 

Cota Pini, 
Santa Rosa. 

To the which are added the settlements of the 

missions of Sucumbios, which were founded by 

E R 



30(5 



R A B 



the Jesuits ; and which, although they were 10 
in the 16th century, are now only five. 

San Diego de los Palmares, 

San Francisco de los Curiquaxes, 

San Pedro de Alcantara de la Coca 6 Nari- 
guera, 

San Joseph de los Abucees, 

San Christoval do los Yaguages. 

In the district of Macas, 
Macas, the capital, Zuna, 
S. Miguel de Navaez, Paira, 
Barahonas, Copueno, 

Yuquipa, Aguayos. 

Juan Lopez, 

Quixos, a small river of this province and go 
vernment, which enters the Coca. 

QUIZIAPA, a settlement of the head settle 
ment of the district of Atlistac, and alcaldia mayor 
of Tlapa in Nueva Espana. It contains 32 fa 
milies of Indians, is of a cold and moist tem 
perature, and of a commerce consisting only in 
maize, as its poverty is such as not to admit of 



R A C 

any thing else. Three leagues w. of the settle 
ment of Cuapala. 

QUIZU, a settlement of the province andcor- 
regimiento of Canta in Peru ; annexed to the cu 
racy of the settlement of Arahuay. 

QULHUACAN, a settlement of the district and 
alcaldia mayor of Mexilcaltzinco in Nueva Es- 
pana. It contains 234 families of Indians, and is 
three leagues w. of its capital. 

QUOHAN, a large, fertile, and beautiful val 
ley of the island St. Domingo ; thus called from 
the cacique who governed in it on the arrival of 
the Spaniards. 

[QUOREPOTY, or QUEREPOTY, a parish of 
the province and government of Paraguay ; si 
tuate on the e. bank of the Paraguay, about 61 
miles n. from Asuncion. In lat. 24 23 25" s. 
and long. 57 13 6" n&amp;gt;.] 

QUORURUPA, a small river of the province 
and captainship of Puerto Seguro in Brasil. It 
rises near the coast, runs e. and enters the 
sea between the point Abre Ojos and the island 
Goerce. 



R 



RABEL, PUNTA DE JUAN, a cape of St. Do 
mingo on the s. coast, between Point St. Nicolas 
and the port Del Agua. 

RABIJUNCO, PUNTA DE, an extremity of 
the w. coast, and to the s. of the island of Inagua. 

RABINAL, S. PABLO DE, a settlement of the 
province and alcaldia mayor of Vera Paz in the 
kingdom of Guatemala ; situate in a beautiful 
and extensive valley, which they call of San Ni 
colas, on the shore of a river which fertilizes it, 
and affords an abundance of fish. It is of a mo 
derately hot temperature, and abounding in ve 
getable productions and delicate fruits ; as also 
in cattle, birds, and game, and most particularly 
in sugar canes. Inasmuch as it is scantily sup 
plied with wheat, the natives are accustomed to 
bread of maize, since this is brought with great 
ease in two days from Suchitepeque, where it 
abounds. The fertility and umbrageous nature 
of this settlement made it formerly a curacy in 
great request by the religious of the order of St. 
Domingo, to whom it belonged, until that the 
king commanded that the clergy should prevail 
throughout all America. Its population consists 



of 18,000 Indians, and to it are annexed the set 
tlements of Salania and of Choi. 

RABINAL, a mountain near the former settle 
ment, from whence it is named. 

RABO, a small river of the province and go 
vernment of Buenos Ayres, which runs n. and 
enters the river Negro. 

[RABY, a small township of New Hampshire 
in Hillsborough County ; about 65 miles w. by 
s. of Portsmouth, and 47 n. w. of Boston. It 
was incorporated in 1760, and contains 338 inha 
bitants.] 

RACAR, a settlement of the province and cor- 
regimiento of Cuenca in the kingdom of Quito. 
It is entirely of Indians, abounds in beautiful 
pastures, and is four leagues n. w. of its capital, 
and two n. of that of Suyausi. In lat. 2 52 s. 

RACAS, a settlement of the province and cor- 
regimiento of Tarma in Peru ; annexed to the 
curacy of the settlement of Los Reyes. 

[RACE, Cape, the s. e. point of Newfound 
land Island in the N. Atlantic Ocean, four leagues 
s. of Cape Ballard. Lat. 46 43 n. Long. 52 
49 w. The Virgin Rocks, much dreaded by 



RAF 

mariners, are about 20 leagues to the s. e. of 
Cape Race.] 

[RACE, Point, the n. zs. extremity of Cape Cod, 
Massachusetts ; a league n. w. of Province Town. 
When within a mile of this point, with a fair 
wind and tide of flood, your course to Boston is 
n. zo. by w. distance 15 leagues. A number of 
huts are erected here on the loose sands, by those 
who come from Province Town to fish in boats.] 

RACINE, a small river of the province and 
government of Louisiana in N. America. It runs 
s. between the rivers Sioux and Grand, and turn 
ing w. enters the Missouri. 

RACLLA, a settlement of the province and 
corrcgimiento of Caxatambo in Peru; annexed to 
the curacy of Caxacay. 

RACOON, a small river of the county of Sa 
lem in the province of New Jersey ; it runs w. 
and enters the Delaware. 

RACOON. Some islands near the coast of S. 
Carolina, close to Cape Carteret. 

RADA Bay, on the coast of the province and 
government of Cartagena ; formed opposite the 
island Fuerte, by the point of Piedra and that of 
Manzanillo. 

RADE, GRAND, a bay of the coast of the island 
St. Christopher, one of the Antilles, the greater 
of them, and where vessels lie at anchor. It is 
on the s. w. coast, in the part which the English 
possessed before the cession to the French, and 
is defended by a good castle, called Fort Charles, 
of a square figure, and close to the back of which 
are some silver mines, which were formerly 
worked. 

RADGON, Strait of, on the e. coast of New 
foundland, between the Strait of Smith and the 
Bay of Taureaux. 

RADNOR, a small city of the county of Phi 
ladelphia. 

[RADNOR, a small pleasant town of Delaware 
County, Pennsylvania. This place was originally 

called Amstel by the Dutch, who beffan to build 

, -i J 

here.] 

[RADNOR, a town of S. Carolina, 45 miles w. 
by s. of Charleston, and 26 n.e. of Purysburg.] 

RAFAEL, S r . a settlement of the province and 
country of the Chiquitos Indians in Peru ; on the 
shore of the river Capivari. It is a reduction of 
the missions formed there by the Jesuits. 

RAFAEL, another settlement, in the province 
of California, on the shore of the coast of the 
gulf, near the Bay of Los Angeles. 

RAFAEL, another, of the province and govern 
ment of Venezuela, in the Nuevo Reyno de 



R A I 



307 



Granada; near a river, and s. of the city of 
Nirua. 

RAFAEL, another, of the province and govern 
ment of Sonora in N. America; near a river, 
between the settlements of San Martin and La 
Merced. 

RAFAEL, another, of the province and king 
dom of Guatemala; formerly a curacy of the 
religious of St. Domingo. 

RAFAEL, another, of the province and corre- 
gimiento of Pachacay in the kingdom of Chile ; 
on the shore of the river Biobio, opposite the 
island of Santa Juana ; and in it the Spaniards 
have built a fort as a defence against the Arau- 
canos. 

RAFAEL, another, of the province and govern 
ment of Veragua in the kingdom of TierraFirme. 
Twenty-five leagues from the capital, and 10 
from the city of Los Remedios. 

RAFAEL, a cape or point of land on the e. coast 
of St. Domingo ; one of those points which form 
the great Bay of Samana. Twenty-seven leagues 
from the island of S. Juan de Puerto Rico. 

RAGE, Cape, on the s. coast of Nova Scotia; 
between Port Vieux and Port of Tangrer. 

RAGE, another cape or point, in. the same pro 
vince and coast ; between the Port of La Heve 
and the Bay of Mirligueche. 

[RAGGED Harbour, on the e. coast of New 
foundland, is a part of Catalina Bay. Many 
craggy rocks lie about the entrance of it, both 
within and without ; so that it is very dangerous 
to enter. It is two leagues n. of Catalina Har 
bour. There is good water at the head of the 
harbour.] 

RAGGED Point, on the e. coast of the island 
Barbadoes ; between Devil s Point and Baker s 
Bay. 

[RAGGED Island, the most s. of the Ymetas 
(or, as they are sometimes called, Ragged Island 
Keys), and which extend about 11 leagues in 
length. They are situated on the s. edge of the 
Great Bahama Bank. They are not inhabited ; 
but salt is made upon Ragged Island during the 
proper season.] 

RAGGED Islands. Some islands, situate near 
the s. coast of Nova Scotia. They are five, all 
small, and lie between the Havre Verd and the 
Port d Ours. 

[RAIMOND, a cape on the s. side of the S. 
peninsula of the island of St. Domingo ; two 
leagues w. of Point Baynet, and II w. of Cape 
Marechaux. It has the cove Petite Anse on the 
e. and that of Bresiliere on the w.~] 

R R2 



308 



R A L 



RAM 



RAIMUNDO, S. a settlement of the province 
and country of LasAmazonas in the part possessed 
by the Portuguese. A reduction of the infidel 
Indians of the missions which are held by the 
Barefooted Carmelites of that nation ; and it is 
situate on the shore of the river Maruruvaca. 

RAIMUNDO,S. another settlement of this name, 
with the addition of Las Casillas, in the province 
and corre gimiento of Guatemala. It is annexed 
to the curacy of the settlement of San Juan de 
Sacatepeque ; contains more than 800 Indians 
who speak the Kachiquel idiom, and was a cu 
racy of the religious of the order of St. Domingo. 
RAINES, a settlement of the island of Barba- 
does in the district of the parish of St. Philip. 

RAINHAM, a city of the county of Bristol in 
the colony of Plymouth and colony of New Eng 
land. 

[RAINY ISLAND River, a small river of the 
N. W. Territory ; having a n. w. course, and 
empties into Illinois River, about half way be 
tween the Little Rocks and Illinois Lake, and 
255 miles from the Mississippi by the course of 
the river. It is 15 yards wide, and is navigable 
nine miles to the rocks.] 

[RAINY Lake, or LAKE LA PLUS, a large lake 
of N. America in the territory belonging to the 
Hudson s Bay Company ; it is of a curious figure, 
having a very intricate coast, and is full of small 
islands. This lake sends its waters into the Lake 
of the Woods, from which lake it lays about 
60 miles to the s. e. and is w. n. w. of Lake Su 
perior. 1 

RAIh, a settlement of the province of Penn 
sylvania of the United States, on the shore of the 
river Jumata. 

RAISIN, a small river of Canada, which runs 
w. between those of Barbue and Grand Riviere, 
and enters the Lake Michigan. 

RAJAN,a settlement of the province and cor- 
rcgimiento of Caxatambo in Peru ; annexed to 
the curacy of the settlement of Ticllos. 

[RALfelGH, the present seat of government 
of N. Carolina: situate in Wake County, about 
10 miles from Wake court-house. In December 
1791, the General Assembly of the State appro 
priated 1 0,000 towards erecting public build 
ings, and named it after the celebrated Sir Wal 
ter Raleigh, under whose direction the first set 
tlement in N.America was made at Roanoake 
Island in Albemarle Sound. The state-house, a 
large handsome building, has been lately finished, 
and cost 6000. Several other buildings have 
been erected, and a number of dwelling houses. 



The situation is healthy. Its remoteness from 
navigation is the greatest disadvantage. It is 
46 miles n. by e. of Fayetteville, 94 from Peters 
burg in Virginia. For further account of this 
colony consult Marshall s Life of Washington, 
vol. i. p. 12.] 

RALEMO, a river of the kingdom of Chile, 
in the territory of the city Imperial, to the n. 
It flows down from the cordillera of the Andes, 
and near its source has the name of Coypo, runs 
w. and enters the Pacific or S. Sea, in lat. 38 
9 s. 

RAMADA, a town of the province and govern 
ment of Santa Marta in the Nuevo Reyno de 
Granada: founded by Captain Luis de Manjarres 
in 1545, in the valley of Upar, at the skirt of the 
sierra Nevada, and on the shore of the river of 
La Enea ; he giving it also the name of Nueva 
Salamanca, in honour to his native place : but 
this name it afterwards lost, having fallen into a 
state of great dilapidation, and nothing remaining 
at the present day but merely some ruins on a 
small scattered settlement of Indians ; not but 
that it abounds in mines of very good copper, 
and some fine stone quarries : nor is it a place 
of inconsiderable traffic, as being in the direct 
road which leads from Cartagena to the Nuevo 
Reyno. Thirty leagues from Santa Marta, in the 
jurisdiction and district of the city, of Los Reyes, 
in lat. 10 n. 

RAMADA, another settlement, of the province 
and corregimiento of Chichas and Tarija in Peru ; 
situate on a craggy eminence, the access to it 
being very dangerous. Eight leagues from the 
settlement of Cotagaita. 

RAMADILLA, a settlement of the province 
and corregimiento of Copiapo in the kingdom of 
Chile ; near the capital, and at the skirt of a 
mountain much celebrated, and called El Bra- 
mador. 

RAMALLOS, a river of the province and go 
vernment of Buenos Ay res, which runs n. n. e. and 
enters the Parana, between the rivers of Matanza 
and of En Medio. 

RAMAUS. Some isles of the N. Sea, near 
the s. coast of Newfoundland, opposite the Bay 
of Vieillard. 

RAME, an island of the Gulf of St. Lawrence 
in the N. Sea ; one of those called of Madelaine 
by the French : n. e. of the island of Entree. 

RAMIERS, a small island of the N. Sea, near 
the coast of Martinique, at the entrance of the 
Cul de Sac Royal. 

RAMIQUIRI, a settlement of the province 



RAN 

and corregimiento of Tunja in the Nuevo Reyno 
de Granada. It is of a cold temperature, pro 
duces wheat, maize, and other vegetable pro 
ductions of the climate, and was the place where 
the zipas, or kings of Tunja, had their altars and 
baths. At the present day its inhabitants should 
amount to 300, with 50 Indians. Near it is a 
great cave, in which the Indians gave adoration 
to a bird adorned with vari-coloured plumage, 
and several other idols ; in which superstition 
they remained for several years after the con 
quest, and until a Catholic Indian woman dis 
covered the aforesaid place to Fr. Diego Man- 
cera, a religious of the order of St. Domingo, 
in 1590 ; when he succeeded in making many 
converts, and burnt the abominable instruments 
of their blindness. 

RAMIREZ, DIEGO, an island of the S. Sea, 
s. w. of Cape Horn ; thus called from having been 
discovered by Diego Ramirez in 1621 : 16 leagues 
from the coast of Magellan. It is uncultivated 
and desert, in lat. 56 37 s. 

RAMI-YACU, a small river of the province 
and government of Mainas in the kingdom of 
Quito. It runs n. n. w. and enters the Yana, 
near its source. 

RAMON, S. a settlement of the missions which 
were held by the Jesuits in the province and go 
vernment of Cinaloa. 

RAMOS, a river of the Nuevo Reyno de Leon 
in N. America, which runs e. 

[RAMSAY S MILLS, in N. Carolina, are si 
tuate at the confluence of Deep, with the n. w. 
branch of Cape Fear River ; about 25 miles s. 
of Hillsborough, and 47 s. e. of Guildford court 
house.] 

[RANAI, one of the Sandwich Islands in the 
N. Pacific Ocean, n. of Tahoorowa, and n, w. of 
Mowee and Owhyhee. It has about 24,000 in 
habitants. It abounds with yams, sweet potatoes, 
and taro, but has few plantains or bread-fruit 
trees.] 

RANAS, a shoal of rocks of the N. Sea, which 
is composed of six isles, and is between the point 
ofMorante of the island of Jamaica, and the w. 
head of the island St. Domingo. [In the most 
recent charts no such shoals exist ; it is therefore 
probable that the shoal which was called Ranas, 
is now called Morant Kays.] 

RANCAGUA, a province and corregimiento 
of the kingdom of Chile, between the two abun 
dant rivers of the Maipo to the n. and of Cacha- 
pual to the s. ; bounded by the jurisdiction of 
Santiago, the former river running between ; and 
by the jurisdiction of Colchagua, the second, in- 



RAN 



309 



tervening. The former river divides it also from 
the province of Melipilla ; and it extends w. as 
far as the coast, and is in length 13 leagues from 
n, to s. and in width 40 from e. to w. It is wa 
tered by the rivers Maypo, Codegua, Cochalan, 
and Cachapoal, besides some others smaller, 
which render it very fertile in vegetable produc 
tions. Fish also are caught in abundance, as 
well in these rivers as in some very large lakes 
in its district. It is thinly peopled, and the in 
habitants who should amount to 12,000 of all 
ages and sexes, live dispersed in the country 
estates. It has minerals of gold of very fine 
quality, and in the mountains to the e. is some 
fine rock crystal ; and not far from the city of 
Santiago some medicinal baths celebrated for the 
cure of many infirmities. 

RANCAGUA, the capital, is of the same name ; 
although it is also called Santa Cruz de Triana ; 
situate 53 miles s. of Santiago, on the n. shore of 
the river Cachapuel, in lat. 34 18 s. and long. 
70 42 w. 

RANG AS, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Tarma in Peru ; annexed to the 
curacy of the settlement of Pasco. 

[RANCHERIA, a small island on the coast of 
Veragua, in lat. 7 37 n. It is near the island 
of Quibo, and affords timber fit for masts.] 

RANCHERIA, a settlement of the province and 
government of Venezuela in the Nuevo Reyno 
de Granada, and country of Ziparas Indians ; 
founded by Nicolas de Federman in 1535. It is 
near the coast of the Lake of Maracaibo, 36 
leagues from where it first stood, having been 
then a large town and of great commerce, but 
now reduced and wretched. 

RANCHERIAS, a settlement of the province 
and government of Darien in the kingdom of 
Tierra Firme ; on the coast of the N. Sea. 

RANCHERIAS. Some small isles of the S. Sea; 
situate near the coast of the province and govern 
ment of Veragua in the kingdom of Tierra Firme, 
to the n. of tne point of Mercalo. 

RANCHO, VIEGO, a settlement of the pro 
vince and government of Darien, and kingdom of 
Tierra Firme ; on the coast of the N. Sea, near 
La Calidonia. 

RANCHO, another settlement, in the province 
and government of Tucuman, and kingdom of 
Peru, of the jurisdiction of the city of Salta. 

RANCHOS, a settlement of the province and 
government of Tucuman in Peru, and of the ju 
risdiction of the city of Cordoba ; on the skirt of 
a snowy mountain, between the rivers 
and Tercero. 



Segundo 



3JO- 



RAP 



RAP 



RANCHOS, SAN MIGUEL DE, another settle 
ment in the head settlement, and real of the 
mines of Temascaltepec in Nueva Espana, at 
the top of a mountain, so as to be of a cold tem 
perature. It contains 58 families of Indians, who 
live by sowing wheat, maize, beans, and barley, 
and by cutting woods. Six leagues n. of its head 
settlement. 

RANCHOS, another, with the dedicatory title of 
San Mateo, in the same head settlement and al- 
caldia mayor as the former. It contains 57 fami 
lies of Indians, and is six leagues e. of its head 
settlement. 

[RANCHOS, a fort of the province and govern 
ment of Buenos Ayres, situate near a small lake, 
about 55 miles s. of Buenos Ayres, lat. 35 30 
30" s. long. 58 16 14" w. ] 

[RANDOLPH, a township of Massachusets, 
formed of the 5. precinct of Braintree, in Norfolk 
County, in the year 1793. It is 15 miles s. by 
e. of Boston.] 

[RANDOLPH, a county of Hillsborough district, 
N. Carolina, bounded n. e. by Orange, and n. w. 
by Guildford. It contains 7276 inhabitants, in 
cluding 452 slaves. Its court-house is 53 miles 
n. w. of Fayetteville, and 32 e. of Salisbury.] 

[RANDOLPH, a county of Virginia, bounded 
n. by Monongalia, and s. by Pendleton. It con 
tains 951 inhabitants, including 19 slaves. Cheat 
River, the e. branch of Monongahela River, rises 
here, on the n. w. side of the Alleghany Moun 
tains.] 

[RANDOLPH, a township in Orange County, 

Vermont, the fourth town w, of Thetford, on 

Connecticut River. It contains 892 inhabitants.] 

[RANDOM, a township in Essex County, 

Vermont, w. of Brunswick, granted in 1780.] 

RANOUS, rocks or shoals of the N. Sea, near 
the coast of Newfoundland, between Cape Bu- 
tard and Crow Island. 

RANQUELCAHUE, a settlement of Indians 
of the province and corregimiento of Puchacay 
in the kingdom of Chile, at the source of the river 
Heuda. 

RANQUEN, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Rancagua, in the same king 
dom as the former, on the shore of the river 
Maule. 

RANS, River of the, in the province and 
captainship of Los Ilheos and kingdom of Brazil. 
It rises near the coast, runs n. n. w. and enters 
the Grande de San Francisco, in the settlement 
or village of Parateca. 

[RAPPAHANNOCK, a large navigable river 
of Virginia, which rises in the Blue Ridge, and 



runs about 130 miles from n. w. to s. e. and enters 
into Chesapeak Bay between Windmill and Stin- 

fray Points. It waters the towns of Falmouth, 
redericksburg, Port Royal, Leeds, Tappahan- 
nock, and Urbanna. It affords four fathoms 
water to Hobbs s Hole, and two from thence to 
Fredericksburg, 1 10 miles from its mouth. It is 
1 league from Gwin s Islands, and six n. of 
New Point Comfort. A single lump of gold ore 
has been found near the falls of this river, which 
yielded 17 dwt. of gold, of extraordinary ducti 
lity. No other indication of gold has been dis 
covered in its neighbourhood. 

RAPPAHANNOCK, a county of the same pro 
vince as the former river. 

RAPANULAHUE, a settlement of the dis 
trict of Tolten Baxo in the kingdom of Chile, on 
the shore of the river Quillem. 

RAPAS, a settlement of the province andcor- 
regimiento of Caxatambo in Peru, annexed to the 
curacy of the settlement of Churin. 

RAPAYAN, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Conchucos, in the same kingdom 
as the former, annexed to the curacy of the set 
tlement of Uco. 

RAPEL, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Colchagua in the kingdom of 
Chile. It has five vice-parishes in its district, 
and a convent of Augustins, in a part called La 
Estrella. Near to it, and in the middle of a 
llanura^ rises a hill, and in about midway of the 
same there is a cave, the door of which is two 
yards w r ide, and somewhat more high, and with 
in which is an irregular saloon of 15 yards long, 
and from three to four wide. From the middle 
of the dome fall drops of water, which fail to dis 
til in the strong heats ; and these drops are caught 
in a small pool in the floor or pavement of the 
cave. The whole of this cave appears to be the 
work of nature ; for there is no memory of its 
having been made by art. In the moist parts of 
the territory of this settlement grows a sort of 
reed, of three quarters of a yard high, the heart 
of which is white and spongy, and serves instead 
of wick to make tallow candles, which give but 
little smoke, but which are very brittle. 

RAPEL, a lake of the province and corregimi 
ento as the former settlement; formed by the 
waters of the sea, which enters two leagues with 
in land. In this lake are many fish, by which the 
precincts are provided. When the mouth, by 
which the water enters, becomes dry, as is gene 
rally the case in the month of January, a thick 
crust of salt is formed by the influence of the sun. 
This salt, which is very white, and well tasted, 



RAP 

is found two or three palms in thickness, although 
not every year alike. 

RAPEL, an abundant river of the same pro 
vince and kingdom. See CACHAPOAL. 

RAPEL, some shoals of rock of the coa-t of the 
same province and corregimiento, at the entrance 
of the river of its name. 

[RAPHAEL, a fertile and healthy canton, or 
district, the westernmost in the Spanish part of 
the Island of St. Domingo. Its boundary to the 
n. is formed in part of the French parish of Go- 
naives. The air round St. Raphael is very cool 
and salubrious, but the town, which is in a hol 
low, is very hot. It has a little garrison, whicli 
served as a check on the smuggling trade with 
the French. Atalaye (that is the centinel or dis 
covery), the westernmost town of all the Spanish 
colony, is 2- leagues s. w. of the town of St. 
Raphael, both which parishes are annexed to 
Hinche. The town of St. Raphael is 10 leagues 
s. of Cape Francois, and n. w. of St. Domingo 
City, as the road runs.] 

[RAPHAEL, CAPE ST. at the e. end of the 
Island of St. Domingo, is the s. e. limit of Samana 
Bay, 20 miles distant in that direction from Cape 
Samana or Cape Reason. It is in lat. 19 4 n. 
and long. 68 53 w. From Cape Raphael, or 
Cape of the Round Mountain, to Punta Espada, 
the s. e. point of the island, the country is level 
16 leagues, by a breadth nearly equal.] 

[RAPHOE, a township in Lancaster County, 
Pennsylvania.] 

RA PI, a settlement of the province and cor- 
regimicnto of Guamanga in Peru, annexed to the 
curacy of the settlement of Anco. 

RAPI DE PLATE, a fall of the river Catara- 
kuy in the province and country of the Iroquees 
Indians, between the fort of Galete and the island 
Montreal. 

[RAPID ANN, a small river of Virginia, which 
joins the Rappahannock, about 10 miles above 
Fredericksburg.] 

[RAPID RIVER, a water of Hudson s Bay.] 

RAPOSO, a province of the government of 
Choco, or district and jurisdiction of this city 
and province, in the Nuevo Reyno de Granada, 
which formerly belonged to that of Popayan. It 
is entirely of woods, uncultivated, and desert, 
and inhabited only in the n. part by some barba 
rian Indians. It has some very good gold-mines, 
of which some are worked ; and is of a hot and 
moist climate. As it is part of Choco, what 
ever applies to that may also be said of this of 
which we treat. See CHOCO. 



R A R 



311 



RAPOSO, a settlement, the capital of this dis 
trict, on the shore of the S. Sea. 

RAPOSO, a river, also of the same district, 
which rises in the valley of Los Gorrones in the 
Nuevo Reyno de Granada, and enters the sea in 
the bay of Buenaventura. 

RAPOSO, an island in the S. Sea, near the 
coast of the province and government of Choco, 
and in which there is a good bay. 

[RAPPO RAPPO, a bay in the island of Mo- 
wee, one of the Sandwich Islands.] 

RAQUIRA, a settlement of the corregimiento 
of Sachica and jurisdiction of the city of Leiva, 
in the Nuevo Reyno de Granada; situate be 
tween that city and the settlement of Chiquin- 
quira, and close to both, and on the shore of a 
river ; the shores and plains of which are most 
fruitful in wheat, maize, and other vegetable 
productions. It is of a very benign temperature, 
and its church was entitled a cathedral by the 
Archbishop Don Fr. Ignacio de Urbina. The 
inhabitants are about 80 in number, and the In 
dians SO, and in its territory is a convent of Re- 
coletans of San Agustin, founded in a very plea 
sant spot, between some rocks, and called La 
Candelaria, this being the first convent of this 
order founded in the kingdom. Here is vene 
rated a miraculous image, to the devotion of 
which assemble an infinite concourse of those In 
fidels. The image was formed by Francisco del 
Pozo Milanes. 

RARINCO, a river of the island of La Laxa, 
in the kingdom of Chile. It runs w. and turn 
ing immediately to s. enters the Huaque. 

[RARITON River, in New Jersey, is formed 
by two considerable streams, called the n. and s. 
branches ; the source of the one is in Morris 
County, that of the other in Hunterdon County. 
It passes by Brunswick and Amboy, and mingling 
with the waters of the Arthur Kull Sound, helps 
to form the fine harbour of Amboy. At Rariton 
Hills, through which this river passes, is a small 
cascade, where the water falls 15 or 20 feet, very 
romantically between two rocks. Opposite to 
Brunswick the river is so shallow, that it is ford- 
able at low water for horses and carriages ; but 
a little below it deepens so fast, that a 20 gun 
ship may ride securely at any time of tide. The 
tide rises so high, that large shallops used to 
pass a mile above the ford ; so that it was no 
uncommon thing to see vessels of considerable 
burden riding at anchor, and a number of large 
river craft lying above, some dry, and others on 
their beam-ends, for want of water, within gun- 



312 



RAY 



shot of each other. Copper ore has been found 
on the upper part of this river ; and in the year 
1754, the ore of this mine sold for ,62 ster 
ling per ton, being of inferior quality to that on 
Passaik river. The mouth of this river is in lat. 
40 28 w.] 

[RARITON, a town situate between the mouth 
of the n. branch of the above river, and Bound- 
brook; five miles w. n. w. of Boundbrook, and 
12 n. w. of Brunswick.] 

RASERO, a lake of the province and govern 
ment of Venezuela in the Nuevo Reyno de Gra 
nada, s. of the lake of Los Tiznados, and w. of 
the settlement of Mojica. 

RATONES, Island of the N. Sea, near the 
coast of the kingdom of Brazil ; near the coast 
and the island of Santa Catalina. In it the Por 
tuguese have a castle, very well built. 

RATONES, another, a small isle, near the same 
coast ; close to Cape Santa Maria. 

[RATTLE-SNAKE Islands lie at the w. end 
of Lake Erie.] 

RANDAL, a settlement of the province of 
Guayana and government of Cumana; one of the 
missions which were held by the Jesuits in the 
Orinoco, on the shore of this river. 

RAVIRA, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Cauta in Peru, annexed to the 
curacy of the settlement of Pari. 

RAUMA, a settlement of the same province 
and corregimiento as the former, annexed to the 
curacy of the settlement of Guamantanga. It is 
of a cold climate, and has a very abundant silver- 
mine ; but provision here is very scarce, as it is 
brought from the other provinces. 

RAUN, a settlement of the province of Osti- 
muri in Nueva Espaiia, on the shore of the 
river Hiaqui, near its entrance into the sea in the 
Gulf of California. 

RAUQUEN, or RAUQUENO, a settlement of 
the province and corregimiento of Maule, in the 
kingdom of Chile, on the shore of the river 
of the Claro. Annexed to it, in its district, are 
three vice-parishes. 

[RAWDON, a town of Nova Scotia, 40 
miles from Halifax, containing about 50 or 60 
houses.] 

[RAWAY, or BRIDGETOWN, a lively com 
mercial village of Middlesex County, New Jer 
sey, on Raway River, four or five miles 5. w. of 
Elizabeth Town, and 57 from Philadelphia. It 
contains a Presbyterian church, and about 50 or 
60 houses.] 

RAYE, Cape of, an extremity of the w. coast 



RAY 

of Newfoundland ; one of those which form the 
mouth of the Gulf of St. Lawrence. 

RAYES, an island of the N. Sea, near the 
coast of French Guayana, and where they had 
an establishment. 

[RAYMOND, a township of New Hampshire, 
in Rockingham County, 12 or 14 miles w. of Ex 
eter, and 32 from Portsmouth. It was incorpo 
rated in 1764, and contains 727 inhabitants.] 

[RAYMOND, or RAYMONDTO\Y N, a settlement 
in Cumberland County, district of Maine, 130 
miles n. n. e. of Boston, and contains 345 inha 
bitants. A stream from Songo Pond, after pass 
ing- through part of Greenland, Waterford, and 
Ottisfield, falls into the n. e. part of SebagoLake 
in this settlement. The land is generally level, 
except one large hill, named Rattlesnake Hill, 
from its abounding with these reptiles. Here 
are some swells of good land, but the greater 
part of the growth is pine and white oak, and 
the land is hard to subdue.] 

[RAYNHAM, a townhip of Massachusets, in 
Bristol County, taken from Taunton, and incor 
porated in 1731. It contains 1094 inhabitants. 
A considerable part of the town lies upon a cir 
cular bend of Taunton River, which is between 
seven and eight rods wide, and affords great 
plenty of herrings and other fish, but so unfa 
vourable is it, in this place, to seining or fishing, 
that the exclusive privilege of fishing i&amp; annually 
sold for less than 12 shillings, while the same 
privilege in Bridge water and Middleborough, 
(towns which bound this ; the former on the e. 
the latter on the .) is annually sold for 250. 
Besides the great river there are several useful 
streams, upon which are six saw-mills, three 
grist-mills, one furnace, a forge, and fulling- 
mill. There are numerous ponds in this town 
ship, of which Nippaniquit or Nippahonset, is 
two miles long and one in breadth. Here ale- 
wives, in millions, annually resort and leave 
their spawns. An excellent kind of iron ore, 
and various kind of fish, are found here. Be 
sides the usual business of husbandry and mecha 
nics, numbers are here employed in the manu 
factories of bar-iron, hollow ware, nails, iron 
for vessels, iron shovels, pot-ash, shingles, &amp;c. 
The first forge set up in America was introduced 
into this town by James and Henry Leonard, 
natives of England, 1652. This forge was situ 
ate on the great road, and is still in employ by 
the family of Leonards of the sixth generation ; 
a family remarkable for longevity, promotion to 
public office, and a kind of hereditary attach- 



R E A 

went to the iron manufacture. King Philip s 
hunting-house stood on the n. side of Fowling 
Pond, which is \\ miles from the forge. In the 
winter season the Indian monarch resided at 
Mount Hope, probably for the benefit of fish. 
Philip and the Leonards lived on such gpod 
terms, and such was Philip s friendship and ge 
nerosity, that as soon as the war broke out in 
1675, which ended in the death of the king and 
the ruin of his tribe, he gave out strict orders 
to all his Indians, never to hurt the Leonards. 
Before Philip s war, Fowling Pond was two 
miles long and three-fourths of a mile wide. Now 
the water is almost gone, and the large tract it 
once covered, is grown up to a thick set swamp 
of cedar and pine. The soil of this pond has 
also a prolific virtue in generating ore. Copious 
beds of ore, in this part of the country, are usu 
ally found in the neighbourhood of pine swamps, 
or near to soils natural to the growth of pine or 
cedar. In this place there has been almost an 
inexhaustible fund of excellent ore, from which 
the forge has been supplied and kept going for 
more than 80 years, besides great quantities car 
ried to other works, and yet here is ore still ; 
but this, like other things in a state of youth, 
is weak, and incapable of being wrought into 
iron of the best quality.] 

RAYO, a settlement of the jurisdiction and 
government of San Juan de los Llanos in the 
Nuevo Reyno de Granada, on the shore of the 
river Ariari. 

RAIZOR, a port of Nova Scotia in N. Ame 
rica. It is large and commodious for all kinds 
of vessels, has at its entrance an island of a 
league and an half long, and separated from the 
mam land on the w. side by a small creek. The 
e. extremity of this island is a cape, which with 
the continent forms the entrance of from four to 
five cables long ; and it is necessary for vessels 
to bear close to the island to avoid a rock in the 
middle of the channel, which is covered by the 
water. 

[RAZOR Island, is four leagues s. of the 
mouth of Rio Janeiro Bay, or Santa Cruz Point, 
on the coast of Brazil, S. America.] 

REACH, a settlement of the province and go 
vernment of Luisiana ; founded by the English, 
after the conquest of this country in 1758 ; situ- , 
ate on the shore of the river Mississippi, about 
11 miles to the s. e. of New Orleans. 

READ s Bay, in the island of Barbadoes ; at 
nearly an equal distance between the cities of 
Hole-Town and Speight s-Town. It is about 
half a mile wide, and much more in depth. Ves- 

VOL. iv. 



R E A 



313 



sels, however large, may lie in it safe at anchor, 
in six or 12 feet water, where also they are de 
fended from all winds except the e. which blows 
directly at the entrance of the bay, which is in 
Ions. 58 47 , lat. 13 V. 

[READFIELD, a township in Lincoln County, 
district of Maine, eight miles from Hallo well, 
which bounds it on the e. whilst the e. branch of 
Androscoggin river separates it from Sterling on 
the zo. It is n. of Winthrop, and was joined with 
it in the enumeration of 1790.] 

[READING, a township of Connecticut, Fair- 
field County, s. of Danbury, adjoining.] 

[READING, a large township of Massachusetts, 
in Middlesex County, 14 miles n. of Boston. It 
was incorporated in 1644, and contains 1802 in 
habitants.] 

[READING, a township of Vermont, Windsor 
County, w. of Windsor adjoining. It contains 
747 inhabitants.] 

[READING, a post-town, and the capital of 
Berks County, Pennsylvania; situate on the n. e. 
side of Schuylkill River, 32 miles w. s. w. of 
Bethlehem, 24 e. of Lebanon, (where the canal 
commences which joins the waters of the Swe- 
tara Creek with those of Schuylkill River), and 
43 n. w. of Philadelphia. It is a flourishing 
town, regularly laid out, and inhabited chiefly 
by Germans. It contains about 600 houses. 
The public buildings are a stone gaol, a court 
house, an elegant church for German Lutherans, 
erected in 1793; a church for Calvinists, one for 
Roman Catholics, a meeting-house for Friends, 
and a large edifice for the public offices. In the 
vicinity of the town is a remarkable spring, 100 
feet square, and 140 feet deep, with a stream 
issuing from it sufficient to turn a mill. The 
water is clear and transparent, and affords abun 
dance of fish. In the neighbourhood are 10 ful 
ling-mills, and several iron works. In the whole 
county of Berks are five furnaces, and as many 
forges. In November 1795, ,.12,000 was voted 
by the county for building a stone arched bridge 
over the Schuylkill at this town, on the high 
road to Harrisburg, 44 miles distant to the w. 
by s.~] 

[READING, a township in York County, Penn 
sylvania.] 

" [READINGTOWN, or RIDDENTOWN, in 
Hunterdon County, New Jersey, 17 miles n. w. 
by w. of New Brunswick, and about 11 e. of 
Lebanon.] 

REAGUI, a settlement of the head settlement 
of the district of Chixila and alcaldia mayor of 
Villalta in Nueva Espana. It is of an hot tem- 
s s 



,114 R E A 

perature, contains 50 families of Indians, and in 
seven leagues w. of its capital. 

REAL, NUESTRA SENORA DEL, a settlement 
of the province and goverment of Maracaibo in 
the Nuevo Reyno de Granada, on the shore of 
the river Masparo, to the e. of the city of Barinas 
Nueva. It is one of the missions held by the re 
ligious of St. Domingo. [Twelve miles from Ba 
rinas or Varinas.] 

REAL, another settlement of the province and 
captainship of Itamaraca in Brazil, on the shore 
of a river which passes by the city of Olinda. 

REAL, a city, now destroyed, in the captain 
skip of S. Paulo, Brazil ; called also Ontiveros, 
the capital of the district of Guaira. It was 
founded by Luis Diaz de Melgarejo in 1543, near 
the river Parana, on the e. bank. [Near this 
place the River Parana is divided into two chan 
nels, forming the Island of Salto, which is about 
44 miles lonpf and five or six wide. This city is 
on the small stream of Tambo.] Its situation 
was fertile, delightful and healthy, and it had in 
its vicinity some mines of excellent copper. It 
was 225 miles from Asuncion to the n. e. in lat. 
23 35 s. See ONTIVEROS. 

REAL, an island of the river St. Lawrence in 
Canada, 60 miles from the Lake Ontario. It is 
extremely fertile, and produces many kinds of 
grain, and has a good fort, built by the French, 
which was taken by the English under General 
Amherst in 1760, after a bombardment of two 
days. 

REAL, a bay on the coast of the Straits of Ma 
gellan, between the great bay of S. Bartolome 
and the Ancon de los Paxaros. 

REAL, a river of the province and captainship 
of Todos Santos in Brazil, which runs e. forming 
a bow, and enters the sea close to Cape Colon. 

REALEJO, a city of the province and go 
vernment of Nicaragua in the kingdom of Gua 
temala, in a beautiful plain, on the e. shore of a 
river of its name, and close to where this enters 
the S. Sea ; 20 miles n. w. of the city of Leon, 
which is the capital, and to which it serves as a 
port. This port is very handsome and capa 
cious, and of good depth. It is called De la 
Concepcion and De la Posesion, and is one of 
those which, in Nueva Espaila, is termed De la 
Otra Costa; and it is capable of containing 200 
vessels. The city, which is small, is surrounded 
with trenches, for its defence. It is of an hot 
temperature, and unhealthy, owing to the stag 
nant waters. It has three churches and an hos 
pital, many orchards and gardens, and a dock, 
m which have been built many vessels. 



R E C 

Its principal commerce consists in pitch, tar t 
and cordage, in which it is extremely abundant. 
Its territory is well irrigated by different rivers ; 
of the which, that which enters the sea in the 
port has eight arms, the same being so many other 
canals, by which are brought to the city, from 
the settlements of its jurisdiction, and from the 
estates and mills, the sugar and other produc 
tions. 

William Dampierre, in his voyage round the 
world, asserts that this place is more notable than 
any on that coast, as having a mountain which 
is always burning, known by the name of the 
Old Volcano, seven leagues from the coast, and 
which is seen at 20 leagues at sea. The river, 
which flows down from the capital, Leon, is s. e. 
of the port, but the territory on either shore is 
so low as to be inundated by the tides ; and so 
thickly covered is it with mangroves, that it is 
impossible to penetrate through them. 

The port is much frequented by vessels from 
Acapulco, Panama, and other parts of the S. 
Sea ; and at the entrance of it is an island, where 
the sea breaks its force, and by which two chan 
nels are formed, the best of which is on the n. w. 
side. This city has suffered many invasions by 
pirates, in the last (16th) century; and is in long. 
87 5 w. lat. 12 30 n. 

REALEJO, a small island of the S. Sea, near 
the coast of the province and government of 
Choco. 

REBALSA, a lake of the province and country 
of Las Amazonas, formed by a waste water of the 
Maranon or Amazon, close to the settlement of 
San Miguel de Yarupa. 

REBUELTO, a river of the Island St. Do 
mingo. It is small, rises near the w. coast, and 
joins the Mexical and Alcabon to enter the great 
river Jacques or Santiago. 

RECALHUE, a settlement of the district of 
the Island of Laxa, in the kingdom of Chile, on 
the shore and at the source of the river of its 
name. 

RECALHUE. This river runs n. n. w. and enters 
the Biobio . 

[RECEIFFE, a harbour on the coast of Brazil : 
it is a very strong place, and near the city of 
Olinda, in lat. 8 W s. The whole coast of 
Brazil is bordered by a thick and flat ridge of 
rocks, which is in some places 20, and in others 
30 yards broad ; and were it not for several 
breaks and chasms in this rocky inclosure, it 
would be altogether impracticable to approach 
the shore. That part which is here denominated 
Reciffe, is a very large passage towards the n. of 



RED 

Olinda, but the ridge of rocks again appears al 
most before the city, and the inhabitants enter it 
in boats at high water. This part of the rid^e 
is termed by the Portugese Reciffo, and by the 
Dutch the Receif. On the n. point is a very nar 
row open passage, through which ships approach 
the shore, and between this ridge of rocks and 
the main land, is a sandy island, about one 
league in length, called the Sandy Receif. On 
this island the Portuguese had constructed a 
itrong fort, well provided with artillery, and 
which by them was deemed impregnable. Of 
this the Dutch Admiral Sonk, in about the year 
1630, made himself master, and having strength 
ened the Stony Receif, he rendered it the chief 
geat of commerce, and it became afterwards one 
of the most considerable places in Brazil.] 

RECIO, a river of the province and govern 
ment of Mariquita in the Nuevo Reyno de Gra 
nada. It rises in the valley of Picara, runs from 
w. to e. and enters the Magdalena. 

RECISTO, a settlement of the province and 
captainship of San Vincente in Brazil, at the 
source of the river Parana-pane. 

[RECONCAVE, the. See Bahia; also addi 
tional matter respecting the history, &amp;c. of 
Brazil.] 

[RECOVERY, Fort, in the N. W. Territory, 
situate on a branch of the W abash River called 
Calemut or Salamanu, 21 miles n. of Fort Jef 
ferson, 36 s. e. of Eil Town, and 15 s. w. from the 
place where General Sinclair was defeated in 
1791. It consists of two block houses and bar 
racks with curtains, and contains 60 men.] 

[RED, a river of the State of Tennessee, a 
water of Cumberland River, with which it min 
gles its waters at the n. bend, about two miles 
n. w. of Clarksville. It is boatable a considerable 
distance.] 

[RED, a principal branch of Kentucky River, 
which heads and interlocks with a main branch 
of Licking River, and flows in a n. w. course 
into Kentucky River, about nine miles above 
Boonsborough. It is 60 yards wide at the 
mouth.] 

[RED River, a large river which rises in the 
province of New Mexico, about 100 miles to the 
. e. of Santa Fe, the capital of the above pro 
vince. It pursues a very serpentine direction to 
the s. e. through the immense province of Loui 
siana, and enters the Mississippi on its w. bank, 
in lat. 31 3 n. The length of this river in a 
direct line (exclusive of its windings, which con 
siderably add to its length), from its source to its 



RED 



315 



junction with the Mississippi, is 735 geographical 
miles. Innumerable are the rivers which enter 
the above in its course. 

Mr. Pike has investigated, (in 1807), very par 
ticularly the courses of three prodigious rivers : 
first, that called Platte, by the French fur 
hunters, a corruption of the Spanish Plata, or 
Silver River, perhaps from its transparency near 
its source ; and which our fur hunters have again 
corrupted into Plat River, from the French 
Plata. This is the furthest to the n. 2. The 
Arkansa, a stream of about 2000 miles in length. 
And, 3. The Red River, of nearly an equal ex 
tent. These vast rivers are now clearly dis 
cerned, rolling their majestic waters from a chain 
of mountains on the n. of New Mexico (some 
of which equal Mount Blanc in height), through 
the vast w. extent of Louisiana, till they join the 
Mississippi, or more properly the Missouri ; thus 
opening a prodigious navigation to the United 
States of America, and leading to important set 
tlements in that direction. It is delightful to 
contemplate the first accounts of these extensive 
regions, the climate and natural advantages of 
many parts of which may one day contribute to 
render them the seats of learning and civiliza 
tion, and which are now peopled by a race, that 
offers the most tempting subject to the exertions 
of the philanthropist. 

Before this country was explored by our au 
thor, the amazing length of these rivers was far 
from being accurately known, and it was sup 
posed that the chief streams directed their course 
to the Gulf of Mexico, so that the navigation 
and commerce would have been subject to impe 
diments from a foreign power. The most fertile 
portion of the territory appears to be that in the 
neighbourhood of the United States; while to 
the zc. ands. there occur great deserts, sometimes 
of sand like those of Africa, and sometimes re 
sembling the steppes of Siberia. The sight of 
such vast plains void of trees, in the midst of the 
American forests, has suggested to travellers an 
idea that the trees have been destroyed by some 
accidental cause. 

But our author has shown that the cause is in 
the soil itself, which is either moveable sand 
wafted by every wind, or too thin to bear trees, 
Nor does petrified timber appear to be found, as 
in several pasts of the deserts of Africa. The 
date-tree might perhaps be cultivated on the 
skirts of these American deserts. But our author 
regards them as advantageous, in an enlarged 
view of policy j as by preventing the progress of] 
s s 2 



316 



RED 



REE 



fpopulation towards the s. w. they confine the 
United States within such boundaries, as may 
afford to the people of that extensive country a 
fair prospect of maintaining the present form of 
government, instead of undergoing the political 
changes incident to an empire stretching over too 
wide a surface. 

The regions of Louisiana may be said to have 
been first dimly descried by Father Hennepin, a 
religious missionary, whose voyage down the 
Mississippi is now chiefly remarkable, as giving 
an account of the numerous peach-trees which he 
observed in every direction, and which seem to 
have been indigenous, though the Americans 
continue to regard the peach as a foreign fruit. 
The unfortunate adventure of M. de la Salle, at 
the same period, 1G80-1690, is well known; but 
after the assassination of their chief, some of his 
men penetrated to the river Arkansa, where they 
formed a little post ; and it is remarkable that 
this river, as well as the Red River, are tole 
rably well delineated, as arising in the moun 
tains of New Mexico, by M. du Pratz, in the 
map which he constructed for his valuable his 
tory of Louisiana, published in three volumes, 
Paris, 1758; though the indications are so vague 
that he was not followed by succeeding geogra 
phers. It is also not a little remarkable, that he 
represents the rivers, which fall into the Gulf of 
Mexico, as of a short and confined course, being 
divided from the Red River by a broad level of 
high land. His gold-mine on the Arkansa, about 
40 miles below a fall or rapid of that river, has 
also escaped recent attention. M. St. Denis, and 
other French settlers, repeatedly passed from 
Mobile to the s. of New Mexico, and even to 
the capital city of Mexico ; and it is probable 
that, from their memorials, Du Pratz formed his 
map, which was, however, clouded with so much 
doubt and uncertainty, that no dependance could 
be placed upon it. But by Major Pike s exer 
tions and perseverance, through the greatest 
difficulties and dangers, the geography of this 
interesting country assumes, for the first time, a 
clear and authentic form, the rivers being laid 
down, with all their surprising meanders, from 
actual and careful surveys, executed with the 
accuracy of modern science, and the precision of 
modern instruments. For further accounts see 
Vol. III. p. 250, of this work.] 

[RED BANK, on the s. e. side of Delaware 
River, in the town of Woodbury, in Gloucester 
County, New Jersey. The situation is elevated, 
and the fort built here during the war, stood 



1900 yards from Fort Island, and about seven 
miles s. of Philadelphia. It cost the British 
400 men, killed and wounded, before they could 
reduce the garrison, in 1777.] 

[RED HOOK, in Dutchess County, New York, 
where a post-office is kept, is on the e. bank of 
Hudson s River, 20 miles s. of Hudson, and 80 
n. of New York.] 

REDONDA, NUESTRA SENORA DE LA, a 
settlement of the mission of Las Juntas in the 
kingdom of Nuevo Mexico, in S. America. 

REDONDA, a lake of the province and govern 
ment of Venezuela in the Nuevo Reyno de Gra 
nada ; also taking its name from its round figure. 
North of the river of La Portuguesa, between 
other two lakes, called, the one of Tiznados, the 
other Saco de Santa Maria. 

REDONDA, a mountain or serrania of a round 
figure, in the province and government of Nica 
ragua, and kingdom of Guatemala ; celebrated 
for the abundance of its pastures for breeding 
cattle ; from the milk of which cattle cheeses are 
made, of great estimation. In this mountain, 
which is in the precise road to the sea coasts, is an 
inn, a great accommodation to travellers. Four 
leagues from the settlement of Petapa. 

REDONDO, a port of the coast of the Straits 
of Magellan, between the Point Santa Isabel 
and the cape of its name. 

REDONDO, this cape is on the w. coast, and 
one of thpse forming the above port. 

REDONDO, another cape, on the coast which 
lies between the river Plata and the Straits of 
Magellan, between the port of Los Leones and 
the bay of San Matias, in lat. 43 s. 

[REDONDO, a rock between Montserrat and 
Nevis, Caribbee Islands. It is about a league 
in circuit, of a round form, where is neither cul 
ture nor inhabitants. Lat. 16 55 n. long. 62 
23 30" w. ] 

[REEDSBOROUGH, or READSBOROUGH, 
the s. e. township of Bennington County, Ver 
mont. It contains 64 inhabitants.] 

[REEDY Island, in Delaware River, 50 miles 
below Philadelphia. It is 20 miles from Bombay 
Hook, and is the rendezvous of outward bound 
ships in autumn and spring, waiting for a fa 
vourable wind. The course from this to the sea 
is s. s. e. so that a n. w. wind, which is the pre 
vailing wind in these seasons, is fair for vessels 
to put out to sea. There is a secure harbour 
here, at Port Penn, where piers have been 
erected by the State of Pennsylvania. The island 
is about three miles long, and not more than 



R E H 

one-fourth of a mile wide. It was formerly 
banked in, hut is now under cultivation, and is 
overflowed in high tides. There is a channel on 
each side of the island; but vessels, especially 
large ones, choose to keep the c. side.] 

[REELFOOT, a small navigable river of the 
State of Tennessee, which empties into the river 
Mississippi, about 44 miles s. of the Ohio. It is 
30 yards wide seven miles from its mouth. One of 
its branches rises on the borders of Kentucky.] 

[REEMSTOWN, or REAMS-TOWN, a small 
town of Lancaster County, Pennsylvania; situate 
on a stream which empties into Calico Creek, a 
water of Conestoga, which falls into the Susque- 
hannah. It contains about 40 houses, and is 
16 miles n. e. of Lancaster, and 48 n. w. by n. of 
Philadelphia.] 

[REGOLETS, the name of the passage from 
the n. part of the Gulf of Mexico into Lake 
Pontchartrain, which has communication, through 
Maurepas Lake and the Gut of Ibberville, with 
Mississppi River; or the general name of the isles 
in the inner part of the channel into that lake. 
The distance from Lake Pontchartrain through 
the Regolets is 10 miles, and between three and 
400 yards broad, and lined with marshes on 
each side. On the s. side of the Regolets, and 
near to the entrance from the gulf, there is a 
large passage into the Lake Borgne, or Blind 
Lake ; and by some creeks that fall into it, small 
craft may go as far as the plantations on the Mis- 
sissipi, and there is a passage between the Lakes 
Borgne and Pontchartrain ; but either by this, 
or that of the Regolets, six and sometimes seven 
feet is the deepest water through. Near the en 
trance, at the e. end of the Regolets, and on the 
. side, are principal mouths of Pearl River. 
From the Regolets to the Bay of St. Louis is 18 
miles.] 

REGO, a settlement of the province and cap 
tainship of Paraiba in Brasil, on the shore of the 
river Paraiba. 

REGIDOR, a settlement of the province and 
government of Santa Marta in the Nuevo Revno 
de Granada, on the shore of the grand river 
Magdalen a. 

REGISTRA, a settlement of the province and 
government of Paraguay, on the shore of the 
river Cayaba. 

[REHOBOTH, a town of Massachusetts, in 
Bristol County, on a branch of Providence River, 
a few miles from Providence, in Rhode Island, 
and 34 miles s. by w. of Boston. It was called 
Saconet by the Indians ; was incorporated in 
and contains 4710 inhabitants.] 



R E I 



317 



REI, or REY, a province and captainship of 
the kingdom of Brasil. See SERGIPE. 

REI, or REY, an island of the S. Sea, in the 
Bay of Panama. It is one of those which they 
call, by another name, of the Pearl islands, and 
it is the largest of the same, being 20 miles long 
from n. to s. and 10 or 11 wide, and about 20 
distant from the continent off the coast of Pa 
nama. It has a good port, called Del Naranjal 
in this rhumb, and is surrounded with other isles. 
In 1685 a gallant engagement took place off this 
island between General Don Pedro Pontejos, 
commodore of seven vessels, and the English pi 
rate, Edward David, whose vessels the former 
nearly destroyed, the said pirate owing his safety 
to the darkness of the night. 

REI, a settlement of the province and govern 
ment of Cartagena in the Nuevo Reyno de Gra 
nada, on the shore of the Grande de la Magda- 
lena. 

REI, a small port of the island of Tortuga, 
near St. Domingo, in the n. part, and formerly 
an asylum for the Fibustiers or pirates, who 
in the last (sixteenth) century infested the Ame 
rican seas. 

REI, a river of the province and government 
of Paraguay, which rises in the lake of Los Vi- 
voras, runs e . and enters the Plata opposite the 
town of Santa Lucia. 

REI, another, a small island; situate within 
the Port Deseado, on the coast lying between the 
river Plata and the Straits of Magellan. It is 
large and narrow, and opposite the island of 
Olivarcs. 

REI, another, also small, in the river Valdi- 
via, at the mouth of the same. It is fertile, and 
inhabited by some Indians. 

REID, a settlement of the Island of Barba- 
does, in the district and parish of Santiago, near 
the coast. 

REINALDO FRAY, a river of the kingdom 
of Brasil, which runs w. and enters the Tocan- 
tines, between San Felix de Arrayal of the New 
Lands and the river Maranhao, and in the cap 
taincy of Goias. 

REINOSA, a town of the province and go 
vernment of La Sierra Gorda in the coast of the 
Bay of Mexico ; founded in 1749 by the Count 
of Sierra Gorda, Don Joseph de Escandon, Co 
lonel of the Militia of Queretaro ; and it is one 
of the new settlements established there, this 
name having been given to it in honour of the 
native place of the viceroy, the Count of Revil- 
lagigedo, who then was governor. 

[REISTERSTOWN. in Baltimore County, 



318 



R E M 



R E M 



Maryland, eight miles s. e. of Westminster, and 
nearly 15 n. w. of Baltimore.! 

REMEDIOS,. NUESTRA SENORA DE LOS, a 
city, the capital of the province and government 
of the Rio del Hacha in the Nuevo Reyno de 
Granada : founded on the shores of this river by 
Nicholas Federman, with the title of Nuestra 
Senora de las Nieves, which it afterw ards changed 
to that which it now holds. It is of an hot tem 
perature, and has been rich and commercial 
through its fisheries of pearl, which, although 
not large, were of very fine orient, and highly 
esteemed. But this lucrative trade has now en 
tirely fallen off, or is practised only by a few 
Guajiros Indians ; and the city is reduced to a 
miserable state, through the invasions it has ex 
perienced. It has a very good parish church, in 
which is venerated a miraculous image of Nues 
tra Senora ; which image, whenever the city was 
invaded, used to turn its back upon it, and its 
face towards the mountain ; the truth of which 
miracle is justly authenticated, through the pre 
cautions taken by the bishop of Santa Marta, to 
whose diocese it belonged. It has also convents 
of religious : the one of S. Francisco, the other 
of S. Domingo. This city is defended by a castle, 
of very regular construction, called San Jorge. 
It was taken and sacked by Francis Drake in 
1596, who set fire to it, and retired with a con 
siderable number of pearls which he found in it. 
[Seventy-three miles e. by n. from Santa Marta, 
and 104 n. w. of the city of Maracaybo, in lat. 
11 30" n. and long. 72 55 30" w.~] 

REMEDIOS, another city, in the kingdom and 

government of Mariquita ; founded in 1559 by 
rancisco Martinez de Hospina, in the valley 
called of Corpus Christi, and afterwards trans 
lated to where it now stands, near the river Miel. 
It is of a hot and sickly temperature, of a craggy 
territory, mountainous, and full of swamps, but 
abounding in washing-places of gold, in which the 
inhabitants are employed. It produces also much 
cacao, sugar-cane, and cotton, of which they 
make many woven stuffs ; also abundance of 
swine, on the flesh of which the natives all sub 
sist, and which they carry for sale to Mompox. 
Here are also found in profusion plantains, 
yucas, and other productions of a warm climate; 
also fish, which is a common food. Besides the 
great heat, it is afflicted with mosquitoes, snakes, 
and several other venomous reptiles. It is inha 
bited by 500 housekeepers, and is 89 miles n. w. 
of Santa F6, and 35 n. by w. from Honda, in lat. 
5 42 n. and long. 75 10 w. 

REMEDIOS, a celebrated sanctuary of Nuestra 



Senora (Our Lady), situate in a dry mountain 
plain, in the alcaldia mayor of Coyoacan and 
kingdom of Nueva Espaiia. This image, which 
is about a third of a yard high, was carried to 
that kingdom by one of the captains who assisted 
the celebrated Hernan Cortes in its conquest ; 
and who, in the night that he was retiring from 
Mexico, having left it wrapped up in a mat made 
of pita, was prevented, through his death, which 
took place the same night, from taking it up 
again ; so that it was not discovered till some 
years after by a newly converted Indian. He 
took it to his house and shut it up in a case, 
putting with it, through his ignorance, some 
maize, and other food, for its nourishment ; but 
returning to look at it, was astonished to find 
that both the food and the image had disappear 
ed ; and the latter was discovered, shortly after, 
in the exact place from whence it had been taken. 
This account of the Indian so astonished the city 
of Mexico, it determined to raise for it, in that 
spot, a sumptuous temple, to which it was made 
the patron ; and now, by the order of the king,, 
a solemn feast is observed yearly on the first of 
September, at which assist the tribunals and the 
nobility. The same solemnity takes place when 
the image is carried to the cathedral for suppli 
cation, whenever its protection may be thought 
necessary, in cases of necessity, sickness, drought, 
and war, and at the dispatch of the fleets. Fif 
teen miles w. by n. of Mexico, in lat. 19 28 30" 
n. and long. 99 13 w. 

REMEDIOS, a settlement of the missions which 
were held by the Jesuits, in the province of To- 
pia and kingdom of Nueva Vizcaya. 

REMEDIOS, another, of the province and go 
vernment of Sonora in Nueva Espana ; on the 
shore of a river, between the settlements of Do 
lores and Copospera. 

REMEDIOS, another, of the province and go 
vernment of Honduras, called also Tasayal ; si 
tuate on the e. coast of an island, formed by an 
inlet from the sea. 

REMEDIOS, another, of the province and go 
vernment of Antioquia in the Nuevo Reyno de 
Granada ; at the source of a small river, which 
enters the Magdalena. 

REMEDIOS, another, of the province and cor- 
reginu ento of Chichas and Tarija in Peru, of the 
division and district of the former, annexed to 
the curacy of Tupisa. 

REMEDIOS, another, called Pueblo Nuevo, in 
the province and government of Veragua and 
kingdom of Tierra Firme ; which was, in former 
times, one of the best settlements in that pro 



R E M 

vince ; also the residence of the governors from 
the great profits derived from the gold mines, 
called De Lobaina. These mines became ruined, 
and their mouth has not since been discovered. 
It has owed no little to the facilities of building 
ressels, as it abounds in excellent timber, and is 
situate on the shore of the S. Sea. Eighty-five 
miles a), from its capital, Santiago. 

REMEDIOS, another, of the province and alcal- 
dia mayor of San Miguel in the kingdom of 
Guatemala ; annexed to the curacy of the settle 
ment of San Juan Chinameca. 

REMEDIOS, a lake of the province and govern 
ment of the Rio del Hacha, in the Nuevo Reyno 
de Granada ; between the lake of San Juan and 
the cape of La V ela, on the sea-shore. 

REMEDIOS, a river of the kingdom of Brazil, 
which rises n.n. w. of the town of Goyaz, runs s. 
and enters, united with that of La Concepcion, 
into the Preto or La Palma. 

REMEDIOS, a large bay on the n. coast of the 
Straits of Magellan ; between the Bay of Posses 
sion and that of Santiago. 

REMEDIOS, a point of land or cape, on the 
coast of the S. Sea, of the province and nlcaldia 
mayor of Suchitepec in the kingdom of Guate 
mala. It is one of those which form the port of 
Acazutla. 

REMEDY, a small island of the coast of Nova 
Scotia, in the strait which is formed by the island 
of San Juan. 

REMI, a river of the province and govern 
ment of Louisiana. It runs w. e. and enters the 
San Pedro. 

REMIRE, PAR DE, a settlement and parish 
of the French in the island of Cayenne, in the e. 
part, and two leagues s. e. of the capital. 

REMIRE. Some islands of the N. Sea, [called 
by the English Malingre, father, mother, and 
daughters]; 1| league distance from the coast 
of Cayenne. They are five, and called by the 
French Malingre, Le Pere, La Mere, and Les 
Deux Filles, these being barren and dry rocks ; 
called also by some The Breasts. They are 
nearly joined, and lie at a quarter of a league to 
. s. e. of that of La Mere. The greater of them 
is Le Pere, which is situate e. n. e. of Mont Joly, 
at the distance of \\ league, and is about an 
eighth of a league long. La Malingre is very 
small, and lies one league e.n.e. of the moun 
tain of Remontabo, and 1} league from that of 
Le Pere. All these isles are of a very healthy 
climate, and vessels may pass very near to them 
without the least danger ; since at the lowest 
tides there is five or six fathoms depth, save on 



R E M 



319 



the n. side of the island of Le Pere, where there 
is a sand-bank extending a quarter of a league. 
The launches and barks may pass between the 
continent and these islands, where, at low water, 
there remain 15 feet of water. But this pass is 
dangerous for large vessels, on account of a chain 
of rocks, some above, and others below the sea, 
in the middle of the channel, between the coast 
of Cayenne and the islands of Pere and Ma 
lingre. 

This shoal is found n.n.w. of Mont Joly, at 
the distance of three-fourths of a league, and 5 
to the s. e. of the mountain of Remontabo, at 
somewhat more than a league s distance, and was 
discovered by a skilful French pilot in 1701. 

The island of Malingre is elevated a little 
above the water, and on the w. side of it is an 
other rock, which extends nearly 300 toises to 
n. n. w. and the which at ebb tide stands more 
than half out of water; it being necessary always 
strictly to avoid the same. Round this island, 
at the distance of 100 toises, are 15 to 16 feet of 
water in ebb tide ; which, joined to eight or nine 
when the tide is up, make 24 or 25 feet. The 
isle of 1 Enfant is to the n. e. one quarter to 
the e. of that of Malingre, at three-fourths of a 
league s distance, and 2^ to the n. one quarter to 
n. w. of Cayenne. In coming to this island it is 
usual to anchor between La Malingre and 1 En 
fant, to wait for the proper tides. The anchorage 
here is very good, in 25 feet of water at ebb tide, 
with a muddy bottom. Vessels also come to 
anchor to e. n. e. and n. e. of 1 Enfant, at one 
half or three-quarters of a league s distance, in 
25 feet water, with the same bottom as above. 
But to the e. and s. e. of this island there are only 
from 10 to 16 feet of water. To the w. of the 
same island, and at three-quarters of a league s 
distance, are found from 10 to 29 feet of water, 
but, approaching two or three cables length into 
shore, there are not more than eight, although at 
the foot of the land and all round the island there 
are 25 feet water, as was proved by the sound 
ings made by the French frigate of war, LaCha- 
rente, by order of the court, in 1736, with a view 
of discovering a passage for vessels under the 
necessity of proceeding when the wind might be 
to n. e. one quarter to e., it being impossible for 
them to make any way with a n. e. wind. It did 
not however succeed in finding sufficient depth, 
for, although there was as much water as a ship 
might draw within a stone s throw of the land, 
yet it is thought too hazardous an attempt where 
the currents are so rapid as they are here. 
REMOLINO, a settlement of the province 



320 



REN 



and government of Santa Marta in the Nuevo 
Reyno de Granada ; on the shore of the grand 
river Magdalena. 

[REMOLINOS, a parish of the province and 
government of Poroznoy, in lat. 26 W 0" s. and 
long. 58 3 48" a&amp;gt;.] 

REMONTABO, a mountain of the island of 
Cayenne ; on the skirt of which the French had 
an establishment. 

) RENAICO, a settlement of Indians, of the 
island of Laxa in the kingdom of Chile ; on the 
shore of the river Tolpan. 

RENAICO, a river of the district of Repocura 
in the same kingdom ; formed by a junction 
of those of Ngelol and Pibinco, to enter the 
Llico. 

RENARD, a small river of the province and 
colony of Nova Scotia in N. America. It runs 
n. and enters the mouth of the St. Lawrence, op 
posite the island of Anticosti. 

RENARD, another, also small, in Canada. 
RENARD, an island, near the e. coast of Lake 
Ontario ; at the entrance of the Bay of Nioure. 

RENARDS, Islands of the N. Sea, near the 
coast of the province of Sagadahock in N. Ame 
rica. They are many, all small, and lie at the 
entrance of the Bay of Penobscot. 

RENCA,a settlement of the province and cor 
regimiento of Santiago in the kingdom of Chile. 
In its church is venerated a miraculous image of 
Santo Christo del Espino ; which was found by 
an Indian in a thicket of espinos, or thorns. It 
was growing naturally amongst the other thorns, 
and, although green, was a perfect crucifix, with 
the figure of a man stretched upon it. The dis 
trict, in which it was found, was of the curacy of 
San Pedro de Limachi in the province of Quil- 
lota ; but it was brought to this of Renca, where 
particular devotion was paid it until 1729, when 
the chapel was burnt, together with part of the 
effigy, but which damage was afterwards re 
paired. 

RENCA, another settlement, in the province 
and corregimiento of Cuyo in the same kingdom ; 
thus called as having in its church another image 
of Christ, made in imitation of that mentioned in 
the former article. It has four vice-parishes, and 
is n. of the city of San Luis de Loyola. 

RENCO, a settlement of the province and cor- 
regimiento of Santiago, in the same kingdom as 
the former ; near the shore of the river Ma- 
pocho. 

[RENOWE S Harbour, on the e. coast of 
Newfoundland Island, is about 21 miles from 
Cape Race. Its entrance is rather dangerous. 



R E R 

but it is a good harbour to fish in ; and is much 
frequented by boats and shallops in the fishing 
season. Half a league from the *. point is a 
high rock, called Renowe s Point; which may 
be seen, in a clear day, three leagues off.] 

[RENSSELAER, a county of the State of 
New York ; bounded n. by Washington County, 
s. by Columbia, e. by part of the States of Mas 
sachusetts and Vermont, and w. by Hudson s 
River. It contains eight townships, viz. Troy, 
Greenbush, Schodack, Stephentown, Petersburg, 
Hosick, Pittstown, and Schactecoke. In 1796, 
there were 3500 of the inhabitants qualified elec 
tors.] 

[RENSSELAERVILLE, or RENSELAER- 
WICK, a township of Albany County, New York ; 
bounded s. by Columbia County, and w. by Hud 
son s River. In 1790, it contained 2771 inhabi 
tants ; in 1796 it had 548 inhabitants who were 
electors. In this town, nearly opposite to the 
city of Albany, is a medicinal spring, which com 
bines most of the valuable properties of the cele 
brated waters of Saratoga.] 

REPENTIGNI, a settlement of the French, 
in Canada ; on the shore of the river St. Law 
rence ; near the mouth of the river of La Asun 
cion. 

REPqCURA, a small district of the kingdom 
of Chile in the ancient division ; now confounded 
in the actual division of the provinces. 
REPULSE. See WALES, North. 
REQUAI, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Sana, in the same kingdom as 
the former. 

REQUEN, a settlement in the island of Laxa, 
in the kingdom of Chile ; on the shore of the river 
Huequen. 

RERE, or REDE, a province and corregimi 
ento of the kingdom of Chile ; bounded w. by 
the province of Puchacay, n. by that of Itata, 
and s.e. by the district oi the island of Laxa. It 
is very fertile and of rich soil, but has scarcely 
any settlements, all its population residing in 
country estates, in which the masters of the same 
reside. The principal of these estates are, Tal- 
camo, Tomeco, Joyague, Pachagua, Chancal, 
Perigallos, Lucas, Palinco, and Gomero. To 
this province is given also the name of Estancia 
del Rey. [The existence of this province is very 
doubtful.] 

RERITIVA, a village and settlement of the 
province an A. captainship of Espiritu Santo in 
Brazil. Fourteen leagues from the capital ; where 
the Jesuits had a small college or house of resi 
dence, in which died the Father P. Josef de An- 



KEY 

cheta, an old inhabitant of the place, and a man 
of great apostolic virtues. 

[RESOLUTION Bay, or MADRE DE Dios, 
is under the highest land on the w. side of St. 
Christina ; one of the Marquesas Islands. Lat. 
9 52 s. Long-. 139 9 o&amp;gt;.] 

[RESOLUTION, Cape, near the e. entrance of 
Hudson s Straits. Lat. 61 29 n. Long. 65 
16 a?.] 

[RESOLUTION Island, at the e. end of Hud 
son s Straits. Lat. 62 n. Long. 65 w.~] 

[RESOLUTION Island, a small island, one of 
the Society Isles ; so called from the ship Reso 
lution. Lat. 17 24 s. Long. 141 15 o&amp;gt;.] 

RESTINGA, DE LA COSTA, a shoal of sand 
and rocks of the river Plata, near the n. shore, 
and w. of the real of S. Carlos. 

RETARULENT, S. ANTONIO DE, a settle 
ment of the province and alcaldia mayor of Suchi- 
tepeque in the kingdom of Guatemala. It is a 
head settlement of the district, and contains 560 
Indians. 

RETARULENT, another settlement, in the same 
province and kingdom, with the dedicatory title 
of Santa Catalina, to distinguish it from the 
former. It contains 180 Indians of various na 
tions, who speak the Kichel, Mam, Lacandon, 
and Mexican idioms ; and was formerly a curacy 
of the religious of the order of Nuestra Senora 
de la Merced. 

RETARULENT, another, also of the same pro 
vince and kingdom, with the dedicatory title of 
Santo Domingo ; annexed to the curacy of the 
settlement of Zamaya. It contains 900 Indians. 

RETE, a small river of the province of Mary 
land in N.America. 

RETIRO, a settlement of the government of 
Neiba, in the Nuevo Reyno de Granada, on the 
shore of the grand river Magdalena. It is very 
small, its inhabitants not exceeding 40 Indians 
and 20 whites, whose traffic is in collecting the 
gold from the lavaderos, which are in abundance 
in its district. Ten leagues from its capital. 

RETIRO, another, of the province and govern 
ment of Cartagena ; near the river Cauca, and 
two leagues from the town of Mompox. 

[REVELS, a small island in the Atlantic 
Ocean, close to the e. coast of Northampton 
County, Virginia.] 

REVERS, a small port on the s. coast of 
Newfoundland, in the extremity which looks to 
the a). 

REXBURY, a city of the province of Mary 
land. 

[REY, Cape, or Point, on the n. coast of S. 

VOL. IV. 



REY 



32! 



America, is 40 leagues w. by w. of Cape Tres 
Puntas, and is n. by e. of Boca del Drago.] 

[REY, a captainship of Brazil. See SERGIPE 
DEL REY J 

REYES, a city of the province and govern 
ment of Santa Marta in the Nuevo Reyno de 
Granada : founded in the valley of Upar to the 
n. and on the shore of the river Guatopori, by 
Captain Miguel de Santa Ana in 1 550, by order 
of the president Miguel Diez de Armendariz. 
To the s. is the river S. Sebastian, which is after 
wards called Cesar ; and this, with many other 
streams of its district, renders it fertile, and 
abounding in vegetable productions and pastures^ 
in which there are large breeds of cattle. 

It abounds equally in mines of silver, copper, 
and lead, and has a good parish-church, and a 
convent of religious of St. Domingo ; but is very 
much reduced and poor, although not without 
some families of distinction. In the mountains 
of its vicinity, to the n. and to the e. dwell some 
barbarian and ferocious Indian nations. It is of 
a very hot and sickly climate ; and is 72 miles s. 
from Santa Marta, and 108 from the Ciudad del 
Hacha, in lat. 10 6 n. and long. 73 50" w. 

REYES, another city, with the dedicatory title 
of S. Sebastian, in the province and government 
of Venezuela, and in the same kingdom as the 
former : founded by Sebastian Diaz in 1584. It 
is of an hot temperature, and its territory yields 
much cacao, which, under the name of orituco, 
passes for the best of that kingdom, and is in 
singular estimation ; some tobacco and zarzapa- 
rilla ; from which productions, and from an infi 
nite breed of neat cattle, the inhabitants carry on 
a lucrative trade. It has a convent of the reli 
gious of S. Francisco ; and whilst it.is greatly in 
fested with venomous snakes, it has a mineral, 
which, dissolved in water, is a perfect antidote 
against their poison. [Forty miles s. s. w. from 
Caracas, in lat. 9 57 n. and long. 67 19 wJ] 

REYES, a settlement of the head settlement of 
the district of Tlapacoya and alcaldm mayor of 
Quatro Villas in Nueva Espana. It contains 
123 families of Indians, who cultivate some co 
chineal, seeds, and fruits, and cut certain woods, 
in which they trade. A little more than two 
leagues n. w. of its head settlement. 

REYES, another, of the province and govern 
ment of Moxos in the kingdom of Quito ; on the 
shore of the river Beni, between this river and 
the cordillera, which runs following its course. 

REYES, another, of the province and govern 
ment of Sonora in Nueva Espana ; in the coun 
try of the Solaipuris Indians, on the shore of a 
T T 



322 



R E Z 



river, and near the settlement of S. Felipe de 
Guevavi. 

REYES, another, of the kingdom of New 
Mexico; in the country of the Quiquimas In 
dians, at the mouth of the grand river Colorado, 
or of the North, by the side of California. 

REYES, another, of the head settlement of the 
district of Acazinco, and alcaldia mayor of Te- 
peaca in Nueva Espana. It contains 258 fami- x 
lies of Indians, who maintain themselves by the 
fruits and herbs which they cultivate in 28 agri 
cultural estates of the district. It has a magni 
ficent temple, dedicated to Nuestra Senora de los 
Dolores ; the painting of which, above 130 years 
old, is venerated with particular devotion. Two 
leagues from its head settlement. 

KEYES, another, of the head settlement and 
alcaldia mayor of Cholula in the same kingdom. 
It contains 46 families of Indians, and is a little 
more than a league s. of its capital. 

REYES, another, of the head settlement of 
Xonotla, and alcaldia mayor of Tetela in the 
same kingdom. Two leagues s. w. of its head 
settlement. 

REYES, another, with the dedicatory title of 
San Andres, in the head settlement of Copala, 
and alcaldia mayor of Tepozcolula in the same 
kingdom. It is of a cold temperature, contains 
66 families of Indians, and is 13 leagues s. of its 
capital. 

KEYES, another, of the head settlement, and 
alcaldia mayor of Periban in the same kingdom. 
It contains 53 families of Spaniards, Mustees^ and 
Mulattoes, and 22 Indians. One league from its 
capital. 

REYES, another, of the head settlement of the 
district of Papalotipac, and alcaldia mayor of Cui- 
catlan in the same kingdom. Two leagues s. of 
its head settlement. 

REYES, another, a small settlement or ward, 
united to that of Tequiszitlan, in the alcaldia 
mayor of Theotihuacan of the same kingdom. 

REYES, another, of the province and corregi- 
miento of Tarma in Peru. 

REYES, a small island near the coast, which 
lies between the river Plata and the Straits of 
Magellan ; in lat. 48 s. between Cape Lookout, 
and Port Deseado. 

REYES, a river of the province and govern 
ment of Tucuman in Peru, of the district and 
jurisdiction of the city of Xuxuy, which runs e. 
for many leagues. 

REZON Cape, or point of land, of the c. head 
of the island St. Domingo ; one of those forming 
the great Bay of Samana., 



R H O 

[RHINEBECK. See RHYNBECK.] 
[RHODE ISLAND, is one of the smallest of 
the United States ; its greatest length being 43 
miles, and its greatest breadth 39 ; or about 1300 
square miles. It is bounded n. and e. by the 
commonwealth of Massachusetts, 5. by the At 
lantic Ocean, and w. by Connecticut. These li 
mits comprehend what is called Rhode Island and 
Providence Plantations ; divided into five coun 
ties, viz. Newport, Providence, Washington, 
Bristol, and Kent, which are subdivided into 30 
townships ; the number of inhabitants of which, 
viz. in Rhode Island and Providence Planta 
tions, was in the year 

1730, 15,352 whites, 2633 blacks. 

1748, 29,755 do. 4373 do. 

1761, 35,939 do. 4697 do. 

1774, 54,435 do. 5243 do. 

1783, 48,538 do. 3361 do. 

1790, 67,877 do. 948 do. 
And by the census of 1810, the total population 
of this state amounted to 76,931 souls. .-* 

Narraganset Bay makes up from s. to n. be 
tween the main land on the e. and w. and em 
bosoms many fertile islands, the principal of which 
are Rhode Island, Canonnicut, Prudence, Pa 
tience, Hope, Dyer s, and Hog Islands. Block 
Island is the southernmost land belonging to the 
state. The harbours are, Newport, Providence,. 
Wickford, Patuxet, Warren, and Bristol. 

Rhode Island, from which the state takes half 
its name, lies between lat. 41 22 , and 41 35 n. 
and between long. 71 8 and 71 20 w. from 
Greenwich ; being about 13 miles long from n. e. 
to s. w., and about 3| broad, on an average. It 
is divided into three townships, Newport, Ports 
mouth, and Middletown. Perhaps no island in 
the world exceeds this in point of soil, climate, 
and situation. In its most flourishing state it 
was called by travellers, the Eden of America. 
But the change which the ravages of war, and a 
decrease of business, have effected, is great. Be 
tween 30,000 and 40,000 sheep are fed on this 
island, besides neat cattle and horses. The state 
is intersected in all directions by rivers ; the chief 
of which are Providence and Taunton rivers, 
which fall into Narraganset Bay ; the former on 
the w. the latter on the e. side of Rhode Island. 
Rhode Island is as healthy a country as any in 
America. The winters in the maritime parts of 
the state are milder than in the inland country ; 
the air being softened by a sea-vapour, which also 
enriches the soil. The summers are delightful, 
especially on Rhode Island, where the extreme 
heats which prevail in other parts of America, 



RHODE ISLAND. 



323 



are allayed by cool and refreshing breezes from 
the sea. The rivers and bays swarm with fish, 
to the amount of more than 70 different kinds ; 
the markets are alive with them. Oysters, lob 
sters, and other shell-fish, abound in Narragan- 
set Bay. Travellers are generally agreed, that 
Newport is the best fish-market in the world. 
This state produces corn, rye, barley, oats, and 
in some parts wheats, sufficient for home con 
sumption ; and the various kinds of grasses, 
fruits, and culinary roots and plants in great 
abundance, and in perfection ; cider is made for 
exportation. 

The n, w. parts of the state are but thinly in 
habited, and are more rocky and barren than the 
other parts. The tract of land lying between 
N. and S. Kingston on the e. and Connecticut 
on the w. called Shannock Country, or Purchase, 
is excellent grazing land, and is inhabited by a 
number of wealthy farmers, who raise some of 
the finest neat cattle in New England, weighing 
from 1600 to 1800 weight. They keep large dai 
ries, and make butter and cheese of the best qua 
lity, and in large quantities for exportation. 
Iron ore is found in great plenty in several parts 
of the state. The iron works on Patuxent River, 
12 miles from Providence, are supplied with ore 
from a bed 4-f- miles distant, which lies in a 
valley, through which runs a brook. The brook 
is turned into a new channel, and the ore pits are 
cleared of water by a steam engine. At this ore- 
bed are a variety of ores, curious stones, and 
ochres. 

In the township of Cumberland is a copper- 
mine mixed with iron, strongly impregnated with 
load-stone, of which some large pieces have been 
found in the neighbourhood. No method has 
yet been discovered to work it to advantage. 
Abundance of lime-stone is found in this state, 
particularly in the county of Providence ; of which 
large quantities of lime are made and exported. 
This lime-stone is of different colours, and is the 
true marble of the white, plain, and variegated 
kind. It takes as fine a polish as any stone in 
America. There are several mineral springs in 
this state ; to one of which, near Providence, 
many people resort to bathe and drink the 
water. 

Newport and Providence are the chief towns 
of this state. The town of Bristol carries on a 
considerable trade to Africa, the W. Indies, and 
to different parts of the United States. But by 
far the greatest part of the commerce of Rhode 
Island, is at present carried on by the inhabitants 
of the flourishing town of Providence, which had, 



in 1791, 129 sail of vessels, containing 11,942 
tons. 

The exports from the state are flax-seed, 
lumber, horses, cattle, beef, pork, fish, poultry, 
onions, butter, cheese, barley, grain, spirits, cot 
ton and linen goods. The imports consist of 
European and W. India goods, and logwood from 
the Bay of Honduras. Upwards of 600 vessels 
enter and clear annually at the different ports in 
the state. The amount of exports from this state 
to foreign countries, for one year, ending Sep 
tember 30, 1791, was 407,131 dollars, 9 cents ; 
in 1792, 698,084; in 1793, 616,416; and in 
1794, 954,573 dollars. The inhabitants of this 
state are progressing rapidly in manufactures. A 
cotton manufactory has been erected at Provi 
dence. Jeans, fustians, denims, thicksetts, vel 
vets, &amp;c. &amp;c. are here manufactured and sent to 
the S. States. Large quantities of linen and tow 
cloth are made in different parts of this state for 
exportation. But the most considerable manu 
factures in this state are those of iron ; such as 
bar and sheet iron, steel, nail-rods, and nails, 
implements of husbandry, stoves, pots, and other 
household utensils, the iron-work of shipping, 
anchors, bells, &amp;c. 

The constitution of this state is founded on the 
charter granted by Charles II. in 1663 ; and the 
frame of government was not essentially altered 
by the revolution. The legislature of the state 
consists of two branches ; a senate or upper 
house, composed of 10 members, besides the go 
vernor and deputy-governor, called in the char 
ter, assistants; and a house of representatives, 
composed of deputies from the several towns. 
The members of the legislature are chosen twice 
a year ; and there are two sessions of this body 
annually, viz. on the first Wednesday in May, 
and the last Wednesday in October. 

This state was first settled from Massachusetts. 
Mr. Roger Williams, a minister, who came over 
to New England in 1631, was charged with 
holding a variety of errors, and was on that 
account forced to leave his house, land, w r ife, 
and children, at Salem, in the dead of winter, 
and to seek a residence without the limits of Mas 
sachusetts. Governor Winthrop advised him to 
pursue his course to Nehiganset, or Narragan- 
set Bay, which he did, and fixed himself at Se- 
cunk, or Seekhonk, now Rehoboth. But that 
place being within the bounds of Plymouth Co 
lony, Governor Winslow, in a friendly manner, 
advised him to remove to the other side of the 
river, where the lands were not covered by any 
patent. Accordingly, in 1636, Mr, Williams and 

T T 2 



324 



R 1 A 



four others, crossed Seekhonk River, and landed 
among the Indians, by whom they were hospi 
tably received, and thus laid the foundation of a 
town, which, from a sense of God s merciful pro 
vidence to him, he called Providence. Here he 
was soon after joined by a number of others, and 
though they were secured from the Indians by 
the terror of the English, yet they, for a con 
siderable time, suffered much from fatigue and 
want ; but they enjoyed liberty of conscience, 
which has ever since been inviolably maintained 
in this state. So little has the civil authority to 
do with religion here, that no contract between 

* i 

a minister and a society (unless incorporated for 
that purpose) is of any force. It is probably for 
these reasons, that so many different sects have 
ever been found here ; and that the Sabbath and 
all religious institutions, have been more neg 
lected in this, than in any other of the New Eng 
land states.] 

[RHODE ISLAND Light-house was erected in 
1749, in Beaver Tail, at the s. end of Canonni- 
cut Island, for the safety and convenience of ves 
sels sailing into the Narraganset Bay and harbour 
of Newport. The ground the light-house stands 
upon is about 12 feet above the surface of the sea 
at high water. From the ground to the top of 
the cornice is 58 feet, round which is a gallery, 
and within that stands the lantern, which is about 
1 1 feet high, and eight feet diameter. High water 
at full and change, 37 after seven o clock. Lat. 
41 22 n. Long. 71 20" .] 

[RHODE River, the westernmost water of the 
%. w. branch of Cape Fear River, in N. Caro 
lina.] 

[RHONDE. See RONDE.] 

[RHYNBECK, or RHINEBECK, a post-town 
of New York ; situate in Dutchess County, on 
the e. side of Hudson s River, opposite to Kings 
ton ; 15 miles n. of Poughkeepsie ; 76 n. of New 
York, and 137 n. n. e. of Philadelphia. The 
township contains 3662 inhabitants, of whom 542 
are electors, and 421 slaves. It is bounded s. by 
Clinton, and n. by Beekman. A very curious 
cavern has been lately discovered at a place in 
this town, called by the Indians, Sepascot. See 
DUTCHESS County.] 

RIACA, a lake of the province and govern 
ment ofCumana ; nearly close to the river Huare, 
communicating with it by the w. side. 

RIACHUCO, a small river of the province 
and government of Buenos Ayres ; which runs n. 
and enters the Plata, opposite the capital. 

RIACHUELO, a small river of the same pro- 
Tince and government as the former. It runs 



R I C 

w. and enters the Plata, opposite the city of 
Corrientes. 

[RIALEXA, or RIALENO. See REALEJO.] 

KIAY, a river of the province and govern 
ment of Paraguay ; which runs w. collecting the 
waters of many others, and enters the Yucay. 

RIBACAICO, a settlement of the province 
and corregimiento of Parinacochas in Peru ; an 
nexed to the curacy of the settlement of Lampa. 

RIBERA, SAN MIGUEL, DE, a settlement of 
Peru ; situate in the llanura of Camana, of the 
corregimienlo of Cuzco. It is of a mild and salu 
tary climate, inhabited by families of distinction. 

RIBERO, a settlement of the province and 
captainship of Paraiba in Brazil ; on the coast, 
between the river Grama and the capital Pa 
raiba. 

RIBERO, a creek on the coast of the province 
and corregimiento of Quillota in the kingdom of 
Chile ; between the river Quillota, and the point 
of Siete Hermanas, or Seven Sisters. 

RICA- VILLA, a city of the province of Mar- 
quina in the kingdom of Chile, near the chan 
nel or waste-water of the Lake Mallabauquen in 
the zo. part. It is of a cold but healthy tempera 
ture. Its territory extends eight leagues towards 
Imperial, and is bounded by the barbarous na 
tion of the Puelches, has very beautiful and fer 
tile llanuras, and in these are found the celebrated 
pines of Libanon. It was founded by Pedro de 
Valdiva in 1551 ; and was taken and sacked by 
the Araucanos Indians in 1559. It is inhabited 
by many illustrious, though poor, families de 
scended from the first conquerors. [Sixty-six 
miles e. s. e. from the city of Imperial, and the 
same from the Pacific Sea ; 51 from the volcano 
of Villarica in the cordillera of the Andes, and 
G6 n. e. of the city of Valdivia, in lat. 39 9 s. 
and long. 72 S w.~] 

RICA-VILLA, another town, in the kingdom 
of Brazil, at the source of the river S.Francisco, 
near the town Mariana to the w. 

RICA-VILLA, an island of the province and 
country of Las Amazonas, in the territory pos 
sessed by the Portuguese. It is in the river 
Maraiion, and formed by this .river, the Negro 
and the Romacucha, which is an arm or waste- 
water of the second. 

[RICARAS, Indians of N. America, the re 
mains of 10 large tribes of the Panias, who have 
been reduced by the small-pox, and the Sioux, to 
the present number. They live in fortified vil 
lages, and hunt immediately in their neighbour 
hood. The country around them, in every di 
rection, for several hundred miles, is entirely 



R I C 

bare of timber, except on the water courses and 
steep declivities of hills, where it is sheltered from 
the ravages of fire. The land is tolerably well 
watered, and lies well for cultivation. The re 
mains of the villages of these people are to be 
seen on many parts of the Missouri, from the 
mouth of Tetone River to the Mandans. They 
claim no land except that on which their villages 
stand, and the fields which they cultivate. The 
Tetons claim the country around them. Though 
they are the oldest inhabitants, they may pro 
perly be considered the farmers or tenants at 
will of that lawless, savage, and rapacious race, 
the Sioux Teton, who rob them of their horses,- 
plunder their gardens and fields, and sometimes 
murder them, without opposition. If these peo 
ple were freed from the oppression of the Tetons, 
their trade would increase rapidly, and might be 
extended to a considerable amount. They main 
tain a partial trade with their oppressors, the 
Tetons, to whom they barter horses, mules, corn, 
beans, and a species of tobacco which they culti 
vate ; and receive in return gums, ammunition, 
kettles, axes, and other articles which the Tetons 
obtained from the Yanktons of the n. and Sissa- 
tones, who trade with Mr. Cammeron, on the 
river St. Peters. These horses and mules the 
Ricaras obtain from their western neighbours, 
who visit them frequently for the purpose of traf- 
cki ng J 

RICE, a settlement of the island of Barba- 
does. 

RICH, a settlement of the same island as the 
former, in the district of the parish of S. Jorge. 

RICHARDOS, a settlement of the island of 
Barbadoes, in the district of the parish of S. Jo 
seph, on the w. coast. 

[RICHARDSON S Bay, on the s. e. part of 
the island of Jamaica. The anchorage within it 
is between Morant River and Two Mile Wood.] 

RICHE, a point of the w. coast of Newfound 
land, at the entrance of the Strait of Bellisle, by 
the Gulf of St. Lawrence, where, by the treaty 
of the peace of Utrecht, were established the li 
mits of the cod fishery to the French ; the same 
limits extending as far as the Cape Buena Vista 
to the n. 

[RICHFIELD, a township of New York; 
situate in Otsego County, taken from Otsego 
Township, and incorporated in 1792 ; 229 of its 
inhabitants are electors.] 

[RICHFORD, the n. easternmost township 
of Franklin County, Vermont; on Missisconi 
River.] 



R I C 



325 



RICHIBOUCTOU, a small river of Nova 
Scotia or Acadia ; which runs e. and enters the 
sea on the coast of this rhumb at the entrance 
of the strait formed by the island S. Joseph. 

RICHILIEU. Some islands of the river St. 
Lawrence in N.America; 12 leagues from the 
city of Three Rivers, and where the government 
of Montreal begins. They are nearly 100, form 
ing a kind of Archipelago, which serves as a 
retiring place to the Indian savages. It abounds 
greatly in game, and especially in foxes, the 
chase of which animals commences about April : 
in lat. 42 22 n. long. 71 J w. 

RICHILIEU, a small fort built by the French 
on the n. shore of the river Sorrel at its entrance 
into the St. Lawrence, opposite the island of 
which we made mention in the former article. 

[HIGHLAND, a county of S. Carolina, Cam- 
den district ; bounded s. and s. w. by Congaree 
and Broad Rivers, and e. by Wateree River, which 
divides it from Kershaw and Clermont Counties. 
It contained, in 1792, 3930 inhabitants, of whom 
2479 were white, and 1437 were slaves.] 

[RicH LAND, a township of Pennsylvania, in 
Buck s County.] 

[RICHLIEU, the French name given for 
merly to the outlet of Lake Champlain. See 
SOREL.] 

[RICHMAN S Island, on the coast of Cum 
berland County, district of Maine, about n. four 
leagues from Wood Island, and a league w. of 
Portland. Few vessels put in here, except 
coasters. There is a sunken ledge s. e. half a 
mile from the n. e. end of the island, which only 
shows itself when the wind blows fresh ; but you 
need not go so near the island.] 

[RICHMOND, a township on the w. line of 
the state of Massachusetts, in Berkshire County, 
17 miles w. by s. of Lenox, and 101 miles w. of 
Boston. Iron ore of the first quality is found 
here, but as it lies deep it is raised at a great 
expense. Ore of indifferent quality is found in 
many places. It abounds with lime-stone, coarse, 
white, and clouded marble. The town was in 
corporated in 1775, and contains an iron-work, 
three grist-mills, a fulling-mill, two saw-mills, 
and 1255 inhabitants.] 

[RICHMOND, a township of Cheshire County, 
New Hampshire ; situate on the Massachusetts 
line, about 11 miles e. of Connecticut River, and 
70 W-. by s. of Portsmouth. It was incorporated 
in 1752, and contains 1380 inhabitants.] 

[RICHMOND, a township inWashington County, 
Rhode Island, separated from Hopkmton on th*&amp;gt; 



326 



R I C 



w. by Ward s River, a branch of Paucatuck River. 
It is about 19 miles w. of Newport, and contains 
1760 inhabitants.] 

[RICHMOND, a county of New York, compre 
hending all Staten Island, Shooter s Island, and 
the islands of Meadow, on the w. side thereof. 
It is divided into the townships of Castletown, 
Northfield, Southfield, and Westfield. It con 
tains 3835 inhabitants ; of whom 488 are electors, 
and 759 slaves. See STATEN ISLAND.] 

[RICHMOND, a county of N. Carolina, situate 
in Fayette district, bounded s. by the state of 
S. Carolina, and n. by Moore County. It con 
tains 5055 inhabitants, including 583 slaves. 
Chief town, Rockingham. The court-house, at 
which a post-office is kept, is 20 miles from An- 
son court-house, 56 from Fayetteville, and 563 
from Philadelphia.] 

[RICHMOND, a county of Virginia, bounded 
n. and n. e. by Westmoreland, and s. and s. w. by 
Rappahannock River, which separates it from 
Essex County. It contains 6985 inhabitants, of 
whom 3984 are slaves. The court-house, where 
a post-office is kept, is 273 miles from Phila 
delphia.] 

[RICHMOND, the present seat of government 
of the state of Virginia, is situate in Henrico 
County, on the n. side of James s River, just at 
the foot of the falls, and contains between 400 
and 500 houses, and nearly 4000 inhabitants. 
Part of the houses are built on the margin of the 
river, convenient for business ; the rest are upon 
a hill which overlooks the lower part of the 
town, and commands an extensive prospect of 
the river and adjacent country. The new houses 
are well built. A large state-house, or capitol, 
has lately been erected on the hill. This city 
likewise boasts of an elegant statue of the illus 
trious Washington, which was formed at Paris. 
The lower part of the town is divided by a creek, 
over which is a convenient bridge. A bridge 
between 300 and 400 yards in length has been 
thrown across James s River, at the foot of the 
fall, by Colonel Mayo. That part from Man 
chester to the island is built on 15 boats. From 
the island to the rocks was formerly a floating 
bridge of rafts ; but the enterprising proprietor 
has now built it of framed log piers, filled with 
stones. From the rocks to the landing at Rich 
mond, the bridge is continued on framed piers 
filled with stones. The bridge connects the city 
with Manchester; and as the passengers pay toll, 
it produces a handsome revenue to Colonel Mayo, 
who is the sole proprietor. The public buildings. 



RID 

besides the state-house, are an episcopal church, 
a court-house, gaol, a theatre, and three tobacco 
warehouses. The falls above the bridge are 
seven miles in length. A noble canal is cutting, 
and nearly completed, on the n. side of the river, 
which is to terminate in a basin of about two 
acres, in the town of Richmond. From this 
basin to the wharfs in the river will be a land 
carriage of about a mile. The expense is esti 
mated at 30,000 Virginia currency. The open 
ing of this canal promises the addition of much 
wealth to Richmond. Vessels of burden lie at 
City Point, 20 miles below, to which the goods 
from Richmond are sent down in boats. It is 
626 miles from Boston, 374 from New York, 176 
from Baltimore, 278 from Philadelphia, 247 from 
Fayetteville, 497 from Charleston, and 662 from 
Savannah. The above distances are in English 
miles, and include the turnings of the roads 
Lat. 37 36 n. long. 77 41 w.\ 

[RICHMOND, a county of the upper district of 
Georgia, in which is situate the city of Augusta. 
It is separated from S. Carolina on the e. by Sa 
vannah River, and contains 11,317 inhabitants, of 
whom 4116 are slaves.] 

[RICHMOND, a town of the island of St. Vin 
cent s, in the West Indies. It is seated at the 
head of a deep bay, on the w. side of the island. 
Chateaubelair River runs on the s. side of the 
town, which gives name to the bay. Another 
river empties into the bay on the n. side of the 
town.] 

RICRAN, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Xauja in Peru, annexed to the 
curacy of its capital. 

RICUDO, a small river of the province and 
captainship of Portoseguro in Brazil. It rises 
near the sources of the Paracatus and the Grande 
de S. Francisco, runs n. n. e., and enters the se 
cond of the aforesaid rivers. 

RIDEAU, a small river of the province and 
country of the Iroquees Indians ; which runs n. e. 
between the Mataovachie and the Petite Riviere, 
and enters the Utaway. 

RIDDER, Bay of, or CANAL OF THE COM 
PANY ; in the s. coast of the Strait of Magellan, 
formed by the island of Luis el Grande and an 
other island which is smaller. 

[RIDGEFIELD, a post-town of Connecticut, 
in Fairfield County, 10 miles s. w. of Danbury, 
40 s. w. of Hartford, 46 n. e. of New York, and 
113 n. e. of Philadelphia. The township of 
Ridgefield was called by the Indians Caudotowa, 
or High Land. It well answers the name, for 



R I N 

though it is 14 miles from the Sound, it affords 
a good prospect of it, and of Long- Island. Of 
the latter, 40 miles in length is visible, and ves 
sels may be seen as they pass up the Sound. It 
was settled in 1709.] 

[RIDLEY, a township in Delaware County, 
Pennsylvania.] 

RIGAUD, a port of the S. Sea, in the island 
of Cape Breton ; between the islands of Heron 
and of S. Esprit. 

[RIGO Island, near the n. w. part of the island 
of Porto Rico, in the W. Indies, behind which 
is the principal harbour of the main island.] 

RIMAC, a river of the province and corregi- 
miento of Guarochiri in Peru : which rises in the 
mountains of that province, runs w. and irrigates 
a delightful llanura, to which it gives name, and 
on which was founded, on its shore, the city of 
Lima, the capital of Peru. It has over it a fine 
bridge, which was built by command of the 
viceroy, the Marquis of Montesclaros, in 1609. 
The Indians had here, in the time of their gen- 
tilism, a rich temple, dedicated to one of their 
principal idols. The Rimac flows into the Pa 
cific Sea in lat. 12 2 s. 

RIMACHUMA, a large lake of the province 
and government of Mainas in the kingdom of 
Quito, and in the woods to the w. of the river 
Pastaza or Pastaca. It is 19 miles long from n. 
to s. and six wide from e. to w. It is entered by 
the s. by the river Apischi, and by the n. w. by 
the Chillay. It has a channel of 10 miles long, 
by which it empties itself on the w. side, into the 
river Pastaza or Pastaca, in lat. 4 11 s. 

RINCAN, a settlement of the kingdom of 
Chile, in the valley of Linache ; where, in 1736, 
was discovered a tree of the figure of a cross, 22 
feet high and 15 wide at the arms ; the same 
bearing upon it, in relievo, the figure of Christ : 
and it was taken away and placed in the settle 
ment of Renca, where we have made mention 
of this prodigy. 

RINCON, S. MATEO DEL, a principal and 
head settlement of the district of the alcaldia 
mayor of Maravatio, in the bishopric of Mecho- 
acan and kingdom of Nueva Espana. It con 
tains a convent of religious of S. Francisco, 10 
families of Spaniards, and 311 of Indians ; and is 
w. of its capital. 

RINCON, another settlement, with the dedi 
catory title of S. Francisco ; in the head settle 
ment of the district and alcaldia mayor of Leon. 
It contains 335 families of Indians, 169 of Spa 
niards, 43 of Mustees and Mulattoes ; produces 



RIO 



327 



wheat, maize, fruit, and seed, and is four leagues 
s. w. of its capital. 

RINCON, another, of the province and govern 
ment of Cumami, in Nueva Andalucia ; on the 
w. coast of the Gulf Triste. 

RINCON, another, of the province and govern 
ment of Santa Marta in the same kingdom as the 
former, and of the district of the Rio del Hacha. 

RINCON, another, with the dedicatory title of 
S. Pedro, in the province and government of 
Buenos Ayres ; where there is a convent of Re- 
coletans of S. Francisco, situate in a ravine. 

RINCONADA, a settlement of the head set 
tlement of the district of Cotazta, and alcaldia 
mayor of Tuxtla in Nueva Espana. It contains 
35 families of Indians, and is in the vicinity of 
its head settlement. 

RINCONADA, another settlement, in the juris 
diction of the town of Pedraza of the Nuevo 
Reyno de Granada. It is very reduced and poor, 
as containing only 50 Indians. 

RINCONADA, another, of the province and 
corregimicnto of Cercado in Peru, annexed to the 
curacy of the settlement of Late. 

[RINDGE, or RINGE, a town in the county 
of Cheshire, New Hampshire. It lies upon the 
Massachusetts line, about 80 miles w. of Ports 
mouth, and 70 n. w. of Boston. Was incorpo 
rated in 1768. In 1775, it contained 542, and 
in 1790, 1143 inhabitants. In this township are 
thirteen natural ponds of water of different sizes, 
in which are pickerel, perch, trout, eels, &amp;c. In 
this township, w., is a mine lately discovered, 
which contains a kind of ochre of a Spanish 
brown. One half of the water of this town runs 
to the* Merrimack, the other to Connecticut 
River.] 

RIJN GHAM, a settlement of the province of 
Massachusetts. 

[RINGO S TOWN, in Hunterdon County, 
New Jersey, lies about about 15 miles n. w. of 
Princeton.] 

RINOGOTE, or RINOCOTTE, Sierra of, in the 
province of Spanish Guyana and captaincy of 
Caracas. It runs for many leagues from n. w. to 
s. e. ; and from it rise very many rivers, of the 
which those in the n. part enter the Carmen, and 
those of the s. the Coroni. 

RIO, S. JUAN DEL, a principal and head set 
tlement of the district of the alcaldia mayor of 
Queretaro in Nueva Espana. It contains 593 
families of Otomies Indians, and a curate wha 
teaches in this language, with two coadjutors, 
and 250 families of Spaniards, Mustees, and Mu- 



328 



lattoes. In it resides a lieutenant of the corre- 
%idor of Queretaro ; and it has a convent of re 
ligious of St. Domingo ; another of St. Juan de 
Dios, and a convent for a sisterhood of the third 
order of S. Francisco. In its district are 38 
estates, which produce sufficient wheat, maize, 
and barley, which are the principal articles of its 
commerce : 20 miles s. e. of its capital, on the 
road to Mexico. 

Rio, another, with the same dedicatory title; 
in the alcaldia mayor of Orizava and district of 
Ixtazoquitlan in the same kingdom. It contains 
213 families of Indians. 

Rio, another, in the province and corregi- 
miento of Lamas in Peru ; thus called as being" 
on the shore of the river which runs down from 
Moyobamba, and which is passed in this part by 
canoes. 

Rio, another, called Del Valle; of Santa Maria 
del Rio, in the alcaldia mayor of S. Luis de Potosi 
and kingdom of Nueva Espaiia. It is divided 
into two wards or congregations, which are dis 
tinguished by the names of Alto and Baxo ; and 
is inhabited by different nations of Indians, some 
Mexicans, and others Otomies, independent one 
of the other. It is of a benign temperature, and 
covered with gardens, which yield abundance of 
grapes and all sorts of fruit, flowers, and vege 
tables. It has a sumptuous church, a convent of 
the religious of S. Francisco, and 471 families of 
Indians of the two nations aforesaid, with the In 
dians of another settlement close by : also in the 
ranches of its district dwell 157 Spaniards, Mus- 
tees, and Mulattoes. 

Rio, another, of the province and government 
of Cumana ; on the coast and near its capital, 
on the s. side. 

RIO ANDRADE, a settlement of the pro 
vince and government of Tucuman in Peru, of 
the district and jurisdiction of the city of Cor 
doba ; on the shore and at the source of a river. 

RIOBAMBA, a province and corregimiento of 
the kingdom of Quito ; bounded n. by the province 
of Tacunga ; s. by that of Cuenca ; w. by the 
(tsiento of Chimbo, and e. by the government of 
Quixos and Macas. It is in extent 30 leagues 
from e. to a?, and 16 in width from n. to s. It is 
of a cold temperature, as well from the loftiness 
of its territory, as because it is in the vicinity of 
the mountain or paramo Chimborzu ; although 
it does not want some settlements enjoying a mo 
derate climate. 

This jurisdiction is divided into two parts; 
and in the second is a lieutenant of the corregidor 



R I O 

who resides at Ambato, the capital. It is very 
abundant in cattle ; of the wools of which the 
natives fabricate annually upwards of 1000 pieces 
of cloth, as also stockings and other manufac 
tures, by which they maintain a good trade ; and 
the wool they collect annually is reckoned at 
14,000 arrobas. It also yields much sugar-cane, 
of which a considerable portion of sugar is made, 
as also brandy ; wheat of the best quality ever 
known, maize, barley, and all kinds of fruit. 
Some few years since have been discovered some 
silver mines, which promise great riches, although 
they are not worked for want of proper energy. 
It may be said, in a few words, that nothing in 
this province is wanting that can conduce either 
to the comfort or necessaries of life. It is of an 
extremely fertile and delightful territory. It 
was well peopled by the Curuayes Indians, a very 
valorous race, and who fought a battle in the 
plain of Trocajas with Sebastian de Bclalcazar, 
to defend the entrance into their territory against 
him : and it was a long time before the dispute 
was finished. But after they were reduced to 
the dominion of the Spaniards they became a di 
ligent and laborious people. The population 
consists of 18 settlements in the district of Rio- 
bamba, and six in that of Ambato ; which are as 
follow : 

In the former. 



Calpi, 
Lican, 
Yaruquiz, 
San Luis, 
Ca jamba, 
San Andres, 
Puni, 
Chambo, 
Quimia, 



Pungala, 

Lito, 

Guano, 

Hilapo, 

Guanando, 

Penipe, 

Cubijies, 

Cevadas, 

Pallactanga. 



In the district of Ambato. 



Patate, 

Sta. Rosa de Pila- 
guin. 



I samba, 

Quisapincha, 

Quero, 

Pelileo, 

The capital is the town of the same name ; 
founded at the extremity of an extensive valley 
at the foot of the sierra, and opposite the snowy 
paramo or mountain of Chimborazo, which makes 
it of a cold but healthy temperature. It was a 
town of the Puruayes Indians, and conquered by 
the Adelantado Sebastian de Belalcazar in 1533; 
and in the following year it was begun to be set 
tled by the , Marshal Diego de Almagro. It 
abounds greatly in pastures and choice produc- 



R 1 O 



R I O 



329 



tions ; has many workshops, wherein they make 
cloths, baizes, and other woollen articles, and 
particularly stockings, which are of great estima 
tion throughout the kingdom. 

The town is large and handsome, the streets 
wide and straight, the buildings of stone and 
mortar, though the greater part low, for fear of 
earthquakes. It has, besides a parish church, 
which is magnificent, another parish, with the 
name of San Sebastian, four convents of religious 
of the orders of San Francisco, S.Domingo, San 
Agustin, and La Merced, and a college which 
belonged to the Jesuits ; also two monasteries of 
nuns ; the one of Carmelites, with the dedicatory 
title of Santa Teresa, and the other of La Con- 
cepcion, and an hospital of San Juan de Dios, 
now nearly abandoned. This town has been 
almost ruined twice by the irruptions of the vol 
cano of Cotopaxi in the years 1698 and 1746. 
It is watered by a rivulet which rises from a lake 
called Colta, which is in a llanura in the s. part, 
of a league long and f wide, and where water 
fowl is found ; moreover, its shores are covered 
with large estates, amongst which there is one 
very large, called Sisapongo. The population is 
composed of nearly 20,000 souls, with many fa 
milies of distinction ; and, indeed, the greater 
part of those established in Quito derive their 
origin from this town, or are related with one 
another; inasmuch as, from the times of the con 
quest, the most noble families of Spain settled 
at Quito, and still remain there as it were in one 
general stock, taking the most rigid precautions 
not to stain their nobility. And thus it is that 
the intermarriages are confined amongst the il 
lustrious titles of Villarvel, Velasco, Zambrano, 
Villagomez, Flores, Vallejo, Davalos, Villavi- 
censio, &amp;c. [By the census of 1802, the popula 
tion was found to amount to exactly 20,000.] 
The natives are of a docile and acute genius, 
courteous and affable. 

This town was the native place of Fr. Gaspar 
de Villaroel, of the order of S. Agustin, arch 
bishop of Chuquisaca, and a celebrated writer ; 
and of Don Gaspar de Escalona y Aguero, oidor 
of the audience of Chile, and author of the work 
entitled " Gazophylacio Regio Peruvico." In 
lat. 1 42 X 5. 

RIOBAMBA, an abundant river of the same 
province and kingdom, which rises from the pa 
ramo or mountain desert of Sisapongo, and at the 
distance of one league from the settlement of 
Puni, enters the Cevados. 

RIOBARA, a river of the province and cap 
tainship of Seara in Brazil, which runs n. and 

VOL. IV. 



enters the sea, between the Bay of Ubarana and 
the Cape of Corso. 

RIO BLANCO, a province and alcaldia mayor 
of the Nuevo Reyno de Leon in N. America : 
bounded s. by the real of mines of Charcas in 
Nueva Galicia, and e. by the Infidel Indians. 
Its jurisdiction comprehends the province of the 
Valle de San Antonio de los Llanos ; which was 
formerly separate from, and afterwards added to 
this. In each is a religious of the order for the spi 
ritual culture of the Indians. This province pro 
duces some seeds, and great quantities of large 
cattle, from the abundance of its pastures. For 
its security has been built a garrison, called De 
Santa Engracia. Fifty-seven miles s. s. e. of 
Monterrey, its capital. 

Rio BLANCO, SAN ANTONIO DE, a settlement 
of the province and corregimiento of Chichas and 
Tarija in Peru ; of the district and jurisdiction of 
the former, and annexed to the curacy of the 
capital. 

[Rio BUENO, in the island of Jamaica, lies 14 
miles e. of Martha Brae, where a ship may lie, 
bringing the point n. n. w. in eight or nine fa 
thoms water. The bank is steep. Eastward of 
this, four or five miles, is Dry Harbour.] 

Rio DAS CARAVELAS, SAN ANTONIO DEL, a 
town of the province and captainship of Portose- 
guro in Brazil. 

[Rio DA VALHAS. See VELHAS.] 

Rio CAR NERO, a settlement of the province 
arid government of Tucuman, in the district and 
jurisdiction of the city of Cordoba, to the n. of 
the same, and on the shore of the river. 

Rio CHICO, a settlement and real of silver- 
mines ; the capital of the province and alcaldia 
mayor of Ostimuri in Nueva Espana, on the 
shore of a moderately sized river. Its popula 
tion is reduced and poor, through the failing of 
the working of the mines. 

Rio DE CORDOBA, a settlement of the province 
and government of Tucuman in the district and 
jurisdiction of the city of Cordoba. 

Rio GRANDE, a province and captainship of 
the kingdom of Brazil, taking its name from the 
river Grande, by which it is irrigated : bounded 
by the Brasilian sea, n. by the province and cp- 
tainskip of Seara, &amp;). by the country of the Pata- 
gueyes and Tobaxares Indians, and s. by the 
province and captainship of Paraiba; and not by 
that of Itamaraca, as is erroneously asserted by 
M. la Martiniere. 

It was conquered by the Portuguese, at the ex 
pense of infinite combats and labours, from the 
Tapuyas Indians, the natives ; and was erected 
u u 



330 



RIO 



11 I O 



by the King of Portugal into a county, for Don 
Lope Hurtado, in the possession of whose house 
it at present remains. Its natives retired to the 
w. from whence they have not failed to make 
constant incursions ; so that the population of 
the province has been much lessened, and many 
of the sugar-engines destroyed. Nicolas Ro- 
sende, who was shipwrecked on its coast, and 
was saved, with 30 other Portuguese, penetrated 
the interior of this province ; searching for a 
rout by land to the other provinces. In his tra 
vels he came to the borders of a lake, so large, 
that, after many days successive travelling along 
its shore, he could not arrive at the end of it. 
From some Indians on the side of this lake 
he procured some extraordinary fine pearls, 
which they told him they found in the lake ; and 
he afterwards printed at Lisbon an account of his 
travels. Besides the above lake, known only by 
his relation, is another, from which rises the 
river Grande, and which is 20 leagues in circum 
ference ; from which also most beautiful pearls 
are extracted. 

The French gained possession of this province 
in 1601 ; but, in the following year, it was re 
taken by the Portuguese. Besides the river 
Grande, it is watered by the Cunhau, which is 
navigable. The settlements of consideration in 
it are reduced to the city of Natal, which is the 
capital, and the towns of Parandibe and Cun 
hau. 

Rio GRANDE, SAN JUAN BAPTISTA DE, a 
settlement and garrison of the province and go 
vernment of Coaguila in Nueva Espana ; on the w. 
shore of the river Grande delMorte, from whence 
it takes its title. It was founded to restrain the 
repeated insults offered by the Infidel Indians ; 
contains 55 families of Spaniards, including 33 
soldiers and corporals, and at a small distance 
from it are the missions of the religious of S. 
Francisco. Twenty-three miles e. of S. Fernando, 
and 180 n. of Monastery. 

[The latest accounts respecting this captainship 
are to be found in the work of Mr. Ma we, from 
which we shall subjoin the following extracts. 
The best port (he observes) of this captainship, 
is situated about 32 s. ; it is dangerous to enter, 
first, from its being shoal water ; and next, from 
a violent sea always running, and from the shift 
ing of the sands. Notwithstanding these incon 
veniences, there is a great trade carried on from 
this place to all the ports of Brazil, in brigs and 
small vessels, that do not draw above 10 feet 
water. After passing the bar, which is long, they 
enter into an inland sea or lagoon, of deep water, 



and navigate to the n. and w. to its head, where 
the principal river runs into it. To the s. is the 
lagoon Meni and the neutral ground, a little to 
the s. of which is the Spanish fortress of Santa 
Teresa, lately put in repair. 

The principal town is defended by many forts, 
some of which are upon islets. Since it was taken 
from the Spaniards by General Coimbra, the 
Portugueze have much strengthened it, and now 
there is a very considerable force of cavalry, 
horse-artillery, and foot soldiers ; so that at a 
short notice, with the addition of the militia, a 
body of five or 7000 men might be calculated 
upon. 

The climate is considered very fine, and the 
soil so productive, that this district may be called 
the granary of Brazil : the wheat grown here is 
shipped to all the ports on the coast where bread 
is used. Farming, however, is carried on in sa 
slovenly a manner, that the grain is always rough, 
bad skinned, and extremely foul. It is packed 
in raw hides, which are sewed up like sacks : it 
swells, and heats frequently on the passage from 
Rio Grande to the more northerly ports ; and 
often, after landing in Rio de Janeiro, it is left 
on the quay exposed for days to the rain. 

The vicinity of Rio Grande is extremely popu 
lous : in a circuit of 20 leagues, the inhabitants, 
including the troops, are estimated at 100,000. 
Their principal occupations are, the breeding of 
cattle, for which the immense tract of pasture 
land is so well calculated ; the drying and pre 
paring of hides, and the making of charque, or 
what is called, in the river Plata, jug-beef! It is 
prepared in the following manner : After the ox 
is skinned, the flesh is stripped from the bones in 
as large flakes as possible, in some degree resem 
bling sides of bacon ; it is put into hot brine, 
where it remains from 12 to 40 hours, according 
to the thickness. It is then taken out, drained, and 
dried in the sun, afterwards made up into pack 
ages that weigh about 1501bs. and shipped from 
this port to all parts of Brazil. It is a general 
article of consumption among the lower classes 
and Negroes, and is not unfrequently seen at re 
spectable tables, being in taste somewhat similar 
to hung beef. It constitutes the general food 
for the sailors, and forms part of almost every 
cargo sent out from this port. It has found its 
way to the W. Indies, where it is in great re 
quest, and has been frequently sold, during the 
war, at 9d. or a Is. per pound. The charque pre 
pared at Rio Grande is much superior to that 
brought from the river Plata. During the time 
that the English troops were in possession of] 



RIO 



R I O 



33 i 



[Monte Video, in consequence of an apprehen 
sion that the cattle might be driven away, and 
they be in want of supplies, large quantities 
were contracted for at St. Pedro, which arrived 
at Monte Video, though not wanted. They were 
afterwards shipped for the W. India market. 

The quantity of hides exported from hence is 
almost incredible ; they furnish many vessels 
with entire cargoes, which are carried to the 
northern ports, and from thence embarked for 
Europe. The annual average may be estimated 
at not less than 300,000. 

Tallow forms another considerable article of 
commerce, which in general is shipped in the 
crude state, and not refined, as in the river Plata. 
The greater part is consumed in Brazil, and the 
dealers find it preferable to refine the article on 
the spot, where they manufacture it into candles. 
It is packed in waste raw-hide packages. Some 
English settlers, disappointed in the river Plata, 
went to Rio Grande, to establish concerns for 
curing beef, refining tallow, &amp;c. which they soon 
found it necessary to abandon. 

Horns and horse-hair form an inferior branch 
of the commerce, and are shipped from this port 
in great quantities. 

The above are the staple productions of Rio 
Grande, which give employment to perhaps 100 
sail of coasters, some of which make two or three 
voyages in a year, carrying thither rum, sugar, 
tobacco, cotton, rice, mandioca, sweet-meats, 
&amp;c. Almost every vessel brings a greater or 
smaller number of Negroes, it being the practice 
at Rio de Janeiro to ship off all those who are 
ill-disposed and troublesome for Rio Grande, 
whence, if they continue refractory, they are fre 
quently sold into the neighbouring colony. 

Of European merchandise, they bring wine, 
oil, olives, glass, and a great variety of English 
commodities, particularly iron (though they 
much prefer the Swedish), baizes, coatings, stout 
woollen cloths, Manchester velverets of various 
qualities and colours, printed cottons, calicoes, 
muslins, handkerchiefs, silk, cotton, and worsted 
hosiery, hats, flannels, &amp;c. 

Sail-cloth, cordage, anchors, tar, paints, fowl 
ing-pieces, ammunition of all sorts, hardware of 
every description, particularly slaughter-knives, 
some plated ware, and fancy articles. A great 
part of the goods are conveyed upon horses into 
the interior, where they are carried from house 
to house for sale or exchange. 

During the old system, so lately as within these 
four years, a most lucrative trade was here car 
ried on with the Spaniards, who came in num 



bers, and most eagerly bought up the tobacco, 
and such of the English manufactures as could 
be transported on horseback, at great prices. 
Thus Rio Grande and its vicinity became very 
enviable situations, where considerable fortunes 
were made in a little time, as the goods bought 
were much in request, though contraband, and 
were paid for in specie. This trade, so advan 
tageous to each party, is now entirely ruined 
through the eagerness of our speculators, in 
overstocking the markets, and selling for two 
what would have been eagerly bought for six. 

The neighbourhood of the capital is an un 
pleasant place, being surrouuded with sand and 
sand-hills of no inconsiderable size, formed by 
the wind blowing the sand in heaps in various 
directions, which become half indurated, and 
appear stratified. The excessively high winds, 
which frequently prevail, blow the sand so as to 
be very disagreeable, as it enters every part of 
the house. 

The cattle bred in this captainship are very 
numerous, and large herds are brought hither 
from the Spanish frontiers. 

The large river Uruguay rises in this captain- 
ship, and empties itself into the river Plata, a 
little above Buenos Ayres : there are numerous 
others of less consquence, the banks of which 
are well stored with wood. Some attempts were 
lately made, by miners sent from Villa Rica, to 
work gold-washings. In the neighbourhood of 
the capital they have some coal. A substance 
from the same district was shown to Mr. Mawe, 
which he decided to be wolfram ; and stated that 
this metal strongly indicated tin, of which it is 
frequently an attendant in Europe, though pro 
bably it may not be so in America or Asia. It was 
amorphous, not rounded by friction, and weighed 
at least a pound. Of the geology of this captain- 
ship very little is known. 

In various parts jaguars, and other beasts of 
prey, are very common. Among the granivorous 
animals are capivaras of great size, deer in great 
numbers, and armadillos, which afford excellent 
eating when roasted. Of birds, there are os 
triches of the dark coloured species, which go 
about in flocks in great numbers. There are ea 
gles, hawks, and other birds of prey ; particularly 
a species of crow of the vulture kind. Cranes, 
storks, wild turkeys, ducks, partridges, horned 
plovers, goat-suckers, horned owls, small par 
rots, cardinals, humming birds, &amp;c. are found 
in great numbers. 

The inhabitants are, generally speaking, ath 
letic and robust, and so extremely fond of riding,^] 
u u2 



232 



R I O 



[as not to go the smallest distance on foot. They 
are esteemed excellent horsemen, and greatly 
surpass their neighbours in dexterity and agility, 
particularly in catching cattle with the balls and 
the lazo. But it ought to be understood, that 
the Spaniards have Peons on their farms, who 
are more nearly allied to the Indians than to 
them ; whereas the Portuguese have Creolians, 
bred up to the business, or expert Negroes, who 
are inferior to none in this labour. 

It is singular to Europeans, that in this fine 
climate, where the thermometer is frequently be 
low 40 Fahrenheit, and where are bred as fine 
cows as any in the world, and every convenience 
is at hand for dairies, neither butter nor cheese 
is made, except on particular occasions ; nor is 
milk even for coffee to be procured at all times. 
It may probably be urged, that the production of 
these articles would not answer the purpose of 
the farmers : but certainly it might be made to 
do so ; and Mr. Mawe hesitates not to say, that 
100 cows, kept for dairy purposes, would yield 
to any man capable of rearing, training, and 
managing them, a greater profit than any other 
part of husbandry. This colony might easily be 
made to supply the neighbouring districts, and 
even the whole of Brazil, with these articles. 

A number of years ago some hemp was grown 
here, by order of government : it proved excel 
lent, but was abandoned because it was trouble 
some to dress, and probably did not yield suffi 
cient profit. 

In some places grapes are very good, and pro 
bably wine will soon be made from them, as the 
restraint laid by the mother-country upon her 
colonies is now removed. 

For the last two or three years, troops have 
been continually sent to Rio Grande, where they 
soon become disciplined, and are ready for any 
expedition, should hostilities commence with 
their neighbours. Perhaps in no place could an 
army be maintained at less expense; their ca 
valry stands in the highest reputation, and their 
flying-artilley is said to be equal to any in Eu 
rope ; nor is this improbable, when we consider 
the excellence of their horses, and the increasing 
discipline with which they are governed.] 

Rio GRANDE, a large and abundant river, 
from which the province and captainship thus 
called in the kingdom of Brazil, are named. It 
rises in the immense plain of Pernambuco, and 
has its mouth of difficult entrance for vessels ; 
and on the s. side of the same is the castle of 
Tres Reyes, which was built by Feliciano Coello 
de Carvallo in 1601. The shores of this river 



11 I O 

are delightful, and the soil fertile. Its mouth is 
in lat. 5 31 s. 

[Rio GRANDE, another river, in the same 
kingdom as the former, also navigable : it rises 
near the city of Principe, and has a n. e. course, 
and enters the Brazilian sea. Lat. 15 27 30" $.J 

[Rio DE PAT AS, on the coast of Brazil, lies 10 
leagues to the 5. of St. Catherine.] 

[Rio DE LA PLATA. See PLATA RIVER, PA 
RAGUAY, and BUENOS AYRES.] 

[Rio DE LA PLATA, a province in the s, divi 
sion of Paraguay, in S. America. Its chief town 
is Buenos Ay res.] 

[Rio DE PUERCOS, a harbour or anchorage 
ground on the n. side of the island of Cuba, s. w. 
of Bahia Honda.] 

Rio JANEYRO. See JANEIRO. 

[Rio PARDO, a very rich diamond work in the 
province and captainship of Rio de Janeiro in 
Brazil : visited by Mawe, the traveller, in 1809, 
from Tejuco.] 

Rio QUARTO, a large river of the province 
and government of Tucuman in Peru. It has its 
origin in the serranias of the city of Cordoba, runs 
by the s. boundaries of the province to the w. and 
e. and, after a course of 60 leagues, enters a lake. 

[Rio REAL, a large and abundant river in the 
captainship-general of Bahia and kingdom of Bra 
zil. It flows down from the mountains of Mang- 
via, which divides the above captainship. Its 
source is about 18 miles from the grand river S. 
Francisco, from which place it has an e. s. e. 
course through the captainship of Sergipe, and 
enters the sea about 87 miles n. e. of S. Salvador 
or Bahia, in lat. 11 57 30" s. ] 

[Rio REAL, a large village of the same cap 
tainship and kingdom, situate on the n. e. shore of 
the above river of the same name, about 25 miles 
from its mouth, and 89 miles n. with a slight in 
clination to the e. of S. Salvador Bahia.] 

RIOJA, TODOS SANTOS DE LA NUEVA, a 
small city of the province and government of 
Tucuman in Peru : founded in 1591 by Don Juan 
Ramirez de Velasco on a llanura of great extent, 
but least so to the w. as here are the sierras, in 
which the natives breed some cattle. Its terri 
tory produces some cotton, seeds, and vines. It 
is of a very poor soil, but has, besides the parish 
church, some convents of the religious orders of 
St. Francisco, St. Domingo, La Merced, and a 
college, which belonged to the Jesuits. It had 
formerly some olive groves, and the natives, find- 
the great profit to be derived from the oil, eco 
nomise the use of it amongst themselves, to such 
a degree, as even to use candles instead of lamps 



R 1 O 

in their church ; but, since this practice, whether 
it may have been through the displeasure of 
heaven, or other reason, we know not, not a ves 
tige of an olive-tree remains. In lat. 29 12 . 

[RIONEYRO, a town of the province and 
government of Buenos Ay res, situate on a river 
of the same name, near the sea, in lat. 40 50 / s. 
loner. 62 23 30" o&amp;gt;.] 

RIOS, Los TRES, a large river of the island of 
St. Domingo, in the part possessed by the French. 
It rises in the valley of Inojuelo, runs w. w. w. 
and enters the sea on the w. coast, at Port of 
Paz. 

RIOS, other three rivers, of the same island, 
on thes. coast; distinct from the former, but also 
in the territory of the French. They run into 
the sea between the settlement of the English and 
Port Pimiento. 

RIOS, other three, of the island of Martinique. 
They are small, run s. e. in the extremity of the 
island which looks to the w. and enter, almost 
united, the sea, opposite the settlement of Dia 
mante, in a bay. 

RIOS, other three, on the e. coast of the island 
of Guadaloupe. They run united into the sea, 
between the Grand Ance and the Point of Petit 
Carbet. 

RIO SECO, a settlement of the province and 
government of Tucuman in Peru, on the s. shore 
of the river S. Miguel, [which enters itself into the 
Salado, near the lake of the same name. A fort 
has been built here, to restrain the Infidel In 
dians.] 

Rio, another settlement, in the jurisdiction of 
Honda and government of Mariquita in the 
Nuevo Reyno de Granada. It is of a very hot 
temperature, produces some fruits of this climate, 
and contains 100 housekeepers, besides a few In 
dians, and is subject to a constant plague of 
mosquitoes : close to the town of Honda, in the 
high road leading to Santa Fe. 

RIO SEGUNDO, a settlement of the same 
province and government as the former. 

RIO TERCERO, a settlement of the same 
province and government as the former, on the 
shore of a river which gives it its name. 

This river rises in the sierra to the s. w. of the 
city of Cordoba, runs e. and augments its stream 
by a smaller river called El Saladillo. On its 
banks are many estates of cattle, the which are 
constantly attacked and destroyed by the Infidel 
Abipones and Guaicurus. 

RIO VERDE, SANTA CATALINA MARTIR 
DE, a settlement of the head settlement of the 
district and alcaldia mayor of Potosi in Nueva 



R I V 



333 



Espana. It is the capital of the missions of this 
name, and where the religious of S. Francisco 
have a convent. Its population is composed of 
100 families of Spaniards, Mustees, and Mulat- 
toes, and some Chichimecos Indians, lately con 
verted to the catholic faith. Their employment 
is in breeding large and small cattle, and in sow 
ing maize, chile, French beans, and cotton ; as 
also in the cultivation of many different kinds of 
fruits. In its vicinity are two small wards, where 
also the religious of S. Francisco have a convent. 
Thirty-five leagues e. of its head settlement. 

Rio VERDE, a settlement of the province and 
captainship of San Vincente in Brazil, between 
the settlements of Rongua and Morungaba. 

RIO VIEJO, a settlement of the province 
and government of Cartagena in the Nuevo 
Reyno de Granada; in an island of the grand 
river Magdalena. 

[RIPPACANOE Creek, in the N. W. Terri 
tory, is a w. branch of Wabash River. The 
Kickapee Indian town lies near it. Its mouth is 
20 miles above the Lower Weau towns.] 

[RIPTON, a township in Addison County, 
Vermont, 22 miles e. of Lake Champlain.] 

[RISTIGOUCHE River, on the n. side of 
Chaleur Bay, is two leagues from W. Nouville, 
and runs a w. course in general. It is navigable 
for ships and brigs seven leagues from its mouth, 
and abounds with salmon and wild fowl. Many 
salmon fisheries are carried on here to consider 
able advantage.] 

RISTIGOUCHE, another river of the same pro 
vince, which also rises from a lake, runs s. e. and 
turning n. enters the sea in the Bay of Chaleurs. 

RITA, S. a settlement of the province and 
government of Cartagena in the Nuevo Reyno 
de Granada, on the zv. shore of the river Grande 
de la Magdalana, and s, s. e. of the town of Te- 
nerife. It is of an extremely hot climate, but 
abounding in plantains and sugar-canes. In lat. 
9 58 n. 

RITA, another settlement, in the country of 
the Guayazas Indians, and kingdom of Brazil ; 
OK the shore and at the source of the river To- 
cantines. 

[RIVANNA. a small n. zc. branch of James s 
River in Virginia, whose head waters unite a 
few miles n. of Charlottesville, and empties into 
James s River, about two miles abov e Elk Island. 
It is navigable for canoes and batteaux to its in 
tersection with the s. w. mountains, which is about 
22 miles ; and may easily be opened to naviga 
tion through these mountains, to its fork above 
Charlottesville.] 



334 



R O A 



RIVELATA, a cape or point of land on the 
coast of the province and government of Vene 
zuela and Nuevo Reyno de Granada, in the N. 
Sea, and &amp;lt;?. e. of Coro. It covers a great but shal 
low bay, and is formed by the river Verde. 

[RIVERHEAD, a township of New York, 
situate in Suffolk County, in Long Island. It was 
taken from the township of Southold, and incor 
porated in 1792 ; 244 of its inhabitants are qua 
lified electors.] 

[RIVER OF THE WEST, in the n. w. part of 
N. America, empties into the ocean in about 
lat. 43 17 30" n. It is little known, except near 
its mouth.] 

[RIVIERE, GRANDE, in Lower Canada, 
empties into the ocean through the n. shore of 
Chaleur Bay, about six leagues w. n. w. of Cape 
Despair. Here is a considerable cod fishery.] 

RIVIERE, GRAND, a river of the island of 
Guadaloupe, which rises in the mountains of the 
e. runs to this rhumb, and enters the sea between 
theGoayaves and the Grand Carbet. At its mouth 
is a convent of the religious of St. Domingo. 

RIVIERES, TROIS, a large and navigable river 
of Canada ; thus called from being entered by two 
other rivers on either shore, near its entrance 
into the St. Lawrence. It rises from the lake St. 
Thomas, and runs s. e. 

RIVIERE, a port in the island of St. Juan in 
Nova Scotia, on the s. coast, and in the strait 
formed by both coasts. 

RIXOS, Mines of, a real of gold-mines, and 
settlement of Portuguese in the kingdom of Bra 
zil, on the shore and at the source of the river 
Paraupasa. 

[ROANOKE Inlet, on the n. coast of N. Ca 
rolina, leads into Albemarle Sound. Lat. 35 
56 n. long. 75 56" a&amp;gt;.] 

[ROANOKE Island, is on the s. side of Albe 
marle Sound. The n. end of the island forms 
the s. side of Roanoke Inlet.] 

[ROANOKE, a long and rapid river, is formed 
by two principal branches, Staunton River, which 
rises in Virginia, and Dan River, which, some 
say, rises in N. Carolina; but its most remote 
source is in Virginia. The low lands on this 
river are subject to inundations. It is navigable 
only for shallops, nor for these, but about 60 or 
70 miles, on account of falls, which, in a great 
measure, obstruct the water communication with 
the back country. It empties by several mouths 
into the s. w. end of Albemarle Sound. The 
planters on the banks of this river are supposed 
to be the wealthiest in N. Carolina. The lower 
part of this river was formerly called Mozattoe.] 



ROB 

[ROANOKE River, Little, empties into Staun 
ton River from the ., about 15 miles above the 
junction of Dan and Staunton Rivers.] 

[ROARING River, a beatable water of Ten 
nessee State, which runs n. w. into Cumberland 
River, 12 miles s. w. of the mouth of Obas 
River.] 

ROATAN, or RATTAN, an island of the N. 
Sea, in the Bay of Honduras, [32 miles n. w. of 
Porto Castillo or territory of Delgado, and 16 w. 
of the island of Guanaja or Bonacca.] It is 30 
miles long and nine wide ; is naturally fortified 
by rocks and shoals, which defended its fort; 
and the entrance to this is rendered still more diffi 
cult, as being so narrow that not more than one 
vessel can pass at a time. Notwithstanding this, 
the port is the best that is known, capable of 
containing 500 vessels, which may lie in it with 
perfect security. This island is covered with 
woods, enjoys a very healthy climate, and is not 
so warm as that of Jamaica, as it is refreshed by 
a pleasing cool air when the wind is in the e. It 
abounds in excellent water, in wild boars, dainos, 
ducks, pigeons, and parrots; and on its coast 
are found tortoises, and all kinds of fish. Here 
are also cocoa-nuts, wild figs, and excellent 
grapes ; but it is infested with a species of 
snakes, which are here called contravandistas, 
as thick as a man s body, from 12 to 14 foot 
long, with an immense mouth, and which, when 
extended along the ground, have the appearance 
of the trunk of a large tree which may have lain 
some time on the ground and become covered 
with mire. 

This island was desert and uninhabited until 
1742, when the English, commanded by Major 
Crawford, established themselves in it to protect 
the hewers of Campeche-wood, and to ensure the 
commerce of indigo and cochineal with the Spa 
niards of Guatemala. In the s. part are some 
ports, amongst the which is Port Royal, the 
larger, and that called Del Norte, defended by a 
coast of rocks, and, besides these, some little 
channels fit for small vessels. This island 
may be considered the key of the Bay of Hon 
duras, and the focus of the commerce of the 
neighbouring provinces. In the w. part of it are 
some meadows in which breed mules, and of 
these meadows consists the greater part of its 
territory. In lat. 16 23 n. long. 86 45 w. 

[ROBERDEAU, a small fort which was erect 
ed in Bald Eagle, or Sinking Spring Valley, in 
Pennsylvania, during the late war. It was erected 
for the protection of those who then worked at 
the lead mines. But the Indian war raging 



ROC 



ROC 



335 



around them, they were forced to abandon the 
enterprise. See BALD EAGLE VALLEY.] 

[ROBERT BAY, on the e. coast of New 
foundland, separated from Spanish Bay by a very 
narrow neck of land; and about e. n. e. four miles 
about the point from Port Grave.] 

ROBERT, Bay, in the island of Martinique. It 
is nearly two leagues deep, and is formed by two 
points, called, that of the e. part, of La Rosa ; 
and, that of the w. of Los Galeones. At the 
mouth or entrance it has two small islands, the 
one opposite the other, and against which the 
heavy seas break, thereby rendering the bay se 
cure for vessels. Indeed it is one of the best 
known, capable of containing a numerous fleet, 
and with such convenience, that, however large 
the ships, they can lie close to the land, and may 
be unladen by a plank. 

[ROBERTSON, a new county of Tennes 
see.] 

[ROBESON, a county of N. Carolina, situ 
ate in Fayette district, and bounded s. w. by the 
State of S. Carolina. It contains 5326 inhabit 
ants, including 533 slaves. Chief town, Lum- 
berton.] 

ROBINAL, a settlement of the province and 
alcaldia mayor of Zacatepeques in the kingdom 
of Guatemala. 

[ROBIN HOOD s Bay, on the e. coast of 
Newfoundland, is frequented by small vessels, 
as they can fish here to advantage. It is not 
far from Trinity Harbour, and near to Fox 
Islands.] 

ROBINSE, a settlement of the island of Bar- 
badoes, in the district and parish of St. Juan, 
near the e. coast. 

ROBINSO, a settlement of the same island 
as the former, in the district of the city of Bridg- 
town. 

ROBLES, a river of the province and govern 
ment of Popayan in the Nuevo Reyno de Gra 
nada, to the n. w. It rises in the mountains of 
Pijagua, runs n. e. and unites itself witli the river 
Hondo to enter the Cauca by the w. part, in lat. 
2 34 n. 

ROBLIGED, Point of, on the n. coast of the 
island of Margarita, and at its w. extremity. 

ROCA, a settlement of the province and cor- 
regimiento of Caxatambo in Peru, annexed to the 
curacy of the settlement of Ticllos. 

ROCA, a large shoal of the n. coast of Nueva 
Espaiia, in the province and alcaldia mayor of Ta 
basco, between the sierras of San Martin and the 
river Goazacoalco. 

ROCA, an archipelago of small desert islands 



on the coast of the province and government of 
Venezuela in the Nuevo Reyno de Granada : 
they are about 90 miles n. w. from the island of 
Tortuga, stretching about 23 miles from the e. to 
the w. and 10 from n. to s. 

The most northern of these islands is the most 
worthy of note, from a lofty mountain of white 
stone which it has at the w. extremity, and is 
discovered at a great distance. On the 5. side is 
a fountain of fresh water, but with a sulphureous 
taste, which makes it disagreeable to the palate. 
The centre of this island is low, and covered 
with a long grass, in which are found to breed 
many small birds, but which lay very large eggs. 
The e. extremity is full of trees, and the terri 
tory covered with a minute sand, the same being 
inundated at the high sea tides. The port is in 
the centre, in the s. part. 

The other islands are low, and that- which is 
closest to the one above spoken of, is very small, 
a flat, without trees, and producing nothing but 
grass. At one league from this are two other, 
at 200 yards distant from each other, and the 
canal dividing them being of sufficient depth for 
large vessels. Both these islands are full of man 
gles, since the soil is very low, and constantly 
swamped. 

The navigation amongst these islands is made 
easily, though from w. to s. as the winds con 
stantly blow from e. and n. raising a high sea. 
Towards the s. the waters are more quiet, and 
here, close to the shore, there is no bottom to 
be found, save at 100 feet deep. The mangroves 
which grow in these islands are of three different 
kinds, black, red, and white. The first is the 
largest sort, nearly as big as the European oak, 
and of 20 feet in height. Its wood is in great re 
quest, but of little use for building. The second 
grows ordinarily on the coast, and on the shore 
of the rivers, is not so thick as the other, but 
has many roots, which rise out of the ground to 
the height of six, eight, or 10 feet, terminating 
in one trunk or body, so that it is impossible to 
walk where these trees are ; as their branches 
are so thick and intertwined. The wood of the 
last mentioned is strong, and useful for many 
purposes ; and in the inner part of its core it is 
red. The third sort does not grow so high as the 
others, and its wood is of little use. These islands 
are situate in long. 66 45 w. lat. 11 55 w. 

ROCACURA, a settlement of Indians of the 
district of Tolten Baxo in the kingdom of Chile; 
on the sea-coast, and at the entrance of the river 
Chile. 

ROCA-MAYOR, a rock at the entrance of 



336 



ROC 



the port of Cayenne, of the French; antiently 
called Aimable : n. n. w. of the point of La Fu- 
erte, at the distance of 300 toises. It is always 
covered by the water, save at the low tide, when 
it stands out seven feet ; though vessels may at 
any time approach to it with safety to within 50 
toises : also, when they enter the port, they 
leave it to larboard, passing it at a cable s length 
or less. 

[ROCA PARTIDA, a small island in the N. 
Pacific Ocean, w. from the isle of Socoro: and 
in about lat. 18 57 / n. and long. 111 10 o&amp;gt;.] 

ROCAS, Bay of the, on the coast of the Straits 
of Magellan, at the entrance of the n. part of the 
third narrow pass called Del Pasage. 

ROCAS, some islands of the S. Sea, on the 
coast of Peru. They are two, and stand at the 
mouth of the river Pisagua, in the province and 
corregimJento of Carangas. 

Rt&amp;gt;CA DE ILHEOS, a small island of the N. 
Sea, on the coast of the province and govern 
ment of Venezuela, near another island called 
Orchilla ; of a very hot climate, but inhabited ; 
in lat. 11 5 I M. 

ROCA, a point of land or cape of the s. coast of 
St. Domingo, and part possessed by the French ; 
between Cape Marchale and Point Margot. 

ROCA, another, on the n. coast of the same 
island, between the Petit Trou and the point of 
Salina. 

ROCA, another cape, on the coast of the river 
St. Lawrence in Canada : one of those which 
form the mouth of the river Chene. 

ROCA, a small river of the island of Martini 
que, which runs n. and enters the sea between 
that of Basse Point and that of Macouba. 

ROCA, another river, of the province and go 
vernment of Luisiana. 

Roc A, an island, situate near the s. coast of Lake 
Superior in Canada, to the e. of that of Hurons. 

ROCHA, a town of the province and govern 
ment of Buenos Ayres. situate on a small river, 
a little to the n. of a lake of the same name, and 
about 35 miles n. e. of Maldonado, in lat. 34 22 
s. long. 54 12 58" w. 

[ROCHE, CAPE DE LA, on the n. side of the 
island of St. Domingo, is about five leagues w. 
of Old Cape Francois.] 

[ROCH, RIVIERE A LA, a river of the N. 
W. Territory, which runs a s. w. course, and 
empties into the Mississippi 57 miles above the 
Iowa Rapids.] 

ROCHE FONTAINE, a rocky shoal of the 
port of Cayenne ; situate towards the s. at the 
distance of a cable and an half from the ordinary 



ROC 

sounding : but it is surrounded with a very ex 
tensive miry bottom, where there is not more 
than eight feet water; so that a vessel drawing 
more than this, should it enter, would be sure 
to sink into the mire, and it should therefore 
make for the rhumb of the mountain of Pont, n. e. 
to the e. and s. w. | to the w. 

ROCHEL, a settlement of the province and 
colony of New York. 

ROCHELOIS, two rivers of the island of St. 
Domingo, in the part possessed by the French. 
They run to s. e. and enter the sea on the n. coast 
of the bay Grande, between the river Nipe and 
the bay Hallada. 

ROCHELOIS, a port on the coast of Nova 
Scotia. 

ROCHE-NORE, a rocky shoal in the port of 
Cayenne ; 500 toises w. n. w. of another called 
Roca Mayor. Some pilots give it the name of 
Banco del Aquila, as it is near the sand-banks to 
the w. The vessels which come to this port are 
accustomed to enter on the star-board tack, in 
order to avoid the rock. It has 14 foot water at 
high tide. 

ROCHER, a shoal of rock near the coast of 
the province of Sagadahook, between Point 
Neshe and the island Mont-Desert. 

ROCHER, a fort in Canada, on the shore of 
the river Illinois, and opposite the fort of Mi- 
amis. 

[ROCHESTER, the n. w. township of Wind 
sor County, Vermont, and contains 215 inhabi 
tants.] 

[ROCHESTER, a township of Massachusetts, 
Plymouth County, 53 miles s. of Boston. It was 
incorporated in 1686, and contains 2644 inhabi 
tants.] 

[ROCHESTER, a considerable township in 
Strafford County, New Hampshire, on the w. 
side of the n. branch of Piscataqua River, 19 
miles n. w. of Portsmouth, and 14 s. by e. of 
Middleton. It was incorporated in 1722, and 
contains 2857 inhabitants.] 

[ROCHESTER, a township in Ulster County, 
New York, extending w. to Delaware River. It 
is about 12 miles s. w. of Esopus, and contains 
1628 inhabitants, of whom 228 are electors, and 
281 slaves.] 

ROCK, a small river of the province and co 
lon y of N. Carolina. 

ROCK, another, in the province and colony of 
Virginia. 

[ROCKAWAY, a small post-town in Morris 
County, New Jersey, on the s, side of the river 
of its name, 10 miles n. by w. of Morristown, 



ROC 

15 s. e. of Newton, and 63 n. e. by n. of Phila 
delphia.] 

[ROCKBRIDGE, a mountainous county of 
Virginia, bounded n. by Augusta, and s. by 
James River, which divides it from Botetourt 
County. It contains 6548 inhabitants, of whom 
682 are slaves. The Natural Bridge, so ele 
gantly described by Mr. Jefferson, in his Notes 
on Virginia, is in this county.] 

[ROCK FISH, aw. w. branch of James River, 
in Virginia, at the mouth of which is some indif 
ferent marble, generally variegated with red, 
blue, and purple. It forms a large precipice, 
which hangs over a navigable part of the river. 
None of the marble has ever yet been worked.] 

[ROCKFORD, a post-town of N. Carolina.] 

[ROCKHILL, a township of Buck s County, 
Pennsylvania.] 

[ROCKINGHAM, one of the five counties 
into which the State of New Hampshire is di 
vided. It lies on the s. e. part of the State ; 
having the Atlantic Ocean on the s. e. the county 
of Hillsborough on the w. Strafford on the n. 
and the State of Massachusetts on the 5. It is 
about 60 miles long, and 30 broad. It embraces 
the only sea-port, and most of the commercial 
towns in the state. It contains 46 townships, 
and 43169 inhabitants. Chief towns, Ports 
mouth, Exeter, and Concord.] 

[ROCKINGHAM, the w. easternmost township in 
Wmdham County, Vermont, is situate on the w. 
bank of Connecticut River, which separates it 
from Walpole, in New Hampshire. It contains 
1235 inhabitants.] 

[ROCKINGHAM, a county of Salisbury district, 
N. Carolina, bounded e. by Caswell, and w. by 
Stokes. On the banks of the Dan, which waters 
this county, are large tracts of fertile low land. 
A furnace and forge have been erected on Trou 
blesome Creek. Iron ore is found in many parts 
of the county. It contains 6187 inhabitants, in 
cluding 1100 slaves.] 

[ROCKINGHAM, the chief town of Richmond 
County, N. Carolina. It is seated on an emi 
nence, about six miles e. of Great Pedee River, 
and contains a court-house, gaol, and a few 
dwelling-houses. It is 68 miles s. s. w. from 
Hillsborough, and 71 s. from Bethania.] 

[ROCKINGHAM, a mountainous county of Vir 
ginia, bounded n. by Shenandoah, and s. by Au 
gusta. It contains 7449 inhabitants, including 
772 slaves.] 

[ROCKINGHAM, a post-town and the seat of 
the courts of the above county, is situate on a 
branch of Shenandoah River, and contains a 

VOL. IV. 



ROC 



337 



court-house, gaol, and about 30 houses. It is 
88 miles e. by n. of the Sweet Springs, 20 n. e. 
of Staunton, and 44 s. w. of Strasburg.] 

[ROCKEMECKO, or ROCKOMESBO, a town* 
ship in Lincoln County, district of Maine. In 
1790, the plantations of New Sandwich, Liver- 
more, and Rockomesbo, contained 400 inhabi 
tants.] 

ROCKLAND, a town of the province of New 
York. 

[ROCKONCAMA, a pond of about a mile in 
circumference, in the centre of Long Island, 
New York State, between Smithtown and Islip. 
It is continually ebbing and flowing ; rising gra 
dually for several years, until it has arrived to a 
certain height, and then falls more rapidly to its 
lowest bed.] 

[ROCKY, a small river of N. Carolina, which 
empties into Yadkin River.] 

[ROCKY Meadows, called by the French La 
Prairie du Rocher, on the e. side of the river 
Mississippi, 12 miles n. of Kaskaskias, and three 
s. of Fort Chartres. About 20 years ago it con 
tained 100 white inhabitants, and 80 Negroes.] 

[ROCKY Mount, or FRANKLIN COURT 
HOUSE, in Virginia, on the n. side of Staunton 
River, where is a post-office; is 14 miles n. from 
Martinsburg, 31 s. from Liberty.] 

[RocKY Point, a perpendicular rock 70 feet 
high, on the s. shore of Lake Erie, lies 41 miles 
5. from the port of Aux Pins, and 90 w. of Pres- 
quile.] 

ROCKY MOUNTAINS, of N. America, running 
in a direction nearly from n. w. to s. e., and being 
a continuation of the chain running through 
Mexico : they extend as far as to lat. 50 n., their 
elevation after this pointbeing very inconsiderable. 
[The two subjoined delineations of two tribes 
of Indians, who inhabit the country on the e. side 
of the Rocky Mountains, are a summary from 
the pen of Mr. Mackenzie. 

The Knisteneaux are of a moderate stature, 
well proportioned, and of great activity. Ex 
amples of deformity are seldom to be seen among 
them. Their complexion is of a copper colour, 
and their hair black, which is common to all the 
natives of N. America ; it is cut in various 
forms, according to the fancy of the several 
tribes, and by some is left in the long lank flow 
of nature : their eyes are black, keen, and pene 
trating ; their countenance open and agreeable ; 
and it is a principal object of their vanity to give 
every possible decoration to their persons. A 
material article in their toilets is vermilion, which 
they contrast with their native blue, white, and] 
x. x 



338 



ROCKY MOUNTAINS. 



[brown earths, to which charcoal is frequently 
added. 

Their dress is at once simple and commo 
dious ; it consists of tight leg-gins, reaching near 
the hip; a strip of cloth or leather, called assian, 
about a foot wide and five feet long, whose ends 
are drawn inwards, and hang behind and before 
over a belt tied round the waist for that purpose ; 
a close vest or shirting reaching down the for 
mer garment, and cinctured with a broad strip of 
parchment fastened with thongs behind ; and a 
cap for the head, consisting of a piece of fur, or 
small skin, with the brush of the animal as a 
suspended ornament ; a kind of robe is thrown 
occasionally over the w r hole of the dress, and 
serves both night and day. These articles, with 
the addition of shoes and mittens, constitute the 
variety of their apparel. The materials vary 
according to the season, and consists of dressed 
moose-skin, beaver prepared with the fur, or 
European woollens. The leather is neatly painted, 
and fancifully worked in some parts with porcu 
pine quills and moose-deer hair ; the shirts and 
leggins are also adorned with fringe and tassels ; 
nor are the shoes and mittens without somewhat 
of appropriate decoration, and worked with a 
considerable degree of skill and taste. These 
habiliments are put on, however, as fancy or 
convenience suggests, and they will sometimes 
proceed to the chase in the severest frost, co 
vered only with the slightest of them. Their 
head-dresses are composed of the feathers of the 
swan, the eagle, and other birds : the teeth, 
horns, and claws, of different animals, are also 
the occasional ornaments of the head and neck. 
Their hair, however arranged, is always be 
smeared with grease. The making of every ar 
ticle of dress is a female occupation ; and the 
women, though by no means inattentive to the 
decoration of their own persons, appear to have 
a still greater degree of pride in attending to the 
appearances of the men, whose faces are painted 
with more care than those of the women. 

The female dress is formed of the same mate 
rials as those of the other sex, but of a different 
make and arrangement : their shoes are com 
monly plain, and their leggins gartered beneath 
the knees ; the coat or body covering falls down 
to the middle of the leg, and is fastened over the 
shoulders with cords, a flap or cape turning- 
down about eight inches, both before and behind, 
and agreeably ornamented with quill-work and 
fringe ; the bottom is also fringed, and fancifully 
painted as high as the knee; as it is very loose, 
it is enclosed round the waist with a stiff belt 



decorated with tassels, and fastened behind ; the 
arms are covered to the wrist, with detached 
sleeves, which are sewed as far as the bend of 
the arm ; from thence they are drawn up to the 
neck, and the corners of them fall down behind, 
as low as the waist. The cap, when they wear 
one, consists of a certain quantity of leather or 
cloth, sewed at one end, by which means it is 
kept on the head, and, hanging down the back, 
is fastened to the belt as well as under the chin. 
The upper garment is a robe like that worn by 
the men. Their hair is divided on the crown, 
and tied behind, or sometimes fastened in large 
knots over the ears. They are fond of European 
articles, and prefer them to their own native 
commodities. Their ornaments consist, in com 
mon with all savages, in bracelets, rings, and 
similar baubles. Some of the women tattoo 
three perpendicular lines, which are sometimes 
double ; one from the centre of the chin to that 
of the under lip, and one parallel on either side 
to the corner of the mouth. 

Of all the nations which I have seen on this 
continent, the Knisteneaux women (says Mr. 
Mackenzie) are the most comely. Their figure 
is generally well proportioned, and the regularity 
of their features would be acknowledged by the 
more civilized people of Europe : their com 
plexion has less of that dark tinge which is com 
mon to those savages who have less cleanly 
habits. 

These people are, in general, subject to few 
disorders ; the lues venerea, however, is a com 
mon complaint, but cured by the application of 
simples, with whose virtues they appear to be 
well acquainted : they are also subject to fluxes 
and pains in the breast, which some have attri 
buted to the very cold and keen air which they 
inhale ; but these complaints must frequently 
proceed from their immoderate indulgence in fat 
meat at their feasts, particularly when they have 
been preceded by long fasting. 

Thev are naturally mild and affable, as well as 
just in their dealings, not only among themselves 
but with strangers : they are also generous and 
hospitable, and good-natured in the extreme, 
except when their nature is perverted by the in 
flammatory influence of spirituous liquors. To 
their children they are indulgent to a fault ; the 
father, though he assumes no command over 
them, is ever anxious to instruct them in all the 
preparatory qualifications for war and hunting ; 
while the mother is equally attentive to her 
daughters, in teaching them every thing that is 
considered as necessary to their character and] 



ROCKY MOUNTAINS. 



339 



[situation. It does not appear that the husband 
makes any distinction between the children of his 
wife, though they may be the offspring- of different 
fathers. Illegitimacy is only attached to those 
who are born before their mothers have coha 
bited with any man by the title of husband. 

It does not appear that chastity is considered 
by them as a virtue ; or that fidelity is believed 
to be essential to the happiness of a wedded life : 
though it sometimes happens, that the infidelity 
of the wife is punished by the husband with the 
loss of her hair, nose, and perhaps life : such 
severity proceeds from its having been practised 
without his permission ; for a temporary inter 
change of wives is not uncommon, and the offer 
of their persons is considered as a necessary part 
of the hospitality due to strangers. 

When a man loses his wife, it is considered as 
a duty to marry her sister, if she has one ; or he 
may, if he pleases, have them both at the same 
time. 

It will appear from the fatal consequences we 
have repeatedly imputed to the use of spirituous 
liquors, that we more particularly considered these 
people as having been, morally speaking, great 
sufferers from their communication with the sub 
jects of civilized nations ; at the same time they 
were not, in a state of nature, without their vices, 
and some of them of a kind which is the most 
abhorrent to cultivated and reflecting man. We 
shall only observe, that incest and bestiality are 
among them. 

When a young man marries, he immediately 
goes to live with the father and mother of his 
wife, who treat him, nevertheless, as a perfect 
stranger, until after the birth of his first child ; 
he then attaches himself more to them than his 
own parents, and his wife no longer gives him 
any other denomination than that of the father 
of her child. 

The profession of the men is war and hunting, 
and the more active scenes of their duty are the 
field of battle, and the chase in the woods : they 
also spear fish ; but the management of the nets 
is left to the women. The females of this nation 
are in the same subordinate state with those of 
all other savage tribes ; but the severity of their 
labour is much diminished by their situation on 
the banks of lakes and rivers, where they employ 
canoes. In the winter, when the waters are 
frozen, they make their journeys, which are never 
of any great length, with sledges drawn by dogs. 
They are, at the same time, subject to every 
kind of domestic drudgery; they dress the leather, 
make the clothes and shoes, weave the nets, col 



lect wood, erect the tents, fetch water, and per 
form every culinary service ; so that when the 
duties of maternal care are added, it will appear 
that the life of these women is an uninterrupted 
succession of toil and pain. This, indeed, is the 
sense they entertain of their own situation ; and, 
under the influence of that sentiment, they are 
sometimes known to destroy their female chil 
dren, to save them from the miseries which they 
themselves have suffered : they also have a ready 
way, by the use of certain simples, of procuring 
abortion, which they sometimes practise, from 
their hatred of the father, or to save themselves 
the trouble Avhich children occasion ; and it has 
been credibly asserted, that this unnatural act 
is repeated without any injury to the health of 
the women who perpetrate it. 

The funeral rites begin, like all other solemn 
ceremonials, with smoking, and are concluded by 
a feast. The body is dressed in the best habili 
ments possessed by the deceased, or his relations, 
and is then deposited in a grave lined with 
branches ; some domestic utensils are placed on 
it, and a kind of canopy erected over it. During 
this ceremony great lamentations are made, and 
if the departed person is very much regretted, 
the near relations cut off their hair, pierce the 
fleshy part of their thighs and arms with arrows, 
knives, &amp;c. and blacken their faces with char 
coal. If they have distinguished themselves in 
war, they are sometimes placed upon scaffolding; 
and we have been informed that women, as in the 
East, have been known to sacrifice themselves 
to the manes of their husbands. The whole of 
the property belonging to the departed person is 
destroyed, and the relations take in exchange 
for the wearing apparel any rags that will cover 
their nakedness. The feast bestowed on the oc 
casion, which is, or at least used to be, repeated 
annually, is accompanied with eulogiums on the 
deceased, and without any acts of ferocity. On 
the tomb are carved, or painted, the symbols of 
his tribe, which are taken from the different ani 
mals of the country. 

Many and various are the motives which in 
duce a savage to engage in war. To prove his 
courage, or to revenge the death of his relations, 
or some of his tribe, by the massacre of an enemy. 
If the tribe feel themselves called upon to go to 
war, the ciders convene the people, in order to 
know the general opinion. If it be for war, the 
chief publishes his intention to smoke in the sa 
cred stem at a certain period, to which solemnity 
meditation and fasting are required as prepara 
tory ceremonials. When the people are thus] 
x x 2 



340 



ROCKY MOUNTAINS. 



[assembled, and the meeting sanctified by the cus 
tom of smoking, the chief enlarges on the causes 
which have called them together, and the neces 
sity of the measures proposed on the occasion. 

He then invites those who are willing to follow 
him, to smoke out of the sacred stem, which is 
considered as the token of enrolment ; and if it 
should be the general opinion, that assistance is 
necessary, others are invited, with great for 
mality, to join them. Every individual who at 
tends these meetings brings something with him 
as a token of his warlike intentions, or as an ob 
ject of sacrifice, which, when the assembly dis 
solves, is suspended from poles near the place 
of council. 

They have frequent feasts, and particular cir 
cumstances never fail to produce them ; such as 
a tedious illness, long fasting, &amp;c. On these oc 
casions it is usual for the person who means to 
give the entertainment to announce his design, 
on a certain day, of opening the medicine bag, 
and smoking out of his sacred stem. This de 
claration is considered as a sacred vow that can 
not be broken. There are also stated periods, 
such as the spring and autumn, when they en 
gage in very long and solemn ceremonies. On 
these occasions dogs are offered as sacrifices, and 
those which are very fat and milk-white are pre 
ferred. They also make large offerings of their 
property, whatever it may be. The scene of 
these ceremonies is in an open enclosure on the 
bank of a river or lake, and in the most conspi 
cuous situation, in order that such as are passing 
along, or travelling, may be induced to make 
their offerings. There is also a particular cus 
tom among them, that, on these occasions, if any 
of the tribe, or even a stranger, should be passing 
by, and be in real want of any thing that is dis 
played as an offering, he has a right to take it, 
so that he replaces it with some article he can 
spare, though it be of far inferior value ; but to 
take or touch any thing wantonly is considered 
as a sacrilegious act, and highly insulting to the 
great Master of Life, to use their own expression, 
who is the sacred object of their devotion. 

The scene of private sacrifice is the lodge of 
the person who performs it, which is prepared 
for that purpose by removing every thing out of 
it, and spreading green branches in every part. 
The fire and ashes are also taken away. A new 
hearth is made of fresh earth, and another fire is 
lighted. The owner of the dwelling remains 
alone in it ; and he begins the ceremony by 
spreading a piece of new cloth, or a well-dressed 
moose-skin neatly painted, on which he opens 



his medicine-bag and exposes its contents, con 
sisting of various articles. The principal of them 
is a kind of household god, which is a small 
carved image about eight inches long. Its first 
covering is of down, over which a piece of birch 
bark is closely tied, and the whole is enveloped 
in several folds of red and blue cloth. This 
little figure is an object of the most pious regard. 
The next article is his war-cap, which is deco 
rated with the feathers and plumes of scarce- 
birds, beavers, and eagles claws, &amp;c. There 
is also suspended from it a quill or feather for 
every enemy whom the owner of it lias slain in 
battle. The remaining contents of the bag are, 
a piece of Brazil tobacco, several roots and sim 
ples, which are in great estimation for their me 
dicinal qualities, and a pipe. These articles being 
all exposed, and the stem resting upon two forks, 
as it must not touch the ground, the master of 
the lodge sends for the person he most esteems, 
who sits down opposite to him ; the pipe is then 
filled and fixed to the stem. A pair of wooden 
pincers is provided to put the fire in the pipe, 
and a double-pointed pin, to empty it of the 
remnant of tobacco which is not consumed. This 
arrangement being made, the men assemble, and 
sometimes the women are allowed to be humble 
spectators, while the most religious awe and so 
lemnity pervade the whole. The Michiniwais, 
or assistant, takes up the pipe, lights it, and pre 
sents it to the officiating person, who receives it 
standing, and holds it between both his hands. 
He then turns himself to the East, and draws a 
few whiffs, which he blows to that point. The 
same ceremony he observes to the other three 
quarters, with his eyes directed upwards during 
the whole of it. He holds the stem about the 
middle between the three first fingers of both 
hands, and raising them upon a line with his fore 
head, he swings it three times round from the 
East, with the sun, when, after pointing and ba 
lancing it in various directions, he reposes it on 
the forks : he then makes a speech to explain the 
design of their being called together, which con 
cludes with an acknowledgment of past mercies, 
and a prayer for the continuance of them, from 
the Master of Life. He then sits down, and the 
whole company declare their approbation and 
thanks by uttering the word ho! with an emphatic 
prolongation of the last letter. The Michiniwais 
then takes up the pipe, and holds it to the mouth 
of the officiating person, who, after smoking 
three whiffs out of it, utters a short prayer, and 
then goes round with it, taking his course from 
e. to &amp;&amp;amp;gt;., to every person present, who indivi-J 



ROCKY MOUNTAINS. 



341 



{[dually says something to liim on the occasion ; 
and thus the pipe is generally smoked out : when, 
after turning it three or four times round his 
head, he drops it downwards, and replaces it in 
its original situation. He then thanks the com 
pany for their attendance, and wishes them, as 
well as the whole tribe, health and long life. 

These smoking rites precede every matter of 
great importance, with more or less ceremony, 
but always with equal solemnity. The utility of 
them will appear from the following relation : 

If a chief is anxious to know the disposition of 
his people towards him, or if he wishes to settle 
any difference between them, he announces his 
intention of opening his medicine-bag, and 
smoking in his sacred stem ; and no man who 
entertains a grudge against any of the party 
thus assembled can smoke with the sacred stem ; 
as that ceremony dissipates all differences, and is 
never violated. 

No one can avoid attending on these occasions : 
but a person may attend and be excused from as 
sisting at the ceremonies, by acknowledging that 
he has not undergone the necessary purification. 
The having cohabited with his wife, or any other 
woman, Avithin 24 hours preceding the ceremony, 
renders him unclean, and consequently disqua 
lifies him from performing any part of it. If a 
contract is entered into and solemnized by the 
ceremony of smoking, it never fails of being 
faithfully fulfilled. If a person, previous to his 
going on a journey, leaves the sacred stem as a 
pledge of his return, no consideration whatever 
will prevent him from executing his engagement. 
It is however to be lamented, that of late there 
is a relaxation of the duties originally attached 
to these festivals. 

The chief, when he proposes to make a feast, 
sends quills, or small pieces of wood, as tokens 
of invitation to such as he wishes to partake of 
it. At the appointed time the guests arrive, each 
bringing a dish or platter, and a knife, and take 
their seats on each side of the chief, who receives 
them sitting, according to their respective ages. 
The pipe is then lighted, and he makes an equal 
division of every thing that is provided. While 
the company are enjoying their meal, the chief 
sings, and accompanies his song with the tam 
bourine, or shishiquoi, or rattle. The guest who 
lias first eaten his portion is considered as the 
most distinguished person : if there should be 
any who cannot finish the whole of their mess, 
they endeavour to prevail on some of their friends 
to eat it for them, who are rewarded for their 
assistance with ammunition and tobacco. It is 



proper also to remark, that at these feasts a small 
quantity of meat or drink is sacrificed before they 
begin to eat, by throwing it into the fire, or on 
the earth. 

These feasts differ according to circumstances; 
sometimes each man s allowance is no more than 
he can dispatch in a couple of hours : at other 
times the quantity is sufficient to supply each of 
them with food for a week, though it must be 
devoured in a day. On these occasions it is very 
difficultto procure substitutes, and the whole must 
be eaten whatever time it may require. At some 
of these entertainments there is a more rational 
arrangement, when the guests are allowed to 
carry home with them the superfluous part of 
their portions. Great care is always taken that 
the bones may be burned, as it would be con 
sidered a profanation were the dogs permitted to 
touch them. 

The public feasts are conducted in the same 
manner, but with some additional ceremony. 
Several chiefs officiate at them, and procure the 
necessary provisions, as well as prepare a proper 
place of reception for the numerous company. 
Here the guests discourse upon public topics, re 
peat the heroic deeds of their forefathers, and 
excite the rising generation to follow their ex 
ample. The entertainments on these occasions 
consist of dried meats, as it would not be practi 
cable to dress a sufficient quantity of fresh meat 
for such a large assembly : though the women 
and children are excluded. 

Similar feasts used to be made at funerals, and 
annually, in honour of the dead ; but they have 
been, for some time, growing into disuse. 

The women, who are forbidden to enter the 
places sacred to these festivals, dance and sing 
around them, and sometimes beat time to the mu 
sic within ; which forms an agreeable contrast. 

With respect to their divisions of time, they 
compute the length of their journeys by the 
number of nights passed in performing them ; and 
they divide the year by their own succession of 
moons. In this calculation, however, they are 
not altogether correct, as they cannot account for 
odd days. 

The names which they give to the moons, are 
descriptive of the several seasons, and are as 
follows : 

May, - - Frog Moon. 

June, - - The Moon in which birds begin 

to lay their eggs. 
July, - - The Moon when birds cast their 

feathers.] 



342 



ROCKY MOUNTAINS. 



[August, - The Moon when the young birds 

begin to fly. 
September, The Moon when the moose-deer 

cast their horns. 

October, - The Rutting Moon. 
November, Hoar-frost Moon. 
December, Whirlwind Moon. 
January, Extreme cold Moon. 
February, - Big Moon ; some say Old Moon. 
March, - Eagle Moon. 
April, - - Goose Moon. 

These people know the medicinal virtues of 
many herbs and simples, and apply the roots of 
plants and the bark of trees with success. But 
the conjurors, who monopolise the medical 
science, iind it necessary to blend mystery with 
their art, and do not communicate their know 
ledge. Their materia medico, they adminster in 
the form of purges and clysters ; but the reme 
dies and surgical operations are supposed to de 
rive much of their effect from magic and incan 
tation. When a blister rises in the foot from the 
frost, the chafing of the shoe, &amp;c. they immedi 
ately open it, and apply the heated blade of a 
knife to the part, which, painful as it may be, is 
found to be efficacious. A sharp flint serves them 
as a lancet for letting blood, as well as for scari 
fication in bruises and swellings. For sprains, 
the dung of an animal just killed is considered 
as the best remedy. They are very fond of Eu 
ropean medicines, though they are ignorant of 
their application : and those articles form an 
inconsiderable part of the European traffic with 
them. 

Among their various superstitions, they believe 
that the vapour which is seen to hover over 
moist and swampy places, is the spirit of some 
person lately dead. They also fancy another 
spirit, which appears in the shape of a man, upon 
the trees near the lodge of a person deceased, 
whose property has not been interred with him. 
He is represented as bearing a gun in his hand, 
and it is believed that he does not return to his 
rest, until the property that has been withheld 
from the grave has been sacrificed to it. 



Examples of their Language. 
Knisteneaux. 

- Ki jai manitou. 

- Match i manitou. 

- Ethini. 

- Esquois. 
Naphew. 



Good spirit 
Evil spirit 
Man - - 
Woman - 
Male - - 
Female 



- Non-gense. 



Infant - - - 
Head - - - - 
Forehead - - 
Hair - - - - 
Eyes - - - - 
Nose - - - - 
Nostrils - - - 
Mouth - - - 
My teeth - - - 
Tongue - - - 
Beard - 
Brain - - - - 
Ears - - - - 
Neck - - - - 
Throat - - - 
Arms - - - - 
Fingers - - - 
Nails - - - - 
Side - - 
My back - - - 
My belly - - - 
Thighs - - 
My knees - - 
Legs - - - - 
Heart - - - - 
My father - - 
My mother - - 
My boy (son) 
My girl (daughter) 
My brother, elder 
My sister, elder 
My grandfather 
My grandmother 
My uncle 
My nephew - - 
My niece 
My mother-in-law 
My brother-in-law 
My companion - 
My husband - 
Blood - - - 
Old man - - - 
I am angry - - 
I fear - - - - 
Joy - - - - 
Hearing - - - 
Track - - - 
Chief, great ruler 
Thief - - - - 
Excrement - 
Buffalo - - - 
Ferret - - 

Polecat - - - 
Elk ..-- 



Knisteneaux. 
A was ish. 
Us ti quoin. 
Es caa tick. 
Wes ty-ky. 
Es kis ocn. 
Oskiwin. 

Oo tith ee gow mow. 
O toune. 
Wip pit tali. 
Otaithana. 
Michitoune. 
With i tip. 
O tow ee gie. 
O qui ow. 
O koot tas gy. 
O nisk. 
Che chee. 
Wos kos sia. 
O s spin gy. 
No pis quan. 
Nattay. 
O povam. 
No che quoin nah. 
Nosk. 
O thea. 
Noo ta wie. 
Nigah wei. 
Negousis. 
Netanis. 
Ni stess. 
Ne miss. 
Ne moo shum. 
N o kum. 
N o ka miss. 
Ne too sim. 
Ne too sim esquois. 
Nisigouse. 
Nistah. 

Ne wechi wagan. 
Ni nap pern. 
Mith coo. 
Shi nap. 

Ne kis si wash en. 
Ne goos tow. 
Ne hea the torn. 
Pethom. 
Mis conna. 
Haukimah. 
Kismouthesk. 
Meyee. 
Moustouche. 
Sigous. 
Shicak. 
Moustouche.} 



ROCKY MOUNTAINS. 



343 





Knisteneaux. 


[Rein deer - - 


Attick. 


Fallow deer - - 


Attick. 


Beaver - - 


Amisk. 


Woolverine - - 


Qui qua katch. 


Squirrel - - - 


Enequachas. 


Mink - - - - 


Sa quasue. 


Otter - - - - 


Nekick 


Wolf ... - 


Mayegan. 


Hare - - - - 


Wapouce. 


Marten - - - 


Wappistan, 


Moose - 


Mouswah. 


Bear - - - - 


Masqua. 


Fisher ... 


Wijask. 


Lynx .... 


Picheu. 


Porcupine - - 


Cau quah. 


Fox .... 


Ma kisew. 


Musk Rat - - 


Wajask. 


Mouse - - - 


Abieushiss. 


Crow Buffalo 


Noshi Moustouche, 


Meat-flesh - - 


Wias. 


DO- .... 


Atim. 


Eagle - - - - 


Makusue. 


Duck .... 


Sy Sip. 


Crow, Corbeau - 


Ca Cawkeu. 


Swan - - 


Wapiseu. 


Turkey - - - 


Mes sei thew. 


Pheasants - - 


Okes kew. 


Bird .-.- 


Pethesew. 


Outard - - - 


Niscag. 


White Goose 


Wey Wois. 


Grey Goose - - 


Pestasish. 


Partridge 


Pithew. 


Water Hen - - 


Chiquibish. 


Dove - - - 


Omi Mee. 


Eggs .... 


Wa Wah. 


Pike or Jack 


Kenonge. 


Carp - ... 


Na may bin. 


Sturgeon 


Na May. 


White Fish - - 


Aticaming. 


Pikrel - - - 


Oc-chaw. 


Fish (in general) 


Kenonge. 


Spawn - 


Waquon. 


Fins - - - - 


Chi chi kan. 


Trout - 


Na-gouse. 


Craw Fish - - 


A shag gee. 


Frog - - - - 


A thick. 


Wasp ... 


Ah moo. 


Turtle - - - 


Mikinack. 


Snake - 


Cinibic. 


Awl -.- - 
Needle - - - 


Oscajick. 
Saboinigan. 


Fire Steel - - 


Appet. 


Fire Wood - - 


Mich-tah. 


Cradle - 


Teckinigan. 



Dagger 
Arrow 
Fish-hook 

Ax - - . 

Ear-bob - 

Comb - - 

Net - - 

Tree - - 

Wood - - 

Paddle - 
Canoe 

Birch Rind 

Bark - - 
Touchwood 

Leaf - -K; 
Grass 

Raspberries 
Strawberries 
Ashes. 

Fire - - 
Grapes 

Fog - - 

Mud - - 

Currant - 

Road - - 
Winter 
Island 

Lake - - 
Sun 

Moon - - 

Day - - 

Night - - 
Snow - 

Rain - - 

Drift - - 

Hail - - 
Ice 

Frost - - 

Mist - - 
Water 

World - 
Mountain 

Sea - - 

Morning - 

Mid-day - 

Portage - 
Spring- 
River 
Rapid 

Rivulet - 

Sand - - 

Earth - - 

Star - - 



Knistencaux. 
Ta comagau. 
Augusk or Atouche. 
Quosquipichican. 
Shegaygan. 
Chi-kisebisoun. 
Sicahoun. 
Athahe. 
Mi stick. 
Mistick. 
Aboi. 
Chiman. 
Wasquoi. 
Wasquoi. 
Pousagan. 
Nepeshah. 
Masquosi. 
Misqui-meinac. 
O -tai-e minac. 
Pecouch. 
Scou tay. 
Shomenac. 
Pakishihow. 
ASUS ki. 
Kisijiwin. 
Mescanah. 
Pipoun. 
Ministick. 
Sagayian. 
Pisim. 
Tibisca pisim (the night 

Sun). 
Kigigah. 
Tibisca. 
Cosnah. 
Kimiwoin. 
Pewan. 
Shes eagan. 
Mesquaming. 
Aquatin. 
Picasyow. 
Nepec. 

Messe asky (all the earth) 
Wachee. 

Kitchi kitchi ga ming. 
Kequishepe. 
Abetah quisheik. 
Unigam. 
Menouscaming. 
Sipee. 
Bawastick. 
Sepeesis. 
Thocaw. 
Askee. 
Attack.] 



344 



[Thunder - - 
Wind - - - 
Calm - - - 
Heat - - - 
Evening - - 
North - - 
South - - - 
East - - - 
West - --5.- 
To-morrow - 
Bone - - - 
Broth - - - 
Feast - - - 
Grease or oil 
Marrow fat - 
Sinew - - - 
Lodge - - - 
Bed --- 
Within - - 
Door - - - 
Dish - - - 
Fort - - - 
Sledge - - 
Cincture - - 
Cap ... 
Stocks - - 
Shirt - - - 
Coat - - - 
Blanket - - 
Cloth - - - 
Thread - - 
Garters - - 
Mittens - - 
Shoe - - - 
Smoking bag 
Portage sling 
Straight on - 
Medicine 
Red - - - 
Blue - - - 
White - - - 
Yellow - - 
Green - - - 

Ugly 

Handsome 
Beautiful - - 
Deaf - - - 
Good-natured 
Pregnant - - 
Fat - - - - 
Big - - - 
Small or little 
Short - - - 
Skin - - - 



ROCKY MOUNTAINS. 



Knisteneaux. 
Pithuseu. 
Thoutin. 
Athawostin. 
Quishipoi. 
Ta kashike. 
Kywoitin. 
Sawena woon. 
Coshawcastak. 
Pasquisimou. 
Wabank. 
Oskann. 
Michim waboi. 
Ma qua see. 
Pimis. 

Oscan pimis. 
Asstis. 
Wig-waum. 
Ne pa win. 
Pendog ke. 
Squandam. 
Othagan. 
Wasgaigan. 
Tabanask. 
Poquoatehoun. 
Astotin. 
Ashican. 
Papacheweyan. 
Papise co-wagan. 
Wape weyang. 
Maneto weguin. 
Assabab. 
Chi ki-bisoon. 
Astissack. 
Maskisin. 
Kusquepetagan. 
Apisan. 
Goi ask. 
Mes ki kee. 
Mes coh. 

Kasqutch (same as black) 
Wabisca. 
Saw waw. 
Chibatiquare. 
Mache nagouseu. 
Catawassiseu. 
Kissi Sawenogan. 
Nima petom. 
Mithiwashin. 
Paawie. 
Outhineu. 
Mushikitee. 
Abisasheu. 
Chemasish. 
Wian. 



or - - - - 

Strong - - - - 

Coward - - - 

Weak - - - - 

Lean - - - - 

Brave - - - - 

Young man - - 

Cold - - - - 

Hot - - - - 

Spring - - - - 

Summer - - - 

Fall - - - - 

One - - - - 

Two - - - - 

Three - - - - 

Four - - - - 

Five - - - - 

Six - - - - - 

Seven - - - - 

Eight - - - - 

Nine - - - - 

Ten - - - - 

Eleven - - - 

Twelve - - - 

Thirteen - - - 

Fourteen - - - 

Fifteen - - - 

Sixteen - - - 

Seventeen - - 

Eighteen - - - 

Nineteen - - - 

Twenty - - - 

Twenty-one - 



Knisteneaux. 
Kinwain. 
Mascawa. 
Sagatahaw. 
Nitha missew. 
Mahta waw. 
Nima Gustaw. 
Osquineguish. 
Kissin. 
Cichatai. 
Minouscaming 
Nibin. 

Tagowagonk. 
Peyac. 
Nisheu. 
Nishteu. 
Neway. 
Ni-annan. 
Negoutawoesie. 
Nish wissic. 
Jannanew. 
Shack. 
Mitatat. 
Peyac osap. 
Nisheu osap. 
Nichtou osap. 
Neway osap. 
Niannan osap. 
Nigoutawoesic osap. 
Nish woesic osap. 
Janenew osap. 
Shack osap. 
Nisheu mitenah. 
Nisheu mitenah payac 

osan. 



osap. 
Twenty-two, &amp;c. Nisheu mintenah nisheu 

osan. 



Thirty - - 

Forty - - - 

Fifty - - - 

Sixty - - - 

Seventy - - 
Eighty 
Ninety 

Hundred - - 
Two Hundred 

One Thousand 
First - - 
Last - - - 
More - - - 
Better - - - 
Best - - - 
I or me - - 
You or thou - 



osap. 

Nishtou mitenah. 

Neway mitenah. 

Niannan mitenah. 

Negoutawoisic mitenah. 

Nishwoisic mitenah. 

Janriaeu mitenah. 

Shack mitenah. 

Mitaua mitinah. 

Neshew mitena a mite 
nah. 

Mitenah mitena mitenan 

Nican. 

Squayatch. 

Minah. 

Athiwack mithawashin. 

Athiwack mithawashin, 

Nitha. 

Kitha.] 



ROCKY ISLANDS. 



345 



[They or them - 

We - - - - 

My or mine - - 

Your s - - 

Whom - - 

His or her s - - 

All 

Some or some few 

The same - - - 
All the world 

All the men - - 

More - - - - 

Sometimes - - 

Arrive - - - - 

Beat - - - - 

To burn - - - 

To sing - - - 

To cut - - - - 

To hide - - - 

To cover - - - 

To believe - - 

To sleep - - - 

To dispute - - 

To dance - - - 

To give - - - 

To do - - - - 

To eat - - - - 

To die - - - - 

To forget - - - 

To speak - - - 

To cry (tears) - 

To laugh - - - 

To set down - - 

To walk - - - 

To fall - - - - 

To work - - - 

To kill - - - 

To sell - - - 

To live - - - 

To see - - - 

To come - - - 

Enough - - - 

Cry (tears) - - 

It hails - - - 

There is - - - 

There is some - 

It rains - - - 
After to-morrow 

To-day - - - 

There-away - - 

Much - - - - 

Presently - - - 

Make, heart - - 
This morning 

VOL. IV, 



Knisteneaux, 
Withawaw. 
Nithawaw. 
Nitayan. 
Kitayan. 
Awoine. 
Otayan. 
Kakithau. 
Pey peyac. 
Tabes co utch. 
Missi acki wanque. 
Kakithaw Ethinyock. 
Mina. 

I as-cow-puco. 
Ta couchin. 
Otamaha. 
Mistascasoo. 
Nagamoun. 
Kisquishan. 
Catann. 
Acquahoun. 
Taboitam. 
Nepan. 

Ne ko mi towock. 
Nemaytow. 
Mith. 
Ogitann. 
Wissinee. 
Nepew. 

Winnekiskisew. 
Athimetakouse. 
Mantow. 
Papew. 
Nematappe. 
Pimoutais. 
Packisin. 
Ah tus kew. 
Nipahaw. 
Attawom. 
Pimatise. 
Wabam. 
Astamotch. 
Egothigog. 
Manteau. 
Shisigan. 

&amp;gt; Aya wa. 

Quimiwoin. 
Awis wabank. 
Anoutch. 
Netoi. 
Michett. 
Pischisqua. 
Quithipeh. 
ShebaSo 



This night - 

Above - - - 

Below - - - 

Truly - - - 

Already - - 
Yet, more 
Yesterday 

Far - - - - 

Near - - - 

Never - - 

No - - - - 

Yes - -:. - 
By and by 

Always - - 

Make haste - 
Its long since 



Knisteneaux. 

- Tibiscag. 

- Espiming. 

- Tabassish. 

- Taboiy. 

- Sashay. 

- Minah. 

- Tacoushick. 

- Wathow. 

- Quishiwoac. 

- Nima wecatch. 

- Nima. 

- Ah. 

- Pa-nima. 

- Ka-ki-kee. 

- Quethepeh. 

- Mewaisha. 



Some account of the Chepewyan or Chepawas In* 
dians. 

They are a numerous people, who consider 
the country between the parallels of lat. 60 and 
65 n. and long. 100 to 110 w. as their lands 
or home. They speak a copious language, which 
is very difficult to be attained. 

It is not possible to form any just estimate of 
their numbers, but it is apparent, nevertheless, 
that they are by no means proportionate to the 
vast extent of their territories, which may, in 
some degree, be attributed to the ravages of 
the small-pox, which are more or less evident 
throughout this part of the continent. 

The notion which these people entertain of 
the creation, is of a very singular nature. They 
believe that, at the first, the globe was one vast 
and entire ocean, inhabited by no living creature, 
except a mighty bird, whose eyes were fire, 
whose glances were lightning, and the clapping 
of whose wings was thunder. On his descent to 
the ocean, and touching it, the earth instantly 
arose, and remained on the surface of the waters. 
This omnipotent bird then called forth all the 
variety of animals from the earth, except the 
Chepewyans, who were produced from a dog ; 
and this circumstance occasions their aversion to 
the flesh of that animal, as well as the people 
who eat it. This extraordinary tradition proceeds 
to relate, that the great bird, having finished his 
work, made an arrow, which was to be preserved 
with great care, and to remain untouched: but 
that the Chepewyans were so devoid of under 
standing, as to carry it away, and the sacrilege 
so enraged the great bird, that he has never since 
appeared. 

They have also a tradition among them, that] 



346 



ROCKY ISLANDS. 



[they originally came from another country, in 
habited by very wicked people, and had tra 
versed a great lake which was narrow, shallow, 
and full of islands, where they had suffered great 
misery, it being always winter, with ice and deep 
snow. At the Copper-mine River, where they 
made the first land, the ground was covered with 
copper, over which a body of earth had since 
been collected, to the depth of a man s height. 
They believe also, that in ancient times their an 
cestors lived till their feet were worn out with 
walking, and their throats with eating. They 
describe a deluge, when the waters spread over 
the whole earth, except the highest mountains, 
on the tops of which they preserved themselves. 

They believe, that immediately after their 
death, they pass into another world, where they 
arrive at a large river, on which they embark 
in a stone canoe, and that a gentle current bears 
them on to an extensive lake, in the centre of 
which is a most beautiful island; and that, in 
the view of this delightful abode, they receive 
that judgment for their conduct during life, which 
terminates their final state and unalterable allot 
ment. If their good actions are declared to pre 
dominate, they are landed upon the island, where 
there is to be no end to their happiness ; which, 
however, according to their notions, consists in 
an eternal enjoyment of sensual pleasure, and 
carnal gratification. But if there be bad actions 
to weigh down the balance, the stone canoe sinks 
at once, and leaves them up to their chins in the 
water, to behold and regret the reward enjoyed 
by the good, and eternally struggling, but with un 
availing endeavours, to reach the blissful island, 
from which they are excluded for ever. 

They have some faint notions of the transmi 
gration of the soul ; so that if a child be born 
with teeth, they instantly imagine, from its pre 
mature appearance, that it bears a resemblance 
to some person who had lived to an advanced 
period, and that he has assumed a renovated life, 
with these extraordinary tokens of maturity. 

The Chepewyans are sober, timorous, and va 
grant, with a selfish disposition, which has some 
times created suspicions of their integrity. Their 
stature has nothing remarkable in it; but though 
they are seldom corpulent, they are sometimes 
robust. Their complexion is swarthy ; their fea 
tures coarse, and their hair lank, but not always 
of a dingy black, nor have they universally the 
piercing eye, which generally animates the In 
dian countenance. The women have a more 
agreeable aspect than the men, but their gait is 
awkward, which proceeds from their being ac 



customed nine months in the year to travel on 
snow-shoes, and drag sledges of a weight from 
two to 400 pounds. They are very submissive to 
their husbands, who have, however, their fits of 
jealousy ; and, for very trifling causes, treat 
them with such cruelty as sometimes to occasion 
their death. They are frequently objects of 
traffic ; and the father possesses the right of dis 
posing of his daughter. They do not, however, 
sell them as slaves, but as companions to those 
who are supposed to live more comfortably than 
themselves. The men in general extract their 
beards, though some of them are seen to prefer 
a bushy, black beard, to a smooth chin. They 
cut their hair in various forms, or leave it in a 
long natural flow, according as their caprice or 
fancy suggests. The women always wear it in 
a great length, and some of them are very at 
tentive to its arrangement. If they at any time 
appear despoiled of their tresses, it is to be 
esteemed a proof of the husband s jealousy, and 
is considered as a severer punishment than ma 
nual correction. Both sexes have blue or black 
bars, or from one to four straight lines on their 
cheeks or forehead, to distinguish the tribe to 
which they belong. These marks are either ta- 
tooed, or made by drawing a thread, dipped in 
the necessary colour, beneath the skin. 

There are no people more attentive to the 
comforts of their dress, or less anxious respect 
ing its exterior appearance. In the winter it is 
composed of the skins of deer, and their fawns, 
and dressed as fine as any chamois leather, in 
the hair. In the summer their apparel is the 
same, except that it is prepared without the 
hair. The shoes and leggings are sewn together, 
the latter reaching upwards, to the middle, and 
being supported by a belt, under which a small 
piece of leather is drawn to cover the private 
parts, the ends of which fall down both before 
and behind. In the shoes they put the hair of 
the moose or rein-deer, with additional pieces of 
leather as socks. The shirt or coat, when girted 
round the waist, reaches the middle of the thigh, 
and the mittens are sewed to the sleeves, or are 
suspended by strings from the shoulders. A ruff 
or tippet surrounds the neck, and the skin of the 
head of the deer forms a curious kind of cap. A 
robe, made of several deer or fawn skins sewed 
together, covers the whole. This dress is worn 
single or double, but always in the winter, with 
the hair within and without. Thus arrayed, a 
Chepewyan will lay himself down on the ice in 
the middle of a lake, and repose in comfort ; 
though he will sometimes find a difficulty in thel 



ROCKY ISLANDS. 



347 



[morning to disencumber himself from the snow 
drifted on him during- the night. If in his pas 
sage he should be in want of provision, he cuts 
a hole in the ice, when he seldom fails of taking 
some trout or pike, whose eyes he instantly 
scoops out, and eats as a great delicacy ; but if 
they should not be sufficient to satisfy his appe 
tite, he will, in this necessity, make his meal of 
the fish in its raw state ; but they generally pre 
fer to dress their victuals when circumstances 
will admit the necessary preparation. When they 
are in that part of their country which does not 
produce a sufficient quantity of wood for fuel, 
they are reduced to the same exigency, though 
they generally dry their meat in the sun. 

The provision called pemican, on which the 
Chepewyans, as well as the other savages of this 
country, chiefly subsist in their journeys, is pre 
pared in the following manner. The lean parts 
of the flesh of the larger animals are cut in thin 
slices, and are placed on a wooden grate over a 
slow fire, or exposed to the sun, and sometimes 
to the frost. These operations dry it, and in 
that state it is pounded between two stones : it 
will then keep with care for several years. If, 
however, it is kept in large quantities, it is dis 
posed to ferment in the spring of the year, when 
it must be exposed to the air, or it will soon 
decay. The inside fat, and that of the rump, 
which is much thicker in these wild than our 
domestic animals, is melted down and mixed, in 
a boiling state, with the pounded meat, in equal 
proportions : it is then put in baskets or bags for 
the convenience of carrying it. Thus it becomes 
a nutritious food, and is eaten, without any fur 
ther preparation, or the addition of spice, salt, 
or any vegetable or farinaceous substance. A 
little time reconciles it to the palate. There is 
another sort, made with the addition of marrow 
and dried berries, which is of a superior quality. 

The dress of the women differs from that of 
the men. Their leggings are tied below the 
knee ; and their coat or shift is wide, hanging 
down to the ancle, and is tucked up at pleasure 
by means of a belt, which is fastened round the 
waist. Those who have children have these 
garments made full about the shoulders, and 
when they are travelling they carry their infants 
upon their backs, next their skin, in which situ 
ation they are perfectly comfortable, and in a 
position convenient to be suckled. Nor do they 
discontinue to give their milk to them until they 
Lave another child. Child-birth is not the object 
of the same tender care and serious attention 
among the savages as it is among civilized peo? 



pie. At this period no part of their usual occu 
pation is omitted, and this continual and regular 
exercise must contribute to the welfare of the 
mother, both in the progress of parturition and 
in the moment of delivery. The women have a 
singular custom of cutting off a small piece of 
the navel-string of the new-born children, and 
hanging it about their necks : they are curious in 
the covering they make for it, which they deco 
rate with porcupines quills and beads. 

Though the women are as much in the power 
of the men, as any other articles of their pro 
perty, they are always consulted, and possess a 
very considerable influence in the traffic with 
Europeans, and other important concerns. 

Plurality of wives is common among them, and 
the ceremony of marriage is of a very simple na 
ture. The girls are betrothed at a very early 
period to those whom the parents think the best 
able to support them, nor is the inclination of 
the woman considered. Whenever a separation 
takes place, which sometimes happens, it depends 
entirely on the will and pleasure of the husband. 
In common with the other Indians of this coun 
try, they have a custom respecting the periodical 
state of a woman, which is rigorously observed ; 
at that time she must seclude herself from society. 
They are not even allowed, in that situation, to 
keep the same path as the men, when travelling; 
and it is considered a great breach of decency for 
a woman so circumstanced to touch any utensils 
of manly occupation. Such a circumstance is 
supposed to defile them, so that their subsequent 
use would be followed by certain mischief or 
misfortune. There are particular skins which the 
women never touch, as of the bear and wolf, and 
those animals the men are seldom known to kill. 

They are not remarkable for their activity as 
hunters, which is owing to the ease with which 
they snare deer and spear fish; and these occu 
pations are not beyond the strength of their old 
men, women, and boys : so that they participate 
in those laborious occupations, which, among 
their neighbours, are confined to the women. 
They make war on the Esquimaux, who cannot 
resist their superior numbers, and put them to 
death ; as it is a principle with them never to 
make prisoners. At the same time they tamely 
submit to the Knisteneaux, who are not so nu 
merous as themselves, when they treat them as 
enemies. 

They do not affect that cold reserve at meeting 
either among themselves or strangers, which is 
common with the Knisteneaux, but communicate 
mutually, and at once, all the information of} 

Y Y2 



.348 



ROCKY ISLANDS. 



[which they are possessed. Nor are they roused 
like them from an apparent torpor to a state of 
great activity. They are consequently more uni 
form in this respect, though they are of a very 
persevering disposition when their interest is 
concerned. 

As these people are not addicted to spirituous 
liquors, they have a regular and uninterrupted 
use of their understanding, which is always di 
rected to the advancement of their own interest ; 
and this disposition, as may be readily imagined, 
sometimes occasions them to be charged with 
fraudulent habits. They will submit with pa 
tience to the severest treatment, when they are 
conscious they deserve it, but will never forget 
nor forgive any wanton or unnecessary rigour. 
A moderate conduct is never found to fail, nor is 
it too much, perhaps, to assert, that they are, 
altogether, the most peaceable tribe of Indians 
known in N. America. 

There are conjurors and high-priests among 
them, who certainly operate in an extraordinary 
manner on the imaginations of the people in the 
cure of disorders. Their principal maladies are, 
the rheumatic pains, the flux and consumption. 
The venereal complaint is very common ; but 
though its progress is slow, it gradually under 
mines the constitution, and brings on premature 
decay. They have recourse to superstition for 
their cure, and charms are their only remedies, 
except the bark of the willow, which, being 
burned and reduced to powder, is strewed upon 
green wounds and ulcers, and places contrived 
for promoting perspiration. Of the use of sim 
ples and plants they have no knowledge; nor 
can it be expected, as their country does not 
produce them. 

Though they have enjoyed so long an inter 
course with Europeans, their country is so bar 
ren, as not to be capable of producing the ordi 
nary necessaries naturally introduced by such a 
communication ; and they continue, in a great 
measure, their own inconvenient and awkward 
modes of taking their game, and preparing it 
when taken. Sometimes they drive the deer into 
the small lakes, where they spear them, or force 
them into enclosures, where the bow and arrow 
are employed against them. These animals are 
also taken in snares made of skin. In the former 
instance, the game is divided among those who 
have been engaged in the pursuit of it. In the 
latter, it is considered as private property ; 
nevertheless, any unsuccessful hunter passing by, 
may take a deer so caught, leaving the hgad, 
skin, and saddle, for the owner. Thus, though 



they have no regular government, as every man 
is lord in his own family, they are influenced, 
more or less, by certain principles, which con 
duce to their general benefit. 

In their quarrels with each other, they very 
rarely proceed to a greater degree of violence 
than is occasioned by blows, wrestling, and pull 
ing of the hair; while their abusive language 
consists in applying the name of the most offen 
sive animal to the object of their displeasure, and 
adding the term ugly, and chiay, or stillborn. 
This name is also applicable to the foetus of an 
animal when killed, which is considered as one 
of the greatest delicacies. 

Their arms and domestic apparatus, in addi 
tion to the articles procured from Americans, are 
spears, bows and arrows, fishing-nets, and lines 
made of green deer-skin thongs. They have 
also nets for taking the beaver as he endeavours 
to escape from his lodge when it is broken open. 
It is set in a particular manner for the purpose, 
and a man is employed to watch the moment 
when he enters the snare, or he would soon cut 
his way through it. He is then thrown upon 
the ice, where he remains as if he had no life in 
him. 

The snow-shoes are of a very superior work 
manship. The inner part of their frame is 
straight, the outer one is curved, and it is pointed 
at both ends, with that in front turned up. They 
are also laced with great neatness with thongs 
made of deer-skin. The sledges are formed of 
thin slips of board turned up also in front, and 
are highly polished with crooked knives, in order 
to slide along with facility. Close-grained wood 
is, on that account, the best ; but their s are 
made of the red or swamp spruce fir-tree. 

The country, which these people claim as their 
land, has a very small quantity of earth, and 
produces little or no wood or herbage. Its chief 
vegetable substance is the moss, on which their 
deer feed ; and a kind of rock-moss, which, in 
times of scarcity, preserves the lives of the na 
tives. When boiled in water, it dissolves into a 
clammy glutinous substance, that affords a very 
sufficient nourishment. But, notwithstanding 
the barren state of their country, with proper 
care and economy, these people might live in 
great comfort, for the lakes abound with fish, and 
the hills are covered with deer. Though, of all the 
Indian people of this continent, they are consider 
ed as the most provident, they suffer severely at 
certain seasons, and particularly in the dead of 
winter, when they are under the necessity of re 
tiring to their scanty woods. To the w. of them] 



ROC 

[the musk-ox may be found, but they have no de 
pendence on it as an article of sustenance. There 
are also large hares, a few white wolves, pecu 
liar to their country, and several kinds of foxes, 
with white and grey partridges, &amp;c. The beaver 
and moose-deer they do not find until they come 
\vithin 60 degrees n. lat. and the buffalo is still 
further s. That animal is known to frequent a 
higher latitude to the westward of their country. 
These people bring pieces of variegated marble, 
which are found on the surface of the earth. It 
is easily worked, bears a fine polish, and hardens 
with time. It endures heat, and is manufactured 
into pipes or calumets, as they are very fond of 
smoking tobacco ; a luxury which the Europeans 
communicated to them. 

Their amusements or recreations are but few. 
Their music is so inharmonious, and their danc 
ing so awkward, that they might be supposed to 
be ashamed of both, as they very seldom practise 
either. They also shoot at marks, and play at 
the games common among them ; but in fact pre 
fer sleeping to either ; and the greater part of 
their time is passed in procuring food, and rest 
ing; from the toil necessary to obtain it. 

They are also of a querulous disposition, and 
are continually making complaints : which they 
express by a constant repetition of the word 
eduiy, " it is hard," in a whining and plaintive 
tone of voice. 

They are superstitious in the extreme, and 
almost every action of their lives, however tri 
vial, is more or less influenced by some whimsi 
cal notion. They are not known to have any 
particular form of religious worship ; but, as 
they believe in a good and evil spirit, and a state 
of future rewards and punishments, they cannot 
be devoid of religious impressions. At the same 
time, they manifest a decided unwillingness to 
make any communications on the subject. 

The Chepewyans have been accused of aban 
doning their aged and infirm people to perish, 
and of not burying their dead ; but these are 
melancholy necessities, which proceed from their 
wandering way of life. They are by no means 
Universal, for Mr. Mackenzie asserts a fact with 
in his own knowledge, of a man rendered help 
less by palsy, being carried about for many years, 
with the greatest tenderness and attention, till 
he died a natural death. That they should not 
bury their dead in their own country, cannot be 
imputed to them as a custom arising from a sa 
vage insensibility, as they inhabit such high la 
titudes, that the ground never thaws ; but it is 
well known, that, when they are in the woods, 



ROD 



349 



they cover their dead with trees. Besides, they ma 
nifest no common respect to the memory of their 
departed friends, by a long period of mourning, 
cutting off their hair, and never make use of the 
property of the deceased. Nay, they frequently 
destroy or sacrifice their own, as a token of re 



gret or sorrow. 



If there be any people who, from the barren 
state of the country, might be supposed to be 
cannibals by nature, these people, from the dif 
ficulty they, at times, experience in procuring 
food, might be liable to that imputation. But, 
in. all Mr. Mackenzie s knowledge of them, he 
never was acquainted with one instance of that 
disposition ; nor among all the natives which he 
met with, in a route of 5000 miles, did he see 
or hear of an example of cannibalism, but such 
as arose from that irresistible necessity, which 
has been known to impel even the most civilized 
people to eat each other. 

For some further account of the Indian na 
tions inhabiting these parts, see article MISSOU 
RI, Vol. III. page 276, of this Dictionary.] 

[RocKF River, in the N. W. Territoy, falls 
into the e. side of Mississippi River, about 70 
miles below the mouth of Mine River. A lead 
mine extends from the mouth of this river on 
the banks of the Mississippi, more than 100 miles 
upwards.] 

ROCO, a settlement of the province and cor- 
regimiento of Tarma in Peru, annexed to the 
curacy of Chacayan. 

ROCOS, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Quillota in the kingdom of 
Chile ; on the shore of the river Ligua. 

ROCROI, Bay of, on theo?. coast of the island 
Guadaloupe, between the river Vieux Habitans 
and that of Plesis. 

RODANTE, a settlement of the province and 
captainship of San Vicente in Brazil, on the 
shore of the river Cahy or Caiyi. 

RODAS, a settlement of the province and go 
vernment of Antioquia in the Nuevo Reyno de 
Granada. 

RODE ISLAND. [See RHODE ISLAND.] 

[RODNEY, Point, on the n. w. coast of N. 
America, is the n. point of Norton Sound. Sledge 
Island is s. e. e. of it, four leagues between 
which and the continent is anchorage in seven 
fathoms. This point has its name in honour of 
the celebrated admiral, Lord Rodney. Lat. 64 
40 n. long. 166 3 / o&amp;gt;.] 

[RODRIGUES Key, on the coast of Florida, 
a pretty large sand or shoal, lying off Key Lar 
go, and bears from Tavernies Key n. n. e. y e. 



350 



R O L 



ROM 



five miles. The roots of the trees are always 
overflowed. Lat. 25 45 n. long. 80 32 o&amp;gt;.] 

RODRIGUEZ, a river of the province and 
government of San Juan de los Llanos in the 
Nuevo Reyno de Granada. It rises in the sierra 
of Los Pardaos, to the n. of Timana, and after 
wards joins the Iscance to enter the Caqueta. 

RODRIGUEZ, also with the surname of Diego, 
some shoals or rocks on the coast of the province 
and captainship of Pernambuco in Brazil, be 
tween the rivers Yaqueacu and Arecife de San 
Francisco. 

ROE, a settlement of the island of Barbadoes, 
on the w. coast. 

[ROEBUCK Island, at the e. extremity of 
Lake Ontario. See FOREST ISLAND.] 

ROGAGUALO, Lake of, in the province and 
government of Moxos of the kingdom of Quito. 
It is large, of an oval figure, and formed by a 
waste water of a channel or arm of the river 
Beni; and runs out by another river, which they 
call De la Exaltacion, into the Marmore. [From 
the above lake three more rivers flow from its n. 
shore, and which empty into the Amazon.] 

ROGER, TROU DE JEAN, a small port of the 
island of St. Domingo, in the part possessed by 
the French, and in the w. head, between Petit 
Goave and the river Del Estero. 

[ROGERS Road, so called from the person 
under whose direction it was made, in 1790. It 
leads through Clinton County in New York State 
into Canada ; and is much used in winter, when 
passing the lakes is often dangerous, and always 
uncomfortable.] 

[ROGERSVILLE, the chief town of Haw- 
kin s County, Tennessee. The road from Knox- 
ville to Philadelphia, 652 English miles, road 
distance, passes by Rogersville, Ross s Furnace, 
Abingdon, English s Ferry, on New River, Big 
Lick ; Peytonsburg, Rockbridge, Lexington, 
Staunton, New-market, Winchester, Frederick- 
town, York, and Lancaster.] 

ROGUAQUE, Cape of, on the s. coast of 
Nova Scotia, within the Bay of Fundy. 

ROIPERA, a settlement of the province and 
captainship of Todos Santos in Brazil, on the sea- 
coast, and at the mouth of the river Saguaripa. 

[ROLAND S Table, on the main land of the 
e. coast of the district of Gaspee, in Lower Ca 
nada, and w. part of the Gulf of St. Lawrence, 
is a flat mountain, which shows itself off to sea 
ward ; appears above several others, and serves 
to find out Isle Percee, or Pierced Island, 15 
miles from Cape Gaspee. The island of Bona- 
ventura is three miles beyond it.] 



ROLDAN, Island of, in Port Deseado ; in 
the coast which lies between the Plata and the 
Straits of Magellan, and in the interior of that 
port. 

ROLDAN, CAMPANA DE, a mountain of the 
s. coast of the Straits of Magellan, in the chan 
nel of San Juan. 

ROLDANILLO, a settlement of the province 
and government of Cumana, situate on the w. 
side of this city, and being almost entirely 
ruined. 

[ROLLING Fork, a main s. branch of Salt 
River in Kentucky. The towns of Lystra and 
Bealsburg stand on this river.] 

ROLLONA, River of the, in the island of 
St. Domingo, and part of the French. It runs 
s. s. e. in the w. head, and enters the sea between 
the port of Leogane and the river Del Estero. 
ROMAIN. See CARTERET. 
ROMAINAS, a barbarous nation of Indians, 
descended from the Mainas, in the province and 
government of this name and kingdom of Quito. 
They dwell in the woods to the e. of the river 
Pastaza and to the w. of the Tigre, and are 
bounded by the Zapas or Incuris by the s. and 
s. e. but are now very few, and live dispersed in 
those woods, being of a disposition the most fickle 
that can be imagined. 

[ROMAN, Cape, on the coast of S. Carolina. 
From hence to Charleston Light-house the course 
w. s. w. 5 w. 21 leagues.] 

[ROMAN, Cape, on the coast of Florida, is 
20| leagues n. w. by n. of Cape Sable, the s. w. 
point of the peninsula of Florida.] 

ROMAN, S. Cape of, a point of land on the 
coast of the province and government of Vene 
zuela and Nuevo Reyno de Granada, 13 leagues 
from Mazola. 

ROMANA, River of the, in the island of St. 
Domingo ; which rises in the mountains of the 
e. head near the town of Bayaguana, runs s. and 
enters the sea in the Bay of Caballos, opposite 
the island Catharine. 

[ROMANO, or ROMANO CAYO, a small island 
off the n. shore of the island of Cuba. It is long 
and narrow, and at the e. extremity of that clus 
ter of isles called the King s Garden.] 

[ROME, a post-town of New York, Herke- 
mer County, on Mohawk River, eight miles w, 
of Whitestown. This township was taken from 
Steuben, and incorporated in 1796. Fort Stan- 
wix, called also New Fort Schuyler, is in this 
town.] 

ROME, a settlement of the Portuguese, in the 
kingdom of Brazil, and territory of tne Guayazas 



RON 

Indians; on the shore of a river which enters the 
Paranaibo. 

ROMERAL, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Quillota in the kingdom of 
Chile, on the shore of the river Quillota. 

[ROMNEY, the chief town of Hampshire 
County, Virginia, contains about 70 dwelling- 
houses, a brick court-house, and a stone gaol. 
It is situate on the w. bank of the s. w. branch 
of Patowmac River, 23 miles w. by n. of Win 
chester, 16 n. e. by n, of Moorfields. It is a 
post town, and is 170 miles w. by s. of Phila 
delphia.] 

ROMO, a port of the e. coast of the province 
and government of Florida, formed by the island 
of San Anastasio. 

ROMONTABO, a settlement of the island 
of Cayenne, on the lofty part of a mountain in 
a point of land formed by the coast. 

[ROMOPACK, a village in Bergen County, 
New Jersey, on Romopack River, 15 or 20 miles 
n. of Patterson.] 

ROMPEDERO, a lake of the province and 
government of Santa Marta in the Nuevo Reyno 
de Granada ; formed by the waters of the river 
Grande de la Magdalena, on the e. side, below 
the port of Ocana. 

[ROMULUS, a military township in New 
York State, Onondago County, between Seneca 
and Cayuga Lakes. The high road to the ferry 
at Cayuga Lake runs through its n. part. It was 
incorporated in 1794; and has within its juris 
diction the townships of Junius and Galen, to 
gether with the lands lying w. of Hannibal and 
Cato, n. of the township of Galen, and s. of Lake 
Ontario, and that part of the lands reserved to 
the Cayuga nation of Indians, w. of Cayuga Lake. 
In the year 1796, 123 of its inhabitants were 
electors.] 

ROMUNCA, an island of the river of Las 
Amazonas ; formed by an arm of it which enters 
tlie river Negro, a little before its mouth. 

ROMUNCACHA, a river of the province and 
country of Las Amazonas, in the territory pos 
sessed by the Portuguese. It is an arm of the 
Negro, which runs to enter the Maranon, just 
before that the whole of its waters do the same. 

ROMUS, a large island of Las Amazonas, 
formed by this river and the Paranaiba. 

RON, a settlement of the province and corre 
gimiento of Luya and Chillaos in Peru; of a very 
hot temperature. 

RONABO, a settlement of the province and 
government of French Guayana, between the 
coast and the river Cayenne, 



R O P 



351 



RONCADOR, a small island of the N. Sea, 
one of the Antilles. [Thirty-five miles e. n. e. of 
Old Providence, and 57 s. of Serranilla or Pearl 
Islands. Lat. 13 32 30" s. and long. 80 4 w.~] 

RONDAMILLO, a settlement of the province 
and government of Popayan in the NuevoReyno 
de Granada ; between some mountains, on the 
shore of an abundant river. 

[RONDE, RHONDE ISLAND, or REDONDA, 
one of the Grenadines, dependant on the island 
of Grenada, in the W. Indies ; situate about 
mid-way between Cariacou or Cariovacou and 
the n. end of Grenada, about six. miles n. of 
Grenada, and 11 s. w. of Cariovacou. It con 
tains about 500 acres of excellent land, which 
are wholly applied to pasturage, and the culti 
vation of cotton. In lat. 12 19 n. and long. 

epasKstf.] 

RONDE, or REDONDA, a very lofty round 
mountain in the island of St. Christopher, one 
of the Antilles : towards the s. e. extremity, in 
the part held by the French when the English 
took possession of it. 

RONDE, an island of the S. Sea, within the bay 
of the island of Falkland. 

RONDE, another, a small island of Lake Supe 
rior in Canada ; near the s. coast, and opposite 
the point of Chagovamigon. 

RONDE, another island, near the coast of Nova 
Scotia, orAcadia. 

RONDOCAN, a settlement of the province 
and corregimiento of Quispicanche in Peru, an 
nexed to the curacy of the settlement of Quis- 
huares. 

RONDOS, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Guamalies, in the same kingdom 
as the former ; annexed to the curacy of the set 
tlement of Banos. 

RONDOS, another, in the province and corre 
gimiento of Tarma, in the same kingdom ; an 
nexed to the curacy of the settlement of Parian- 
chacra. 

RONGUA, a settlement of the province and 
captainship of San Vicente in Brasil ; between 
the settlements of Escama and Rio Verde. 

ROOTSER, a settlement of the island of Bar- 
badoes in the district and parish of St. Thomas. 

[ROPE Ferry, a ferry across a bay in the 
town of New London, in Connecticut; four miles 
s. w. by w. of New London city, on the post-road 
to New Haven. The bay sets up from Long 
Island Sound, between Millstone Point and Black 
Point in Lyme. In August, 1796, a bridge, 500 
feet long, was built across this ferry, two miles 
above Millstone Point, where the water is 18 feet 



352 



R O S 



deep. The bridge is 24 feet broad, with a sliding 
draw.] 

[ROQUE, a small island near the coast of 
Venezuela. See ROCA.] 

ROQUE, a very prominent cape or point of the 
coast of Brazil, in the province and captainship 
of Rio Grande, between the river Cinaminin and 
the river Grandes. [It is called by the Portu- 

fuese Petitinga. In lat. 5 3 s. and long. 35 
5 w.~] 

ROQUE, a shoal, near the coast of the same 
province and kingdom as the former cape, and 
near to it. 

[RoQUE, SAN, a parish of the province and 
government of Buenos Ayres, situate near the 
Laguna (Lake) Ybera, at the source of the river 
Atores, about 70 miles s. of Corrientes, in lat. 
28 33 33" 5. long. 58 37 30" w.~\ 

ROQUES, some islands of the N. Sea, of the 
Lucayas. They are two, one greater than the 
other, and both of them lying between the islands 
of Yuma and St. Andrew. 

ROQUES, a shoal or isle near the island of 
Cuba. 

ROSA, SANTA, a settlement of Indians, of 
the province and government of Paraguay, situ 
ate on the confines of Laguna (Lake) Ybera, 
about four miles s. e. from Santa Maria Fe. In 
lat. 26 53 19" s. and long. 56 54 39" zo. 

Ros A, S. a settlement of the province and corre 
gimiento of Lampa in Peru. It is of a very cold 
temperature, as being situate very near the cordil- 
lera. It has, at the distance of four leagues, a well, 
which they call of the Inca, the mouth of which 
resembles a jug, and the waters of which are 
drank by the Indians, who assert that it is chicha; 
similar to that which they make of maize, but 
somewhat insipid, although of the same colour. 
It is thought to pass through certain minerals, 
by which it contracts this smell, colour, and taste. 

ROSA, another settlement, in the province and 
government of Quixos and Macas in the king 
dom of Quito ; near the grand river, Napo, in 
which there are some washing places of gold. It 
is fertile in yucas^ maize, and plantains ; its na 
tives are hunters, and so dextrous, as even to 
kill fish with their arrows. 

ROSA, another, of the province and govern 
ment of Santa Cruz de Iq. Sierra in Peru ; a re 
duction of the Chiquitos Indians made by the mis 
sionaries of the Jesuits. 

ROSA, another, of the province of Barcelona 
and government of Cumana ; one of those com 
posing the mission of the Franciscan fathers, the 
missionaries of Piritu. 



R O S 

ROSA, another, with the addition of Nueva. 
in the province and government of Moxos and 
kingdom of Quito ; on the shore of the river 
Itenes, and founded in 1768, to serve as a place 
of arms for the troops of the expedition made to 
quell the invasions of the Portuguese in that 
port, and which was commanded by Brigadier 
Don Francisco Pestana, President of Charcas. It 
is now abandoned. 

ROSA, another of converted Indians, of the 
Pantagua nation : bounded by the province and 
corregimiento of Guanuco in Peru ; and in it re 
sides a religious missionary of the order of San 
Francisco, of the college of Ocopa. 

ROSA, another, of the province and corregi 
miento of Tacunga in the kingdom of Quito; 
near the road which leads down to Guayaquil. 

ROSA, another, of the missions held by the 
religious of S. Francisco, in the district of the 
alcaldia mayor of Guadalcazar and kingdom of 
Nueva Espana. Thirty-three leagues e. of the 
head settlement of Tula. 

ROSA, another, of the province and corregi- 
mienlo of Quillota, in the kingdom of Chile, on 
the shore of the river of the same name as is the 
province. 

ROSA, another, of the province and govern 
ment of Maracaibo in the Nuevo Reyno de Gra 
nada ; on the shore of the river Masparro, about 
12 miles e. n. e. of the city of Barinas Nueva. 

ROSA, another, of the province and govern 
ment of Venezuela, in the same kingdom as the 
former ; on the shore of a river, to the e. of the 
city of Barquisimeto. 

ROSA, another, of the same province and king 
dom, between the rivers of La Portuguesa and 
Guarico, and nearest to the latter. 

ROSA, another, of the province and corregi 
miento of Pomabamba in Peru ; on the shore of 
a river of its name, and e. of the ruins of San 
Juan del Oro. 

ROSA, another, of the province and govern 
ment of Cartagena in the Nuevo Reyno de Gra 
nada; between two streams, and five leagues 
s. zo. of the capital. 

ROSA, another, of the missions which were 
held by the Jesuits, in the province and govern 
ment of Paraguay. [It is situate on a small 
branch of the Paraguay, about 32 miles e. from 
Ascuncion, in lat. 25 22 28" s. and long. 57 
3 19" o&amp;gt;.] 

ROSA, another, of the missions which were 
held by the said Jesuits, in the province of Cali 
fornia ; on the coast of the gulf and bay of Los 
Palmas. 



R O S 

ROSA, another of the province and govern 
ment of Popaydn in the Nuevo Reyno de Gra 
nada. 

ROSA, another, of the same province and 
kingdom, in the district and government of 
Pastos. 

ROSA, another, of the province and corregi- 
miento of Riobamba, and of the district of Ambato 
in the kingdom of Quito, s. of its capital ; and 
in its precincts is a large estate called Patalo. 

ROSA, another, with the surname of Viterbo, 
in the province and corregimiento of Tunja in the 
Nuevo Reyno de Granada ; in a delightful and 
pleasant plain, of a cold temperature, but healthy, 
and abounding in large and small cattle, wheat, 
maize, papas, and other vegetable productions 
of this climate. It contains 12 souls, and is eight 
leagues n. of Tunja. 

ROSA, a town, which was formerly of the name 
of San Rafael, in the province and corregimiento 
of Coqtiimbo in the kingdom of Chile. 

ROSA, another, in the province and corregi 
miento of Xauxa in Peru, e. of its capital. 

ROSA, a small river of the province and go 
vernment of Buenos Ayres ; which runs w. and 
enters the Uruguay between the Bellaco and the 
Negro. 

ROSA, another river, of the province and cor- 
regimiento of Pomabamba in Peru. It rises in 
the province of Larecaxa, runs n. and turning 
e. enters the Beni. 

ROSA, or ST. ROSE S, a bay on the coast of the 
province and government of Louisiana, defended 
by a very large island of the same name, extend 
ing as far as the Bay of Panzacola. The chan 
nel, which divides this island from the continent, 
is of sufficient width for vessels to pass from one 
bay to the other. The island abounds in water, 
and in game. The tides here are more regular 
than in other parts of the Gulf of Mexico, and 
happen periodically every 12 hours. 

[This bay stretches about 30 miles to the n. e. 
and is from four to eight miles broad. The bar 
before it has only seven or eight feet water, 
where deepest ; but within there is 16 or 17, as 
far as the Red Bluff on the main land. The 
peninsula between this bay and that of Penza- 
cola is generally of a very poor sandy soil, pro 
ducing, in some places, large pines and live oak. 
The largest river that falls into the bay is Chacta 
Hatcha, or Pea River, which runs from the n. e. 
and enters the e. extremity of the bay through 
several mouths, but so shoal that only a small 
boat or canoe can pass them. Mr. Hutchins as 
cended it about 25 leagues, where he found a 

VOL. IV. 



R O S 



353 



small party of the Coussac Indians. In long. 86 
42 zo. lat. 30 32 w.] 

[RosA, or ROSE ISLAND, extends along the 
mouth of the above bay, and is about 36 miles 
long, and no where above one mile broad. The 
channel at the e. end of the island is so choked 
up with a large shoal, in some places dry, that 
the deepest water is only four or five feet ; and 
the channel between Rose Island and the main 
is barely sufficient for boats or pettiaugers. 
Upon this island a quantity of salt is made 
annually.] 

ROSA, a fort and garrison, in the province and 
government of Paraguay, to restrain the Infidel 
Indians. 

[RosA, a cape in the Island of St. Domingo, 
e. n. e. \ e. of Cape Dame Marie, the w. point of 
the island, distant about seven leagues.] 

ROSAL, a settlement of the province and go 
vernment of Popayan in the Nuevo Reyno de 
Granada. 

ROSALIA, S. a settlement of the missions 
which were held by the Jesuits in the province 
of Tepeguana and kingdom of Nueva V r izcaya 
in N. America. 

ROSALIA, another, in the province of Califor 
nia; also of the missions which were held by the 
Jesuits : on the shore of the gulf and of the river 
Mulege, in the Bay of Concepcion. 

ROSALIA, a fort built by the French, in the 
province and government of Louisiana and terri 
tory of the Nanches Indians, on the shore of the 
river Mississippi, 105 miles n. of New Orleans, 
in a fertile and pleasant, but unhealthy, country; 
on which account it was abandoned. 

ROSARIO, a settlement and real of silver- 
mines ; the capital of the province of its name, 
on the zo. shore of the river of its name; called 
also Chametla. At the present day the greater 
part of these mines have filled with water, though 
they used formerly to be the source of great com 
merce. Its present population amounts to 5600 
souls. [It is 400 miles n. w. of Mexico, in lon-. 
1069 o&amp;gt;. lat. 2328 / w.] 

ROSARIO, another settlement, of the province 
and corregimiento of Chichas and Tarija in Peru; 
on the shore of the river Tarija. 

ROSARIO, another, of the province and go 
vernment of Tucurnan, in the same kingdom ; on 
the shore of the river of its name. 

ROSARIO, another, of the kingdom of Chile, 
in the valley of Tango. 

ROSARIO, another, of the province and go 
vernment of Valparaiso, in the same kingdom as 
the former; e. of the town of Santa Barbara, 
z z 




354 



R O S 



" ROSA RIO, another, of the province and cor- 
reqimiento of Colchagua in the same kingdom. 

ROSARIO, another, of the province and cap 
tainship of Portoseguro in Brazil, on the e. shore 
of the river Grande de San Francisco, opposite 
the mouth of the Paracatus. 

ROSARIO, another, of the province and cap 
tainship of Seara in the same kingdom as the 
former : on the coast between the river Camueip 
and the Bay of Cericuncua. 

ROSARIO, a town, of the province and govern 
ment of Buenos Ay res ; on the shore of the river 
Parana, and at the mouth of the river Carcaraiial. 

[ROSARIO, a town of the province and go 
vernment of Buenos Ayres, situate at the mouth 
of the Tercero River, where it enters the Parana 
about 75 miles s. of Santa Fe. Lat. 32 56 4". 
long. 60 51 20".] 

ROSARIO, a large and abundant river of the 
province and government of Tucuman in Peru, of 
the district and jurisdiction of the city of Salta. 
It changes its name according to the estates 
through which it passes ; has in the middle of it 
many shady islands which are covered with wil 
lows, as are the greater part of its plains ; and 
in these are some of the best places for breeding 
mules throughout the province. 

ROSARIO, another, a small river of the same 
province and kingdom as the former. It runs e. 
and enters the Salado, or Del Pasage. 

ROSARIO, another, a small river, of the pro 
vince and government of Buenos Ayres ; which 
runs s. on the side of the colony of Sacramento, 
and enters the Plata. 

ROSARIO, another river, of the province and 

government of Cartagena in the Nuevo Reyno 
e Granada. [This canal or river communicates 
with the Magdalena, and may be called an arm 
of that river, from whence it runs n. n. w. and 
enters the Cauca, forming an island about 41 
miles long, and about 19 broad.] 

ROSARIO, another, a small river in the pro 
vince and government of Choco, and district of 
Barbacoas, in the same kingdom as the former. 
It empties itself into the S. Sea, opposite the 
port of Tumaco, serving as limits of division to 
that coast and the government of Atacames or 
Esmeraldas. 

ROSARIO, a small island of the N. Sea to the 
w. of Cartagena. It is 1 j leagues long ; is low, 
of a very hot climate and desert: in lat. 10 10 w. 

ROSARIO, a rocky shoal, near the coast of the 
same province as the former, between Long 
Island and that of Baru. 

ROSAS, a river of the province and govern- 



11 O S 

ment of Venezuela in the Nuevo Reyno de Gra 
nada. It rises f. of the city of Barquisimeto, 
runs s. and turning to w. enters the Tucuyo. 

ROSE, a small river of the island of Guada- 
loupe, Avhich runs e. and enters the sea opposite 
the rivers Flament and Ccrcelles in the bay of 
the Cul de Sac Petit. 

ROSE, a cape or point of the s. e. coast of the 
island of Martinique, formed by the port of the 
Cul de Sac de Robert. 

ROSE, a sand-bank near the coast of New- 
England in N. America, with the additional title 
of Vieille ; and called also Crown-bank. It lies 
between Cape Cod and the island of Nantucket. 

ROSE, another, on the same coast, and near 
the former, called Nouvelle, to distinguish it. 

[RosE, ST. or JAYNA. The establishments in 
the plain of St. Rose, and those on the banks of the 
Jayna, on the s. side of the island of St. Domingo, 
are looked upon as depending on the city of St. 
Domingo. They are reckoned to contain at least 
2000 persons, for the most part people of colour, 
free and slaves. The river Jayna is three leagues 
w. of that city. The parish of St. Rose or Jayna, 
which has in its dependency the ancient rich po 
pulation of Bonaventure, is now reduced to a 
handful of individuals, whose employment is the 
breeding of cattle, or the washing of gold sand. 
Towards the source of the Jayna, and near the 
town of St. Rose, were the celebrated gold mines 
of St. Christopher ; in the neighbourhood of 
which Columbus erected a fort by the name of 
St. Christopher.] 

[RosE. See the articles under the title ROSA.] 

[ROSEAU, the capital of the island of Do- 
minieo, in the W. Indies. It is now called Char- 
lottetown, and is situate in St. George s parish, 
about seven leagues from Prince Rupert s Bay. 
It is on a point of land on the s. w. side of the 
island which forms two bays, viz. Woodbridge s 
Bay on the n. and Charlotteville Bay to the s. 
Roseau is about half a mile in length from Char 
lotteville to Roseau River, and mostly two fur 
longs in breadth, but is of an irregular figure. 
It contains more than 500 houses, besides cot 
tages occupied by Negroes. Whilst in possession 
of the French it contained upwards of 1000 houses. 
Lat. 15 17 n. long. 61 27 w.] 

ROSEAUX, a citv of the island St. Domingo, 
in the part of the trench, and on the w. coast. 
It enters the sea between Cape San Marcos and 
the Trou Forban. 

ROSEAUX, another, a small river of the pro 
vince and colony of N. Carolina ; which runs s. w. 
and enters that of Cumberland. 



R O U 



R O U 



ROSEAUX, another, also small, in the same 
province as the former ; which runs c. and enters 
the Conhaway. 

ROSEAUX, another, of the province and colony 
of S. Carolina ; which runs s. and enters the 
T rente Milles. 

ROSEAUX, a port of the island of Martinique, 
on the s. e. coast, between the ports Robert and 
Francois : at its entrance is a great sand-bank. 

ROSENDO, a fort of the kingdom of Chile, 
built by the Spaniards in the country of the 
Araucanos Indians, on the shore of the river 
Biobio, to restrain those infidels ; but who burnt 
and destroyed it in 1601. 

[ROSEWAY, Port, a populous sea-port town, 
on the s. e. coast -of Nova Scotia, n. e. by e. of 
Cape Negro and Harbour.] 

[ROSEVVAY Island lies at the mouth of Port 
Wager, on the .9. e. coast of Nova Scotia.] 

[ROSIA, Cape, in Penobscot Bay, district of 
Maine.] 

[HOSIERS, Cape, the s. limit of the mouth of 
the river St. Lawrence ; from whence it is 96 
miles across to the n. shore, measuring by the w. 
end of the island of Anticosti. This is the east 
ernmost point of the district of Gaspee, in Lower 
Canada. It has Florell Isle and Cape Gaspee 
on the s. Lat. 48 56 / n. long. 64 5 a?.] 

[ROSSIGNOL, Port, on the s. coast of Nova 
Scotia, a harbour to the s. w. of Port de 1 Hcve.] 

[ROSSIGNOL,, a considerable lake in Nova 
Scotia, between Liverpool and Annapolis. The 
Indians say it is the main source of Liverpool 
and Petit Rivers. It has been a place of resort 
for the Indians, on account of the favourable 
hunting grounds upon it.] 

[ROTTERDAM, or ANAMOCOE ISLE, one of 
the Friendly Islands, situate on the n. of Amster 
dam Isle ; remarkable for its fertility and the 
peaceable disposition of the inhabitants.] 

[ROTTERDAM, NEW, a new settlement on the 
n. side of Oneida Lake, in the state of New 
York.] 

ROTUNDA, a small island of the N. Sea, 
three leagues to the e. of Granada ; one of the 
smaller Antilles, and the fifth of the Granadillas. 
It is from s. to n. desert and uncultivated, and in 
lat. ll56 tt. 

ROVANIBO, a small river of the province 
of Guayana, in the French part; called also 
Karova, or Karovabo. 

ROUGE, or RED, a large and abundant river 
of the province and government of Louisiana in 
N. America. It rises in the province of New 
Mexico, n, c. of Santa Fe, runs s. e, and, collect 



ing the waters of another river, turns its course 
s. to the settlement and fort of Natchitoches, 
when it inclines again to s. e. forms various lakes 
and islands, and turning to e. enters, much en 
larged, into the Mississippi. [It is so called from 
its waters being of a red colour, and said to 
tinge those of the Mississippi in the time of the 
floods. It rises in New Mexico, its length in a 
straight line is about 730 miles, joins the Missis 
sippi 106 miles above New Orleans, 56 miles 
below Fort Rosalie ; 30 miles from its mouth it 
receives Noir, or Black River. Near 104 miles 
up Rouge River the French had a considerable 
post called Natchitoches, already mentioned, and 
which was a frontier to the Spanish settlements, 
being 20 miles from Fort Adayes. Some further 
description of this river may be found under the 
article RED, which is the more proper name.] 

ROUGE, another, a small river, in Canada, 
which runs s. w. and enters Lake Superior by the 
c. part. 

ROUGE, another, also small, of the same pro 
vince as the former. It runs 5. in the territory 
of the Araucanos Indians, and enters the St. 
Lawrence. 

ROUGE, another, a small river, of the island 
Martinique ; which runs n. e. and enters the sea 
between those of Capot and Grand Ance. 

ROUGE, a settlement and parish of the island 
St. Domingo, in the part possessed by the 
French ; on the n. coast, and on the shore of the 
Bay of Manzanillo. 

ROUGE, a small island, near the s. coast of 
the island of Newfoundland, in the interior of 
Plaisance, or Placentia Bay. 

ROUGE, a port in the same coast as the for 
mer island, and within the same bay. 

ROUGE, a small island in the river St. Law 
rence of Canada; opposite the mouth of the river 
Saguenay. 

ROUGE, a cape or point of land of the s. coast 
of Newfoundland ; and one of those forming the 
entrance of Plaisance, or Placentia Bay. 

ROUGE, another cape, in the same island and 
on the e. coast; between Cape Noir and the Tor- 
bay. 

ROUND, one of the small Virgin Isles, in 
the N. Sea; n. of Ginger Island, and s. of the 
cluster of isles called Old Jerusalem : in lat. 18 
10 / n. long. 62 52 w. 

[ROUND Bay, a fine bay, with good anchorage, 
situate on the w. side of the island of St. Lucia, 
in the W. Indies.] 

[Rou^D, Cape, on the coast of Labrador in 
N. America.] 



R O X 



[ROUND Heads, Indians inhabiting on Riviere 
aux Tetes Bowles, or Round Head River, in N. 
America. Warriors, 2000. | 

[ROUND Island, a small island on the coast of 
W. Florida, lies five miles n. from, and opposite 
to, the middle of Horn Island, and is well tim 
bered.] 

[RouxD Rock, one of the Virgin Islands, ;/. 
of Ginger Island.] 

[ROWAN, one of the most populous counties 
of N. Carolina, in Salisbury district; bounded 
n. by Iredell, and s. by Cabarrus. It contains 
15,828 inhabitants, including 1742 slaves.] 

[ROWE, a township in the n. w. corner of 
Hampshire County, Massachusetts ; bounded ;?. 
by the state of Vermont, and 130 miles n. w. of 
Boston. It is watered by Deerfield River, and 
contains 443 inhabitants.] 

[ROWLEY, a township of Massachusetts, 
Essex County, having Newbury on the n. e. and 
contains two parishes, besides a society of Ana 
baptists. The inhabitants, 1772 in number, are 
mostly farmers. Near its bounds with Newbury 
some specimens of black lead have been disco 
vered, and it is thought there is a considerable 
body of it, which may be hereafter an object of 
consequence. It is five or six miles n. by zo. of 
Ipswich, and 24 n. by e. of Boston, and was incor 
porated in J639.] 

ROXAS, a settlement of the province and 
eorregimitnto of Coquimbo in the kingdom of 
Chile ; on the shore of the river Lirnary. 

[RoxAs, a fort of the province and govern 
ment of Buenos Ayres, situate near the river 
Arecife, about 120 miles zo. of Buenos Ayres: 
lat. 34 1 1 30" s. long. 60 59 50" .J 

[RoxAs, HAITE DE, the heights in the dis 
trict of Bayaguana, in the middle of the e. part 
of the island of St. Domingo, are so called. Here 
Valverde saw, after having long sought for it in 
vain, a little quadruped, which in form and size 
resembled a sucking pig of a fortnight old, ex 
cept that its snout was a little longer : it had but 
very little hair, which was as fine as that of the 
dogs called Chinese. The town of Bayaguana 
is about four leagues s. e. by e. of Baya.] 

[ROXBOROUGH, a township of Pennsyl 
vania, situate in Philadelphia County.] 

[ROXBURY, a pleasant town in Norfolk 
County, Massachusetts, one mile s. w. of Boston. 
The township is now divided into three parishes, 
and was settled in 1630. In the three parishes 
are 2226 inhabitants. The first parish in this 
town has lately been connected with Boston Har 
bour by a canal. The Rev. John Elliot, the 



ROY 

apostle of the Indians, was the first minister who 
settled here. He translated the Bible and other 
pious books into the Indian language, and founded 
many religious societies among the Indians. 
Those of Natick and Mashpee, few in number, 
remain to this day. Jle died in 1670, after being 
pastor 60 years. ]} 

[ ROXBURY, a township in the zi). part of 
Orange County, Vermont, having only 14 inha 
bitants.] 

[RoxiiURY, a township of Morris County, 
New Jersey, on Musconecunk River, 25 miles 
from its confluence with the Delaware, and 38 
miles n. of Trenton. Near it is a mineral spring.] 

ROXO, Cape, of the coast of the province 
and alcaldia mayor of Tampico in Nucva Espaiia. 
Opposite the island of Lobos, and 50 leagues 
from the port of Vera Cruz. 

Roxo, another cape or point of land, on the 
n. coast of the island St. Domingo, between Port 
Caballo and the Pan Marrnouset. 

Roxo, another, which looks to s. s. e. of the 
island of San Juan de Puertorico, opposite the 
isle of Desecho. 

Roxo, a river of the province and govern 
ment of Louisiana in N. America; which runs e. 
and enters the Mississippi. 

ROXON, a settlement of the province and 
government of Cartagena in the Nuevo Reyno 
de Granada; near the coast, and between the 
settlements of Tubara and Usacusi. 

ROY, a small river of the island of Marti 
nique: which runs w. and enters the sea between 
the settlement of Precheur and the river of Ford 
de Canauville. 

ROY, a small river of the province and go 
vernment of Paraguay: which runs e. and enters 
the Parana, on the side of the river Japeribuy. 

ROYAL, CUL DE SAC, a large, handsome, 
and convenient bay of the island Martinique ; 
the best in the island, and on the shore of which 
stands the capital. 

ROYAL, an island of the river St. Lawrence, 
in Canada : 60 miles from Lake Ontario. It is 
of a verv fertile territory, and produces grain in 
abundance. It has a strong castle, which was 
built by the French, when it was taken by the 
English commanded by General Amherst in 1760, 
after a two-days siege. 

[ROYAL Bay, is a short distance to the e. 
southerly of Boon s Point, at the n. part of the 
island of Antigua in the W. Indies.] 

ROYAL Island, one of the Bahama Islands, in? 
which there is a very secure harbour for small 
vessels. It is on the s. side of the island upor*. 



RUG 

which there are a few settlers. Royal Island 
lies to the e. of Egg Island, n. w. from New Pro 
vidence. 

[ROYAL S River, in Cumberland County, Maine, 
empties into Casco Bay, in the township of North 
Yarmouth.] 

[ROYALTON, a township in Windsor County, 
Vermont, n. w. of Hartford, on White River, and 
contains 748 inhabitants.] 

[ROYALSTON, a township of Massachu 
setts, Worcester, 35 miles n. w. by n. of Worces 
ter, and CO n. w. of Boston. It was incorporated 
in 1665, and contains 1130 inhabitants. Miller s 
River runs through this town from the e.~] 

RUALLAGA, a principal and head settle 
ment of the district of the alcaldia mayor of Vil- 
lalta in Nueva Espana. It is of a cold tempe 
rature, contains 132 families of Indians dedicated 
to the labour and cultivation of maize, and is 
two leagues e. of its capital. 

RUAN, a settlement of the province of Osti- 
muri, on the shore of the coast of the Gulf of 
California. 

[RUATAN, an island in the Bay of Honduras. 
See ROATAN.] 

RUBIO, a river of the province and govern 
ment of Venezuela in the N uevo Reyno de Gra 
nada. It laves the country of the ancient nation 
of the Ziparas, runs e. and enters the sea in the 
Gulf of Venezuela by the w. part, opposite the 
island of Las Paiomas, n.n. w. of Maracaibo. 

RUBIO, another, a small river, in the province 
and government of Tucuman and kingdom of 
Peru. It runs e. and enters the Paraguay or 
Parana, between the Blanco and the Gomez. 

RUCA, a small river of the province and go 
vernment of Venezuela in the Nuevo Reyno de 
Granada. It rises to the e. of the city of Coro, runs 
n. forming a curve, and enters the sea between 
the port of this city and the river Guaique. 

RUCANA, an ancient province of Peru, to 
the n. of Cuzco : it was bounded e. by the pro 
vince of Apucara, and s. by that of Hatun-rucana : 
conquered and united to the empire by Inca Ca- 
pac-Yupanqui, fifth emperor. 

RUCARADAS, a settlement of the province 
and captainship of Para in Brazil ; on the shore 
of the river of Dos Bocas, near its entrance into 
that of Las Amazonas. 

RUCUE, a small river of the island of Laxa 
in the kingdom of Chile ; which runs n. n. w. and 
enters the river Laxa. On its shore, at its source, 
a town is begun to be founded. 

[RUGELEY S Mills, in S. Carolina, are about 
10 miles n. of Camden, near the westernmost 



&amp; U M 



357 



branch of Lynche s Creek. Here General Greene 
retreated in May, 1781, to wait for reinforce 
ments after his repulse at Camden, and to pre 
vent supplies reaching it.] 

[RUISSEAU, Grand, a settlement on the e. 
side of the river Mississippi, and in the N.W. Ter 
ritory, which, with the villages of St. Philip and 
Prairie-du-Rochers, contained, in 1792, 240 in 
habitants.] 

[RUM KEY, one of the Bahama Islands, situ 
ate about eight or nine leagues e. from the n. end 
of Long Island, and 10 w. from Great Harbour 
in the latter island. It is at present under culti 
vation, and the acres of patented estates granted 
by the crown for this purpose previously to May, 
1803, amounted to 11,738.] 

RUMENA, a point on the coast of the king 
dom of Chile ; between the point of Canero and 
that of Lavapie. 

RUMFORD, a town of the province and co 
lony of Hampshire ; [now known by the name 
of Concord ; which see.] 

RUMIBAMBA. See RUMI-PAMPA. 
RUMICHACA, an abundant river of the pro 
vince and correghmento of Pastos in the kingdom 
of Quito. It rises near the settlement of Cliiles, 
runs e. and turning n. enters the Grande de Patia. 
See HUAITARA. 

RUMINAVI, a lofty mountain of the province 
and kingdom of Quito, to the 5. of the mountain 
of Ichubamba, and n.w. of that of Sincholagua. 
It is almost entirely covered with snow, and has 
the name of Rumiiiavi, from a general of the 
Inca Atahualpa, emperor of Peru, and king of 
Quito, the same general having been assisted by 
Quizquiz in the command of the Indian armies; 
and it is asserted by the Indians, that the chief 
hid all his treasures in this mountain on hearing 
of the arrival of the Spaniards. This mountain, 
which is a volcano, is in lat. 28 s. 

RUMI-PAMPA, a large and beautiful llanura, 
being part of that of Anaquito, near the city of 
Quito. It is studded with vast stones thrown 
upon it by the irruption of the volcano of Pi- 
chinche. 

[RUMNEY, or ROMNEY, a township of New 
Hampshire ; situate in Grafton County, on a n. 
branch of Baker s River, about seven or eight 
miles n. w. of Plymouth, on the w. side of the 
Pemigewasset. It was incorporated in 1767, and 
contains 411 inhabitants.] 

RUMOS, a barbarous nation of Indians of the 
province and country of Las Amazonas, who 
dwell to the s. e. of the river Aguarico, in the 
woods close upon its banks. They are at con- 



358 



R U P 



stant war with the Encabellados Indians ; and 
more than this nothing is known of them, save 
that their number is very few. 

RUMULHUE, a river of the district of Tol- 
ten Baxo in the kingdom of Chile ; which runs s. 
and enters the Cauten. 

RUNA-HUANAC, a large and beautiful 
llanura of the kingdom of Peru, to the w. of 
Cuzco. It is very fertile and well-peopled, and 
was conquered by the Inca Pachacutec, tenth 
emperor. Its climate is benign and healthy. 

[RUNAWAY Bay, on the n. w. coast of the 
island of Antigua; situate between the fort on 
Corbizon s Point to the n. and Fort Hamilton to 
the s. Off it lie rocks and shoals.] 

[RUNAWAY Bay, on the n. coast of the island 
of Jamaica, w. of Great Laughlands River and 
Mumby Bay, and nine or 10 miles e. of Rio 
Bueno.l 

RUNDUBAMBA, a settlement of the pro 
vince and corregimifnto of Guamalies in Peru ; 
annexed to the curacy of the settlement of Huai- 
cabamba. 

RUNQUIN, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Quillota in the kingdom of Chile, 
near the river Quillota. 

[RUPERT, the n. westernmost township of 
Bennington County, Vermont. It contains 1033 
inhabitants.] 

RUPERT Bay, in the island of Dominica, one 
of the Caribees ; of great size and depth, and 
renowned for shelter of vessels. It is in the n. w. 
part, and the best bay of the island ; and from it, 
in time of war, a commerce might intercept the 
trade of the W. Indies. On its shore the Eng 
lish have begun to build a city, with the name of 
Portsmouth. 

RUPERT, an island in the Straits of Magellan, 
close to the s. coast, and one of those which form 
the channel of S.Gabriel; between the islands 
Jayme and Luis le Grand. 

RUPERT, a river of Hudson s Bay, where the 
English have a factory and establishment. In 
lat." 57 20 n. Long. 78 2 w. 

RUPERT, a fort which was built by the French 
on the shore and at the entrance of the former 
river ; but which they abandoned. 

[RUPERT S Land, a name synonymous with 
that of Hudson s Bay Territory. A copy of 
the charter of this company may be seen in 
the Appendix of Dobbs s Account of Hudson s 
Bay.] 

RUPUNUNI, a river of the province and 
country of Las Amazonas, in the territory and 
colony of the Dutch. It rises in the cordillera, 



near the equinoctial line, runs n. and enters the 
Esquivo. 

[RUSSELL, a county of Virginia ; bounded n. 
by Greenbrier, and s. by Lee County. Before 
Lee was erected out of this county, it contained 
3338 inhabitants, including 190 slaves.] 

[RUSSELL, a township in Hampshire County, 
Massachusetts ; 15 miles w. of Springfield, 808 w. 
by 5. of Boston. It was incorporated in 1792.] 

[RUSSELL Island, one of the Bahamas, near 
Harbour Island, at the n. w. extremity of Eleu- 
thera. It contains one or two families who have 
settled there.] 

[RUSSIAN AMERICA. Some settlements 
on the n.zo. coast of that continent, not very ac 
curately defined ; but for which see Vol. III. 
p. 221. of this work.] 

[RUTHERFORD, a county of Morgan Dis 
trict, N. Carolina ; bounded n. by Burke, and s. 
by the state of S. Carolina. In 1790 it contained 
7808 inhabitants, including 614 slaves; but a 
new county has been lately formed out of it.] 

[RUTHERFORD Town, the capital of the above 
county. It contains a court-house, a gaol, and a 
few dwelling houses.] 

[RUTHSBOROUGH, a village in Queen 
Anne s County, Maryland ; on Tuckahoc Creek. 
Six miles s. e. of Centerville, and 1\ n. w. of 
Greensborough.] 

[RUTLAND, a county of Vermont; bounded 
n. by Addison County, e. by Windsor, s. by Ben 
nington, and w. by New York. Otter Creek, 
and other streams, water this county. It has 
also numerous lakes or ponds, well stored with 
fish ; the chief of these are, Lakes Bombazon, 
and St. Austin ; the former in Hubberton and 
Castleton, and the latter in Wells. It contains 
25 townships, and 15,565 inhabitants. Here are 
14 forges, three furnaces, and a slitting-mill.] 

[RUTLAND, a post-town of Vermont, and ca 
pital of the above county, on Otter Creek ; 45 
miles from the mouth of that creek in Lake Cham- 
plain, 43 n. of Bennington, and 28 w. by n. of 
Windsor. This town and Windsor, are to be 
alternately the seat of government for the state. 
It contains a congregational church, a court 
house, and about 60 houses. Lat. 43 34 / SO" n. 
Long. 72 54 30" w. The mean heat here, ac 
cording to Dr. Williams, is 43 6 

Least heat 21 
Greatest heat 92 

The township contains 1407 inhabitants. Pipe 
clay is found here, which has been wrought into 
crucibles that prove very durable.] 

^RUTLAND, a township of Massachusetts, 



SAB 



SAB 



359 



Worcester County ; 10 miles n. w. of Worcester, 
and 42 w. of Boston. The town was incorpo 
rated in 1722, and contains 1072 inhabitants.] 

RWANE, a river of the province and colony of 
Virginia in N.America; which runs.?, and turning; 
its course to e. enters the James. See Ri VAN A. 

[RYE, a township in New Hampshire, on the 
sea-coast of Rockingham County, opposite the 
Isle of Shoals, and eight miles s. of Portsmouth. 
It was incorporated in 1719, and contains 865 in 
habitants. The coast affords excellent salt hay.] 



[RYE, a township of New York, W. Chester 
County, on Long Island Sound ; 24 miles n. e. 
from New York City. It contains 986 inhabi 
tants, of whom 154 are qualified electors, and 
123 slaves.] 

[RYE, a township in Cumberland County, 
Pennsylvania.] 

[ RYEGATE, the s. easternmost township of 
Caledonia County, Vermont ; and separated from 
Bath in New Hampshire on the e. by Connec 
ticut River. It contains 187 inhabitants.] 



S 



SABA, an island of the N. Sea: one of the 
Lesser Caribes. It is very pleasant, and situate 
13 miles n. w. of San Eustaquio, and 24 s. w. of 
that of San Bartolome. It is four or five leagues 
in circumference, belonged at first to the Danes, 
and, at first sight, appears an uncultivated rock. 
The Dutch sent to it a colony from St. Eustace, 
which found a llanura sufficiently large to main 
tain, with cultivation, some families ; but it is 
still without any settlements. The fish caught 
on the coasts is very abundant, par icularly boni- 
tos, which are in great request ; nor is it wanting, 
in general, in the conveniences of life. By the 
coast the sea is very shallow ; rocks appear for 
some distance, and vessels, of course, cannot 
come close in unless they be very small ; and 
there is only one small bay, which has a sandy 
bottom, where the inhabitants can keep their 
canoes. At the top of this island is a passage 
cut in the stone, so narrow as to admit only one 
person; and appearing to be a sort of natural 
impregnable fortification. Also, in manv parts, 
the natives have heaped up stones over some of 
the passes in the rocks, in such a manner that 
they may, by merely pulling a string, cause them 
to fall upon the heads of an enemy ; and even so 
as, with one shower of stones, to destroy an army. 
The Father Labat says, that this island is divided 
into two parts, which contain about 50 families 
and 130 Negroe slaves ; who maintain them 
selves by making shoes, this being their principal 
branch of trade ; although they cultivate some 
indigo, and cotton of which they make stockings. 
They live in perfect harmony amongst them 
selves ; their dwellings being provided with all 



necessaries. [In lat. 17 39 n. Long. 63 
19 .] 

SABA, another, a small island, one of the Vir 
gins ; situate s. of St. Thomas, and belonging to 
the Danes. 

SABA, S. a settlement and garrison of the pro 
vince of Coaguila in N. America. 

SABAINO, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Aimaraez in Peru. 

SABANA, a small settlement, or ward, of the 
head settlement of the district of Orizaba, and 
alcaldia mayor of Ixmiquilpan inNueva Espana : 
united to the settlement of San Juan, and five 
leagues w. of its capital. 

SABANA, another settlement, in the province 
and government of Santa Marta and Nuevo 
Reyno de Granada ; of the district of the Rio 
del Hacha, in the royal road. 

SABANA, another, with the addition of Grande, 
in the province and government of Cartagena, of 
the same kingdom as the former ; situate on the 
shore of the Dique, between the rivers Malambo 
and Santo Tomas. 

SABANA, another, of the province and govern 
ment of Trinidad ; situate on the w. coast, and 
within the Gult of Triste. 

SABANA, another, with the addition of Alta, 
in the same kingdom as the former, and very 
near to it. 

SABANA, another, with the same additional 
title, in the jurisdiction of Santiago de la Ata- 
laya, in the $uevo Reyno de Granada ; situate 
to the s. between two rivers. 

SABANA, another, with the addition of Larga, 
in the province and government of Cartagena, 



360 



SAB 



and Nuevo Reyno de Granada ; situate in the 
road which leads down to the river of La Mag- 
dalena, and on the shore of a lake which origi 
nates from the Dique. 

SABANA, a large valley of the island of St. 
Domingo, in the e. head ; on the shore of the 
coast of the great bay of Samana, between the 
rivers Nicagua and Magua. 

SABANAS, a river of the province and go 
vernment of Darien and kingdom of Tierra Firme; 
which rises in the mountains of the s. coast, 
and enters the sea in the Gulf of San Miguel. 

SABANILLA, a settlement of the province 
and government of Cartagena, and Nuevo Reyno 
de Granada ; on a point of the coast which runs 
into the sea, opposite the island Verde. 

SABANDIJAS, a river of the province and 
government of Mariquita, in the same kingdom 
as the former settlement. It runs e. and enters 
the Grande de la Magdalena. 

SABARA, a small river of the province and 
captainship of Espiritu Santo in Brazil. 

SABA YA, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Carangas in Peru ; annexed to 
the curacy of Huachocalla. It was formerly very 
large and numerous, but at present much re 
duced, since it was ruined in 1600 by an irrup 
tion of the volcano Ornate. It has a sanctuary 
of Nuestra Seiiora de la Candelaria, which is 
much frequented. 

SABIANGO, a large river of the province and 
corregimiento of Loxa in the kingdom of Quito ; 
which rises in the mountains of Pandomine, and 
runs w. till it enters by the w. part the Macara, 
in lat. 25 s. 

SABINA, S. a port of the coast, in the pro 
vince and government of Sonora, in the Gulf of 
California, having at its entrance the island of 
San Pedro. 

SABINAS, SANTIAGO DE LAS, a settlement 
and real of mines of silver of the Nuevo Reyno 
de Leon in N. America. It has 30 families of 
Spaniards, and in its district are two estates where 
they grind metals. It abounds in large and 
small cattle and sugar canes, of which they make 
honey and sugar. On the n. it is inhabited by 
the district of the infidel Indians, and lies in the 
direct road to the province of Texas. Twenty- 
two leagues n. e. of its capital. 

SABINAS, a river of the province of Gila in 
Nueva Espana. It enters the sea in the Gulf 
of Mexico, between that of San Pedro and El 
Bravo. 

SABIROSQUI, a settlement of the province 
and corregimiento of Caxamarquilla in Peru. 



SAB 

SABLE, an island of the Atlantic Ocean, 35 
leagues s. e. of Cape Breton, where the Baron 
Leti attempted to establish a colony in 1598, but 
could not, according to Father Charlevoix, find 
a place fit for the purpose, as it is small, without 
any port, and producing nothing but plums. It 
is also very narrow, and forms the figure of a 
bow. It is not more than 10 leagues in circum 
ference, and in its centre is a lake of five leagues 
in circumference. At the two extremities are 
two large strands, lying very high, and which, in 
clear weather, are discovered at seven or eight 
leagues at sea. In lat. 44 15 n. Long. 59 
2 w. 

SABLE, a settlement and parish of the island 
St. Christopher, one of the Antilles ; situate on 
the s, e. coast, near the point of the same name, 
in one of the divisions possessed by the French, 
before they became masters of the whole, and 
when they divided its possession with the Eng 
lish. It has a very good castle of a square figure, 
and at a small distance from this the English 
constructed another, for a defence of their boun 
dary limits. 

SABLE, the aforesaid point of land, on the w. 
coast. 

SABLE, a small river of Canada in N. Ame 
rica, which runs w. and enters the lake Superior, 
between the point of Kioveounam and the river 
Tonnagane. 

SABLE, another, a small river of the same pro 
vince, which runs c. between those of San Nico 
las and Blanche, and enters Lake Michigan. 

SABLE, another, a small river of the province 
and country of the Iroquees ; which runs w. be 
tween those of Asuncion and Famine, and enters 
the lake Ontario. 

SABLE, another, a small river of Nova Scotia 
or Acadia, which runs nearly due s. and enters 
the sea opposite the Brown (Jank. 

SABLE, a large sand-bank, near the coast of 
the same province as the former river, which ex 
tends w. from the island of its name. 

SABLE, a cape or point of land of the coast, in 
the province of Nova Scotia or Acadia. [Lat. 
43 30 n. Long. 65 33 w. Variation of the 
needle in 1787, 12 W w.~] 

SABLE, a bay of the lake Superior in Canada, 
in the e. part ; close to the Bay of Michipi- 
coton. 

[SABLE, Cape, the s.w. point of the peninsula 
of Florida ; 33 leagues e. n. e. three-quarters e. of 
the s. w. point of the Dry Tortuga Shoals.] 

[SABLE, Great and Little, two rivers empty 
ing intoLakeChamplain, from the w. side. Great 



SAC 



SAC 



Sable River is not far from the Saranac, and is 
scarcely 60 yards wide. On this stream are re 
markable falls. The whole descent of the water 
is about 200 feet, in several pitches, the greatest 
of which is 40 feet perpendicular. At the foot 
of it the water is unfathomable. A large pine 
has been seen, in a freshet, to pitch over endwise, 
and remain several minutes under water. The 
stream is confined by high rocks on either side, 
a space of 40 feet ; and the banks at the falls are 
at least as many feet high. In a freshet, the 
flood wood frequently lodges, and in a few mi 
nutes the water rises to full banks, and then 
bursts away its obstructions, with a most tre 
mendous crashing.] 

[SABLE Point, on the w. side of the island 
of Newfoundland. Lat. 50 24 n. Long. 57 
35 a&amp;gt;.] 

SABLES, GRANDES, a bay of the s. coast of 
Lake Superior in New France or Canada, near 
the e. head. 

[SABLES, RIVIERE \VK. See BLACK RIVER, 
a water of Lake Ontario.] 

SABLON, a bay on the coast of the country 
and land of Labrador ; at the entrance of the 
Strait of Belleisle. 

[SABLON. See SANDY.] 

SABLONEUX, a river of the province and 
country of N. Carolina ; which runs n. e. then 
turns n. and enters the Ohio. 

SABLONEUX, another, a small river, in the 
same province as the former. It runs to the 
same rhumb, and enters also the Ohio. 

SABONIERE. See MALIGNE. 

SABOYA, a small settlement of the corregi 
miento of the city of Veley, in the Nuevo Reyno 
de Granada. lit is of a cold temperature, but 
healthy, and produces few fruits. It has 50 
housekeepers and as many other Indians and 
Zambos, a body divided from the rest. Seven 
leagues from Chiquinquira. 

SABRAL, a settlement of the province and 
captainship of Rio Grande in Brazil, near the 
coast ; between the rivers Carabatang and Cama- 
ratuba. 

[SAC, GRANDE RIVIERE DU CUL DE, a river 
of the island of St. Domingo, which rises in 
Montague de la Selle, by two branches ; takes a 
semicircular course of 12 leagues, and runs w. 
into the sea, about two leagues n. of Port au 
Prince.] 

SACABA, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Cochabamba in Peru. 

SACACA, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Charcas in Peru; [67 miles n.-n. 

VOL. IV. 



w. from the city of La Plata, and 94 s. s. e. of La 
Paz.] It is also called Sicasica, and was for 
merly a large and populous town, but now re 
duced to a miserable state. Its climate is cold, 
[and it is situate on a s. head branch of the Rio 
Grande or Guapey, in lat. 18 40 *.] 

SACADAS, a settlement of the province and 
government of Buenos Ay res, s. of the town of 
Lujan. 

SACAGUAR, a river of the province of Bar 
celona and government of Cumana in Nueva 
Andalucia. It rises s. of the town of Aragua, 
runs w. and enters the Huere. 

SACAN, SAN PEDRO DE, a settlement of the 
head settlement of Uruapan, and alcaldia mayor 
ofValladolid in the province and bishopric of 
Mechoacan. It contains 80 families of Indians 
and five of Muslces. Eight leagues w. of its 
head settlement. 

SACAPA, a settlement of the province and 
government of Yucatan ; situate in the high road 
to Guatemala. 

SACAPA, SAN PEDRO DE, another settlement, 
the head settlement of the district of the pro 
vince and alcaldia mayor of Chiquimula in the 
kingdom of Guatemala. It contains more than 
2000 Indians, including those of three other set 
tlements annexed to its curacy. 

SACAPECPAN, S. GREGORIO DE, a settle 
ment of the head settlement of the district and 
alcaldia mayor of Cholula in Nueva Espana. It 
contains 78 families of Indians, and is one league 
w. of its capital. 

SACAPULA, a settlement of the province and 
alcaldia mayor of Chiapa in the kingdom of Gua 
temala. 

SACATECOLUCA, SANTIAGO LUCIA DE, a 
settlement of the province and alcaldia mayor of 
San Vincente de Austria in the kingdom of Gua 
temala ; on the coast of the S. Sea, and to the w. 
of the river Salbutiqui. It contains more than 
3100 Indians. [There is a burning mountain 
near the town of this name. The volcano of St. 
Salvadore is more n. about 30 miles, and 12 e. 
of Bernal.] 

SACATEPEC, SANTA MARIA DE, a settle 
ment of the head settlement of the district and 
alcaldia mayor of Cholula in Nueva Espana. It 
contains 26 families of Indians, and is two 
leagues w. of its capital. 

SACATEPEC, another, in the head settlement of 
Atitlan and alcaldia mayor of V^illalta in the 
same kingdom. It contains 115 families of In 
dians, and is 15 leagues from its capital. 

SACATEPEC, another, of the province ajid king-. 
3 A 



362 



SAC 



SAC 



dom of Guatemala ; situate near the settlement 
of Pinula. 

SACATEPEC, another, which is the head settle 
ment of the district, of the province and corregi- 
miento of Amatitan, in the same kingdom as the 
former. 

SACATEPEC, another, of the same province and 
kingdom as the former, but distinct from it. 

SACAHUCHEN. Some mountains of the 
province and government of Campeche. 

SACHENDAGO, a settlement of the province 
and colony of New York in N. America, to the 
w. of Lake Cadaroses. 

SACHICA, a principal and head settlement 
of the district of the corregimiento of its name, 
in the Nuevo Reyno de Granada. It is small, 
containing only 50 families and 30 Indians ; but 
its temperature is benign, and it abounds in 
wheat, maize, barley, and other vegetable pro 
ductions. 

SACHICHIS, a barbarous nation of Indians 
of the kingdom of Peru, descended from that of 
the Lamas, with the which it is united ; and these 
form together a settlement of the same name, 
and which has the title of city. 

SACKVILLE, a settlement of the province 
and colony of Nova Scotia, near the s. coast, at 
the mouth of the river St. Croix. In its vicinity 
the English have built a fort. It is n. of Ha 
lifax. 

[SACO Falls, situate on Saco River in the 
district of Maine, five miles from the sea. The 
river is here divided by Indian Island, consisting 
of about 30 acres of land, and on each side of it 
tumbles over a precipice of rocks, and mixes with 
the tide. The prospect from the e. side of the 
island is very sublime and majestic. From the 
beginning of the falls, to the tide below, the dif 
ference of height is above 40 feet. There are 
many corn and saw mills ; on the falls, and below 
the island, is a fine bason, where vessels take in 
their cargoes. Salmon Falls are 10 miles above 
this.] 

[SACO River, is one of the three largest rivers 
in the district of Maine. The principal part of 
its waters fall from the White Mountains. Its 
course, some distance from its source, is s. ; it 
then suddenly bends to the w. and crosses into 
the district of Maine, and then makes a large 
bend to the n. e. and s. w. embracing the fine 
township of Fryburge, in the county of York. Its 
general course thence to the sea is s, e. Great 
and Little Ossipee Rivers fall into it from the w. 
This river is navigable for ships to Saco Falls, 
about five miles from the sea. Here the river 



is broken by Indian Island, over which is the 

Eost-road. A bridge is thrown over each of the 
ranches. A number of mills are erected here, 
to which logs are floated from 40 or 50 miles 
above ; and vessels can come quite to the mills 
to take in the lumber. Four million feet of pine 
boards were annually sawed at these mills before 
the war. The mouth of this river lies five miles 
n. e. of Cape Porpoise. There is a bar which 
will not allow a vessel of above 100 tons burden 
to pass, if fully loaded. Without the bar, and 
between Fletcher s Neck and the main land, is a 
pool, wherein vessels of any size may lie at all 
seasons of the year, and take in their ladings at 
pleasure. 

On the w. side of the river a small neck of land 
divides it from the pool, which might be easily 
cut, and so save the hazard of passing the bar. 
On the branches of this river, as well as on the 
main stream, are a great many mills and valua 
ble works : 25 miles from the sea a small stream, 
issuing from Little Ossipee Pond in New Hamp 
shire, joins it ; and 15 miles further up Great 
Ossipee River, from another pond, in New 
Hampshire, swells the Saco, and impels its 
course. 

Proceeding up the Saco, its source is found on 
the side of the White Mountains in New Hamp 
shire. From these mountains the waters run 
into Connecticut, Saco, and Androscoggin Ri 
vers. Saco River meanders through the ancient 
Indian village of Peckwalket, 60 miles from the 
sea. In 1775, a new river burst into the Saco, 
from the White Mountains, and still continues to 
aid Saco and a branch of it, called Ellis s River. 
A mixture of iron ore, gave the waters a red co 
lour for a few days, and the people on the upper 
banks had a report, that the river was bloody, 
which they considered as an ill omen to the 
public concerns.] 

SACO, a city of the same province and colony 
as the former river, at the mouth of it, and 
having in its vicinity a fort belonging to the 
English. 

SACONET. See REHOBOTH. 
SACRAMENTO, a city and colony which 
was held by the Portuguese, in the province and 
government of Buenos Ayres ; situate opposite 
this capital [and 33 miles n. e. from it], on the 
shore of the river La Plata. The Portuguese 
established themselves here in 1678, but in 1680 
the city was taken by the Spaniards, commanded 
by the governor of the province, Don Joseph de 
Garro. Shortly afterwards it was recovered by 
the former, and then, for the second time, taken 



SAC 



SAG 



363 



by the major-general Don Baltasar Garcia Ros, 
in 1704, and restored at the peace. In 1706, it 
was, a third time, besieged by the Spaniards with 
800 regular troops and 5000 Indians, and, by sea, 
with four frigates of five guns, named La Galga, 
El Xavier, La Palamo, and San Estevan : al 
though the attempts to take it were unavailing. 
In 1762, however, it was again taken by Lieute 
nant-general Don Pedro Ceballos, governor of 
Buenos Ayres, and restored at the peace of Paris 
in 1763 ; and, lastly, by the same Don Pedro 
Cevallos, in 1777, who destroyed it by order of 
the court. 

It had a very convenient port, that is to say, a 
bay formed by the river ; the same forming every 
convenience to the commerce of the Portuguese, 
and for the contraband trade which they carried 
on with the Spaniards ; and in which the Eng 
lish were also much benefited. It was fortified 
with good walls, heavy artillery, and a sufficient 
number of troops : was also the residence of the 
Portuguese governor and the other ministers of 
the royal revenues. It was small, but well- 
peopled ; and it had a pitiful appearance on ac 
count of the narrowness of the buildings. In 
deed, it had no other open space than the square; 
the whole of the territory surrounding it having 
been occupied by the Spaniards; from whom was 
introduced whatever was necessary for the sub 
sistence of the Portuguese, and for which these, 
who were very rich, consisting chiefly of great 
merchants, used to pay very dearly. [It was in 
lat. 34 22 10" s. and long. 57 52 a;.] 

SACRAMENTO, another settlement and garrison 
of the province and government of Coaguila, on 
the shore of the river of Las Sabinas, which runs 
s. e. to enter the Grande del Norte. It contains 
60 families of Spaniards, including 50 soldiers of 
the garrison ; and is 30 leagues from Monclova, 
to the n. 

SACRAMENTO, a lake of N. America, called 
also Gregorio. It unites itself with the Champ- 
lain, 20 miles e. of Oswego. At its s. extremity 
a battle was fought between the English general, 
William Johnson, and the Baron of Dieskau, 
commandant of the French troops, in 1755. 

SACRIFICIOS, an island of the N. Sea, near 
the coast of the province and government of Vera 
Cruz in Nueva Espaiia and the Gulf of Mexico, 
half a mile from the continent. It was discovered 
by Captain Juan de Grijalva in 1518 ; who gave 
it this name, from finding in it an altar stained 
with blood, and various dead bodies of Indians, 
which the Indians had sacrificed to their idols 



the night previous. This island is small, uncul 
tivated, and desert. 

SACRIFICIOS, another island, of the same name, 
in the S. Sea, near the coast of the province and 
alcaldia mayor of Tecoantepec ; situate at th 
mouth or entrance of the Port of Los Angeles. 

SACSAMA, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Arica in Peru; annexed to the. 
curacy of Copta. 

SACSAMARCA, a settlement of the province 
and corregimiento of Vilcashuaman, in the same 
kingdom as the former ; annexed to the curacy 
of ^ancos. 

SACSAMARCA, another, in the province and 
corregimiento of Angaraes, in the same kingdom ; 
annexed to the curacy of San Sebastian. 

SACSAQUERO, a settlement oi the province 
and corregimiento of Castro- Virreyna in Peru ; 
annexed to the curacy of its capital. 

SACUALPA, SANTA MARIA DE Z AYABA DE, 
a settlement of the province and alcaldia mayor 
of Quiche in the kingdom of Guatemala. 

[SADDLE River, a village in Bergen County, 
New Jersey.] 

[SADSBURY, a township in Chester County, 
Pennsylvania.] 

SAGADAHOCK, a territory and district of 
the Bay of Massachusetts in New England and 
N. America; ceded by Charles II. of Great Bri 
tain, in 1634, to his brother the Duke of York, 
before it was annexed to the government of New 
York. But this duke coming to the throne 
through the death of the king, it became incor 
porated with the estates of the crown. 

Its territory extended from the river Santa 
Crux to the e. to the river Quenebec to the w. 
and from each of these rivers n. as far as the river 
St. Lawrence, which was its n. frontier, and to 
the Atlantic, which was its s. frontier. 

When the French possessed Nova Scotia, Sa- 
gadahock was comprehended in its district and 
government, for the purpose of doing away all 
dissentions. In the peace of Utrecht, in 1713, 
the French renounced their pretensions both to 
Nova Scotia and Sagadahock, and the court of 
London recovered the right of that province : a 
few years afterwards, when the French established 
a royal government in these parts, the territory 
of Sagadahock still remained under the jurisdic 
tion of the Bay of Massachusetts, and sent a de 
puty to the Council, though not to the House of 
Representatives of Massachusetts. Neither could 
the General Assembly dispose of the lands with 
out the royal consent ; and the proprietorship of 
3 A2 



SAG 



SAG 



the particular concessions remained in favour of 
the holders until that they were re-united to the 
crown as in Nova Scotia. These establishments, 
however, have much varied, as having- been sepa 
rated from England with the other provinces 
which form the United States. Colonel Dunbar 
endeavoured to form of this territory a separate 
government, and accordingly obtained a royal 
decree to take 30,000 acres of ground, with line 
trees and timber fit for the royal navy. This 
order was further confirmed by another of 1730, 
given to Colonel Philips, then governor of Nova 
Scotia ; wherein he was commanded to take pos 
session of the territory lying between the rivers 
Santa Cruz and Quenebec ; and to this end there 
was sent out a detachment of 30 men, commanded 
by an officer, to occupy that territory, and also a 
garrison for Fort Frederick on the river Pemma- 
quid. The end was obtained, and the troop re 
mained there some time ; but the company of the 
Muscangus having had recourse to the court of 
London, and being in possession of a part of Sa- 
gadahock, the decree was repealed, and the de 
tachment of Colonel Philips commanded to retire. 

In 1714, the number of men capable of bearing 
arms in Sagadahock did not exceed 370; and 
these afterwards diminished, through the repeated 
incursions it experienced, both from the French 
and the Indians. At the beginning of the last 
century, both France and England carried on an 
indiscriminate commerce with Sagadahock. In 
deed, its territory is most fertile and worthy of 
cultivation ; but it is nothing more than a vast 
wood producing timber for building, and a great 
number of white firs fit for ship-masts. [At pre 
sent there is no defined boundary for this ter 
ritory.] . 

SAGADAHOCK, a bay on the coast of the same 
province, between Small Point and the river 
Damariscote. 

[SAGAMOND, a river of the N. W. Terri 
tory, which has a-*, e. course, and enters Illinois 
River, 17 miles below Demi Quian River, and 
96 from the Mississippi. It is 100 yards wide at 
its mouth.] 

[SAGANUM, or SAGANA BAY, in the s. w. 
part of Lake Huron, is about 34 miles in length, 
and 16 broad. Around it live the Chippeway 
Indians.] 

SAGASUI, a bay on the coast of the province 
and captainship of Rey in Brazil. 

[SAGATUCK River, a small river of Con 
necticut, which rises in Ridgfield, in Fairfield 
County, passes through Reading and Weston, 



and running s. separates Fairfield from Norwalk, 
and empties into a harbour of its own name in 
Long Island Sound.] 

[SAGENDAGO, a head branch of Hudson s 
River. Its mouth is about 20 miles w. of For( 
Anne.] 

[SAGG HARBOUR, a post-town and port of 
entry in the state of New York, Suffolk County, 
towards the e. end of Long Island. It contains 
a Presbyterian church and about 50 houses. The 
whale fishery from this harbour produced 1000 
barrels of oil annually. Its exports in 1784 
amounted to the value of 6762 dollars. It is 12 
miles n. e. of Southampton, 78 e. of New York.] 

SAGHADOC, a large and abundant river of 
the province and colony of Virginia in N. Ame 
rica. 

SAGONE, a small island, near the s. coast of 
Newfoundland, at the entrance of Fortune Bay. 

[SAGUANA, a bay in the n. e. corner of the 
Gulf of Mexico, on the coast of Florida, having 
numerous isles on both sides ; Cayos del Pagoi 
on the s. e. and Flarellon de Pagoi on the n. a&amp;gt;.] 

SAGUARIPA, a settlement of the province and 
government of Ostimuri in N. America: 27 
leagues n. n. e. of the river Chico. 

SAGUARIPA, a small river, of the province and 
captainship of Todos Santos in Brazil ; which 
rises near the coast of the Sierra Chapada, runs 
e. and enters the sea in the point of its name. 

SAGUARIPA. This point is between the town 
of San Antonio and the island of La Pasqua. 

SAGUENAI, or more properly SAGUENAY, 
a tract of land which was known by this title, 
on the shore of the river of its name, in Lower 
Canada, N. America. The territory and shore 
of the river had proved so unfit for any settle 
ment, and the first colony founded by the French 
in Tadousac had succeeded so badly, that they 
were disheartened from making any others in 
Canada ; until that, having penetrated as far as 
Quebec, they recovered spirit, and went on in 
creasing their establishments for many years : 
when, in 1759, the capital fell in the power of 
the English. This province abounds so greatly 
in marble of various sorts, that even the houses 
of private persons are continually built with this 
material. 

[SAGUENAI, or SAGUENY, a large river of Ca 
nada, which rises from Lake St. John, and after 
pursuing an e. course above 100 miles, empties 
through the w. bank of the river St. Law 
rence, at the town and harbour of Tadousac. It 
is about i of a mile wide at its mouth, and is 



8 A r 

from 80 to 90 feet deep, but higher up it is wider; 
and the narrowness of the channel greatly in 
creases its rapidity, though it is navigable for the 
largest vessels 25 leagues from its mouth. The 
harbour, called Port Tadousac, can afford con 
venient anchorage for 25 sail of ships of war, 
and is well secured from all winds and storms?. 
It is deep, of a circular form, and surrounded at 
a distance with very high rocks, except at the 
entrance. A small stream empties into it, suffi 
cient to water a fleet. The country in the vicinity 
abounds with marble. 

The falls of the river Saguenav may be consi 
dered amongst the natural curiosities of this ter 
ritory. They are about 90 miles up the river, 
are 50 feet high, and remarkable for the immense 
sheet of water which breaks over the cataract, 
and precipitates itself with amazing velocity into 
the river St. Lawrence, where it causes a strong- 
eddy or current, that frequently carries a vessel 
out of its course.] 

[SAGUENAY River, Little, a river of Labra 
dor, which runs s, and empties into the St. Law 
rence a short way e. of the Seven Isles, and w. 
of Bason River. Lat. 50 18 n. long. 65 w.~] 

SAGUENAY, another, a small river of the pro 
vince and country of Labrador. It runs s. and 
enters the St. Lawrence. 

SAGUENAY, a bay on the w. coast of Lake 
Huron. 

SAHUACARI, CERRO DE, a settlement of 
the province and corregimiento of Camana in the 
kingdom of Peru ; on the shore of the coast, 
near the settlement of Acari. 

SAHUANCUCA, a mountain or volcano of 
the province and corregimiento of Collahuas, and 
district of Arequipa in Peru. It is near the set 
tlement of Achoma, and almost continually vo 
miting fire. 

[SAIL Rock. See ST. AMBROSE.! 

[SAILING COVE, on the s. side of the island 
of Newfoundland, in the great bay wherein is 
situate the Bay of Trepassi. It is six miles n. 
of Cape Pine.] 

SAINA, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Condesuyos de Arequipa in Peru : 
annexed to the curacy of Zaila, in the province 
of Parinacochas. 

SAINAPUCHI, a settlement of the missions 
held by the religious of San Francisco in the pro 
vince of Taraumara and kingdom of Nueva Viz- 
caya in N. America: situate 15 leagues w. s. w. 
of the real of mines of S. Felipe de Chiguagua. 

SAINTS, Cape, a point of land on the e. 



SAL 



coast of Newfoundland, between Green Bay and 
that of Cataline. 

[SAINTS, two islands near Guadaloupe Island. 
See ZAINTES.] 

SAIZA, a settlement of the province andcor- 
regimiento of Lucanas in Peru. 

SAL, a settlement of the province and go 
vernment of Popayan, in the Nuevo de Gra 
nada. 

SAL, a river, of the province and corregimiento 
of Castro-Virreyna in Peru. It rises in a lake 
to the s. of the capital, runs n. passes near to this 
capital, and turning e. enters the Isuchaca. 

SAL, a mountain of the province and colony 
of Surinam, or part of Guayana, possessed by 
the Dutch, between the great sierra of Rinocote 
and the river Mazarroni. 

SAL, another mountain of the province and 
corregimiento of Caxamarquilla in Peru. 

SAL, some extensive llanuras or pampas in the 
province and corregimiento of Lipes or the same 
kingdom as the former mountain. 

SA L, a port, on the coast of the province and 
government of Honduras, and kingdom of Nueva 
Espaiia, between the Triumfo de la Cruz and 
the river Ulua. 

SAL, some islands in the Gulf of California, 
or Mar Roxo de Cortes, with the addition of Si 
Puedes. They are various, and having their pe 
culiar names. The largest of them are called 
Las Animas, San Lorenzo, San Estevan, and San 
Agustin. They are situate in the interior of the 
gulf, and form a chain from the coast as far as 
Nueva Espana, leaving only some very narrow 
channels, of difficult entrance for vessels : and 
thence they are called Sal Si Puedes. 

SAL, some isles or shoals of rock near the . 
coast of the island of Cuba, opposite La Cruz 
del Padre, to the w. of the Fall of Anguila, and 
very near to it. 

SAL, another river, of the kingdom of Chile; 
which flows down from the cordillera of the Andes, 
and runs to the w. through the desert tract of 
Atacama : its waters are extremely clear but salt, 
and it enters the S. Sea. 

SALA, a river of the province and govern 
ment of Buenos Ayres ; which runs n. n. e. and 
enters the Parana, between the Areco and the 
Dos Hermanas. 

SALADA, a bay and river of the coast of the 
S. Sea, in the province and corregimiento of 
Copiapo, in the kingdom of Chile. [Lat. 25 
40 *.] 

SALADILLO, a settlement of the province 



SAL 



SAL 



and government of Tucuman in Peru ; on the 
shore of the river of its name. 

SALADILLO, another settlement, in the same 
province, on the shore of the river Dulce, and 
s. of the Turupampa. 

SALADILLO, a river, of the province and go 
vernment of Buenos Ay res : it is an arm of the 
river Salado. which runs s. and enters the Pa 
rana. 

SALADILLO, another, of the same province 
;md government as the former. It rises in the 
Pampas, runs s. s. e. for many leagues, and enters 
the sea on the coast of the Patagonians. 

SALADILLO, another, of the province and go 
vernment of Tucuman in Peru ; which runs e. 
in the jurisdiction of the city of Cordoba, and 
enters the Tercero. 

SALADO, an abundant river of the province 
and government of Tucuman in Peru. It has 
its rise from many streams which flow down from 
the serranias of this kingdom in lat. 24, but 
principally from those streams of the valley of 
Calchaqui, where it incorporates with another 
which flows down from the s. w. and these united 
run to the valley of Huachipas, which name the 
said river here takes, but afterw r ards changes for 
that of Charomoros, from a place thus called ; 
and being named a little lower down the Pasage, 
as being where it must necessarily be passed, 
and not without risk, from the rapidity of its 
current, by those travelling by the high road 
from Buenos Ayres to Salta. It is afterwards 
called De Balbuena, as it washes the lands and 
fort of the settlement of this name : but before 
this, at some distance, it is joined by the river 
Piedras, which is the best water of any in the 
province ; passes lower down by the jurisdiction 
of Santiago del Estero, from whence it runs SO 
leagues with the name of the Salado, and loses 
itself about 86 miles n. n. w. of the city of Santa 
Fe in a lake called Mar Chiquito, [or Lake Sala- 
das of the Porangos.] 

After it passes the boundaries of Salta, it turns 
to s. e. runs for a great distance by the side of the 
Chacos, or Dulce, and lastly is joined by this 
river previous to its disemboguement. 

Its whole course is upwards of 200 leagues, 
and it formerly reached as far as the city of Santa 
Fe, where it formed a peninsula with an arm of 
the Parana; but from having opened to itself 
some new channels from its great swellings, it 
runs into the lake which it now forms. It has 
been endeavoured to bring it back to its native 
bed, as likely thus to be beneficial to the trade 



with Santa Fe and Buenos Ayres by Parana, 
and as hindering a great round-about journey ; 
but the king ordered it to be left in the state in 
which it was, from the numberless difficulties at 
tending the project. 

SALADO, another river, in the kingdom of 
Chile, which flows down from the cordillera into 
a deep valley, by which it runs immediately upon 
the confines of Peru. Its waters are so salt as 
not to be drinkable. 

SALADO, another, of the province and country 
of the Apaches Indians in Nuevo Mexico to the 
s. w. and which enters the Gila opposite the set 
tlement of La Tota. 

SAT-ADO, another, of the province and corre- 
gimiento of Atacama in Peru, which runs nearly 
w. and enters the sea close to Port Betas. 

SALADO, another, a small river, of the pro 
vince and corregimietito of Chichas and Tarija in 
the same kingdom as the former, which runs e. 
and enters the Pilcomayo. 

SALADO, another, also small, of the province 
and government of Paraguay: which runs n. and 
then turns w. to enter the Paraguay opposite the 
city of La Asunsion. 

SALADO, another, of the island St. Domingo, 
in the part possessed by the French. It rises in 
the sierra of Banaisa of the n. coast and w. head, 
runs n.n.c. and enters the sea in the Bay of Ba- 
raderos. 

SALADO, another, of the same island as the 
former, which rises in the sierra Prieta, to the w. 
of the Lake Enriquillo, runs s. and enters the sea 
between the Bay of Peur and that of Gros 
Gravios. 

SALADO, another, of the same island, near the 
M. coast, in the e. head. It is small, and enters 
the sea in the Bay of Barbacoa. 

SALADO, another, also of the same island as 
the former, in the part possessed by the French, 
on the s. coast, between the Trou Petit and the 
river Guillermo. 

SALADO, another, a small river, of the island 
Martinique, which runs n. e. and enters the sea 
opposite Fort Trinidad and the Bay of Sazevout. 

SALADO, a lake on the coast of the kingdom 
of Chile, in the province and corregimienlo of 
Coquimbo, between the ports of Juncal and 
Chimiral. 

[SALAGUA, Port, on the w. coast of New 
Mexico, is near the rough headland called San 
Tiago, and eight leagues from the valley of Co- 
lima. Here are two good harbours called Las 
Calleta.s, or the Creeks, where many ships may 



SAL 



SAL 



367 



ride. That to the n. to. is very safe, and land 
locked against all winds, though smaller than 
the other. Between Salugua and the White 
Rock (which joins the head-land) is the port of 
St. Tioga. In lat. 19 4 .] 

SALA-HONDA, Point of, on the coast of the 
S. Sea, and province and government of Choco 
in the district of Barbacoas, one of those which 
form the first mouth or entrance of the river 
Patia. 

SALAMANCA, a city, in the province and 
government of Santa Marta in the Nuevo Reyno 
de Granada. At the present day nothing but 
a small village, and called La Ramada. It is in 
the plain of Upar and jurisdiction of the city of 
Los Reyes near the mountains. It is of a very 
bad climate, and in its district is a mine of very 
fine copper. 

SALAMANCA, atown of the province and alcal- 
dia mayor of Tlaxcala in Nueva Espana. 

[SALAMANCA, a pretty little town of the in- 
tendancy of Guanaxuato (according to Hum- 
boldt), situate in a plain rising insensibly by 
Temascatio, Burras, and Cuevas, towards Gua 
naxuato. Height 1757 metres, or 5762 feet.] 

SALAMANCA, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Condesuyos de Arequipa in 
Peru. 

SALAMANCA, another, of the kingdom and 
bishopric of Mechoacan in Nueva Espana; 
bounded by that of Nueva Galicia. 

SALAMANCA DE BALCALAR, a city of the 
province and government of Yucatan in Nueva 
Espana ; founded by the Adelantado, Francisco 
de M ontejo, who gave it this name in memory of 
his native place. It is small, but handsome and 
well built ; situate on the e. of the isthmus which 
joins the peninsula of Yucatan with the continent. 
It has 120 houses, and a small fort with a strong 
garrison ; but its territory is extremely low and 
always inundated ; and accordingly its climate is 
unhealthy, and it is subject to an insufferable 
plague of mosquitoes. TLat. 18 53 / n. lon\ 
88 5(Xw.] 

SALAMANQUILLA, a small island of the N. 
Sea, near the coast of the province and govern 
ment of Cartagena in the Nuevo Reyno de Gra 
nada, between the Grande of Tintinpan, and the 
point of San Bernardo. 

SALAQUICHE, a river of the province and 
government of Choco in the same kingdom as 
the former island. It rises in its mountains, and 
enters the sea in the Gulf of Darien and mouth 
of the river Atrato, 



SALAS, a settlement of the province and cor 
regimiento of Piura in Peru. 

SALAZAR DE LAS PALMAS, a city of the 
Nuevo Reyno de Granada. See the article 
PALMAS. 

SALBUTIQUI, a river of the province and 
government of Nicaragua in the kingdom of 
Guatemala : it runs s. and enters the Pacific to 
the w. of the town of San Miguel. 

SALCABAMBA, a settlement of the province 
and corregimiento of Guanta in Peru, annexed to 
the curacy of the settlement of Huaribamba. 

SALCABAMBA, a beautiful and extensive val 
ley in the province and corregimiento of Pataz in 
the same kingdom as the former settlement, shut 
in on two sides by a cordillcra of mountains, and 
on the third by the river Perene. It is of the 
district and jurisdiction of the missions of Caxa- 
marquilla. 

SALDAN, a settlement of the province and 
government of Tucuman in Peru, of the district 
and jurisdiction of the city of Cordoba. 

SALDAN A, a rapid river of the province and 
government of Popayan in the Nuevo Reyno de 
Granada : it runs in the jurisdiction of the city 
of La Plata to n. e. and, after collecting in its 
course the waters of others, enters the Grande 
de la Magdalena by the w. part. Wherever this 
river is passed, it is at great risk, from the strength 
of its currents. 

SALDANA, a paramo or desert mountain, which 
is very lofty, and constantly covered with snow, 
in the province and government of Quixos of 
the kingdom of Quito : to the e. of that of Co- 
topaxi. It is discovered from Vallevicioso. 

SALE, a small river of the island Guada- 
lupe, which rises in the mountains, runs s. o&amp;gt;., 
and enters the sea between the Sence and the 
Bay of La Cruz. 

SALEM, a city and capital of Essex County, 
in the province of the Bay of Massachusetts and 
New England, 13 miles w. of Boston, where 
there is a church of very fine architecture. It is 
situate in a plain between two rivers, and has 
two forts, called, the one Winter, and the other 
Summer. It is where the colonies of the Bay of 
Massachusetts made their first establishment, and 
whither the port of Boston transferred the par 
liament of England in 1774, when the disturb 
ances were beginning between these colonies and 
the European Metropolis. This city is cele 
brated for its building of ships and fishing-smacks, 
and carries on a great commerce with the islands. 
The severity with which sentence is passed on 



368 



SAL 



criminals by its tribunal, is the cause why there 
are more put to death here than in all the other 
parts of New England. The tribunal of the 
city celebrates its meetings on the last Wednes 
day of the months of June and November. 

[Salem is now properly denominated the port 
of entry and post-town of Massachusetts, be 
sides being the capital of Essex County. It 
lies four miles n. w. of Marblehead, and 15 n. 
by e. of Boston. It is the second town for 
size in the commonwealth, containing (in 1790) 
928 houses and 7921 inhabitants, and, except 
Plymouth, the oldest; was settled in 1628, by 
Governor Endicot, and was called by the In 
dians, Naumkeag. 

Here are a society of Quakers, an episcopal 
church, and five congregational societies. The 
town is situate on a peninsula, formed by two 
small inlets of the sea, called North and south 
Rivers. The former of these passes into Beverly 
Harbour, and has a drawbridge across it, built 
many years ago at private expense. At this 
place some part of the shipping of the town is 
fitted out ; but the principal harbour and place 
for business is on the other side of the town, at 
South River, if that may properly be called a 
river which depends on the flowing of the sea 
for the water it contains. So shoal is this har 
bour, that vessels which draw more than 10 or 
12 feet of water, must be laden and unladen at a 
distance from the wharfs by the assistance of 
lighters. Notwithstanding this inconvenience, 
more navigation is owned, and more trade car 
ried on in Salem, than in any port in the common 
wealth, Boston excepted. 

The fishery, the trade to the West-Indies, to 
Europe, to the coast of Africa, to the East-Indies, 
and the freighting business from the S. States, are 
here all pursued with energy and spirit. A bank 
was established and incorporated here in 1792. 
The enterprise of the merchants of this place is 
equalled by nothing but their indefatigable in 
dustry and severe economy. This latter virtue 
forms a distinguishing feature in the character of 
the people of this town. Some persons of rank, 
in former times, having carried it to an unbecom 
ing length, gave a character to the people in 
general, of a disgraceful parsimony. But whether 
this reproach was ever justly applied in so exten 
sive a measure or not, nothing can be more inju 
rious than to continue it at the present time ; for 
it may justly be said of the inhabitants of Salem 
at this day, that, witli a laudable attention to the 
Acquisition of property &amp;gt; they exhibit a public 



spirit and hospitality, alike honourable to them - 
selves and their country. A general plainness 
and neatness in dress, buildings and equipage y 
and a certain stillness and gravity of manner, 
perhaps in some degree peculiar to commercial 
people, distinguish them from the citizens of the 
metropolis. 

A court-house, built in 1786, at the joint ex 
pense of the county and town, forms a principal 
ornament, and is executed in a style of architec 
ture that would add to the elegance of any city in 
the Union. The supreme judicial court holds a 
term here the second Tuesday of November, the 
courts of common pleas and sessions, the second 
Tuesday of March and September. A manufac 
tory of duck and sail-cloth was lately instituted 
here, and is prosecuted with much spirit. 

The melancholy delusion of 1692, respecting 
witchcraft, originated in this town, in the family 
of the Rev. Mr. Paris, the then minister, and here 
was the principal theatre of the bloody business. 
At the upper end of the town, at a place called, 
from the number of executions which took place 
there, Gallows Hill, the graves of the unhappy 
sufferers may yet be traced. Though this unfor 
tunate and disgraceful business was chiefly trans 
acted here, it is well known that the leading 
people, both of church and state, in the colony,, 
took an active part in it. Unjust therefore and 
highly absurd it is to fix a peculiar odium on the 
town of Salem for what was the general weak 
ness or crime of the country. 

The town of Salem is connected with Beverly 
by Essex Bridge, upwards of 1500 feet in length, 
erected 1789. It is high water here, at full and 
change, 30 minutes after 11 o clock. The works 
for the the defence of the harbour consist of a 
fort and citadel. Lat. 42 29 n. long. 70 51 a&amp;gt;.] 

[SALEM Village. SeeDANVERs.] 

[SALEM, a Moravian settlement in the N. W. 
Territory, situate on Muskingum River. It was 
forsaken in 1782, and plundered by the Indians^ 
who were allies of the British army.] 

[SALEM, a Moravian settlement in the N. W. 
Territory, situate on the n. e. branch of Monon- 
gahela River; two miles from Guadenhutten, on- 
the opposite side of the river, and 69 miles w. of 
Pittsburg. Congress granted 4000. acres of land 
to the United Brethren, or Moravians, Sept. 3, 
1788, for the purpose of propagating the Chris 
tian religion among the heathen.] 

[SALEM, New, a Moravian, settlement of Chris 
tian Indians, on Huron River, and near Pett- 
quotting, on the s. side of Lake Erie. The plan- 



SAL 



SAL 



369 



tations are on the w. bank of the river, and the 
dwelling 1 houses on the e. side, which is high 
land. In June 1786, their new chapel was con 
secrated, and is better built than that at Pill- 
gerruh.] 

[SALEM, a county of New Jersey, bounded e. 
by Cumberland, and w. by Delaware River. It 
is divided into nine townships ; those on Dela 
ware River are generally excellent for pasture, 
and have large dairies. The land affords, be 
sides, fine banked meadows, which produce flax, 
Indian corn, wheat, and other grain ; but the 
people are subject to intermittent fevers. Here 
the Quakers have four meeting-houses, the Pres 
byterians four, the Episcopalians two, the Ana 
baptists three, and the German Lutherans one. 
It contains 10,437 inhabitants. Alloway Creek, 
in this county, which runs into the Delaware, is 
navigable 16 miles for shallops, with several ob 
structions of draw-bridges.] 

[SALEM, a post-town of New Jersey, and ca 
pital of Salem County, situate on a branch of 
Salem Creek, about 3y miles from its confluence 
with Delaware Bay. It contains a meeting-house 
for Baptists, one for Quakers, and one for Me 
thodists ; a court-house, gaol, and about 100 
houses, most of them built with brick, and many 
of them elegant. There is a wooden bridge over 
the creek, and so far vessels of 40 or 50 tons 
burden can go up. It is 16 miles n. w. of Bridge 
town, eight s. by a?, of Woodstown, and 27 s. w. 
by s. of Philadelphia.] 

[SALEM, a township of Vermont, Orleans 
County, at the s. end of Lake Memphremagog.J 

[SALEM, New, a township in Rockingham 
County, N. Hampshire, in the s. w. corner of 
the county, adjoining Plastow, and divided from 
Methuen by the Massachusetts line. It was in 
corporated in 1750, and contains 1218 inhabi 
tants ; distant 42 miles from Portsmouth.] 

[SALEM, a township in W. Chester County, 
New York, bounded e. and s. by the State of 
Connecticut, and w. by Poundridge and Bedford 
townships and Croten River. It contains 1453 
inhabitants; of whom 202 are electors, and 19 
slaves.] 

[SALEM, a township on the e. bounds of Wash 
ington County, New York, bounded w. by Ar- 
gyle, and s. by Albany County. It contains 2186 
inhabitants ; of whom 368 are electors, and 22 
slaves.] 

[SALEM, the name of two townships of Penn 
sylvania, the one in Luzerne County, the other 
in that of Westmoreland.] 

[SALEM, a post-town of N. Carolina, Stokes 
VOL. iv. 



County, on the w. side of Wack Creek, which, 
with other streams, forms the Gargalis, and 
empties into Yadkin River. It contains above 
100 houses, regularly built, and chiefly occupied 
by tradesmen. A paper-mill has been erected 
here by the Moravians, which is very useful. Tho 
Moravians formed this settlement in 1766. It is 
20 miles s. e. of Ararat or Pilot Mountain, 24 
n. e. by n. of Salisbury.] 

[SALEM, the chief town of Surry County, in 
Salisbury district, N. Carolina.] 

SALES, ETANGS, or SALT LAKES, in Ca 
nada. They are eight, large and small, and near 
the s. coast of Lake Erie. 

[SALFORD, Upper and Lower, two town 
ships in Montgomery County, Pennsylvania.] 

[SALGADO, a river on the coast of Pernam- 
buco, Brazil, 13 leagues n. e. of Rigo Lagoa de 
Sal, or Salt Lake River. It is navigable only 
for small boats ; but the harbour is very good, 
lying behind the sands.] 

SALINA, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Tunja in the Nuevo Reyno de 
Granada, opposite some rough sierras. It is of 
an hot temperature, very barren and reduced, 
and may contain about 25 housekeepers, and as 
many other Indians, who live by collecting salt 
from a saline of three springs on the shore of a 
river, and called Guacha Chinibaque and Salina 
Grande. They do not apply themselves to any 
thing else, save the bringing of fuel from the 
mountains for strangers, who come hither to buy 
the salt. [Twenty-five miles e. s. e. from the 
settlement of Chita, and 11 to. of the town of 
Pore.] 

. SALINA, another settlement, in the district of 
the corregimiento of Las Cinco Leguas de la Ciu- 
dad of Quito. 

SALINA, a large lake, and with this surname, 
in the island of St. Christopher : in the extre 
mity which looks to the s. e. surrounded by others 
smaller. 

SAUNA, another lake, also large, of salt water, 
in the island of Martinique, and the extremity 
which looks to the s. w. very near the coast. 

SALINA, another, in the island of Guada- 
loupe, on the point by the castles of Grand 
Tierra. 

SALINA, another, of the same island as the 
former ; on the s. coast of Grand Tierra, near 
the settlement of Santa Ana. 

SALINA, another, of the island of St. Domin 
go, on the n. coast, near the mouth of the river 
Grande de Yaque. 

SALINA, another, of the province and govern- 
SB 



370 



SAL 



SAL 



ment of Buenos Ayres, to the w. of the settle 
ment of Canada Larga. 

SALINA, a bay on the coast of the province and 
corregimiento of Chancay in Peru, opposite the 
farnllones or isles of Guaura. 

SALINA, a small island in the N. Sea, between 
the Caicos and the shoal of the Panuelo Quad- 
rado. 

SALINA, another isle, situate near the former, 
and to the 5. of it. 

SALINA, a point of land on the s. coast of the 
island of St. Domingo, between the Bay of Ocoa 
and the Point of Nizao. 

SALINA, another point of the same island as 
the former, on the n. coast, with the surname of 
Pequena, to distinguish it; between the islands 
La Roche und Del Manglar. 
[SALINA. See SALT.] 

SALINAS, a settlement and real of mines of 
the Nuevo Reyno de Leon in N. America. Its 
jurisdiction is bounded w. by the province of 
Coaquila, and its district is peopled with Infidel 
Indians, although these have never committed 
any hostilities. The king, however, maintains 
here a corporal and 10 soldiers, to restrain them. 
The population consists of 50 families of Spani 
ards, Mustees, and Mulattoes, who were formerly 
employed in the working of the mines of silver, 
which have produced much metal, and of very 
good alloy ; although they are now fallen into 
decay, as having amongst the silver a great mix- 
ture of lead. The metals are carried to be re- 
lined to the reals of Zacatecas, Sombrerete, 
Guanajuato, and Chiquagua. They breed also 
here a portion of cattle, but cultivate very few 
seeds and vegetable productions. [Ninety-seven 
miles e. of Monastery.] 

SALINAS, another settlement of the province 
and corregimiento of Paria in Peru. 

SALINAS, another, with the dedicatory title of 
San Pablo, in the alcaldia mayor of Tacuba and 
kingdom of Nueva Espana. 

SALINAS, another, of the province and cap 
tainship of Rio Grande in Brazil ; situate on the 
shore of the river Amargoso, near the coast, and 
the village of Webasau. 

SALINAS, another, of the province and corre 
gimiento of Ibarra in the kingdom of Quito : n. 
of the settlement of Cayasqui or Caguasqui. 

SALINAS, another, of the province and corre 
gimiento of Potosi in Peru, situate in the valley 
of its name. 

SALINAS, another, of the province and corre 
gimiento of Maule in the kingdom of Chile ; on 
the coast of the vallev of Nilhue. 



SALINAS, another, of the province and govern 
ment of Santa Cruz de la Sierra in Peru : founded 
in the llanura of Misque in 1549, by Captain An 
dres de Salinas, from whom it took its name. It 
is large, of a fertile and pleasant territory, but 
very thinly peopled, through want of commerce; 
although it be not without some families of dis 
tinction. In lat. 18 s. 

SALINAS, another, in the Nuevo Reyno de 
Leon, and valley of its name. It is the head 
settlement of the district of this government; and 
in its neighbourhood are bred very many goats ; 
but its fruits and seeds are few. It takes its name 
from a saline spot, on which it stands ; is inha 
bited by 18 families of Indians, and is 12 leagues 
n. w. of the capital. 

SALINAS, a river of the province and govern 
ment of Venezuela in the Nuevo Reyno de Gra 
nada ; which runs s. and enters that of Gama- 
lotal. 

SALINAS, a point of land or cape of the coast 
of the S. Sea, and province and government of 
Choco, to the n. of the Cape of Corrientes. 

SALINAS, a point in the island of St. Christo 
pher, looking to s. w.\ thus called from some 
lakes in it, and in which there is plenty of 
salt. 

SALINAS, another, on the s. w. coast of the 
island of Martinique. 

SALINAS, another, on the coast of the pro 
vince and captainship of Para and kingdom of 
Brazil, between the point of Latigisca and the 
mountain Pirausu. 

SALINAS, another, which is the extremity of 
the w. coast of the island of Puna, in the pro 
vince and government of Guayaquil and kingdom 
of Quito. 

SALINAS, a valley or extensive llanura in the 
district of the corregimienlo of Cuzco and king 
dom of Peru; wherein is a salt-water fountain, 
from whence they collect much salt. It is cele 
brated for the battle which was fought in 1538, 
between Francisco Pizarro and Diego de Al 
ma gro. 

SALINAS, another valley, in the province and 
corregimiento of Chichos and Tarija, in the same 
kingdom as the former ; near the river Bermejo. 

SALINAS, another settlement, in the province 
and government of Nicoya and kingdom of Gua 
temala. 

SALINAS, a port on the coast of the province 
and alcaldia may or of Tecoantepec in Nueva Es 
pana, at a small distance from its capital. 

SALINAS, a shoal of rocks, near the coast of 
the province and captainship of Rio Grande in 



SAL 

Brazil : it is between the point of Tiburofi and 
the settlement of Obrandive. 

SALINAS, a bay on the s. w. coast of the island 
of Martinique, on the side of the point of this 
name. 

SALINAS, another point of land, on the w. 
coast of the island Tortuga, near that of St. 
Domingo. 

SALINAS, a desolate tract, in the province and 
government of Tucuman and kingdom of Peru. 

SALINE, a small river of the province and 
government of Louisiana, which runs n. c. and 
enters the Pasus. 

SALINE, another river, of the same province 
and government ; which runs n. n. e. and enters 
the Mississippi. 

SALINE, a large pool or lake in the island of 
Guadaloupe, and on the s. coast of La Gran 
Tierra, close to the settlement of San Francisco. 

SALINE, a settlement of the province and go 
vernment of Louisiana in N. America : on the 
shore and at the mouth of the river of its name, 
to enter the Mississippi. In its vicinity are the 
celebrated mines of La Mote. [Here all the salt 
is made which is used in the Illinois country, 
from a salt spring which is at this place. It is near 
nine miles s. w. by s. from Kaskaskias village.] 

[SALINE. See SALINA.] 

[SALISBURY, a fertile district of N. Caro 
lina, which comprehends the counties of Rock- 
ingham, Guilford, Montgomery, Stokes, Surry, 
Iredell, Rowen, Cabarras, and Mecklenberg. It 
is bounded n. by the State of Virginia, and s. by 
the State of S. Carolina. Iron ore is found in 
several parts, and works have been erected which 
manufacture pig, bar-iron, &amp;c. to a considerable 
amount ; tobacco of good quality is cultivated 
here, and the planters are wealthy. It contains 
66,480 inhabitants, of whom only 8138 are 
slaves.] 

[SALISBURY, the capital of the above district, 
and a post-town, is situate in Rowan County, on 
the n. w.* side of Cane Creek, about five miles 
from its junction with Yadkin River. It contains 
a court-house, gaol, and about 100 houses. It 
is a flourishing place, in the midst of a fine coun 
try, and lies about 25 miles s. of the Moravian 
settlements, 211 w.s.w. of Halifax, 70 w. s.w. 
of Hillsborough, 83 n. w. by w. of Fayettville. 
Lat. 35 43 n. long. 80 34 w.) 

[SALISBURY, a township in Essex County, 
Massachusetts ; is divided into two parishes. 
The most ancient settlement in this town is in 
the lower parish, at which place the general 
court of the former province of Massachusetts 



SAL 



371 



Bay was sometimes held. The part of the town 
at present most flourishing, is a point of land 
formed by the junction of Merrimack and Powow 
Rivers. Here is a village very pleasantly situate 
on the bank of the Merrimack, where, before 
the revolution war, ship-building was carried on 
to a considerable extent, which, though now 
much decreased, is still not wholly laid aside ; 
and this, with its auxiliary trades, and some 
little navigation, owned and fitted here, give the 
place a very lively and busy appearance. The 
continental frigate Alliance, was built at this 
place, under the direction of Mr. Hacket, a very 
respectable naval architect. It is between three 
and four miles n. of Newbury Port, and 35 n. n. e. 
of Boston. It was incorporated in 1640, and 
contains 1780 inhabitants. See Powow RIVER.] 

[SALISBURY, a township of Vermont, on Ot 
ter Creek, in Addison County. Trout Pond, or 
Lake Dunmore, five miles long, and two broad, 
is in this town. It contains 446 inhabitants, and 
is 15 miles e. by n. of Mount Independence.] 

[SALISBURY, a considerable agricultural town 
ship in Hillsborough County, New Hampshire. 
It is situate on the w. side of Merrimack River, 
at the mouth of Black water River, and opposite 
to Canterbury ; 10 or 12 miles n. of Concord. It 
was incorporated in 1768, and contains 1372 in 
habitants.] 

[SALISBURY, the Wiatiac of the Indians, is the 
n.w. township of Connecticut, Litchfield County, 
having Massachusetts n. and New York w. Here 
are several forges and iron-works, and a paper- 
mill. During the late war several pieces of can 
non were cast in this town.] 

[SALISBURY, a town of Delaware, Newcastle 
County, on the n. side of Duck Creek, on the s. 
line of the county ; 9| miles s. e. of Noxtown, 
and 12 n. w. of Dover.] 

[SALISBURY, the name of two townships in 
Pennsylvania, the one in Lancaster County, the 
other in that of Northampton.] 

[SALISBURY, a post-town of Maryland, situate 
on the e. shore of Chesapeak Bay, in Somerset 
County, between the two principal branches of 
Wicomico River. It contains about SO houses, 
and carries on a considerable lumber trade. It 
is five miles s. of the Delaware State line, 16 
n. w. of Snowhill, and 47 s. of Dover in Dela 
ware State.] 

[SALISBURY, a small town of Virginia, 20 
miles from Alexandria, 15 from Leesburg.] 

[SALISBURY, an island at the w. end of Hud 
son s Straits, e. of Nottingham Island. Lat. 63 
29 n. long. 76 47 a&amp;gt;.] 

3 B2 



372 



SAL 



[SALISRURY Point forms the n. side of the 
mouth of Merrimack River, or Newbury Har 
bour, in Massachusetts. Lat. 42 49 n. long. 
70 50 a&amp;gt;.] 

SALI VAS, a numerous nation of Indians of 
the province and government of San Juan de los 
Llanos in the Nuevo Reyno de Granada, be 
tween the rivers Meta and Cazarare. It is di 
vided into tribes ; some of which inhabit the zn. 
and others the e. of the river Vichada. 

They are the most docile, pacific, and well in 
clined Indians of any known, notwithstanding 
their character, in some degree, denies this as 
sertion ; for their customs are wildly extravagant. 
When the time of sowing comes, all the young 
men go out to labour, and, being formed into 
ranks, receive at the hands of the old men a fu 
rious lashing : this, they say, is to beat out idle 
ness from youth, and there is no one that ever 
complains of this treatment. They delighted to 
carry very shining arms, although they were too 
cowardly to use them ; and giving as excuse, 
that their ancestors never fought. It is the bu 
siness of the women, every day, to comb the 
hair of their husbands, sons, brothers, and guests, 
to dress it, and anoint thfeir bodies : and in this 
they spend the greater part of their time ; whilst 
the sole business of the men is to sit still, and to 
take care lest the operation be troublesome ; 
frequently looking at themselves in a mirror. 
They look upon it as a great affliction when their 
wives bear twins ; as they consider it as a dis 
honour to their persons. The unhappy woman, 
in this case, experiences the reproach of all her 
sex, who, without considering that the same 
may be their own lot, pour forth volleys of abuse, 
by calling her mother of mice, in as much as 
these animals bring forth half a dozen at a time ; 
and others calling her cachi-camos, which animals 
produce more at a time, and more frequentlv. 
They, accordingly, always kill one of the chil 
dren, without permitting any one to know the 
act ; since the husband invariably supposes one 
of the children to be the fruit of infidelity, and, 
consequently, carries his wife before the cazique, 
who beats her unmercifully, in the presence of 
other women, to deter them from the same act. 
The Jesuits of Santa Fe reduced this nation of 
the Salivas to the Catholic faith ; but the Cari- 
bes burnt and destroyed their settlements, put 
ting to death the missionaries, in 1684; and have 
frequently since repeated their invasions. 

SAL1VE, Point of, at the extremity of the 
coast which looks to the e. of the island Trini- 
tlad, close to that of Los Arrecifes. 



SAL 

[SALLAGUA, a harbour on the w. coast of 
New Mexico, which affords good anchorage. 
Lat. 19 4 n. See SALAGUA.] 

SALLE, a small river of the province and 
colony of Virginia in N. America, which runs 
w. and enters the Seyota near the settlement of 
Harriskinton. 

SALLIQUE, a settlement of the province and 
government of Jaen de Bracamoros in the king 
dom of Quito. 

SALMEDINA, a shoal of rocks and sand at 
the entrance of the port of Portobello in the 
kingdom of Tierra Firme ; opposite the point 
where stood the castle of San Felipe, entirely of 
iron; at seven leagues distance. 

SALMEDINA, another shoal, near the coast of 
the province and government of Cartagena in the 
Nuevo Reyno de Granada, at the entrance of the 
port of Boca Chica. 

SALMEDINA, another, near the coast of the 
province and government of Honduras in N. 
America, between the Morro Chico and the island 
Utila. 

[SALMON Fall, the name of Piscataqua River 
from its head to the Lower Falls at Berwick. See 
PASCATAQUA RIVER.] 

[SALMON Falls, in Saco River, on the line 
between the district of Maine and the State of 
New Hampshire, 10 miles above Saco Falls. 
The number of saw-mills on the river has neither 
destroyed or lessened the quantity of salmon on 
it. The mill-dams do not extend across the 
river, and there is a curiosity in seeing the ex 
ertion "of these fish in making their way up the 
falls : when the sun shines clear in the morning, 
they are frequently seen engaged in this enter 
prise, moving from one rock to another, and 
resting on each, in spite of the cataract which 
opposes their progress, uutil they have gained 
the still waters above.] 

[SALMON Point, on the e. coast of the island 
of Newfoundland, and n. e. of Claune Point, 
which is the n. entrance into Conception Bay.] 

SALMORIN, a settlement of the island of St. 
Domingo, in the French division. The Spaniards 
burnt and destroyed it in 1690. 

SALOMON, islands of the S. Sea ; called also 
De Mendaila, as having been discovered by Al- 
vard de Mendana, by order of the Marquis of 
Cafiete, Viceroy of Peru, (and not Meudoza, as 
is wrongly stated by the Ex-Jesuit Coleto), in 
1567. 

They are many, and the principal were named 
by the said Mendana, as follows : Guadalcanal, 
Santa Isabel, Guadalupe, Arrecife, Buena-vista, 



SAL 

San Christoval, San Jorge, Santa Ana, San 
Marcos, San Nicolas, San Geronimo, La Galera, 
La Florida, San Dimas, Ramos, Santa Catarina, 
Santiago, Nombre de Dios, and Santa Cruz. 

The climate, in all of them, is benign, and 
the territory fertile ; and they were inhabited by 
savages. But they have not been discovered any 
further than their coasts, as none of their disco 
verers entered far into them. That of Guadal 
canal is 200 leagues in circumference, and the 
best of them all ; and somewhat less than this is 
that of Santa Isabel, in which is the port of Es- 
trella, large, convenient, and secure. Geogra 
phers differ about the longitude of these islands; 
nor is their situation justly ascertained, no vessel 
having since reconnoitred them ; so that they 
are actually, by some, thought to be only ima 
ginary. In the journal, however, of the afore 
said Alvaro de Mendana, remitted to the king, 
they appear to be between lat. 7 23 / s. 

SALS, a small island of the N. Sea, one of 
the Virgins : w. of the island Copper in the 
King s Channel and Bay of Francis Drake, and 
to the e. of the island of Peter. In long. 63 
lat. 18 4 X . 

[SALT Bay, or Baia Salada, called also Sa- 
lina, is 30 miles n. of Cape Tontoral, on the 
coast of Chile, and on the S. Pacific Ocean. It 
has a good ship-road, which is much resorted to 
by coasting vessels, for loading salt, as well as 
other produce. Good fresh water may be had 
near the road.] 

[SALT Island, one of the smaller Virgin Isles, 
and w. of Cooper s Island. Lat. 21 30 w. Long. 
71 3 X KJ.] 

[SALT Island, on the s. coast of the island of 
Jamaica, off Old Harbour, and n. n. e. of Port 
land Point.] 

[SALT Key, a small island in the W. Indies. 
Lat. 21 30 w. long. 71 3 w. ] 

[SALT POND Bay, on the s. coast of the island 
of Jamaica, e. of Port Royal.] 

[SALT Lake, in the State of New York. See 
ONONDAGO LAKE.] 

[SALT River, in Kentucky, is formed by three 
principal branches, and empties through the s. e. 
bank of the Ohio, by a mouth 80 yards, accord 
ing to others, 150 yards wide; 20 miles below 
the Rapids. It is navigable for boats about 60 
miles. It has good lands on its head waters, 
but they are low and unhealthy: for 25 miles 
from its mouth, the land on each side is level and 
poor, and abounds with ponds. Between Salt 
and Green Rivers there are two springs of 



SAL 



373 



bitumen, which, when analized, is found to be 
amber.] 

SALT River, on the n. shore of the island of 
Jamaica, is nearly due s. from Point Galina.] 

[SALT River, the arm of the sea which sepa 
rates the island of Guadalonpe, in the W. Indies, 
into two parts, and communicates with the ocean 
on both sides of the island. It is two leagues in 
length ; 15 or 16 paces broad. The navigation 
is hazardous, nor will it admit vessels above 25 
tons.] 

[SALT. See SALINA, and SALINE.] 

[SALTASH, a township of Vermont, Wind 
sor County, 12 miles w. of Windsor. It contains 
106 inhabitants.] 

[SALT PETRE Creek, in Baltimore County, 
Maryland, falls into Gunpowder River on the w. 
side ; e. n. e. of Baltimore, and tw o miles n. w. 
from the zo. point of Gunpowder Neck.] 

[SALT SPRING River, in the N.W. Ter 
ritory, rises near the e. line of the New Jersey 
Company s lands, and runs s. e. into Ohio River, 
10 miles below the mouth of the Wabash, and 
nearly 30, by the course of the river, above the 
Great Cave. It runs above 56 miles ; and 10 
miles from its mouth is the salt spring, which 
gives name to the river.] 

SALT A, San Miguel de, a city of the pro 
vince and government of Tucuman in Peru, 
founded in 1582, by Don Gonzalo de Obreu y 
Figueroa, with the name of San Clemente de la 
Nueva Sevilla, and afterwards translated by 
Hernando de Sesma, eight leagues from that 
spot, into a beautiful valley called Lerma, which 
is five leagues in circumference, and through 
which passes a river, on the shore of which the 
city stands, and over which is built a conve 
nient bridge. This city, without walls, or any 
other defence than the valour of its inhabi 
tants, has always defended itself against the In 
fidel Indians, and even rendered itself formidable 
to those enemies. It contains 500 men capable 
of bearing arms, 400 houses, a parish with two 
curates, and two vice-parishes, which are San 
Bernardo and Nuestra Senora de la Candelaria, 
erected in 1762, as a place wherein to deposit 
the image which used to be in a chapel in the 
valley of Siancas, near a vineyard. It has four 
convents of religious orders : namely, of San 
Francisco, Santo Domingo, San Agustin, and 
La Merced, and a college which belonged to the 
Jesuits. It is very fertile, and abounding in 
wheat, rye, vines, and cattle ; of the skins and 
salted flesh of which it makes a good trade ; 



374 



SAL 



SAL 



though the most considerable article of com 
merce is that of mules, which are fattened in the 
folds here, and at the sale of which a vast con- 
course of people assemble in the months of Fe 
bruary and March ; and at this time there are in 
this valley no less than 60,000 mules and 4000 
horses. 

The natives are subject to a species of leprosy, 
and nearly all the women, after twenty years 
old, have the coto or swelling in the throat. 
Notwithstanding these inconveniences, it is the 
ordinary residence of the governor of the pro 
vince, who prefers it from its commerce and cli 
mate, to Santiago del Estero and to the capital. 
[In lat. 24 17 s. long. 64 I SO"^.] 

SALT A, a river of this province and govern 
ment, which takes its denomination from the 
former city, on the shore of which it is built. It 
runs e. and enters the Bermejo. 

SALTILLO, SANTIAGO DEL, a town and 
head settlement of the district of the province 
and government of the Nuevo Reyno de Leon 
in N. America. It belongs to the bishopric of 
Guadalaxara, and is a necessary pass to those 
travelling from Durango and Parral to the 
coasts of the Bay of Mexico. [From the former 
of those places it is about 148 miles.] The same 
travellers must also proceed along the side of a 
narrow and confined port of more than two 
leagues, and by a place at a short distance from 
this, called La Cuesta de los Muertos ; where 
dwell the nations of the barbarian Indians, the 
Tobosos and Gavilanes ; who perpetrate incre 
dible murders and depredations on passengers. 
It is 75 leagues w. with a slight inclination to s. 
of its capital. 

[This town, which, according to Humboldt, is 
of the Intendancy of Durango, is surrounded 
with arid plains, in which the traveller suffers 
very much from want of water. The table-land 
on which the Saltillo is situate, descends towards 
Monclova, the Rio del Norte, and the province 
of Texas, where, in place of European corn, we 
find only fields covered with cactus. Population, 
6000.] 

SALTILLO, another town in the province of 
Tepeguana and kingdom of Nueva V izcaya. It 
is a large town, and through it people generally . 
pass into the Nuevo Reyno de Leon, as it bounds 
this kingdom on the e. It is of a mild tempera 
ture, and 60 leagues e. n. e. of the capital Gua- 
diana. 

SALTO, VALLE DEL, a valley of the province 
and corregimiento of Santiago, of the kingdom 



of Chile ; thus called from a fall of the river 
Mapocho, which, running through a level ter 
ritory, throws out an arm to irrigate this valley, 
which being much higher in the e. part than any 
other, causes the water of the river to form a 
beautiful spectacle, as it rushes down the decli 
vities which present themselves in its course : 
this river then spreads itself into different aque 
ducts whereby to fertilize the territory, render 
ing the same abundant in vegetable productions 
in the extreme ; likewise the harvest is gathered 
here one month earlier than in any other part of 
the kingdom. In short, it is one of the most 
delightful spots to be found in these parts. Half 
a league from the capital and city of Santiago. 

SALTO, a river of the province of Mexico in 
Nueva Espana. It rises in the mountains of the 
Sierra Nevada, and enters the lake of Chalco. 

SALTO, another river of the kingdom of Bra 
zil : called thus from a fall which it makes for 
the distance of three leagues. It runs nearly due 
w. and enters the Tocantines, between the river 
Seno and the Cocheira Cumplida. 

SALTO, a settlement of the province and cap 
tainship of Todos Santos in Brazil; on the shore 
of the bay. 

SALTOS, a large island of the river Parana in 
the province and government of Paraguay ; thus 
called from a great fall made by the river oppo 
site it. 

[SALTO, a fort of the province and govern 
ment of Buenos Ayres, situate near the river 
Arecife, about 100 TO. of Buenos Ayres. Lat. 
34 18 45". long. 60 34 40"] 

SALVADOR, S. a city and capital of the 
kingdom of Brazil ; situate in the Bay of Todos 
Santos. It is large, rich, and well built, but in 
a territory so rough and unequal, as to render its 
access very difficult. Its height above the level 
of the sea is 600 feet ; and thus they are obliged 
to use machines for raising up whatever they may 
want. The upper plain of the city is as regular 
as the inequality of the territory will admit ; 
but the streets are straight, and of a sufficient 
w r ideness, though the greater part are at their 
entrance so steep as to be inaccessible for car 
riages : for which reason the richer class are car 
ried about in palanquins, with curtains on each 
side, and carried by two Negroes. 

This city was founded by Tomas de Sousa, a 
Portuguese, near the Fort of San Antonio ; in 
the spot called at the present day Villa Veya or 
Ciudad Vieja ; and it was afterwards removed to 
where it now stands. Its inconvenient and irre- 



S ALVA D OR. 



375 



gular situation does not hinder it from being- a 
place of great commerce, and one of the richest 
cities of America. It is w^ll defended naturally, 
and could, at little expense, be rendered im 
pregnable ; for it has natural ditches, and other 
exterior works of fortification, such as would 
cause it, when attacked, to be disputed inch by 
inch. 

The e. part is nearly as inexpugnable, and all 
the other parts are well fortified by nature and 
by art. The approaches also are defended by- 
various forts, particularly by that of S. Pedro, 
which is an irregular tetragon of earth, studded 
with stone, and surrounded by a ditch ; that of 
San Diego, nearly of the same figure and mate 
rials, but without a ditch ; the powder magazine 
of the same ; and another fort built in arches, 
and covered over in the form of a pyramid.; 
that of San Antonio, also of the same figure, but 
larger ; and the castle of Nuestra Senora de la 
Victoria, situate about a cannon-shot from that 
of San Antonio ; that of San Bartolome, which 
is defended by a small port, wherein vessels are 
careened ; and those of Monferrato, and others, 
which command the entrance of the bay. 

From the above enumeration, it should appear 
that nothing more could be required to keep this 
city impregnable, than a proper attention to the 
garrisoning and supplying the above forts. But 
this is not the case ; as they are very badly 
served, a great part of their guns being useless, 
and the whole of the military consisting only of 
six companies of regulars, and even these daily 
diminishing, under the influence of the climate, 
and an irregular method of life. 

The commerce of this capital, which is very 
considerable, consists in linen, cloths, hats, silk 
and thread stockings, grain, rice, flour, biscuit, 
port wine, household utensils, Negroes, oil, 
cheese, butter, and bacon, in exchange for which 
it gives of its productions : such as gold, sugar, 
tobacco, in leaf and dust ; brazil-Avood, skins, 
balsam of Copayvi, ipecacuana, and many other 
drugs. These articles are conveyed from the 
High City to the Low City in machines, at which 
the slaves labour ; and there are three of these 
to be hired publicly. The inhabitants of the 
higher class are distinguished for their courteous 
behaviour, but the lower orders are insolent to 
a degree. The women are more recluse here 
than in Portugal, and are not seen out of their 
houses save on Sundays and holidays, when they 
go to mass, and then very early in the morning. 
This city is very rich and commercial ; the build 



ings are for the most part of stone, large, strong, 
and richly furnished. It contains about 2000 
houses. The streets are full of Negro slaves, of 
both sexes, all but naked, sweating with fatigue, 
and groaning under the most insupportable 
slavery. But what is the greatest shock to hu 
manity, is to see various shops open, filled vvith 
these poor creatures, who are exposed at certain 
prices, like beasts ; the masters, in fact, having 
the same authority over them as over animals, 
and treating them oftentimes with as great or 
even greater inhumanity. 

The town is divided into high and low, the 
latter consisting of a certain few streets filled 
with storehouses on the shore of the bay, for the 
convenience of loading and unloading ; and the 
high or upper part, which is the principal, is 
adorned with magnificent buildings, and, above 
all, with a cathedral dedicated to San Salvador, 
which has given name to the city, and is not only 
of beautiful architecture, but adorned with fine 
sculpture, and gilt inside and out ; enriched with 
crosses of gold, with candlesticks, and other pre 
cious articles of extreme value, and some so 
heavy as to be more than two men can lift. Op 
posite the cathedral is a small platform, from 
Avhich you enjoy a beautiful prospect of all the 
bay, islands, &amp;c. United to the cathedral is an hos 
pital, dedicated to Nuestra Senora de la Merced, 
a sumptuous and well-endowed edifice. On the 
cathedral are dependent various parish-churches, 
as San Antonio, San Pedro, and Santa Barbara ; 
and to the n. is the college which belonged to 
the Jesuits, the church of which is built of marble 
brought from Europe ; and this, as well as the sa 
cristy, are extremely rich and curious, equally for 
their choice ornaments as for their fine sculpture 
and paintings. Besides these temples it contains 
convents of the Capuchins, Carmelites, Benedicts, 
Franciscans, and Augustins, a monastery of nuns 
of Nuestra Senora de la Encarnacion, and va 
rious chapels and oratories. The palace, in 
which the viceroy resides, is an excellent fabric, 
and not less so is the palace of the archbishop. 
The tribunal of justice, the hospital, and other 
public buildings, correspond to the riches of the 
country ; the commerce is much enlarged by an 
intercourse with Rio Janeiro ; and near it are 
many gold mines, abounding in this metal. The 
Portuguese government, contrary to the policy 
of the greater part of the European powers, per 
mits no foreigner to buy the productions of the 
country ; and they are still more averse to any 
one bringing hither any foreign merchandise for 



SAL 



SAL 



sale. The two reasons alledged for this conduct 
are as follow : the one is to oblige and animate 
its vassals to lay aside their pride and natural 
indolence ; and the other to hinder the defalcation 
of the public revenues ; which, through the sys 
tem of the duties here established, are greater by 
an internal than an external trade. In spite, 
however, of all these precautions, and the penal 
ties imposed upon contrabandists, this sort of 
commerce is carried on to a great extent. 

The inhabitants of San Salvador are so much 
dedicated to the cultivation of the plantations of 
sugar and tobacco, that in some of these they 
employ 500 slaves ; and these they make to work 
so hard, and feed so badly, that it is a rare in 
stance of any of these poor creatures enduring 
the service for more than seven years. The ap 
plication to the above commerce causes a com 
parative disregard to the cultivation of other ve 
getable productions ; and it necessarily follows, 
that provisions are very dear ; the fish, too, which 
abounds in the bay, is in little demand, and the 
fattening of cattle for killing is a thing unknown. 

It has for arms, a white dove with an olive 
branch in its beak, surrounded by an orle of sil 
ver with this motto, " Sic ilia ad aream rerersa 
est" the whole upon a green field, and granted 
by king Don Juan III. of Portugal : the same 
are to be seen engraved on the gates of the city, 
and on the houses of the corporation. 
In 1588 the English attempted to surprise this 
city ; but it was defended by the Indians, ani 
mated by the Jesuits, and under the direction of 
Father Christoval de Govea, visitor. Juan de 
Laetio, in his description of the West Indies, 
confesses that the Portuguese owe the preserva 
tion of this metropolis entirely to the industry 
and exertions of the Jesuits. The Dutch took 
it in 1623 : but it was recovered in 1625 by Ma 
nuel de Meneses. It was erected into a bishopric 
by the pontiff Julius III. and into an archbishopric 
and metropolitan of Brazil by Innocent XI. in 
1676. The climate is hot and unhealthy ; and 
the port is large, convenient, and secure, but of 
difficult entrance : [in lat. 12 58 s. long. 38 
32 30" w.~\ 

SALVADOR, S. a province and alcaldia mayor of 
the kingdom of Guatemala ; bounded e. by that 
of San Miguel, w. by that of Guatemala, n. by 
that of Honduras, and s. by the Pacific Sea. It 
is of very limited extent, and little commerce ; 
but produces some sugar and indigo, and has a 
very considerable population, included in the fol 
lowing settlements : * 



Sta. Lucia de Suchi- San Miguel Guisocan, 

toto, Cuscutan, 

Tenanzingo, Xilobasco, 

S. Christoval Tutiapa, Tonacatepeque, 
Chalatenango, San Christoval, 

Quesaltepeque, Ayustitipeque, 

San Miguel Tecchon- Santiago, 

cho, San Marcos, 

Arcatagua, San Juan Cojutepe- 

Santo Tomas Tejutla, que, 
S. Juan Olocuitla, Scncontepeque, 

Tapac, Xilopango, 

Cuyultitan, San Antonio Zuya- 

Panchimalco, pango, 

Santa Lucia, Pululapa, 

Santo Tomas Texa- Purulapilla, 

quangos, San Martin Purulapa. 

San Peclro Masagua, Istepeque, 
San Antonio Masagua, Apastepeque. 
Tepezontes, Zaguayapa, 

Chinameca, Guacoteti, 

San Miguel, Texinca, 

Tapalguaca, Aduaca. 

San Jacinto, 

SALVADOR, S. the capital, of the same name, 
is a small city ; situate on the shore of a river, 
which, at the distance of 12 miles, runs into the 
Pacific Sea. It has on the n. the craggy moun 
tains, called De Los Chontales, and in its vici 
nity are some sugar mills and herds of cattle. It 
contains above 5000 souls of all classes, three 
convents of religious orders ; namely of San Fran 
cisco, Santo Domingo, and La Merced ; but they 
are all very reduced and poor. [In long. 89 
20 X . Lat. 1340 w.] 

SALVADOR, S. a settlement of the province 
and corregimiento of Calca and Lares in Peru ; 
annexed to the curacy of the settlement of Przac. 
SALVADOR, S. another, of the head settlement 
of the district of Uruapan, and aJcaldia mayor of 
Valladolid in the province and bishopric of Me- 
choacan. It contains 19 families of Indians, and 
is one league s. of its head settlement, and a little 
less than 20 e. of the capital. 

SALVADOR, S. another of the head settlement 
of the district of Undameo, of the same alcaldia 
and bishopric as the former. It contains 18 fa 
milies of Indians, and is three leagues e. of its 
head settlement. 

SALVADOR, S. another, of the head settlement 
of the district of Toxtepec, and alcaldia mayor of 
Tecali in Nueva Espaiia. It contains 93 fami 
lies of Indians. 

SALVADOR, S. another, of the province and 



S A L 



SAL 



377 



government of Quixos and Macas in the king 
dom of Quito. It is of a very hot and moist 
temperature, and consequently unhealthy ; and 
produces maize, i/ucas, and plantains, though in 
small quantities, as it is much reduced. 

SALVADOR, S. another, of the alcaldia mayor 
of Octupan in Nueva Espaiia. 

SALVADOR, S. another, of the head settlement 
of Acazinco, and alcaldia mayor of Tepeaca, in the 
same kingdom as the former. It contains 83 fa 
milies of Indians, and is two leagues from its 
head settlement. 

SALVADOR, S. another, of the missions which 
were held by the Jesuits in the river Orinoco, 
and Nuevo Reyno de Granada ; on the shore of 
the river Pauto. 

SALVADOR, S. another, of the province and go 
vernment of Cumana; on the shore of the river 
Orinoco, opposite the Ciudad Real, which was 
destroyed by the Caribees, and of which only the 
ruins remain. 

SALVADOR, S. another, of the province and 
government of Sonora in N. America ; situate in 
the country of the Apaches Indians, on the shore 
of a river, between the settlements of Quiburio 
and San Marcos. 

SALVADOR, S. another, of the head settlement 
of the district of Tlacolula, and alcaldia mayor of 
Xalapa in Nueva Espafia ; situate on a lofty 
plain, and of a mild temperature, inasmuch as it 
enjoys the winds of the four cardinal points, and 
rarely receives moist air from the clouds which 
collect in these parts, as being in the centre of 
the sierra. It is inhabited by 40 families of In 
dians, who employ themselves in cutting woods 
much esteemed, and forming the principal arti 
cle of its trade ; also in collecting various exqui 
site fruits, which are cultivated in the precincts 
of trie town. At two leagues distance to the w. 
is the ramhtria, called La Joya, which serves as 
a market-place for traders at the arrival of the 
fleets. This is situate in a very cold and cloudy 
spot, and is inhabited by 12 families of Spaniards 
and some Indians, and in the high road leading 
to Mexico. Two leagues further on is the estate 
of Las Vigas, enjoying the same climate, and 
serving as a place of refreshment to travellers. 
It is inhabited by 20 families of Spaniards and 
Mustees, occupied in breeding neat cattle and 
goats. It abounds in firs, from which they ex 
tract a certain portion of pitch, which they carry 
for sale to Vera Cruz to careen the ships. Two 
leagues n. of its head settlement. 

SALVADOR, S. a river of the province and go 
vernment of Buenos Ayres in Peru, which rises 

VOL. IV. 



near the coast of the river La Plata, runs w. and 
enters the Uruguay a little before this enters the 
Plata. 

SALVADOR, S. a river of the province and cap 
tainship of Rio Janeiro in Brazil ; which runs e. 
and enters the sea, close to Cape Santo Tome. 

SALVADOR, S. another, a large river of the 
province and government of Tucuman, which 
rises in the valley of Abacuan, and runs e. in the 
district of the city of Xuxuy. It is also called 
Bermejo. 

SALVADOR, S. an island of the N.Sea, one of 
the Lucayas, which was the first land of the New 
World discovered by Admiral Christopher Co 
lumbus in 1492, when he took possession of those 
dominions for their Catholic Majesties, Don Fer 
nando V. and Dona Isabel, who were reigning 
in Castilla. The Indians called it Guanahani or 
Cuanabay. [It is also known by the name of 
Cat Island, and is more properly denominated as 
one of the Bahamas. All accounts, indepen 
dently of that furnished by our author, agree that 
this island was the first land discovered by Co 
lumbus in the w. hemisphere. But if the ac 
counts transmitted by him to the court of Spain 
of the natives, description, and appearance of the 
island were true, it must probably have under 
gone some very great alteration since the dis 
covery. All along the e. coast of the island, 
(which is from 50 to 60 miles in length), and 
where he is stated to have landed, there is now a . 
reef which no vessel of any size could venture to 
pass, or where any one would attempt to come 
to anchor. Round the s. w. end of the island, 
however, is a reef-harbour, where vessels may, 
in most winds, have a secure anchorage. It is 
called Port Howe, and faces the s. to. There is 
also a good anchorage in the Bight, to the n. of 
it. This island, except at the s. extremity, is 
very narrow. The population in 1797, amounted 
(including whites) to 657 ; and in 1803, the 
acres of patented estates granted by the crown 
for cultivation to 28,903. Long. 75 40" w. Lat. 
24 20 w.] 

[SALVADOR, S. Little, one of the uninhabited 
Bahama Islands, a few leagues to the w. of the 
n. end of Great Cat Island, or St. Salvador, op 
posite to Powel s Point, Eleuthera.] 

[SALVAGE, a dry rock off Cape Ann, on the 
coast of Massachusetts. When it bears s. e. two 
leagues distant, you have six leagues n. w. to 
Newbury Port Bar, and n. one-half w. 11 leagues 
to Portsmouth ; n. one-half e. eight leagues to 
Isle of Shoals.] 

SALVALEON, DE IGUEY, a settlement of 
3c 



378 



SAM 



SAM 



the island St. Domingo, one of the first towns 
founded there by the Spaniards, 28 leagues from 
the capital. It is celebrated for the quantity of 
sugar made in it, and for its fine pastures, in 
which are bred infinite quantities of cattle. 

SAL VATIERRA, a city of the alcaldia mayor 
of Zelaya and bishopric of Mechoacan in Nueva 
Espafia. It is of a mild temperature, surrounded 
by wards or small settlements, in which dwell 
905 families of Indians and 800 of Spaniards, 
Mitstees, and Mulattoes, occupied (the greater 
part of them) in the cultivation of the estates 
and farms of its jurisdiction. It has two con 
vents of religious, the one of St. Francisco, the 
other of Barefooted Carmelites. It is very fer 
tile and abundant in fruits and seeds, of which its 
commerce consists ; as also ill melons, which are 
esteemed the best in the kingdom. Although 
the territory is stony, it is rendered agreeable by 
a variety of farms and fruit gardens. Twelve 
leagues w. s. w. of its capital, and 30 n. w. of 
Mexico. 

SALUDA, a county of the province and 
colony of S. Carolina, one of those under the 
obligation of sending out a regiment of militia 
whenever the government may require. 

SALUDE, a river of the province and colony 
of S. Carolina, which runs e. and enters the 
Santi. 

[SALUT, Port, lies on the s. w. side of the 
s. peninsula of the island of St. Domingo ; about 
14 leagues from Les Caves, as the road runs, and 
only seven in a straight line s. w. of that town.] 

SAMA, a settlement of the province and cor- 
regimiento of Arica in Peru ; where there is a 
creek, which serves as a place of shelter to fisher 
men s barks. 

SAMABALETA, a river of the province and 
government of Santa Marta in the Nuevo Reyno 
de Granada. It rises s. of the town of S. Faus- 
tino, and enters the Lebrija. 

SAMACA, a settlement of the corregimiento of 
Tunja, in the same kingdom as the former river. 
It is of a very cold climate; situate in the road 
which leads to Chiquinquira, produces much 
wheat, maize, barley, papas, and other fruits of 
a cold soil, and contains 250 Indians, and 
more than 300 housekeepers. Two leagues from 
Tunja. 

SAMAGALLI, a settlement of the province 
and government of Quixos and Macas in the 
kingdom of Quito ; on the shore of the river 
Avenico, and n. of the capital Macas. 

SAMAIPATA, a large and populous settle 
ment of the province and government of Santa 



Cruz de la Sierra in Peru. It contains more than 
600 Spanish souls, and is a league s distance from 
a lofty mountain, where there is a large building 
much the worse for age, and having the appear 
ance of what they called the Palace of the Incas. 
In this palace it is thought there is a great trea 
sure secreted, ever since the Indian gentilism. 

SAMAMBAYA, a settlement of the province 
and captainship of San Vicente in Brazil; be 
tween those of Pinsa and Morungaba. 

SAMAN, a settlement of the province and cor 
regimiento of Asangaro in Peru. 

SAMAN, a cape or point of land on the coast of 
the S. Sea, and province and corregimiento of 
Camana in Peru, close to the creek of Laquiaca. 

SAMAN, a large and fertile valley of the same 
province and corregimiento, between the coast of 
the S. Sea and the cordillera. 

SAMAN, a port of the island of Cuba, on the n. 
coast, between the point of Mulas and the port 
and river of Las Pal mas. 

SAMANA, Bay of, on the coast of St. Do 
mingo, between Capes Francois and Engano, 
near the which are some shoals of the same name, 
and on which, in 1724, was wrecked the lieute 
nant-general of marine Don Baltasarde Guevara, 
with two ships of 70 guns, called the Guadalupe 
and the Tolosa, which were bringing quicksilver 
to Vera Cruz. 

[This large bay is at the e. end of the island of 
St. Domingo. It opens to the n. e. between Cape 
Samana (which is also called Cape Reson or 
Cape Grondeur) on the n. and Cape Raphael 
s. e. of the former, 20 miles apart. Its mean 
breadth is about 1 1 miles, and its length 39. 
Some mariners reckon Pointe d Icaque, or Icaque 
Point, as the s. point of the bay, which comes 
after Cape Raphael, and is only 30 miles from 
the head of the bay, and lies in lat. 19 8 w.^and 
long. 69 13 w. 

This bay offers a safe shelter to the stoutest 
squadrons. Lying to the windward of the island, 
it has the advantage over all the other places as 
a maritime post, which renders it capable of pro 
tecting the whole Gulf of Mexico, to which it 
is in reality a key. The entrance is difficult, 
and very narrow ; because from the s. side of its 
opening runs a breaker, which advances in a 
point towards Port Banister, and between which 
and the n. coast nature has placed the rock or 
shallow, called the Rebels. This rock narrows 
the entrance, so that between it and the land, 
forming the n. side, in the interior of the bay, 
there is little more than 800 fathoms. Thus a 
battery on shore, and another on the rock, fhe 



SAM 



SAM 



379 



Hebels would, by their cross fire, completely de 
fend the entrance against even the smallest ves 
sels ; and -a battery on the other side of the Re 
bels would effectually prevent any vessel from 
entering between it and the breakers. Samana 
was taken by the English in November 1808. 
See OLD CAPE FRANCOIS.] 

SAMANA, a settlement of the island, in which 
is the former bay ; situate at the e. head, on the 
shore. 

SAMANA, a cape or point of land of the same 
island, between Capes Rezon and Cabron. 

SAMAVA, a small island of the N. Sea, 20. of 
that of Maquana. 

SAMAPAM PA, a settlement of the province 
and government of Tucuman in Peru, of the dis 
trict and jurisdiction of the city of Cordoba. 

SAMA QUANTI, a river of the province and 
government of Choco in the Nuevo Reyno de 
Granada. It rises in the interior of the moun 
tains, and enters the sea in the Gulf of Tacumari 
or Darien. 

SAMARUNBU, a lake of the province and 
captainship of Rey in Brazil, near the coast, be 
tween this lake and the great lake of Los Patos. 

SAMBA, GALERA DE, a point of the coast in 
the province and government of Cartagena in the 
Nuevo Reyno de Granada, between that capital 
and the city of Santa Marta. In its vicinity are 
some shoals of the same name. 

SAMBALAS, or SAMBALLAS. Some small 
islands of the N. Sea, in the province and go 
vernment of Panama, and kingdom of Tierra 
Firme. They are many, and at unequal dis 
tances, being from the continent one, two, three, 
and fouc miles. They extend a great length, 
and form a pretty spectacle with the mountains 
and woods for evergreen. In the midst of them 
are some navigable channels, through the which 
vessels off the coast of the isthmus may pass, or 
lay at anchor well sheltered from all the winds. 
Thus these straits have ever been an asylum for 
pirates and smugglers. The islands in one di 
rection are low, level, and sandy, and covered 
with trees and shell-fish of different sorts. 

In some of the islands are fountains of very 
good water, and parts fit for careening vessels. 
The great channel passing between them and the 
isthmus is two miles wide, and in some parts 
four ; and extends from the point of the same 
name as far as the Gulf of Darien and the coast; 
and on this are many ports and streams of sweet 
water. These islands are also called, Of 
Springer. 

SAMBALAS, a cape or point on the same coast 



of Panama, which takes its denomination from 
the former islands. It runs far into the sea, and 
on the e. side covers the bay called also of Sam- 
balas, formed by the river of Concepcion, and 
closed in on the w. by the Point of JEscribanos. 
It is of a low territory, and well covered with 
trees. 

SAMBALAS, the aforesaid bay, has in the middle 
a small island, which divides its entrance into two 
parts, and of which the part to the e. is best. In 
lat. 9 59 n. 

[SAMBOROUGH, Cape and Island, on the 
s. coast of Nova Scotia, and w. of Chebucto Bay 
and Harbour, on which is a light-house for the 
direction of ships. High water at full and change 
at eight o clock.] 

S^MBRO, a small island near the 5. coast of 
Nova Scotia or Acadia, between the cape of its 
name and the Port of Cathe or Butin. 

SAMBRO, the aforesaid cape, is on the side of 
Port Prospect. 

SAMBRO, a sand-bank, near the coast of the 
same province, opposite the former cape. 

SAMBU, a settlement of the province and go 
vernment of Darien, and kingdom of Tierra 
Firme ; on the shore of the river of its name, 
near the coast of the S. Sea. 

SAMBU, the aforesaid river, rises in the moun 
tains of the s. coast, and enters the sea within the 
Gulf of S. Miguel, and at the back of the point 
of Garachine. 

[SAMGANOODKtA, or SAMNAXOODHA, a 
harbour on the n.e. side of Oonalashka Island, on 
the n. w. coast of N. America, 10 miles e. of 
Egooshak Bay. Ships can lie here land-locked 
from all winds in seven, six, and four fathoms 
water. It abounds with hallibut, salmon, &amp;c. 
Lat. 53 55 w. Long. 166 30 15" w.~] 

[SAMILITAM, a river on the w. coast of New 
Mexico, 12 miles from Point Artela on one side, 
and six further to Copalita River. At its mouth 
is an Indian town, where a ship s company may 
find provisions and fresh water.l 

SAMIRiA. SeeYAXA. 

SAMO, a small town of the province and go 
vernment of S. Juan de los Llanos in the Nuevo 
Reyno de Granada, on the shore of the river 
Amadea. 

SAMO, a settlement of this name, with the ad 
dition of Alto, in the province and corregimiento 
of Coquimbo, and kingdom of Chile, at the source 
of the river Limari. 

SAMO, another, with the addition of Baxo, in 
the same province and kingdom, on the shore 
of the river of its name. 



380 



SAN- 



SAN 



SAMO, this river runs w. and enters theLimari. 

[SAMPTOWN, a village in Middlesex 
County, New Jersey, 2 miles n. e. of Quim- 
bletown, and above 13 s. w. of Elizabethtown.] 

[SAMPSON, a county of Fay ette District, N. 
Carolina ; bounded n. by Johnson County, and 
s. by Bladen. It contains 6065 inhabitants, in 
cluding 1183 slaves. The court-house, where a 
post-office is kept, is 22 miles from Fayetteville, 
12 from Cross Roads, near Duplin court-house.] 

SAMPUES, a settlement of the province and 
government of Cartagena, in the Nuevo Reyno 
de Granada ; situate in the Sabanas, and in the 
high road leading to the capital. 

[SAMPUTA, a town of Mexico. See AN- 

GELOS.] 

[SAMBALLET Point, near the mouth of the 
river Darien, and n. w. of the Island of Pines. It 
is 12 miles e. of Port Scrivan.] 

SANA, a province and corregimicnto of Peru, 
in the bishopric of Truxillo ; bounded e. by the 
province of Caxamarca ; n. e. by the same, in the 
district of Guambos ; n. and n. w. by that of 
Piura, and w. by the S. Sea. Its length is 25 
leagues from s. e. to n. w. and its width 14. It 
was in former times populous, and so abundant 
in vegetable productions that in the port of Cher- 
repe many vessels used to lade for Panama, Gua 
yaquil, Callao, and Chile, not to mention the ar 
ticles which were carried into the internal pro 
vinces. 

Its temperature is most benign, and in nothing 
differing from that of Truxillo. It is watered by 
four small rivers, of the which that furthest to 
the n. is called of La Leche. The second is that 
which passes through Lambayeque, and has a 

food bridge of wood. The third passes through 
ana : and the fourth, which runs s. is that which 
empties itself into the sea by Xequetepeque. 
They all change their names according to the 
different places through which they pass, and all 
have their origin from the serranias of Caxa 
marca. 

The vegetable productions of this province are 
many ; since besides wheat, maize, rice, and 
other seeds, it has all kinds of fruits, canafistola^ 
large cocos, dates, and mameyes. Here are ma 
nufactories of barilla, which they here call lico, 
of which they make lye for washing; and they 
procure much tallow from the goats, which they 
buy in the province of Piura in order to fatten 
them in this ; and of these animals they kill 
in the settlement of Lambayeque alone 60,000 
yearly, making dressed leather of their skins, and 
forming from these articles a branch of commerce, 



which occasions this to be one of the richest pro 
vinces of the kingdom. 

It also trades in articles made of the finest cot 
ton, such as mantles, napkins, and towels. The 
natives gather much tobacco, grapes, and sugar ; 
and make mats from a slight weed which they 
here call petates. It has no other than one port 
on its coast, and this is far from safe, and called 
Cherrepe ; but it lias a creek of the name of Pas- 
camayo. The capital is Santiago de Miraflores, 
to which is commonly given the title of the pro 
vince. 

The other settlements of its jurisdiction are 
the following : 

Santa Lucia, 

Cherrepe, 

San Juan de la Punta, 

Jayanca, 



Pacora, 
Morrope, 
Illimo, 
Mocupe, 
Guadalupe, 
San Joseph, 
Muchumi, 
Tucume, 
SANA, a town, 
former province, 



Ferrenafe, 
Chiclayo, 

San Ifdefonso de Pu 
eblo Nuevo, 
San Pedro de Lloco, 
San Miguel de Pixce, 
Eten, 
Monsefu, 
Reque, 
Chepen, 
Xequetepeque. 



which was the capital of the 
although its denomination is 
also Santiago de Miraflores; situate near the 
coast of the S. Sea, and on the shore of the river 
of its name. In 1685 it was sacked by the pirate 
Edward David, and from that time the greater 
part of its inhabitants went and established them 
selves in the settlement of Lambayeque. In 1728 
it was nearly ruined by an inundation of the 
river; and the inhabitants looked upon.it as a 
visitation from heaven, for their having sold to 
the cathedral of Lima the body of their arch 
bishop, Santo Toribio Mogrovejo, who died here. 
It is of an excellent climate, and fertile territory. 
At present nothing remains of it but the convent 
of S. Francisco and the hospital of S. Juan de 
Dios, with some few noble but poor families. It 
is situate between the settlements of Lambayeque 
and Cherrepe. [In lat. 6 52 s. and long. 79 
35 30 // a&amp;gt;.] 

[SAN AUGUSTIN, DE LAS CUESAS, a vil 
lage, in lat. 19 18 37" n. and long. 99 7 o&amp;gt;.] 
This village terminates, according to Humboldt, 
on the w. of the great valley of Mexico.] 
[SAN AUGUSTIN. See AUGUSTIN SAN.] 
SANARE, SANTA ANA DE, a settlement of the 
province and government of Venezuela, in the 
Nuevo Reyno de Granada, on the shore of the 
river Claro, which enters the Cojede e. of the 



SAN 

city of Tucuyo, in the road which leads from 
Guanare to Barquisimeto. It is a doctrinal esta 
blishment of Indians, and for these principally 
was it founded, who are tributary. It has also 
Spanish inhabitants and other casts, as well 
within the town as in the fields of its territory, 
and here they have crops of wheat and other 
grain ; bounded e. by the settlement of Nuestra 
Senora de la Aparicion de la Corteza, of the 
vicarage of the town of Araure; w. by the settle 
ment of Barbacoas, n. by the settlement of Cu- 
biro, and s. with a declination to the w. by the 
settlement of Guarico, being nine leagues distant 
from the latter. Its population consists of 1809 
Spaniards and people of colour, and 244 Indians. 

SANASCA, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Aimaraes in Peru; annexed to 
the curacy of the settlement of Soraya. 

SANATEPEC, a settlement of the province 
and alcaldia mayor of Chiapa in the kingdom of 
Guatemala. 

[SANBORNTOWN, a township of New 
Hampshire, Straftbrd County ; situate on the 
point of land at the confluence of Winnipisiogee 
and Pemigewasset Rivers. It was incorporated 
in 1760, and contains 1587 inhabitants. In this 
town is the appearance of an Indian fortress, 
consisting of five distinct walls, one within the 
other. Some pieces of baked earthenware have 
been found here, from which it is supposed that 
the Indians had learned the potter s art.] 

SANBORONDON. See ZAMBORONDON. 

SANCHEZ, a town of the province and go 
vernment of Cumana; situate on the shore of the 
river Orinoco, opposite the mouth of the Ma- 
napire. 

SANCHEZ, a settlement of the province and 
government of Tucuman, in the jurisdiction and 
district of the city of Cordoba, on the shore of the 
river Tercero. 

SANCHEZ, another, with the dedicatory title of 
Santiago, in the province and government of 
Buenos Ay res ; on the shore of the river Plata, 
and s. of the city of Corrientes. 

SANCHEZ, a river of the province and king 
dom of Tierra Firme, in the district and govern 
ment of Portobello. It runs n. and enters the 
sea between this city and the Port of Naos. 

SANCHO-PARDO, a shoal of rocks of the 
N. Sea, near the coast of the island of Cuba and 
the Cape San Antonio of that island. 

[SANCOTY Head, the e. point of Nantucket 
Island, on the coast of Massachusetts. Lat. 41 
15 n. Long, 69 58 a&amp;gt;.] 

[SANCTOS. See SANTOS.] 



SAN 



381 



SANCUDO, a small settlement of Indians, 
reduced by the missions of the religious of St. 
Domingo, in the jurisdiction of the city of San 
Christoval, in the Nuevo Reyno de Granada; on 
the shores of the river Apure. It is of a very 
hot temperature, and its natives, who are few 
and of the nation of the Chinatos, are reputed 
throughout the kingdom as notorious sorcerers. 

SANDE, a small river of the kingdom of Bra 
zil. It rises between that of Taquanhua and that 
of Araguay, and after a small space enters the 
Tocantines. 

SANDER, a settlement of the province and 
government of Jaen de Bracamoros in the king 
dom of Quito. 

[SANDGATE, a mountainous township of 
Bennington County, Vermont; 18 miles n. of 
Bennington. It contains 773 inhabitants.] 

[SAND-HILL Bay, is on the n. side of the 
peninsula, at the g. e. end of the island of St. 
Christopher in the W. Indies.] 

SANDIA, a settlement and capital of the pro 
vince and corregimiento of Carabaya in Peru ; 
on the shore of the river Amantata. 

[SANDISFIELD, a hilly township in Berk 
shire County, separated from Litchfield County, 
in Connecticut, by the S. State line ; 22 miles s. 
by e. of the shire-town. It was incorporated in 
1762, and contains 1581 inhabitants.] 

[SANDOWN, a township in Rockingham 
County, New Hampshire ; was taken from Kings 
ton and incorporated in 1756, and contains 561 
inhabitants.] 

[SANDUSKY, a fort in the N.W. Territory; 
situate on the s. side of the bay of the same name, 
at the s. w. end of Lake Erie.] 

[SANDUSKY Lake, or Bay, at the s. w. side of 
Lake Erie, is a gulf shaped like a shoe, and en 
tered from the lake by a very short and narrow 
strait. Its length is 13 miles, its greatest breadth 
seven. From the n. w. part of this lake, there is 
a portage of only 1| miles to Portage River, a 
small river which runs into Lake Erie. The 
fort stands opposite to the gut. Lat. 4"1 50 n. 
Long. 82 43 a?.] 

[SANDUSKY River, a navigable water t)f the 
N.W. Territory, which rises near a branch of 
the Great Miami, between which is a portage of 
nine miles. It pursues a n. e. course, and emp 
ties into the s. w. corner of Sandusky Lake. The 
Indians, by the treaty of peace at Greenville, 
August 3, 1795, have ceded to the United States 
a tract of land six miles square upon Sandusky 
Lake, where a fort formerly stood, and two miles 
square at the Lower Rapids of Sandusky River. 



.382 



SAN 



It is a considerable river, with level land on its 
bank, its stream gentle all the way to its mouth, 
where it is large enough to receive sloops.] 

[SANDWICH, a township in the n. part of 
Strafford County, New Hampshire ; n. of Win- 
nipisiogee Lake. It was incorporated in 1763, 
and contains 905 inhabitants.] 

[SANDWICH, Massachusetts, a post-town at 
the bottom of Cape Cod, in Barnstable County. 
It extends the whole breadth of the cape, and is 
18 miles s, e. of Plymouth, and about 45 s. of 
Boston. There is a little decent group of houses, 
on the e. side of the cape, and a pretty stream of 
water running through it. Incorporated 1639 ; 
inhabitants 1991. It is near the place where the 
proposed canal is to commence from Barnstable 
to Buzzard s Bay. The Indian town Kitteaumut, 
or Katamet, was situate on Buzzard s Bay ; and 
Mannamit was the name of a place near the bot 
tom of Buzzard s Bay. There is a place on the 
same bay, on Sandwich side, called Pokeset, 
usually called by the Indians Poughkeeste. It 
is the second parish in Sandwich. There is an 
Indian territory, called Herring Pond, in the 
neighbourhood of Sandwich, about five miles 
n. w. from this village, and so extending from 
thence along shore to Monument Ponds, all in 
cluded within the township of Plymouth. It 
contains about 120 souls, one-half of whom are 
mixed. The Indian name of this territory is 
not generally known. They appear to have been 
considered as a distinct tribe, now known by the 
name of The Herring Pond Indians.] 

[SANDWICH, NEW, a plantation in Lincoln 
County, district of Maine ; containing 297 inha 
bitants.] 

[SANDWICH Islands, a group of islands in the 
S. sea, discovered by Captain Cook, who gave 
them the above name in honour of the Earl of 
Sandwich, under whose administration they were 
first visited. They consist of 1 1 islands, extend 
ing from lat. 18 40 to 24 n. and from long. 
154 50 to 165 40 w. They are called by the 
natives Owhyhee, Mowee, Ranat, Morotinnee, 
Tahowrowa, Morotoi, Waohoo, Atooi, Neehee- 
how, Oreehoua, and Tahoora ; all inhabited, ex 
cept Morotinnee and Tahoora. Besides these, 
the natives speak of another, lying to the w. s. w. 
of Tahoora ; which is low and sandy, and visited 
only for the purpose of catching turtle and sea- 
fowls. As they do not know of any others, it is 
probable that none exist in their neighbourhood. 
An account of each inhabited island wi 1 be 
found in its proper place. The climate differs 
very little from that of the W. India islands in 



SAN 

the same latitude. Upon the whole, perhaps, 
it may be more temperate ; nor are there any 
traces of those violent winds and hurricanes 
which render the stormy months in the W. In 
dies so dreadful. There is also more rain at the 
Sandwich Isles, where the mountainous parts 
being generally enveloped in a cloud, successive 
showers fall in the inland parts, with fine wea 
ther and a clear sky at the sea-shore. Hence it 
is, that few of those inconveniences to which 
many tropical countries are subject, either from 
heat or moisture, are experienced here. The 
winds in the winter months, are generally from 
e. s. e. to n. e. The tides are very regular, ebb 
ing and flowing six hours each. The flood conies 
from the e. and it is high water at the full and 
change of the moon, 45 min. past three o clock. 
Their greatest rise is two feet seven inches, and 
the water is always four inches higher when the 
moon is above the horizon than when she is be 
low it. The vegetable productions are nearly the 
same as at the other islands in this ocean. The 
taro-root is of a superior quality. The bread 
fruit trees thrive not in such abundance as in the 
rich plains of Otaheite, but produce double the 
quantity of fruit. The sugar-canes are of a very 
unusual size, some of them measuring 11 1 inches 
in circumference, and having 14 feet eatable. 
There is also a root of a brown colour, shaped 
like a yam, and from six to 10 pounds in weight, 
the juice of which is very sweet, of a pleasant 
taste, and an excellent substitute for sugar. 

The inhabitants are undoubtedly of the same 
race that possesses the islands s. of the equator ; 
and in their persons, language, customs, and man 
ners, approach nearer to the New Zealanders 
than to their less distant neighbours, either of the 
Society or Friendly Islands. They are in gene 
ral above the middle size, and well made. They 
walk very gracefully, run nimbly, and are capa 
ble of bearing very great fatigue ; although, upon- 
the whole, the men are somewhat inferior, in 
point of strength and activity, to the Friendly 
Islanders, and the women less delicately formed 
than those of Otaheite. Their complexion is ra 
ther darker than that of the Otaheitans, and they 
are not altogether so handsome a people. How 
ever many of both sexes have fine open counte 
nances ; the women in particular have good eyes 
and teeth, with a sweetness and sensibility of 
look, that render them very engaging. Their 
hair is of a brownish black ; neither uniformly 
straight, like that of the American Indians; nor 
uniformly curling, as . among the Negroes of 
Africa. There is one peculiar characteristic of 



SAN 

this great nation, and which is also prevalent in 
the Friendly Islanders, that even in the hand 
somest faces there is a fullness of the nostril, 
without any flatness or spreading of the nose. 
This may probably be the effect of their usual 
mode of salutation, which is by pressing the ends 
of their noses together. The same superiority 
that is observed among the higher ranks, through 
all the other islands, is found here. The chiefs 
are, almost without exception, perfectly well- 
formed; whereas the lower sort, besides their 
general inferiority, are subject to all the variety 
of make and figure that is seen in the populace 
of other countries. Tattooing the body is much 
practised here. 

The natives rise with the sun, and, after en 
joying the cool of the evening, retire to rest a 
few hours after sunset. Their instruments of 
war are spears, daggers, clubs, and slings. The 
dagger is a weapon peculiar to themselves ; it is 
from one to two feet long, made of heavy black- 
wood resembling ebony, sharpened at one or 
both ends, and secured to the hand by a string : 
its use is to stab in close fight, and it is well 
adapted to the purpose. They have also the 
knife, or saw, with which the New Zealanders 
cut up their slaughtered enemies. For defensive 
armour they wear strong mats, which are not 
easily penetrated with such weapons as theirs. 

The principal island of Owhyhee is nearly 
20 leagues in circumference, and contains up 
wards of 30,000 inhabitants, under the arbitrary 
government of one chief.] 

[SANDWICH, or HAVVKES River, is two miles 
within Chebucto Harbour, in Nova Scotia.] 

[SANDWICH, a small river at the bottom of 
Barnstable Bay, in Barnstable County, Massa 
chusetts.] 

[SANDY Bay, at the e. end of the island of Ja 
maica; s. of Mulatto River, and six miles w. of 
Mauchaneel Harbour.] 

[SANDY Bay, at the n. w. extremity of the 
same island, w. of Stoddard Bay, and e. of Green 
Island. Little Sandy Bay, on the s. e. part of 
the island, is about a league w. of Point Morant. 
Sandy Cays lie off the entrance of Port Royal 
Harbour.] 

[SANDY Cove, to the n. w. round the point of 
Cape Ann, on the coast of Massachusetts, and 
lies between two head-lands. Lat. 42 45 X w. 
long. 70 44 o&amp;gt;.] 

[SANDY Harbour, on the e. side of the island 
of St. Lucia, near the s. e. point of the island, 
where a small river empties into the ocean.] 

[SAVDY Hill, a small delightful village in 
New York State, two miles n. of Fort Edward, 



8 A N 



383 



on a high hill, overlooking Hudson s River from 
the e.~\ 

{[SANDY HOOK, or Point, in the township of 
Middleton, in New Jersey, forms a capacious 
harbour, from whence, and from the inlet pass 
ing- to New York, is about 18 miles. From 
Montauk Point, on Long Island, to the Hook, is 
s. w. by w. i w. 98 miles. The pilots are obliged 
to keep a good and sufficient whale-boat ready at 
the Hook. High-water, at full and change, 37 mi 
nutes after six o clock. The light-house on the 
n. point of the Hook lies in lat. 40 27 n. and 
long. 74 w. At the first discovery of America, 
few or no cod-fish were to be found s. of the 
Banks of Newfoundland and Sable Island. About 
40 years ago they were discovered off Sandy 
Hook, and they have ever since become more 
plentiful on the fishing grounds off the Never- 
sink, in six, seven, and eight fathoms water. 

During the American war, the Countess Dow 
ager of Morton erected, on the 20. side of Sandy 
Hook, a fine monument of marble to the memory 
of her son, Lieutenant Halliburton, of the royal 
navy, who, together with a boat s crew, perished 
there in a snow storm. A few years ago this work 
of parental affection was beat down and de 
stroyed, by the crew of a French armed ship, 
in a manner that reflects no honour upon their 
professional or manly feelings. It was ungene 
rous to wage war with the dead, or to demolish 
the works erected to perpetuate their fame.] 

[SANDY Island, a small island off the w. coast 
of the island of Antigua, about two miles from 
the shore.] 

[SANDY Point, the s. e. extremity of Barnstable 
County, Massachusetts, called Point Care by 
Gosnold. The course to Nantucket Light-house 
is s. s. w. three leagues.] - 

[SANDY Point, the most w. point of the island 
of St. Christopher; called also Beltates Point.] 

[SANDY Point, near the s. e. part of the island 
of St. Lucia, and forms the s. limit of Sandy 
Harbour.] 

[SANDY Point, near the s. e. point of the island 
of Antigua, on the larboard side of the opening 
into Willoughby Bay.] 

[SANDY Point, the n. e. point of Nantucket 
Island, on the coast of Massachusetts. Lat. 41 
23 n. long. 70 w.~] 

[SANDY Point, a town of the island of St. 
Christopher, on the s. w. side of the island, in 
St. Anne s parish, and in Fig-tree Bay. It is a 
port of entry, and is defended by Charles Fort 
and Brimstone Hill, both near the town.] 

[SANDY River, in Kentucky. See BIG SANDY 
River.] 



384 



SAN 



[SANDY River, in the district of Maine, rises 
in Cumberland County, consists of many small 
branches ; runs a w. e. course, and empties into 
Kennebeck River, at the n. w. corner of the 
township of Norridgewalk.] 

[SANDY River, the plantations in Lincoln 
County, district of Maine, of this name, in 1790, 
were as follow : 

Inhabitants. 

Mouth of Sandy River 327 

Sandy River, No. 1 494 

No. 2 130 

No. 3 and Seven-mile 

Brook 350 

Twenty-five mile Pond and Titcomb 

Town - -------- 264] 

[SANDY River Old Town. See TITCOMB.] 

[SANDYSTON, a township of New Jersey, 
Sussex County, on Delaware River, at the foot 
of the Blue Mountains, about 11 miles above 
Walpack, and about as far n. w. of Newton. It 
contains 5 19 inhabitants, including 26 slaves.] 

[SANFORD, a post-town of the district of 
Maine, nine miles from Waterbury court-house, 
15 from Berwick. It is in York County, 98 miles 
n. of Boston, and the township contains, in all, 
1802 inhabitants.] . 

[SANFORD, a township of New York, Dutchess 
County. There are 239 of the inhabitants qua 
lified electors.] &amp;gt; 

[SANGALLAN, or GALLAN CAPE, called 
Cangallan by the British seamen ; is situate on 
the coast of Peru, n. n. w. of the island of Labos, 
and three miles n. w. of Carette Island. On the 
s. side of the cape is a very good harbour, much 
frequented by the coasting ships from Panama 
and Lima. Off this cape it is very blustering 
ami stormy.] . 

SANGALLO, a port of the S. Sea, in the pro 
vince and corregimiento of Carnana in the king 
dom of Peru, opposite the island of Chincha. 

SANGARARA, a settlement of the province 
and corregimiento of Quispicanchi in Peru. 

SANGAY, a mountain and very lofty volcano 
of the province and government of Quixos and 
Macas in the kingdom of Quito, and in the dis 
trict of the second, the name of which the moun 
tain also bears. Its w. side is constantly covered 
with snow, and its height is prodigious, an d 
"by the academicians of the sciences of Paris, who 
measured it, it was ascertained to be 2.687 toises 
above the level of the sea. From its top flames 
smoke, and metallic and calcined matter is seen 
to burst forth continually, and the eruptions are 
heard at a great distance : since in the settle 
ments of Pintac, of the corregimiento of Quito, 



SAN 

which is more than 40 leagues distant, the same 
may be plainly heard when the Avind sets that 
way. The fields in its vicinity are rendered en 
tirely barren from the overflow of the lava. In 
its skirt on the e. part is a lake from whence rises 
the river Palora, and on the s. rises the river of 
Volcan, and another which they call De Puente- 
Honda ; the which afterwards enters the Upano : 
in lat. 2 7 s. 

SANGAY, a river of the same province and 
kingdom ; which rises at the skirt of the former 
mountain from the melted snows ; and, uniting 
itself with the Upano, forms the Paira, which 
enters very abundantly into the Maranon. 

SANGAY, a settlement of the same province 
and kingdom as the former mountain, and on its 
skirt : on the shore and at the source of the river 
of the same name. 

SANGAYACO, a settlement of the province 
and corregimiento of Castro Virreyna in Peru; 
annexed to the curacy of the settlement of Huai- 
tara. 

[SANGERFIELD, a township of New York, 
situate in Herkemer County, which contains 
1459 inhabitants, of whom 238 are electors. This 
town was divided by act of the legislature, 1797. ] 

SANGOLICA, a settlement of the province 
and alcaldia mayor of Oaxaca in Nueva Espana ; 
near the settlement of Jalapa. 

SANGRALOVE, a river of the province and 
country of Las Amazonas, in the territory of 
Matogroso and part possessed by the Portuguese. 
It rises to the w. of the town of Oro, runs s. s. w. 
and then turns w. to enter the Itenes or Guapore. 

SANGUAY. See SANGAY. 

[SAN JUAN DE LOS LLANOS, a town of 
S. America, at the foot of the mountains of Po- 
payan. See LLANOS.] 

[SAN MIGUEL DE IBARRA, a jurisdiction 
of Peru, in the province of Quito. See IBARRA.] 

SANO, a settlement of the province and go 
vernment of Guayana or Nueva Andalucia : on 
the shore of the river Orinoco to the n. \ n. w. 
of the city of Real Corona. 

[SANPINK Creek. See TRENTON, New 
Jersey.] 

SANQUEL. See MIALILU. 

SANSA, a small river of the province and 
government of San Juan de los Llanos in the 
Nuevo Reyno de Granada. It run* e. and shortly 
enters the Ariari. 

[SANSONATE Port, or SANSONETTE, on the 
w. side of New Mexico, 21 miles from the river 
Maticaloe, Point Remedies is the s. limit or 
opening of the port.] 

SANTA, a province and corregimiento of the 



SAN 



SAN 



385 



kingdom of Peru : bounded e. by the province 
of Guailas, n. by that of Truxillo, s. e. by that 
of Caxatambo, and w. by the S. Sea. Its length 
is 40 leagues from w. to s. and its width from 10 
to 12 from e. to w. It is of an hot temperature, 
as are all the provinces of the coast ; has various 
ports, and some well sheltered and fit for all kinds 
of vessels. It is watered by many rivers and 
streams ; and the most abundant are two which 
terminate its jurisdiction, called, the one, Bar 
ranca, the other of the name of the province; and 
both being difficult to cross. 

Santa is one of the poorest provinces in the 
kingdom, and all its commerce consists in tallow 
of the swine, which is carried to Lima ; in the 
sowing of maize, and in the fishing for tof/o and 
other fish, which they salt and carry to different 
parts for sale. They make here some sugar and 
brandy, and gather some indigo and cotton ; 
which, in the province of Guailas, they change 
for meal, papas, cloths, and baizes. At the dis 
tance of two leagues from the river of La Bar 
ranca and one from the sea, is seen, upon a small 
mountain, a fortress of the time of the great 
Chimo, Cazique or Chief, who commanded in 
those valleys, and who was so powerful as to 
make opposition to the Incas. 

This fortress is of a square oblong figure, with 
three enclosures or mud walls, those of the inte 
rior standing higher than those of the exterior. 
The greater side of the exterior wall is 300 yards 
long, and the lesser 200, and within the latter 
are various separate houses with narrow passes. 
At 30 yards from each angle of the exterior en 
closure are r ound some bulwarks in a rhomboidal 
figure, which flank the curtains. Here is also 
a pointed mountain by the sea-side, on the top 
of which are three semicircular ramparts, by the 
land side, and which they say were the prisons of 
the great Chimo ; and also that from this moun 
tain he used to cause the delinquents to be dashed 
headlong into the sea : both of these buildings 
are in a state of great dilapidation. 

This province has also mines of loadstone. 
Its corregidor had a repartimiento of 25,000 dol 
lars, and it used to pay an ttlcavala of 200 an 
nually. The capital is Santa Maria de la Par- 
rilla, and its population consists of the following 
settlements : 

Huambacho, Pativilca, 

Casma Alta, Llautan, 

Casma Baxa, Lacramarca, 

Guarmey, Taquilpin, 

Huamba, Quisquis, 

Cusmo, Quillo. 

VOL. IY. 



The capital, a town founded in the valley and 
river of its name. It has been much reduced in 
population and importance since that it was 
sacked and destroyed by the pirate Edward Da 
vid in 1685. It had formerly a convent of the 
religious of San Francisco, which was entirely 
ruined. It was formerly nearly close upon the 
coast, but the people, having at the siege gra 
dually retreated, they fixed their abode about 
half a league s distance from the same, the spot 
where the city now stands. In 1761 it was in 
undated by a high tide, and it is constantly 
troubled with mosquitoes. In its parish church 
is venerated a miraculous image of Christ cru 
cified, the gift of the emperor Charles V. [210 
miles n. n. &amp;lt;r. from Lima; in lat. 9 s. long. 78 
30 a&amp;gt;.] 

SANTA, a river of the same province, which 
rises in the mountains of the province of Huailas, 
and, after passing the settlement of H uailas, enters 
the S. Sea. [It is about 213 miles n.n.w. of Lima. 
It is near a quarter of a league broad at the 
place where it is usually forded, which is near 
the town of the same name, forming five prin 
cipal streams, which run during the whole year 
with great rapidity. The velocity of the current, 
even when the waters are low, has been found to 
be a league and an half in an hour.] 

SANTA, a small island of the S. Sea, opposite 
the mouth of the former river. It is desert and 
uncultivated. 

[SANTA BARBARY, on the s. side of the e. 
end of the island of Curacoa, in the W. Indies, 
is the best harbour in the island, where the 
Dutch have a town and fort.] 

[SANTA CLARA, an island in the Bay of 
Guyaquil, on the n. part of the coast of Peru. 
From this island to Punto Aren, the w. point of 
Puna Island, is 12 miles, n. e. Lat. 3 W s. 
long. 80 14 a&amp;gt;.] 

[SANTA CRUZ, a port of Nootka, on the 
n. w. coast of S. America, called Puerto de San 
Lorenzo by Perez, and Friendly Cove by Cook. 
It is from 7{ to 8{ fathoms English in depth, and 
is almost shut in on the s. e. by small islands, on 
one of which Martinez erected the battery of San 
Miguel. The mountains in the interior of the 
island appear to be composed of thonschiefer, 
and other primitive rocks. M. Moziiio disco 
vered among them seams of copper and sulphu 
retted lead. He thought he discovered near a 
lake, at about a quarter of a league s distance 
from the port, the effects of volcanic fire in some 
porous amygdaloid. The climate of Nootka is 
so mild, that under a more northern latitude than 

3D 



386 



SAN 



SAN 



that of Quebec and Paris, the smallest streams 
are not frozen till the month of January. This 
curious phenomenon confirms the observation of 
Mackenzie, who asserts that the n. w. coast of 
the new continent has a much higher tempera 
ture than the e. coasts of America and Asia, situ 
ate under the same parallels. The inhabitants of 
Nootka, like those of the n. coast of Norway, 
are almost strangers to the noise of thunder. 
Electrical explosions are there exceedingly rare. 
The hills are covered with pine, oak, cypress, 
rose bushes, vaccinium, and androraedes. The 
beautiful shrub which bears the name of Linneus, 
was only discovered by the gardeners in Van 



couver s expedition in 



higher 



latitudes. John 



Mears, and a Spanish officer in particular, Don 
Pedro Alberoni, succeeded at Nootka in the cul 
tivation of all the European vegetables ; but the 
maize and wheat, however, never yielded ripe 
grain. A too great luxuriance of vegetation ap 
pears to be the cause of this phenomenon. The 
true humming bird has been observed in the 
islands of Quadra and Vancouver. This im 
portant fact, in the geopraphy of animals, must 
strike those who are ignorant that Mackenzie 
saw humming-birds at the sources of the River 
of Peace, under the 54 24 of n. latitude, and 
that M. Galiano saw them nearly under the same 
s. parallel in the Straits of Magellan. 

Mr. Mackenzie, as well as Humboldt, have 
stated their belief that the change of climate ob 
servable throughout all N. America, cannot be 
attributed to petty local causes ; as for example, 
to such as the destruction of forests, &amp;c. Their 
opinions will indisputably have weight in the 
theories of the speculating philosopher.] 

[SANTA CRUZ. See CRUZ SANTA.J 

[SANTA CRUZ, a Danish island in the W. In 
dies. See CRUZ SANTA.] 

[SANTA CRUZ, a considerable town in the 
island of Cuba, having a good harbour at the 
bottom of the Bay of Matanzas, 63 miles e. of 
the Havannah. Lat. 22 11 n. long. 81 5 w. ] 

[SANTA CRUZ, or St. Croix, a large island 
lying in the Pacific Ocean, 1850 leagues w. of 
Lima, in lat. 10 55" s. long. 174 10 s. e. of 
the island of Arsacides ; discovered by Medina 
in 1595, and since by Carteret in 1767, and by 
him called Egmont Island. Great and unpro 
voked cruelties were committed upon these 
friendly and hospitable islanders by Mendana s 
men, for which Mendana caused two of his prin 
cipal officers to be beheaded, and another to be 
hanged. The natives of this island are as black 
as the Negroes of Africa, their hair woolly, and 



stained with different colours. Their faces and 
bodies are tattooed. Their only covering is a 
leaf of a certain tree ; their ornaments, arms, 
and boats, are not unlike those of the inhabitants 
of Tierra Austral. The country is fertile, and 
very populous, abounding in eatable roots, six 
or seven species of bananas, plenty of cocoa- 
trees, almonds, nuts, chesnuts, a sort of apple, 
sugar-canes, ginger, bread-fruit, &amp;c. Hogs, 
geese, fowls, partridges, ring and turtle doves, 
herons, swallows, and a great variety of birds ; 
and on the coast a great plenty and variety of 
fish. There are here no noxious insects, which 
are common in other islands of the torrid zone. 
In a word, the island of Santa Cruz, and others 
of the same group, offer the most valuable re 
sources to navigators who traverse the Great 
Pacific Ocean, s. of the line.] 

[SANTA CRUZ DE LA SIERRA, a large juris 
diction, and also a capital of that jurisdiction in 
the kingdom of Peru. See CRUZ, SANTA DE LA 
SIERRA.] 

[SANTA FE. See FE SANTA.] 

[SANTA FE, a town of Nuevo Mexico. See 
FE SANTA.] 

[SANTA FE Bay, on the w. coast of S.America, 
w. of Comana Gulf.] 

[SANTA FE DE BOGOTA, the capital of the 
province of Nueva Granada, in S. America. See 
FE SANTA DE BOGOTA.] 

[SANTA Island, or HOLY Island, on the coast 
of Peru, is opposite to the port of Ferol. It is 
three miles from the port and city of Santa, and 
as far from Ferol, w r hich is s. e. of it.] 

[SANTA MARIA, a river of the Isthmus of 
Darien, which is navigable eight or nine leagues, 
and so far the tide flows ; but above that its two 
branches will only admit canoes. It empties into 
the Gulf of St. Michael, or Miguel, in the Pacific 
Ocean. The town of its name is about six 
leagues from its mouth ; and is considerable on 
account of the gold-mines in its neighbourhood, 
which are worked to great advantage ; but the 
country about it is low, woody, and very unheal 
thy. Lat. 8 20 7 w.] 

[SANTA MARTA, a province of Tierra Firme 
in S. America. See MARTA SANTA.] 

[SANTA MARTA, the capital of the above pro 
vince. See MARTA SANTA.] 

[SANTA Port, on the coast of Peru, and on 
the S. Pacific Ocean, lies n. c. of Santa Island, 
at the mouth of a river of the same name.] 

[SANTA RITA, a settlement of the kingdom 
of Brazil, of which we have already made a slight 
mention under the article Rita, but of which we 



SAN 

are enabled to afford a more complete decription 
under the former title, as adopted by Mr. Mawe, 
to whose labours we are indebted for the follow 
ing extracts. Santa Rita, which is a gold wash 
ing place in the captainship of Janeiro in Brazil, 
and is situate about 75 miles from thence, was 
visited by Mawe in 1809, during his stay at 
Canta Gallo, from whence it lies about five 
leagues, in a n. e. direction. After passing the 
uneven country in the immediate neighbourhood 
of the village, he arrived at the Rio Negro, a 
considerable stream formed by many rivulets, 
which empties itself into the Paraiba ; on cross 
ing it, he entered upon a fine open country, the 
fertility of which w r as evident from the luxuriant 
growth of the tobacco and other plants : but it 
lay in a state of almost total neglect, and the 
families thinly scattered upon it appeared in the 
lowest condition of indolence and misery. He 
proceeded a league farther, through a tract en 
tirely destitute of inhabitants, and arrived about 
tw r o in the afternoon at Santa Rita. The pro 
prietor of the works received him very kindly, 
and conducted him through them while dinner 
was preparing. The washing is in a deep ravine, 
bounded at one end by an abrupt hill, and open 
at the other to the plain. The vegetable earth 
appeared extremely rich, being clothed with 
luxuriant verdure, and the hills on each hand 
covered with trees of all sizes. The stratum of 
cascalhao, which lies under a bed of soil four or 
five feet deep, is very thin and uneven, being no 
where more than two feet thick, and in many 
parts not more than seven or eight inches. The 
incumbent soil is removed at great labour and 
expense, being dug out and carried away in 
bowls ; and the cascaUiao is conveyed with great 
care to a convenient place for water, where it is 
w r ashed by the most expert among the miners, in 
a way similar to that practised at the mines of 
Jaragua. The proportion of gold produced was 
moderate. It is said to pay the master at the 
rate of from ]4d. to 2s. per day for each Negro ; 
which is a large profit, as the daily subsistence 
of one costs somewhat less than one penny. 

The sides of the ravine towards the top were 
bare, and of different shades of colour, being 
tinged by the water which flows from the vege 
table matter above : in the bottom, on the sur 
face that was yet unworked, lay some huge, half- 
rounded amorphous masses. In the parts which 
had been worked, Mr. Mawe observed two or 
three substances of the same kind, which being 
too large to be moved, the earth which imbedded 
them had been cut away, and they appeared like 



SAN 



387 



detached nodules. On breaking a fragment from 
one of them with his hammer, he was much sur 
prised to find it a calcareous substance, a solid 
mass composed of hexagonal crystals, with a 
small portion of brilliant crystals of specular 
iron ore. He presented this fragment to the 
proprietor, informing him that it was limestone ; 
and he also discovered afterwards that the moun 
tains were of the same substance. 

There is reason to suppose that the stratum of 
limestone, below the earth in the bottom of the 
valley, is of very modern formation, and that, if 
not too thick to cut through, there might be 
found, between it and the granite stratum under 
neath, a bed of cascalhao of prior formation, 
much richer in gold than the upper stratum. 

After having investigated these works, Mr. 
Mawe took an excursion of seven or eight miles, 
chiefly over a rich plain, abounding with the finest 
timber. On the margins of the rivulets which he 
crossed, he observed that the moss was incrust- 
ed, somewhat like the tuffa at Matlock ; and, on 
more particular examination, he found a stratum 
of tuffa in all the valleys, a few inches below the 
surface, which, as he conjectured, must have 
proceeded from the deposition of calcareous mat 
ter by the overflowings of the streams after 
heavy rains. The hills, even at this distance, 
were composed of the same sparry limestone as 
at the gold -washing. It is much to be wished 
that the value of this material were duly appre 
ciated at the capital, where the cost of the wood 
used in burning shells into lime exceeds the price 
at which lime brought from Santa Rita might be 
delivered, if proper roads were made for its con 
veyance from this district to Porto dos Caxhes. 
Such an undertaking highly deserves the attention 
of his highness s ministers; the benefits likely 
to result from it are incalculable, and the ex 
pense attending it would be trifling ; for in no 
part of the globe are roads made so cheaply, or 
public works of any kind done on such moderate 
terms, as in Brazil. 

This fine, but almost uninhabited district, pro 
duces spontaneously many valuable articles of 
commerce, which run to waste for want of hands 
to cultivate and gather them. Here is found 
that celebrated variety of the palm-tree, the 
long, serrated, lancet-formed leaves of which 
are composed of innumerable fibres, that rival 
silk both in fineness and strength.] 

SANTANDER, New, a province and govern 
ment ofthe kingdom of NuevaEspana; called also 
of La Sierra Gorda. It extends from s. to n. for 
more than 100 leagues, on the coast of the Bay of 
3D2 



388 



SANTIAGO. 



Mexico; and is bounded s. by the jurisdiction and 
cdcaldia mayor of Panuco and Tampico, the town of 
the valleys and province of Guasteca ; n. by the 
province of Coaguila and the beginning of the 
province of Las Texas. It is 80 leagues from e. 
to w. from the coast of the sea to the confines of 
the Nuevo Reyno de Leon, and to a part of the 
aforesaid province of Coaguila. The greater 
portion of it is situate in the Torrid Zone ; but it is 
of a mild temperature, and enjoys a pleasant air, 
as also a territory which is very fertile, and 
abounding in vegetable productions, and parti 
cularly in cattle. It has many saline earths, and 
some excellent silver-mines in the sierra; and 
from these mountains flow down many rivers, 
which fertilize the valleys. This extensive coun 
try was peopled by innumerable Indians, who 
for a long time remained unconquered, until that 
in 1748 their reduction was begun by the Colonel 
of Militia of the city of Queretaro, Don Joseph 
de Escandon, who obtained his end after infinite 
expenses, troubles, and fatigues ; peopling 26 
towns and settlements, which have not since 
flourished. In remuneration, however, the king 
granted him many privileges, and the title of 
Count de Sierra Gorda. The capital is the town 
of the same name, founded by the same con 
queror in 1748. It has a good port, which was 
discovered in 1739, and a fort constructed for its 
defence. This city, had its advancement been 
prosecuted with the same spirit of enterprise that 
its foundation was laid, and every thing made of 
the advantages offered by its port, would have 
been a place of the first distinction ; although 
now the greater part of its houses are covered 
with straw. 

[SANTEE, a navigable river of S. Carolina, 
the largest and longest in that State. It empties 
into the ocean by two mouths, a little s. of 
Georgetown, which last lies in lat. 33 11 n. 
and long. 79 9 w. About 14 miles in a direct 
line from its mouth, it branches into the Con- 
garee and Wateree ; the latter, or n. branch, 
passes the Catabaw nation of Indians, and bears 
the name of Catabaw River, from this settlement 
to its source.] 

SANTERO, a settlement of the province and 
government of Cartagena in the Nuevo Reyno 
de Granada, of the division and district of the 
town of Sinu ; near the sea-coast, in the bay of 
the same name. It was formed of different small 
settlements, which were reunited in this by the 
Governor, D. Francisco Pimienta, in 1776. 

SANTIAGO, a province and corregimiento of 
the kingdom of Chile. It is 21 leagues long 



from n. to s. and 26 wide from e. to w. It has* 
some gold-mines, which may be worked in the 
summer months, namely, December, January, 
February, and March ; but in the winter time 
the rains and snow, and severity of the weather, 
force the labourers to desist. 

Twenty leagues from the capital is the great 
mine of Kempu ; some of the metals of which 
are founded, and some otherwise prepared : but 
the working of this mine is not well established, 
notwithstanding it has 16 veins. Further towards 
the s. is another mine, with the name of Maipo, the 
metals of which are lowered down by engines from 
a very lofty mountain, discovered more than 100 
years ago, and called San Simon ; and here also 
are the mines called De San Pedro Nolasco, which 
render a considerable portion of massy silver. On 
the e. of this mountain is a very pleasant place 
called Valle Blanco, where silk- worms breed ; and, 
in the n. part, by the mountains of the curacy of 
Colina, are found 34 gold-mines, which are ac 
tually worked, independently of 200 others which 
are also worked. Besides these mines there are 
five lavaderos, or washing-places, in the mountain 
of Guindo, and some other veins in the old asiento 
of Tiltil. The top of Calen is covered with lava- 
deros of the richest gold. 

This province has also copper and tin mines, 
and in Lampa are three of silver and one of lead. 
In the small settlement of Montenegro is a vein 
of jasper lately discovered, which is easily work 
ed ; the people forming of it jars, pitchers, and 
other articles. 

This province is watered by the rivers Mapo- 
cho, Colina, and Zampa or Lampa, and by se 
veral other beautiful streams. It also contains 
the Lake Pudaguel, which is about three leagues 
in length. It is the most fertile of any part of 
Chile, producing great quantities of corn, wine, 
and fruits, particularly peaches, which in size 
and flavour surpass any others of the country. 

The mountains (as has been observed) and 
especially those of Caren, abound with mines of 
gold, and that part of the Andes which is at 
tached to it with silver. But the chief import 
ance of this province is derived from its being 
the seat of the capital of the kingdom. 

SANTIAGO, the capital of the above province, 
and, at the same time, of the whole kingdom, bears 
the same name ; and was founded by Pedro de 
Valdivia, its conqueror, in 1541, in an extensive 
valley, enclosed on the e. by the cordilkra of the 
Andes, on the w. by the hills of Prado and Poan- 
que, on the n. by the stream of Colina, and on 
the s. by the river Mapocho, called also Topo- 



SANTIAGO. 



389 



calma, and which laves the city to the n. tra 
versing and fertilizing the valley to which it 
gives its name. This city was called, at first, 
the New City Estremadura, in memory of the 
native place of its founder. Its situation is one 
of the most advantageous and agreeable that 
can possibly be offered to the imagination : and 
its temperature is equally so. The territory is 
so fertile and abundant throughout, that every 
thing around bursts forth to render life charming. 

The streets are wide, paved, and in straight 
lines, forming little insular squares. The houses, 
although low, are convenient and handsome, and 
to each is a garden, which is watered by aque 
ducts from the river. The chief square, which 
is nearly in the centre of the town, has a magni 
ficent fountain : its n. front is occupied by the 
palace of the president, the tribunal of the audi 
ence, the houses of the corporation, and the 
prison ; that of the w. by the cathedral church, 
and the bishop s palace. 

Towards the n. and on the other side of the 
river are two suburbs called, the one Chimba, 
the other Canadilla ; and on the e. nearly touch 
ing the houses, is a moderate mountain, with 
the name of Santa Lucia ; from the top of which 
may be discovered the whole of the plain, which 
is six leagues long, and seven wide. 

It is a head of a bishopric, suffragan to Lima, 
erected by his Holiness Paul IV. in 1561. It 
has, besides the cathedral, which is magnificent, 
three parishes with the names of San Pablo, 
Santa Ana, and San Isidro ; and lately there was 
erected another, with the name of San Francisco 
de Borja, in one of the churches which was held 
by the Jesuits. It has three convents of reli 
gious ; namely, of San Francisco, which is that 
of the Casa Grande ; the college for students of 
San Diego ; and the Recoletans without the city, 
called De Monte Alberne; two convents of Au- 
gustins, one of St. Domingo, one of La Merced, 
and another of San Juan de Dios, with a great 
hospital. It had five colleges of the Jesuits, 
namely, San Miguel, El Noviciado, San Pablo, 
San Xavier, which was a house of students, with 
an university in which they conferred titular de 
grees, and called San Felippe : and the Olleria, 
as a house for exercises. It had seven monas 
teries for religious women : the two of Santa 
Clara, the other two of Carmelites, one in the 
city, and the other in the suburb of Canadilla ; 
one of Capuchins, another of Dominicans, with 
the title of Senora de la Pastoria ; another of 
Augustins, and a convent of this same order : 
also a house of recluse women, another for ex 



ercises, and another for the reception of orphans. 
Besides all the above convents, the religious of 
St. Domingo have one of the Recoletos, in the 
aforesaid suburb of Chimba; and at a short dis 
tance a chapel of Xuestra Senora del Rosario, 
commonly called De la Vina, and that oi La 
Merced, a college in La Canada. 

This capital is adorned by many families of 
great riches and distinction. The tribunal of 
royal audience, founded in the city of Concep- 
cion, was translated to this in 1574 ; it was 
afterwards abolished, and re-established in 1609. 
Here are the tribunals of Santa Cruzada, of ac 
counts, and of the mint, wherein vast quantities 
of money are coined. 

The surrounding territory is delightful, plea 
sant, and fertile. The Indians of the country 
called this llanura Promocaces, which, in their 
idiom, signifies the place of dancing and delight, 
and this in order to express its exceeding beauty. 

This city enjoys the title of very noble and 
very loyal, a title granted to it by the king in 
1552 ; and it has for arms a shield in a white 
field, and in the middle a lion rampant with a 
sword in his paw, and for orle eight golden 
scallops. 

The natives are robust, well personed, and 
corpulent, and the women are of particular 
beauty, elegance, and grace. But all the advan 
tages of this fine province are counterpoised by 
the frequency with which it experiences the 
scourge of earthquakes ; and those, which were 
particularly lamentable in their effects, happened 
in 1570, 1647, 1657, 1722, 1730, and 1737. It 
was entirely destroyed by the Araucanos Indians 
in 1601. Its population is composed of more 
than 4000 families, and it has been the native 
place of Don Antonio de Irazabal and Andia, 
Marquis of Valparaiso, Commandant-General of 
the Canaries, Viceroy of Tremecen, of Oran, 
and of Navarra, and of the supreme council of 
state and war. [Fifty-five miles from the port 
of Valparaiso in the S. Sea, in long. 70 44 w. 
lat. 33 26 s. See index to additional history of 
Chile, Chap. 2.] 

Bishops who have presided in Santiago of Chile. 

1. Don Rodrigo Gonzalez Marmolejo, native 
of Carmona in Andalucia. He was curate and 
vicar of Santiago of Chile when nominated for 
bishop of Cuzco, to the diocese of which this 
kingdom belonged ; and when this was dismem 
bered and erected into a bishopric, he was pre 
sented to it by the Sefior Don Felipe II. He 
erected the church into a cathedral, and governed 



390 



SANTIAGO. 



it with great zeal and sanctity, and died at the 
age of 74 years, in 1565. 

2. Don Fr. Fernando de Barrionuevo, of the 
order of San Francisco, native of Guadalaxara, 
a man of extraordinary good life, and of great 
literature. He was the second bishop of Santiago 
de Chile, presented in 1566. He governed his 
church only 18 months, and died in 1568. 

3. Don Fr. Diego de Medellin, whom others 
call Pedro, of the same order as the former ; a 
collegiate in the royal college of Lima, and the 
first priest and doctor who presided there ; an 
admirable preacher, and a man of great virtues. 
He was provincial of the province of the 12 
apostles of Lima, guardian of the convent of this 
capital, of blameless life ; elected bishop of this 
holy church of Santiago of Chile in 1574. He 
assisted at the council of Lima, and governed 
with holiness and prudence 17 years, being vene 
rated by all. He died very poor, and was buried 
in a chapel which he had built, in 1593. 

4. Don Fr. Pedro de Azuaga, native of Me 
dellin in Estremadura, religious of the order of 
San Francisco, in the province of the Nuevo 
Reyno de Granada : elected bishop of Santiago 
de Chile in 1595, of which he took possession the 
following year, without being consecrated. He 
died in 1597. 

5. Don Fr. Juan Perez de Espinosa, also a 
religious of the order of San Francisco, native 
of Toledo. He passed to America as missionary, 
\vhere he remained 44 years, and was presented 
by the king, Don Philip III. to this bishopric in 
1600. He founded a seminary in its church, and, 
having returned to Spain without permission, he 
was sent back to his ofiice, and died in the con 
vent of his order at Sevilla, in 1622. 

6 Don Francisco de Salcedo, canonical dig 
nitary of the treasury of the church of Tucuman; 
dean of the metropolitan of Charcas, elected 
bishop of Santiago de Chile in the aforesaid year, 
1622, celebrated a synod for the better govern 
ment of his diocese in 1628, erected the parish 
of Santa Ana ; and, in his time, a celebrated 
victory was gained by the Spaniards over the 
Araucanos. He died in 1635. 

7. Don Fr. Caspar de Villaroel, of the order 
of San Augustin, native of Quito. He was lec 
turer of arts, and prior of some convents in its 
province. He passed over to Spain, where he 
acquired the reputation of being a celebrated 
preacher, and great author, as his works testify, 
and particularly by that work entitled " Pacifica 
Union y Concordia de los dos cuchillos Pontificio 
&amp; Regio." He was elected bishop of Santiago 



de Chile in 1637 ; and in his time the Marquis 
of Baydes, Count of Pedroso, made a peace with 
the Araucanos Indians, in 1642, and in the same 
year happened a great earthquake, which ruined 
the greater part of the city. He was promoted 
to the church of Arequipa in 1651. 

8. Don Diego de Zambrana y Villalobas, na 
tive of Merida in Estremadura : he studied ca 
nons, and graduated in the university of Sala 
manca : was curate of Torre-Mocha in the bi 
shopric of Badajos, passed over to Peru, and was 
made beneficed clergyman of the church of Po- 
tosi and its vicar, judge in ordinary; was visitor 
of the bishopric of La Paz, commissary of the 
holy office and of the holy crusade ; and was 
elected bishop of Concepcion of Chile, and pro 
moted to Santiago in 1651. He became deacon 
of the prelates of the Indian women, and en 
deavoured, though in vain, to procure a license 
to retire, from king Philip IV. He died in 
1653. 

9. Don Fernando de A vendano, native of Lima, 
morning professor of theology in its university ; 
calificador of the holy office, curate and rector of 
archiepiscopal church, chanter and archdeacon of 
the same, and visitor of the Indians : elected 
bishop of Santiago de Chile in 1655 ; but he died 
without taking possession. 

10. Don Diego de Encinas, native of Lima, 
professor of its university, canonical peniten 
tiary, treasurer, chanter, and archdeacon of its 
holy metropolitan church : a very excellent and 
wise man ; elected bishop of Santiago de Chile, 
and died before he was consecrated, in 1659. 

1 1 . Don Fr. Diego de Umansoro, religious of the 
order of San Francisco, native of Guizcoa, pro 
vincial of the province of Cuzco : elected bishop 
in 1660. He governed with prudence and zeal, 
and celebrated the third synod in 1670, and died 
in 1676. 

12. Don Fr. Bernardo Carrasco, of the order 
of St. Domingo, native of Zana in Peru, pro 
vincial there ; presented to the bishopric of San 
tiago de Chile in 1679. He celebrated the fourth 
synod in 1688, consecrated the cathedral church, 
to the building of which the king granted some 
of the royal tythes. He added to it a beautiful 
sacristy and offices, and was promoted to La Paz 
in 1694. 

13. Don Francisco de la Puebla Gonzalez, 
native of Pradena in the bishopric of Segovia, 
collegiate of Lugo in Alcala de Henares ; curate 
of the parish of San Juan de Madrid : elected 
bishop in 1694, but did not take possession till 
1699. He governed with a skill corresponding 1 



S A N 

to his great learning until 1704, when he died ; 
but after being promoted to Guamanga. 

14. Don Luis Francisco Romero, native of 
Alcobendas, in the archbishopric of Toledo. Col 
legiate of the real of San Martin of Lima, and 
of that of the Teologos de Alcala de Henares, 
where he graduated as doctor : he was chanter 
and dean of the church of Cuzco ; took pos 
session of the bishopric of Santiago de Chile in 
1708, built the altar of Los Santos Justo y Pas 
tor, and was promoted to the church of Quito 
in 1717. 

15. Don Alexo Fernando de Roxas, whom 
some call Alexandra ; native of Lima, collegiate 
of the real and mayor of San Felipe : elected 
bishop of Santiago de Chile, of which he took pos 
session in 1719, and promoted to La Paz in 1723. 

16. Don Alonso del Poso y Silva, native of 
La Concepcion de Chile ; collegiate of the Con- 
victorio de San Francisco Xavier of this city, 
curate and rector, magisterial canon, archdeacon 
and dean of the same cathedral ; from whence 
he was promoted to the bishopric of Tucuman; 
and from this to Santiago de Chile in 1723. He 
was extremely charitable and virtuous, and 
passed to the archbishopric of Charcas in 1731. 

17. Don Juan de Sarricolea y Olea, native of 
Lima, collegiate of the real of San Martin, noon- 
professor and afterwards prime professor in theo 
logy in the royal university of San Marcos : pe 
nitentiary canon of that holy metropolitan church : 
elected bishop of Tucuman, and promoted to 
Santiago de Chile in 1731, and from hence in 
1735 to the bishopric of Cuzco. 

18. Don Juan Bravo del Rivero, native of 
Lima, first collegiate in the royal college of San 
Martin, and afterwards of the mayor of San 
Felipe, oidor of the royal audience of La Plata, 
and afterwards canon and treasurer of that city : 
presented to the bishopric of Santiago de Chile 
in 1735. He endowed his church with many 
costly ornaments, rebuilt the tower which had 
been demolished by an earthquake, was very- 
charitable, and governed with great zeal till 
1743, when he was promoted to Arequipa. 

19. Don Juan Gonzalez de Melgarejo, native 
of the city of La Asuncion del Paraguay ; in 
which cathedral he was canon, likewise arch 
deacon, dean, provisor, and vicar-general of its 
bishopric : presented to the bishopric of Santiago 
de Chile, of which he took possession in 1745. 
He began the building of the new cathedral, 
giving towards it upwards of 40,000 dollars, and 
many valuable articles and sacred vases. He 



SAN 



was promoted to Arequipa in 1754, but died be 
fore he took possession. 

20. Don Manuel de Alday y Aspee, native of 
the city of Concepcion de Chile; where he studied 
philosophy and theology in the con-cictorio of San 
Joseph, and afterwards jurisprudence in the col 
lege of San Martin and royal university of San 
Marcos de Lima ; in which cathedral he was ca 
nonical doctor and judge sub delegate of the tri 
bunal of the holy crusade. He was made bishop 
of Santiago de Chile, of which office he took 
possession in 1754. He continued the building 
of the cathedral, contributing to it 5000 dollars 
annually. He celebrated the fifth diocesan synod, 
and governed 34 years with the greatest credit 
for his virtue, zeal, and charity. 

SANTIAGO, another city, with the surname of 
Alanje, in the province of Veragua and king 
dom of Tierra Firme. See ALANJE. 

SANTIAGO, another, with the surname of Los 
Caballeros, in the island of St. Domingo ; one of 
the principal of that island ; situate on the e. 
shore of the river Yagua, in a fertile territory, 
and of a good temperature. It was fortified by 
Admiral Christoval Colon, contains 26,000 souls, 
and is 10 leagues from the city of Concepcion, 
and 30 from the capital, St. Domingo. 

SANTIAGO, another, in the island of Cuba, 
and capital of the same, called also Cuba ; situate 
on the s. coast, and founded by Diego Velazquez 
in 1514, in the interior of a bay, and on the shore 
of a river of its name. It has a beautiful port de 
fended by a castle called El Morro, and by another 
fort which is within the same city, and has the 
name of San Pedro de Roca, as having been 
built in 1641 by the governor Don Pedro de 
Roca y Borja, knight of the order of Santiago, 
native of Valencia ; and also by a battery which 
they call La Estrella. It is a small town, but of 
beautiful structure, and frequented by vessels 
and a great concourse of people on account of 
its trade and abundance of its productions, which 
are, principally, sugar and tobacco. It is a head 
of a bishopric erected in 1523, although the 
bishop is accustomed to reside in the Havana ; 
and a separate government was made of this in 
1607. It has besides the cathedral church the 
convents of the religious of San Francisco and 
Santo Domingo, and an hospital with the dedi 
catory title of Nuestra Senora de la Concepcion: 
in lat. 20, long. 76 6 . 

SANTIAGO, another, in the island of Jamaica, 
which was the capital of the same : situate six 
miles from the coast, to the n. e. in a great level, 



392 



SAN 



from whence it has obtained the surname of La 
Vega; on the shore of the river Cabras: founded 
by Juan de Garay, governor of the same island ; 
and it was one of the largest and best towns of 
any here : but the English destroyed it when 
they took the island, although they immediately 
rebuilt it on account of its fine situation, still 
leaving to it the prerogative of being the capital, 
together with a governor and its tribunals of 

J ustice. It has some very beautiful edifices, is 
arge and of considerable commerce ; and its vi 
cinities are adorned with country houses and 
estates, and sugar manufactories, and they are 
cultivated with all the vegetable productions 
that may be necessary to the comfort or luxury 
of life ; and amongst other parts that called La 
Havana is particularlv delightful. The admiral, 
Charles Knowles, being governor of this island, 
endeavoured, in 1754, to change his residence to 
Kingstown ; but he met with such opposition 
from the inhabitants, that he was obliged to aban 
don his enterprise for fear of dangerous conse 
quences : it is five leagues from Puerto Real, in 
lat. 18. 

SANTIAGO, a settlement of the head settle 
ment and alcaldia mayor of La Puebla de los An 
geles, in Nueva Espaiia. It contains 95 families 
of Indians, and is one league from its capital. 

SANTIAGO, another, in the head settlement 
and alcaldia mayor of Xuchipila in the same 
kingdom : 10 leagues to the w. 

SANTIAGO, another, of the head settlement 
and alcaldia mayor of Cocotlan in the same king 
dom : a league and a half distant of that head 
settlement. 

SANTIAGO, another, of the head settlement of 
the district and alcaldia mayor of Zacatlan in the 
1 same kingdom : it has a chapel of ease and 150 
families of Spaniards, Mustees, and Mulattoes, 
who dwell in various farms, where they gather 
good crops of maize, barley, vetches, and beans, 
and breed a good proportion of swine, horses, 
cows, and sheep, although not so many of the 
latter : two leagues from its capital. 

SANTIAGO, another, a small settlement or 
ward, united to the settlement of Tequiszitlan 
in the alcaldia mayor of Teotihuacan in the same 
kingdom. 

SANTIAGO, another, of the head settlement of 
Yautepec and alcaldia mayor of Cuernavaca in 
the same kingdom. 

SANTIAGO, another, of the head settlement 
and district of Tepoxtlan in the same alcaldia and 
kingdom as the former. 



SAN 

SANTIAGO, another, of the head settlement 
and alcaldia mayor of Marinalco in the same 
kingdom : one snort league from its capital. 

SANTIAGO, another, of the head settlement 
and alcaldia mayor of Tochimilco in the same 
kingdom, in a beautiful situation, and being fer 
tile in wheat, fruit, and wild cochineal. It con 
tains 64 families of Indians, and is one league w. 
of its head settlement. 

SANTIAGO, another, of the head settlement of 
Amatepec and alcaldia mayor of Zultepec in the 
same kingdom. It contains 10 families of Indians, 
and is very close to its head settlement. 

SANTIAGO, another, of the alcaldia mayor of 
Lerma in the same kingdom. It contains 86 fa 
milies of Indians, and is one league e. of its head 
settlement. 

SANTIAGO, another, of the head settlement of 
Escateopan and alcaldia mayor of Zaqualpa in 
the same kingdom, and contains 73 families of 
Indians. 

SANTIAGO, another, of the head settlement and 
alcaldia mayor of Tepeaca in the same kingdom. 
Five leagues from its capital. 

SANTIAGO, another, of the head settlement of 
the district of Tecamachalco and of the same 
alcaldia and kingdom as the former. It contains 
95 families of Indians, and is one league from its 
head settlement. 

SANTIAGO, another, of the head settlement of 
Xonotla and alcaldia mayor of Tetela in the same 
kingdom. Two leagues and a half from its head 
settlement. 

SANTIAGO, another, a small ward of the head 
settlement and alcaldia mayor of Justlahuaca in 
the same kingdom. 

SANTIAGO, another, also small, of the head 
settlement of Mistepec in the same alcaldia and 
kingdom as the former. 

SANTIAGO, another, of the head settlement of 
Tecomaxtlahuaca in the same alcaldia and king 
dom as the former. 

. SANTIAGO, another, a small ward, with the 
surname of La Puente, in the district and juris 
diction of the city of Valladolid in the province 
and bishopric of Mechoacan. 

SANTIAGO, another, of the alcaldia mayor of 
San Luis de Potosi in Nueva Espana. It con 
tains 75 families of Indians, and is to the n. of 
its capital very near to it, and at a much greater 
distance from the settlement of Tlaxcalilla, being 
divided from the same by a river. 

SANTIAGO, another, of the head settlement of 
Xacona and alcaldia mayor of Zamora in the 



SAN 



393 



same kingdom, between two lofty mountain 
plains ; of a cold temperature, and close to the 
sluice of Tangamandapio. It contains 200 fa 
milies of Spaniards and 51 of Indians, and is five 
leagues s. of its head settlement. 

SANTIAGO, another, of the head settlement of 
Cirandaro and alcaldia mayor of Guimeo in the 
same kingdom. It contains 27 families of In 
dians, arid is eight leagues from its head settle 
ment. 

SANTIAGO, another, of the head settlement of 
Papalotipac and alcaldia mayor of Cuicatlan in 
the same kingdom. It contains 15 families of 
Indians, and is annexed to the curacy of its head 
settlement. 

SANTIAGO, another, of the head settlement of 
Teutitlan, and of the same alcaldia and kingdom 
as the former. It contains 172 families of In 
dians, who trade in seeds, cotton, and cochineal, 
and is four leagues n. of its head settlement. 

SANTIAGO, another, of the head settlement of 
Mistepeque and alcaldia mayor of Nejapa in the 
same kingdom. It is of a cold temperature, and 
situate between two deep ravines, with 130 fa 
milies of Indians, and being 1 1 leagues s. of its 
capital. 

SANTIAGO, another, of the head settlement of 
Quieguelani. It contains 25 families of Indians, 
and is two leagues from its head settlement. 

SANTIAGO, another, of the head settlement of 
Yautepec and alcaldia mayor of Nejapa in the 
same kingdom. It contains 130 families of In 
dians, who trade in cochineal and seeds, and is 
five leagues n. of its head settlement. 

SANTIAGO, another, of the head settlement of 
Atoyaque and alcaldia mayor of Xicayan in the 
same kingdom. It contains 14 families of In 
dians, and is 10 leagues from its head settlement, 
and close to that of San Juan. 

SANTIAGO, another, of the head settlement of 
Mezca and alcaldia mayor of Sentipac. It con 
tains 40 families of Indians who live by the trade 
of fishing, and is six leagues w. of its head settle 
ment. 

SANTIAGO, another, of Tepeguanes Indians, 
in the kingdom of Nueva Vizcaya. Three leagues 
from the city of Guadiana, and the capital. 

SANTIAGO, another, in the province and go 
vernment of La Sierra Gorda in the Bay of 
Mexico and in the kingdom of Nueva Espana : 
founded by the Count of that title, Don Joseph 
Escandon, colonel of militia of Queretaro in 
1749. 

SANTIAGO, another, of the government and 
jurisdiction of San Faustino in the Nuevo 

VOL. IV. 



Reyno de Granada ; annexed to the curacy of 
the city of Salazar of Las Palmas, to which it 
is very near. It is very mean and wretched ; and 
the poor Indians, who inhabit it, are so many re 
fugees, who come hither for the sake of their 
libA-ty. 

SANTIAGO, another, with the surname of Chico, 
in the province and corregimicnlo of Guamachuco 
in Peru ; situate near two streams, which unite 
to enter the river Santa. 

SANTIAGO, another, of the province and go 
vernment of Chucuito, in the same kingdom as 
the former. 

SANTIAGO, another, of the province and cor- 
regimiento of Omasuyos in the same kingdom ; 
annexed to the curacy of the settlement of Acha- 
cache. 

SANTIAGO, another, of the province and cor- 
regimiento of Castro Virreyna in the same king 
dom ; annexed to the curacy of the settlement of 
Huaitara. 

SANTIAGO, another, of the province and cor- 
regimiento of Guanta in the same kingdom ; 
annexed to the curacy of the settlement of 
Ticllas. 

SANTIAGO, another, of the province and go 
vernment of Quixos and Macas in the kingdom 
of Quito : one of the reductions of the Sucum- 
bios Indians, which were made and held by the 
Jesuits. 

SANTIAGO, another, of the province and go 
vernment of Veragua in the kingdom of Tierra 
Firme. 

SANTIAGO, another, of the province and go 
vernment of Paraguay ; situate between the river 
Paraguay and the source of the Yabeviri, or 
Yabibiry, to the w. of the settlement of Santa 
Rosa, and one of those of the missions of Parana. 
[In lat. 27 &amp; 40" s. Long. 56 48 34" w.l 

SANTIAGO, another, of the province and go 
vernment of the Chiquitos Indians in the same 
kingdom ; situate nearly s. of that of San Juan 
Bautista. It is a reduction of Indians of the mis 
sions which were held there by the Jesuits. 

SANTIAGO, another, of the province and go 
vernment of Cartagena in the Nuevo Reyno de 
Granada ; formed by the reunion of two other 
small settlements in 1776, by the governor Don 
Francisco Pimienta, near the river Cauca, to the 
w. of the town of S. Benito Abad, from whence 
it is four leagues. 

SANTIAGO, another, of the province and go 
vernment of Popayan in the same kingdom as the 
former, on the shore of the river Putumayo, near 
its source. 

3 E 



394 



SAN 



SANTIAGO, another, with the surname of San 
chez, in the province and government of Buenos 
Ayres in Peru ; situate on the shore of the river 
Plata, between the settlements of Homa and 
Santa Lucia. 

SANTIAGO, another, of the province and cor- 
regimiento of Chimbo in the kingdom of Quito ; 
annexed to the curacy of the settlement of S. 
Lorenzo. 

SANTIAGO, another, of the island and govern 
ment of S. Juan de Puerto Rico. 

SANTIAGO, another, a parish of the English in 
the n. part of the island of Jamaica. 

SANTIAGO, another, also a parish of the Eng 
lish, and head settlement of the district, in the 
island Barbadoes, on the w. coast. 

SANTIAGO, another, in the province and cor- 
regimiento of Caxamarquilla in Peru. 

SANTIAGO, another, in the province and go 
vernment of Californias, a reduction of Indians of 
the missions held there by the Jesuits. 

SANTIAGO, another, of the province and alcal- 
dia mayor of Chiapa in the kingdom of Guate 
mala. 

SANTIAGO, another, of the province and alcal- 
dia mayor of V^era Paz, in the same kingdom as 
the former. 

SANTIAGO, a large and abundant river of the 
kingdom of Quito, in the province and govern 
ment of Jaen de Bracamoros. It flows down 
from the mountains of Loxa to the e. runs to this 
rhumb for 40 leagues, and then turns its course 
to e. s. e. It afterwards enters the Paute and 
takes the name of Santiago, as it washed this 
city, which is now destroyed. Its shores are 
covered with very large trees, and in the woods 
dwell many barbarian Indians of the nation of 
the Xibaros, who impede the navigation of the 
river. In the sands of this river are found grains 
of gold. It enters the Maranon by the n. part, 
in lat. 4 27 s. 

SANTIAGO, another river, of the province and 
government of Esmeraldas in the same kingdom. 
It rises in the mountain of Cotacacha in the pro 
vince of Otavalo, and runs w. collecting the wa 
ters of several others which swell it exceedingly, 
(for, amongst the rest, some being, of themselves, 
very large ; namely, the Onzoles, San Miguel, and 
Bogota) and enters the Pacific or S. Sea, in lat. 
1 W n. 

SANTIAGO, another, of the province of Barce 
lona and government of Cumana, which rises in 
the serrania of Paraigua, runs w. and enters the 
Manapire. 

SANTIAGO, a bay on the n. coast of the Straits 



SAN 

of Magellan ; between the Point of Nuestra Se- 
nora del Valle and the Bay of Los Remedios. 

SANTIAGO, a port of the n. coast of the island 
of St. Domingo ; between the Bay of Padre Pin 
and the point of Macury. 

SANTIAGO, a mountain and volcano of the 
kingdom of Chile, in the province and corregimi- 
ento of Cuyo, n. of the city of Mendoza. 

SANTI-ESPIRITU, a town of the island of 
Cuba, founded by Diego Velazquez. Fifty 
leagues from the city of Santiago, and GO from 
that of Bayamo. 

SANTILLANA, a shoal of sand and rocks, 
near the coast of the province and government 
of Yucatan ; between the islands Viciosas and 
La Misteriosa. 

SANTO, a port of the coast of the province 
and government of Cumana, to the n. of the city 
of Cariaco. 

[SANTO ESPIRITU, a captainship of Brasil. 
See ESPIRITU SANTO.] 

SANTON, a small port on the e. coast of 
Newfoundland, in the n. part ; between Port 
Pincet and Cape Argent. 

SANTOS, BAHIA DE TODOS, a province and 
captainship of the kingdom of Brazil, so called 
from a large and beautiful bay ; bounded n. by 
the river Real, s. by the province of Los Ilheos, 
e. by the ocean, and w. by the three nations of 
infidel unconquered Indians : discovered by the 
Portuguese captain Christoval Jaques ; and the 
king deputed to its conquest and afterwards to 
its proprietorship Francisco Countinho, who had 
returned from India full of renown. He accord 
ingly sat out on his new enterprise with a squa 
dron containing many distinguished families, to 
settle this new colony ; and he succeeded in ren 
dering it obedient to him after conquering the 
Tupinambas Indians, who were then its masters. 
He then proceeded to establish many engines and 
estates, but the barbarians shortly afterwards re 
volting, killed many of the new settlers, and 
caused the rest to flee in two galleys, which they 
happened to have with them, to the province of 
Los Ilheos ; where they remained until the In 
dians, seeing that they were now without the ad 
vantages of the trade they formerly enjoyed, and 
the presents which they used to receive, began to 
repent of the steps which they had taken, and of 
fered to the Portuguese very advantageous pro 
posals, that they should come again amongst 
them. The Portuguese obeyed the summons, 
but in their passage were shipwrecked on the 
coast of the island of Itaparica, when the greater 
part of them perished, the few that survived 



SAN 

forming food for the savage natives ; every one, 
even to the unhappy Coutinho himself, meeting 
this wretched end. On the death of this go 
vernor the property of the province devolved 
upon the crown ; and it was straightway settled, 
and its extent assigned at 50 leagues along the 
coast. 

It is extremely fertile and abundant in cotton, 
tobacco, and sugar-cane, of which they make 
sugar ; and these are the chief articles of its com 
merce. It is watered by the rivers Paraguasu, 
Serzipe, Jaguaripe, Matuim, Paranamerin and 
Piraja, which, flowing from the mountains, fer 
tilize it, and enter the sea in the bay. 

It comprehends the populations of the follow 
ing towns : Nuestra Seilora del Rosario de Cache- 
vira, Nuestra Senora de la Ayuda de Jagoaripe, 
San Antonio de Juan Amaro, San Francisco del 
Sitio, and two modern towns with the names of 
Jacobina and Maragogipe ; founded by the vice 
roy Vasco Fernandez Cesar de Meneses, not to 
count many villages, which, in all, contain more 
than 100,000 souls, although the greater part live 
at the manufactories and in the country estates. 

SANTOS, the bay from which the above pro 
vince is called, is one of the best on that coast. 
It is three leagues from the entrance from the 
Bar of San Antonio to the Strait of Tapagipe ; 
12 leagues in diameter and 36 in circumference. 
It is convenient, secure, and full of islands. All 
its vicinities are covered with sugar engines and 
estates, the productions of which are conveyed 
in large barges by the rivers : and for this em 
ploy there are no less than 2000 of the above 
cratl in constant employ ; so great is the traffic 
t&amp;gt;f the bay. [In lat. 12 42 w. Long. 38 42 tw.j 

SANTOS, a town of the alcaldia mayor of Nata 
in the province and government of Tierra Firme; 
situate on a spot discovered by Rodrigo Valen- 
zuela ; one league from the S. Sea. It is of an 
hot temperature, very abundant in cattle, parti 
cularly swine : and supplies with this and salted 
meats, cheese, and other articles, the city of Pa 
nama, the capital of the kingdom. 

SANTOS, a settlement of the province and go 
vernment of Jaen de Bracamoros in the kingdom 
of Quito ; sit-.iate on the shore of the river Si- 
manchi, s. of the city of Loyola. 

SANTOS, another, of the province and corregi- 
mie-tto of Angaraes in Peru. 

SANTOS, another, very short and reduced, in 
the district and government of San Juan Giron, 
of the Nuevo Keyno de Granada ; containing 
only 40 housekeepers. 

SANTOS, another, a parish and head settlement 



SAO 



395 



of the island of Barbadoes, near the n. ex 
tremity. 

SANTOS, another, of the province and govern 
ment of Tucuman, and jurisdiction of the city of 
Cordoba in Peru, on the shore of the lake formed 
by the river Primero. 

SANTOS, another, of the missions which were 
held by the Jesuits in the province of California 
in N. America. 

SANTOS, another, which is a real of mines in 
the province of Ostimuri. Twenty-five leagues 
n. n. w. of the real of Rio Chico. 

SANTOS. I hree islands of the N.Sea, amongst 
the Antilles, s. e. of Dominica, and n. w. of Gua- 
dalupe. The French established themselves in 
them in 1648. That to the e. is called Tierra 
Alta, and that to the w. Tierra Baxa ; the third 
being nothing more than a large rock standing 
above the water, and incapable of cultivation. 
In this, however, is a good port, between its w. 
coast and the Tierra Baxa, where vessels of every 
size may lie safe at anchor. In these islands 
there is a settlement under the charge of the re 
ligious Carmelites, where they cultivate much 
cotton and tobacco : the same being dependent 
on the governor of Guadalupe. 

SANTOS, a large settlement in the province 
and captainship of San Vicente in Brazil ; situate 
near the sea-coast, defended by a rampart on the 
side of the river by which it stands, and which 
river is in that part half a league wide. It has 
also two castles ; one in the s. part, and another 
in the centre. Its population is composed o : 250 
inhabitants, and it has besides the parish church 
a convent of nuns, and a college which belonged 
to the Jesuits. [In lat. 23 59 30" s. Long. 
46 24 o&amp;gt;.] 

SANTOS, an island in the province and govern 
ment of Buenos Ayres, formed by the rivers 
Flores and Saladillo. 

SANTOS, a river of the province and colony 
of S. Carolina; the same which the Indians call 
Congari. It runs s. e. is very abundant, and 
changing its name to Santos, enters the sea. 

SAONA, a small island of the N. Sea; near 
the e. head of the island St. Domingo, and di 
vided from thence by a channel, through which 
only small vessels can pass. This island is only 
13 miles long and four wide, and abounds in fine 
woods and pastures, but it is otherwise desert 
and uncultivated, and inhabited only by some 
fishermen, at such times as the tortoises are ac 
customed to come upon land and lay their eggs 
on the beach. Five miles from the island of St. 
Domingo, and 14 e. of that of St. Cataline. The 
SE 2 



396 



SAP 



n. and s. coasts are full of rocks, and it is only on 
the e. coast that vessels can come to anchor, the 
depth here being from seven to eight feet, and 
the harbour well sheltered from the winds. 

[The island of Saona lies not much above a 
league or a league and a quarter from Little Palm 
Tree Point, to that which advances from the n. of 
the Saona. At each of its extremities e. and w. is 
a mountain, and there is a third at a point about 
the middle of the s. side. These mountains at 
once shelter and water it, and temper the air. 
The Indians called this island Adamanoy, and 
had a particular cacique, who was sovereign of 
the island, independent of those of St. Domingo. 
His subjects devoted themselves to commerce 
with the Spaniards, to agriculture, fo cultivation 
of grain and fruits. They furnished enough for 
the consumption of the city of St. Domingo, and 
for provisioning several expeditions going from 
that port. Some Castilians having caused the 
cacique to be eaten by a dog, this act of cruelty 
became the cause of a quarrel, and the Spa 
niards having exterminated the unfortunate in 
habitants, formed settlements on their little 
island. It is surrounded with banks and break 
ers, except at the w. part : but there is a pas 
sage for small barks, between its n. side and the 
main of the island of St. Domingo. The island 
and its port are a shelter for the mariners sail 
ing in this part, who here find water, wood, and 
wild cattle, all which are in abundance. It is 
impossible to have an idea of the vast quantities 
of birds, and particularly of wood-pigeons, that 
are seen here. The e. point of the island lies in 
lat. 18 W n. and long. 68 35 a&amp;gt;.] 

fSAPA, ST. MICHAEL DE, a village in the 
valley of Arica, in the province of Charcos in 
Peru. It is a small place, but famous for the 
quantity of Guinea-pepper produced in its vici 
nity. It will not thrive in mountainous parts, 
but is cultivated in the valleys. The inhabitants 
of this village sell annually no less than 80,000 
crowns worth of it.] 

SAPARA, a settlement of the province and 
government of Maracaibo in the Nuevo Reyno 
de Granada ; at the entrance of the lake. 

SAPAS. See INCURIS. 

SAPATOCA, SAN JOAQUIN DE, a settlement 
of the jurisdiction of the town of San Gil, and 
corregimitnto of Tunja in the Nuevo Reyno de 
Granada. It is of a mild, healthy, and pleasant 
temperature, and fertile in sugar canes, maize, 
yucasy and tobacco ; has many good pastures in 
which might be bred much fine cattle ; and is 
bounded by the mountains which run towards the 



SAP 

river Grande de la Magdalena ; is eight leagues 
n. of San Gil, the river Suarez running between, 
and the same distance from San Juan Giron, the 
river Chocoa intervening. The population is 
small but of affable and courteous habits. 

SAPAYES, a barbarous nation of Indians of 
Cayenne or Equinoctial France. It is not nu 
merous, and inhabits the vicinities of the river 
Cavo or Cauvo. Little is known of its customs. 

SAPCI, a settlement of the province and cor- 
rcgi)tn ento of Yamparaes, and archbishopric of 
Charcas in Peru. 

SAPE, SANTA MARIA DEL, a settlement of 
the missions which were held by the Jesuits in 
the province of Tepeguana, and kingdom of 
Nueva Vizcaya in N. America ; on the shore of 
the river Nasas. 

[SAPELO, a village of Georgia, in Liberty 
County, opposite to the sound and island of that 
name, and about six miles s. of Sunbury.] 

SAPOCAI, a river of the province and cap 
tainship of San Vicente in Brazil. It rises in the 
mountains, runs w. in a curve, and enters the 
Parana. 

SAPOLA, an island of the N. Sea, near the 
coast of Florida ; one of the Georgian, which are 
at the mouth of the river Alhatajama. Some call 
it Del Sapo ; and it is found between the island 
of San Simon Chico and that of Santa Catalina. 

SAPONA, a river of the province and colony 
of N. Carolina, which runs to s. e. and enters the 
Pedi. 

[SAPONIES, Indians who inhabit on a n. 
branch of Susquehannah River. Warriors 30. 
See MUNSAYS.J 

SAPOTAN, a settlement of the head settle 
ment of the district and alcaldia mayor of Com- 
postela in the kingdom of Nueva Galicia. It 
contains 100 families of Indians, and many more 
of Spaniards, JMustees, and Mulattoes. Five 
leagues s. of its capital. 

SAPOTETLAN, SANTA MARIA DE, a settle 
ment of the head settlement of Mitla, and alcaldia 
mayor of Teutitlan. It contains 10 families of 
Indians, and is five leagues s. of its head settle 
ment. 

SAPOTLAN Y TUSPA, an alcaldia mayor of 
the kingdom of Nueva Galicia, and bishopric of 
Mechoacan in N. America. It has some settle 
ments situate in it, which are in Nueva Espana, 
through a particular projection of its territory in 
this direction ; and thus the capital stands in the 
territory of the bishopric of Mechoacan. This is 
of the same name, and in it is a convent of the 
religious of San Francisco. It is inhabited by 



S A Q 

50 families of Spaniards, Mustees, and Mulattoes, 
and many Indians, is of a mild temperature ; and 
near it passes a rivulet called Amaqueca, on the 
banks of which are the estates of Tigre and Men- 
guaro. Also to its jurisdiction belongs another 
district called Tuspa or Tuspan, and in this are 
two volcanoes, much celebrated, and serving as 
marks of division to the jurisdictions of Tusca- 
queso, Colima,and Sapotlan, as also to the bishop 
rics of Mechoacan and Guadalaxara. Twenty- 
four leagues .?. one quarter to s. e. of Guada 
laxara. 

The other settlements are, 
San Sebastian, Tuspan, 

San Andres, Zapotiltic, 

Masamitla, Tamasula. 

SAPOTLAN Y TUSPA, another settlement, of 
the head settlement of the district and alcaldia 
mayor of La Barca in the kingdom of Nueva 
Galicia. 

SAPOTLAN Y TUSPA, another, of the head 
settlement of the district and alcaldia mayor of 
Tecpatitlan in the same kingdom and bishopric 
as the former ; situate nine leagues from its capi 
tal to the w. and eight from the province of Gua- 

SAPPOROVIS, a very lofty mountain in the 
province of Caribana, to the s. e. of the river Ma- 
ravini ; on the skirts of which some gold is found, 
as also much marcasite. It is in the Dutch co 
lony of Corentin, in lat. 5 9 n. 

SAPURI, a small river of the province and 
government of Guayana or Nueva Andalucia. 
It rises in the country and territory of the To- 
bajaris Indians, runs e. and enters the Caura. 

SAPURICACU, or SAPUTIYAEU, according 
to the geographer D. Juan de la Cruz, a river of 
the province and government of Mainas in the 
kingdom of Quito, which rises in the mountains, 
and enters the Apena, nearly at the mouth where 
this disembogues itself into the Maranon. 

SAPUYES, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Pasto in the kingdom of Quito. 

SAQUALCO, a settlement of the head settle 
ment of the district and alcaldia mayor of Tlajo- 
mulco in Nueva Espana ; situate in a fertile and 
beautiful valley ; and abounding in all kinds of 
seeds and fruits ; on the shore of the great lake 
or sea of Chapala. It has a convent of the reli 
gious of San Francisco, and is s. of its capital. 

SAQUAREMA, a settlement of the province 
and captainship of the Rio Janeiro in Brazil ; on 
the coast, and close to Cape Frio. 

SAQUISILLI, a settlement of the province 
and corregimiento of Tacunga in the kingdom of 



S A R 



397 



Quito ; where they manufacture jars and pitchers 
which are much esteemed. 

SARA, a river of the province and govern 
ment of Moxos in the kingdom of Quito. It 
issues from a lake, runs n. n. w. and enters the 
Marmore. 

SARABA, a river of the province and govern 
ment of Mainas, in the same kingdom as the 
former. It rises in the sierra in the territory of 
the Chirenes Indians, runs n. and forming a cir 
cle, turns w. and enters very abundantly into the 
Perene or ancient Maranon. 

SARABES, a barbarous nation of Indians of 
the province and government of Paraguay ; who 
dwell on the e. shores of this river, their territory 
being also laved by many other rivers. They are 
but little known. 

SARABITA, a large and abundant river of the 
Nuevo Reyno de Granada ; of which the Spa 
niards changed the name to that of Suarez, as its 
current, which is very rapid, once carried away 
the horse of a captain of this name. [It rises 
about 22 miles s. w. of the lake Fuquene, and runs 
n. with a slight inclination to the e.] traversing 
the province of Velez, until it unites itself with 
the Chicamocha or Sogamoso. In it have occur- 
ed many accidents, it being in the direct road ; 
and the president Don Venero de Leiba directed 
a bridge to be built over it, which, although of 
wood, has a very solid stone foundation. 

SARACE, a river of the province and govern 
ment of San Juan de los Llanos, in the Nuevo 
Reyno de Granada. It rises in the mountains of 
Bogota, near the city of Pamplona, runs near the 
settlement of San Ignacio to e. n. e. and enters 
the Cazanare. 

SARAGURO, a settlement of the province 
and corregimiento of Loxa in the kingdom of 
Quito ; [situate in the Royal Road which leads 
from Quito to Lima, about 38 miles s. of Cuenca.] 

SARAGURO, a river, which takes its name from 
the former settlement, in this province and king 
dom. It receives on the s. the Vesiacapa, and 
by the n. the Natuvanucha ; runs w. and its 
stream being much enlarged by other rivers, re 
ceives the name of Amarillo, passes through the 
city of Zamora, or Saruma, and enters the woods 
and unknown countries to form the Tumbez, 
which runs into the sea by three arms in the 
Gulf of Guayaquil, [the most s. of which lies 
in lat. 3 20 s.] 

SARAICA, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento ofAimaraes in Peru: annexed to 
the curacy of the settlement of Yanaca. 

SARAMA, a small river of the province and 



398 



S A R 



S A R 



government of Guayana, or Nueva Andalucia. 
It rises in the country of the Cudupinapos In 
dians, runs n. and enters the Caura. 

SARAMAJOS, a settlement of the province 
and government of Guanuco in Peru ; at the 
source and on the shore of the river Guallaga. 

SARAMBIRA, a small river of the province 
and government of Choco, in the Nuevo Reyno 
de Granada, and of the district of the kingdom 
of Raposo. It enters the S. Sea, opposite the 
island of Gorgona. 

SARAMECA, a large and abundant river of 
Guayana, in the part of this province possessed 
by the Dutch, or colony of Surinam. It runs w. 
for many leagues in a winding course, and unites 
itself with the Copename, these together entering 
the sea near the Surinam. 

SARAMISSUES, a barbarous and ancient na 
tion of Indians, to the n. of Cuzco. The em 
peror Huayna-Capac, having entered their ter 
ritory to subject them to the empire, saw that 
they were so brutal, as to appear rather like 
beasts than men. He therefore abandoned them, 
saying, " let us return, for these creatures are 
not worthy of me as their lord." 

SARAN, a settlement of the province and 
government of Venezuela in the Nuevo Reyno 
de Granada, near the settlement of Bayladores, 
a very lofty mountain lying between them. 

[SARANAC, a river of New York, which 
passes through Plattsburg, and empties into Lake 
Champlain from the w. It has been explored 
nearly 30 miles, and there found equal in size to 
the mouth. It abounds with salmon, bass, pike, 
pickerel, trout, &amp;c. At the mouth of the river 
salmon are found in such plenty, that it is usual 
to take 400 or 500 a day, with spears and small 
scoop-nets* They are caught from May till No 
vember.] 

SARAOA, a lake of the country of Amazonas, 
in the part possessed by the Portuguese. It is 
formed from a waste-water of that river, near 
the island Dos Ramos. 

SARAPIQUI, a river of the province and 
government of Costa-riea in the kingdom of 
Guatemala. It runs n. and enters the San Juan 
or Desaffuadero in the lake of Nicaragua, in the 
middle of its course. 

SARARE, S. NICOLAS DE, a settlement of 
the province and government of Venezuela in 
the Nuevo Reyno de Granada; on the shore of 
the river of its name, to the n. of the town of 
Araure. Its population consists of Spaniards 
and other casts, of the which some dwell in the 
settlement, and others in fields where they have 



their crops and herds of neat-cattle, mules, and 
horses. It was founded in quality of a mission 
in 1754 by the Andalucian Capuchin missionaries 
of this province ; and it was under their charge 
till 1759, when it was transferred to a priest with 
the title of vice-curate of the city of Barquisi- 
meto, from which time its church became a col 
legiate. It is bounded e. by the settlement of 
Santa Ines del Altar, from whence it is distant 
seven leagues ; w. by the settlement of Cubiro of 
the vicarage of Tocuyo, two miles distant, a lofty 
serrania intervening ; n. by the settlement of 
Yaritagua, eight leagues distant, and at the 
same rhumb, though with some inclination to 
the w. by the city of Barquisimeto ; and s. by 
the town of Araure. It contains 203 Spaniards, 
297 Indians, 496 Pards, and 194 Negroes. 

SARARE. This river rises e. of the city of 
Tucuyo, and unites itself with that of S. Juan 
and Cojede to enter the Portuguese, [or Portu- 
gaire.] 

SARARE, another river, in the province and 

fovernment of S. Juan de los Llanos in the same 
ingdom. It rises in the sierras of Pamplona to 
the s. of this city. [It runs s. e. about 20 miles, 
and afterwards turns e. and enters the A pure. It 
serves at the present day as part of the boundary 
between the kingdom of Grenada and the cap 
tainship of Caracas.] 

[SARARE, another, a settlement situate at the 
source of the above river.] 

SARARE, another, a small river of the pro 
vince and district of Matogroso in the kingdom 
of Brazil. It rises near the settlement of San 
Francisco Xavier of the Chiquitos Indians in 
Peru, runs s. e. and enters the Itenes. 

SARATI, a river of the province and king 
dom of Tierra Firme, in the district and settle 
ment of Chepo. Its stream is quiet, waters sweet, 
and its shores are cultivated and covered with 
estates. It enters the sea in the Gulf of Panama, 
in lat. 8 21 . 

[SARATOGA, a county of the state of New 
York, bounded e. and n. by Hudson s River, 
which separates it from Rensselaer and Washing 
ton Counties, and s. by Mohawk River. It has 
been established since 1790, and is divided into 
eight townships, viz. Greenfield, Ballstown, 
Charlton, Half Moon, Milton, Saratoga, Galway, 
and Stillwater. In 1796, 3270 of the inhabitants 
were qualified electors.] 

[SARATOGA, or SARAGHTOGA, a township of 
New York, situate in Saratoga County, on the 
w. side of Hudson s River, 26 miles n. of Albany. 
It contains few houses in a compact state, In. 



S A R 



S A K 



399 



1790, when it belonged to Albany County, it 
contained 3071 inhabitants; and there were here 
in 1796, M2 qualified electors. It will ever be 
distinguished in history, for being the place at 
which General Bnrgoyne was obliged to surren 
der his army in 1777. 

This town is also famous for its medicinal wa 
ters, called the Saratoga Springs. They are 10 
miles from Ballstown, in a shallow vale or marsh, 
in several respects resembling that of Ballstown. 
These waters appear to have received as strong, 
if not stronger, impregnation of the same kind 
of ingredients that enter those of Ballstown, and 
may be a stream of the same fountain running 
through the same kind of calcareous earth. One 
of these springs is covered over by a natural cre- 
tacious, or rather calcareous pyramid, about five 
or six feet high. This hollow pyramid, or cone, 
has a hole in the top about six inches over. If 
we look into this hole we see the mineral water 
boiling vehemently like a pot over the fire ; the 
water is nevertheless intensely cold, and is said 
to be, in every respect, smarter than that at Balls- 
town. The calcareous matter extends for several 
rods from the basis of this pyramid. There are 
several idle stories related of this spring; one is, 
that it overflows at certain stages of the moon. 
This is not true. As this is found to be false, 
they tell you it overflows once a year ; but this 
has as little foundation in truth as the other. 
People who live at these springs think they must 
relate something marvellous by way of enhancing 
the value of the waters, and reconciling you to 
the great expense attending these visits.] 

SARA-URCU, a lofty mountain and volcano 
of the kingdom of Quito, which forms part of 
the cordillera of Guamani on the e. of that capi 
tal. On two occasions it has vomited fire, and 
afterwards water : in lat. 23 s. 

SARAW, a settlement of Indians of the pro 
vince of S. Carolina, on the shore of the river 
Pedi. 

SARA-YACU, a river which signifies the wa 
ter of maize. It flows down from the mountains 
to the w. of the Maranon [Proper, but which is 
here called Paro, and Ucayale], in the province 
and corregimiento of Guanuco in Peru, and, after 
many windings, enters the Ucayale in lat. 6 45 / s. 
It is accustomed also to be called De Pisque. 

SARBE, a large and abundant river of the 
Nuevo Reyno de Granada, in the province and 
corregimiento of Muzo. 

SARDINAS, a river of the province and 
kingdom of Tierra Firme; which rises in the 
mountains of Mandinga, near the point of San 



Bias, and enters the N. Sea opposite the settle 
ment of Palenque. 

SARDINAS, another river, in the province and 
government of Maracaibo and Nuevo Reyno de 
Granada. It rises in the valley of Chama, runs 
nearly due s. and enters the Sulia, just before 
this joins the lake of Maracaibo. 

SARDINAS, another, in the province and go 
vernment of Mainas and kingdom of Quito. It 
rises in the confines of the province of Quixos, 
runs e. and enters the Aguarico. The engineer 
Bellin wrongly asserts that it enters the Orinoco. 

SARDINAS, a gulf on the e. coast of the lands 
of Magellan, or Patagonia, formed between Cape 
Redondo to the n. and that of Santa Elena to 
the s. 

SARDINAS, a very lofty mountain, called Ancon 
de Sardinas, on a point or long strip of land of 
the coast of the S. Sea, in the province and go 
vernment of Esmeraldas, on the side of Port 
Tumaco. 

SARDINATA, a river of the province and 
government of Maracaibo in the Nuevo Reyno 
de Granada. It rises n. of the city of Las Pal- 
mas, and enters the Sulia. 

[SARDO, a cape on the coast of New Spain, 
and in the N. Sea.] 

[SARECTO, the chief town of Duplin County, 
N. Carolina, situate on the w. side of the n. e. 
branch of Cape Fear River, which affords water 
for rafts to the town. It contains a court-house, 
gaol, and about 20 houses. It is 46 miles above 
Wilmington, to the .] 

[SARENA, a town on the coast of Chile, in 
S. America, on the coast of the South Pacific 
Ocean. Lat. 29 56 s. long. 71 W a&amp;gt;J 

SAREPE, a river of the Nuevo Reyno de 
Granada, in the province and government of 
San Juan de los Llanos. It runs through the 
country of the Salivas Indians to the w. and, 
after many leagues, turns n. n. e. and enters the 
Enecaramu by the s. part. 

SARURAS, a barbarous nation of Indians of 
the same province and kingdom as the former 
river. They dwell between those of Sinaruco 
to the w. and are numerous and valorous. The 
Jesuits began to reduce them to the faith with 
success in 1739. 

SARHUA, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Vilcas-Huaman in Peru ; an 
nexed to the curacy of the settlement of Chuschi. 

[SARINHAYM, a river on the s. e. coast of 
Brazil, and opposite to the island of Alexo, which 
is w. of Cape St. AugustineJ 

[SARMIENTO ISLANDS, PEDRO DE,inthe 



400 



S A S 



S. Pacific Ocean, are thought to be the same as 
the Duke of York s Islands, n. of the w. end of 
the Straits of Magellan. They lie in about lat. 
50 s. and are about 80 in number.] 

SARNABITIVA, a small river of the pro 
vince and captainship of Portoseguro in Brazil. 
It rises near the coast, runs e. and enters the sea 
between the Itamhaen and the mountain Pasqual. 
[SARONILLA, or SERVANILLA, or SERRA- 
ILLA, shoals off the island of Jamaica, ISO miles 
w. s. w. of Pedro Shoals, and 203 s. w. of Port 
land Point. The middle of them lie in lat. 15 
44 n. and long. 79 59 w."] 

SARUMILLA, a settlement and asiento of 
silver mines of the province and corregimiento of 
Caxamarquilla in Peru ; annexed to the curacy 
of its capital. 

SAS, a small river of the province and go 
vernment of Quixos and Macas in the kingdom 
of Quito. It enters just after its rise into the 
Putumayo. 

SASACINA, a settlement of the jurisdiction 
of the town of Honda in the Nuevo Reyno de 
Granada. It is of an hot temperature, very 
abundant in tobacco, cotton, and other vegetable 
productions of its climate ; but its inhabitants, 
who may amount to 100, are much infested, to 
gether with some Indians who live here, with 
mosquitoes, spiders, snakes, and other venomous 
insects. Ten leagues from Honda, in the mid- 
road between this town and Santa Fe. 

[SASCACHAWAX, or SASKASHAWAN, a 
large river which is navigable very near to its 
sources. It has its origin in the Rocky Moun 
tains, from whence flow many of its branches ; 
the two principal of which are denominated by 
n. and s. branches ; which, after running very 
curvature courses to the e. join about 60 miles 
e. of Hudson s Hou^e. From the sources to this 
junction is about 440 miles in a direct line : from 
the above junction it runs n. e. to Pine Island 
Lake, from whence there is a communication by 
a short portage to Nelson s River. From Pine 
Island Lake it runs in a .9. e. direction through 
Devil s Drum Lake, and afterwards through Ce 
dar Lake, and empties into the Winnipig Lake. 
From Lake Winnipig there is a water communi 
cation through Play Green Lake and Nelson s 
River to York Fort on the w. coast of Hudson s 
Bay. 

SASPOS, a small river of the province and 
government of Buenos Ayres in Peru. It runs 
s. and then turns . to enter the Uruguay in the 
winding this river gives to the w. 

[SASSAFRAS, a small navigable river of 



S A V 

Maryland, which rises in Delaware State, and 
runs w. into Chesapeak Bay. It separates Kent 
County from that of Cecil, and has the towns of 
Fredericktown, Georgetown, and Sassafras on 
its banks. The latter is five miles e. by n. of 
Georgetown, and about three s. of Warwick.] 

SATEBO, a settlement of the missions that 
were held by the Jesuits in the province of Te- 
peguana and kingdom of Nueva Vizcaya. 

SATICO. See TANASEE. 

SATIGNAN, a settlement of Canada, on the 
shore of the river La Chaudiere, four leagues 
from the city of Quebec. 

[SATILLA, GREAT and LITTLE, two rivers of 
Georgia, which fall into the ocean in Camden 
County, between the Alatamaha and St. Mary s 
Rivers.] 

SATIVA, a settlement of the province and 
correginriento of Tunja in the Nuevo Reyno de 
Granada. It is of a cold but healthy tempera 
ture, and abounding in the vegetable productions 
of this climate, as also in flour, with which it 
provides Santa Fe and the other settlements. Its 
parish church is one of the best of the kingdom, 
though its inhabitants, whose number exceeds 
1000, are much aftlicted with the garganta, or 
swelling of the throat, a disease very common in 
these parts: [106 miles n. e. of Santa Fe, and 
.08 from Tunja,] in the same rhumb, in the 
high road leading to Pamplona, Merida, Caracas, 

1 f~l ~ O * J 

and Ocana. 

SATIVA, another settlement in the same pro 
vince and kingdom, at a small distance from the 
former, and like it abounding in productions, and 
of a favourable climate. Its population is only 
60 Indians and a few Spaniards, and it is mucn 
visited by persons coming to the veneration of a 
miraculous image of Christ crucified, which is in 
its church. 

SATOCA, a settlement of the province and 
corregimJcnto of Arica in Peru, annexed to the 
curacy of Cibaya. 

[SAVAGE, a small river of Maryland, which 
runs s. through Alleghany County, and empties 
into the Patowmac, w. of George s Creek. Its 
mouth is 18 miles s. w. of Fort Cumberland. 
Boats carrying 10 tons can reach Alexandria in 
four or five days, but will take double the time 
to return.] 

[SAVAGE Creek, a small bay on the n. w. 
coast of Newfoundland, near the w. entrance of 
the bay of Mouco, and 20 leagues n. e. of Cape 
Ferrol.] 

[SAVAGE Island, in the S. Pacific Ocean, is 
about 33 miles in circuit, and is inhabited by 



S A V 

savages. It is overrun with bushes, and has no 
port. Lat. 19 2 s. long. 169 30 a?.] 

[SAVAGE Island, GREAT, in Hudson s Straits. 
Lat. 62 30 n. long. 7047 a&amp;gt;. High water, at 
full and change, at ten o clock.] 

[SAVAGE Island, LOWER, in the same straits, 
has high water, at full and change, at nine 
o clock. Lat. 61 48 n. long. 66 3 a&amp;gt;.] 

[SAVAGE Point, UPPER, on the n. side of Hud 
son s Straits, s. e. of Cape Charles, and the n. w. 
point of an inlet up into the land, so as to form 
the island of Good Fortune.] 

[SAVAGE S Post, at the Rock Landing, 10 miles 
below the Falls of Oconee River.] 

[SAVAGE Sound, a passage in the n. part of 
the Welcome Sea, in Hudson s Bay, into Repulse 
Bay. It is but little known.] 

SAVALO, a settlement of the province and 
government of Darien and kingdom of Tierra 
Firme; on the shore of a small river, near the 
coast of the S. Sea. 

SAVANA, a generical word used in many pro 
vinces of America for meadow or llanura^ in which 
cattle feed. It is equivalent also to the word 
ejido, signifying a common. 

SAVANA GRANDE, a port of the island of 
Cuba, on the s. coast, between the port of Ya- 
tera and the river Guatiquiri. 

SAVANDIJA, a large and abundant river of 
the province and government of Neiva in the 
Nuevo Reyno de Granada ; thus called by the 
Spaniards since the time of the conquest, from a 
very extraordinary sabandija or grub found here ; 
it having been formerly called Quamo ; and in 
its vicinity is a rich gold mine, still preserving 
the latter name. 

SAVANETAS, Point of, on the n. coast of 
St. Domingo, between Cape Frances Vieux and 
Port Yaqueson. 

SA VANILLA, a river of the province and 
government of Quixos and Macas in the kingdom 
of Quito. It runs s. in the district of the city 
of Zamora, and unites itself with the Bombasi- 
caro to enter the Zamora by the n. part. In lat. 
43 s. 

[SAVANNAH, a bay at the e. end of the 
island of Antigua, near the s. e. part of Green 
Island, on the 5. side, a little westward of Indian 
Creek.] 

[SAVANNAH Channel, towards the s. e. point 
of the s. side of the island of Jamaica; a short 
way w. of Port Morant Harbour; between them 
is Fisherman s River.] 

[SAVANNAH, a port of entry and post-town 
of Georgia, and formerly the metropolis of the 

VOL. IV. 



8 A V 



401 



State ; situate in Chatham County, on the s. side 
of the river Savannah, on a high sandy bluff, 13 
miles from the ocean. It is well laid out for a 
warm climate, in the form of a parallelogram, 
about a mile and a quarter long, and half a mile 
wide. The streets are wide, and open into spa 
cious squares, each of which has a pump in the 
centre, surrounded by a small plantation of trees. 
A great disadvantage, however, to the town, is 
the total want of foot-paths and pavement. Im 
provements of this nature would render walking 
more agreeable, and the town more cool and 
healthy. At present, one sinks at every step, up 
to the ancles in sand; and, in windy weather, the 
eyes, mouth, and nostrils, are filled with it. The 
magistrates are charged with neglect for not pav 
ing and improving the town; but, economy is 
their foible. 

The houses are mostly built of wood, and stand 
separate from each other, divided by court-yards, 
except in two or three streets, where they are 
close built, many of them with brick, and con 
tain several shops and stores. One large range 
of brick buildings stands near the market-place, 
and, at a distance, has the appearance of an hos 
pital. It is the property of one person, who built 
it on a speculation. It is divided into distinct 
houses, the ground-floor being appropriated to 
retail stores, and the upper apartments to private 
lodgings. But the principal street is that called 
the Bay, where there are several very good houses 
of brick and wood. Some contain booksellers , 
grocers , and drapers stores, others are private 
dwellings. This range of buildings extends 
nearly three-quarters of a mile along the town ; 
and opposite to it is a beautiful walk or mall, 
planted with a double row of trees, the same as 
those at Charleston, (Melia Azedarach, or Pride 
of India.) These trees are also planted in dif 
ferent parts of the town, but are supposed to be 
unfriendly to the health of the inhabitants. The 
shade of their thick foliage, however, forms an 
agreeable relief from the scorching beams of the 
sun, and they never engender or harbour any 
noxious insects upon their branches, which are 
advantages that have brought them into repute 
both in Charleston and Savannah. 

This agreeable promenade is situate near the 
margin of the height or bluff, upon which the 
town stands ; and the merchants stores, ware 
houses, and wharfs, for .landing, housing, and 
shipping of goods, are built immediately below, 
along the shore, forming, in some degree, a sort 
of lower town. From the height there is a fine 
commanding view of the Savannah River as far] 



402 



SAVANNAH. 



fas the sea, and for several miles above the town. 
The river is intersected by several extensive 
swamp islands, which divide it into different 
channels. They have been converted into ex 
cellent rice grounds, as they lie very low, and 
are easily inundated at the proper seasons, which 
the culture of that grain requires. The Negroes 
employed in that work live on the islands, in 
small wooden huts, exposed to the night dews 
and exhalations from the marshy soil, surrounded 
also by frequent fogs off the water. The con 
tinual moisture and dampness in which they live, 
would kill a white man in a few months. In the 
first settlement of the colony, Negroes were pro 
hibited to the settlers, but they now nearly equal 
the white population. 

About the centre of the walk, and just on the 
verge of the cliff, stands the exchange, a large 
brick building, which contains some public of 
fices ; and an assembly-room, where a concert 
and ball are held once a fortnight, during the 
winter. Upon the top of this building is a 
steeple, and from it may be had a very extensive 
panorama view of the town, the shipping, the 
river, and surrounding country. The prospect 
is bounded by immense forests, and very little 
land appears cleared in the vicinity of the town. 

Savannah, including its suburbs, contained in 
1787 about 2300 inhabitants, of whom about 80 
or 90 were Jews. By a census taken five or six 
years ago, its population consisted of 3009 
whites and free people of colour, and 2376 
slaves, making a total of 5385. At present it is 
supposed to be about 6000. The public build 
ings consist of the Branch bank of the United 
States, the Exchange, four or five places of 
worship ; and a gaol, built upon the common, 
some distance from town. The latter is a large 
strong brick building, and well adapted for the 
confinement of refractory Negroes, and other of 
fenders against the laws. 

A large bury ing-ground is judiciously situate 
out of town, upon the common. It is inclosed 
by a brick wall, and contains several monuments, 
and tomb-stones, which are shaded by willows 
and pride of India ; and have a very pretty ef 
fect. This cemetery, though now a considerable 
distance from the town, will, in time, most pro 
bably, be surrounded by the dwellings of the in 
habitants, like those of New York and Charles 
ton. In hot climates, these places infect the at 
mosphere with unwholesome exhalations, and 
injure the health of the people. They should at 
least be two or three miles away from all habita 
tions. But Savannah is not likely to increase 



very rapidly ; for adventurers reside there as at 
Charleston, merely for the purpose of accumu 
lating a speedy fortune in trade ; and then retire 
either to their native country, or to some other 
part, more congenial to health and comfort. 

The situation of Savannah, and the plan upon 
which it is laid out, would, if the town contained 
better houses, render it far more agreeable, as a 
place of residence, than Charleston. Its greater 
elevation, it is supposed, must also be more con 
ducive to the health of the inhabitants, than the 
low and flat situation of the other city. Both, 
however, are in the neighbourhood or swamps, 
marshes, and thick woods, which are apt to en 
gender diseases, injurious to the constitution of 
white people. Georgia, like Carolina, is subject 
to frequent storms, hurricanes, and inundations. 
In 1806, a hurricane tore up the grove of trees 
on the Bay at Savannah, did great damage to 
the town and shipping, levelled all the Negro 
huts on the swamp islands, and destroyed several 
of the Negroes. Savannah has also suffered 
much from fire. More than two-thirds of it was 
consumed by that which happened in the fall of 
1796. 

The exports for one year, ending the 30th of 
September, 1794, amounted to the value of 
263,830 dollars. This city was bravely defended 
by the British General Prevost, against a supe 
rior force, headed by Count d Estaing and Ge 
neral Lincoln. The allies made a fatal and un 
successful attack on the 18th of October, 1779, 
when they were obliged to retreat, after having 
from 1000 to 1200 men killed and wounded. 

The road from Savannah to St. Mary s is very 
indifferent, and the stage goes no further than 
Darien ; from thence the mail and passengers 
proceed in a canoe for upwards of 40 miles coast 
wise, between the numerous islands and the sea. 
In the spring of 1808 the mail-boat was lost in 
this passage ; and two monks, who happened to 
be passengers in it, were drowned. It is 129 
miles n. by e. of St. Mary s, 132 s. w. by s. from 
Augusta, and 925 in a like direction from Phila 
delphia, including the windings of the roads. 
Lat.324 w. long. 81 11 30" a&amp;gt;.] 

[SAVANNAH River divides the state of Georgia 
from that of S. Carolina, and pursues a course 
nearly from n. w. to s. e. It is formed chiefly of 
two branches, the Tugelo and Keowee, which 
spring from the mountains, and unite under the 
name of Savannah, 15 miles n. w. of the n. bound 
ary of Wilkes County. Its navigation for large 
vessels is 17 miles up to Savannah, and for boats 
of 100 feet keel to Augusta. After rising a fall] 



SAVANNAH RIVER. 



403 



[just above this place, it is passable for boats to 
the mouth of Tugelo River. After it takes the 
name of Savannah, at the confluence of the Tu 
gelo and Keowee, it receives a number of tribu 
tary streams from the Georgia side, the principal 
of which is Broad River. Tybee Bar, at the 
entrance of Savannah River, has 16 feet water 
at half-tide. Tybee lighthouse lies in lat. 32 n. 
and long. 81 w. and from thence to Port Royal 
is six leagues n. e. % e. 

The freshes of this river will sometimes rise 
from 30 to 40 feet perpendicular, above the usual 
level of the river. In 1701 a very destructive 
one occurred in part of the country; and, in 1796, 
a similar flood poured down the Savannah River, 
laying the town of Augusta upwards of two feet 
under water, and damaging goods therein to a 
large amount. It tore away an extensive bridge, 
near 800 feet long, belonging to Mr. Wade 
Hampton, which had been thrown over that river 
from S. Carolina, and carried destruction and 
dismay before it, quite to the town of Savannah. 
The height of this fresh was supposed to be from 
35 to 40 feet at Augusta above its common-level. 
This inundation also occasioned immense damage 
in S. Carolina, where the waters rose to as great 
a height as in Georgia. Several bridges were 
carried away, and many of the Negro huts on the 
islands and swamp plantations near the coast, 
were torn up with the people in them, and car 
ried by the torrent entirely out to sea. 

Proceeding up Savannah River, from the town, 
the sight is regaled with a variety of beautiful 
views. Numerous small islands intersect and 
divide the river into pretty meandering channels. 
The shores are mostly lined with large forest- 
trees, and the islands with abundance of small 
shrubs. A few plantations appear at intervals 
upon the banks, with now and then a handsome 
house ; but in general you see nothing but the 
Negro huts, together with many of the slaves 
who work upon the rice swamps : these, together 
with the cotton plantations, are very numerous 
on the banks of this river ; of the latter we shall 
speak towards the end of this article : the culti 
vation of the former is conducted in the following 
manner : 

Rice lands are laid out into squares, or small 
fields, proportioned to the strength of the Ne 
groes who work them, in such manner, that they 
can be planted or hoed through in the course of 
a week. These fields are separated from each 
other by proper banks, sufficiently strong for re 
taining water in the one, whilst those adjoining 
are kept dry. They communicate with each 



other by trunks and sluices, having valves at 
either end to receive or retain water, and large 
trunks or flood-gates, from rivers or reservoirs, 
through which water is occasionally introduced. 
About the 20th of March the spring has so far 
made its appearance as to enable the sowing of 
rice in the tide-lands: the inlands are not planted 
until the first or second week in A pril, as their 
soils are of a colder nature. Now the red-flower 
ing maple has put on its scarlet robe, the alder 
its blossoms, and the willow its leaves ; the alder 
also shoots up its v igorous stalks from the rich 
land in w r hich it grows: and the swamp sloe-bush 
is covered with a profusion of snowy blossoms. 
The wild-geese and ducks have departed for the 
northern regions ; and the planter, freed from 
their ravages, begins seriously to sow his crop, 
continuing that business, from time to time, until 
the 10th of June, after which the seasons scarcely 
permit its ripening before the frosts set in. For 
this purpose, the land having been previously 
turned up, is drilled either with ploughs or hoes, 
but most generally with the hoe, into about 100 
or 125 trenches in the half-acre, or 80 trenches 
in a quarter of an acre, and rice is sown therein, 
from one to two bushels the acre. It is then co 
vered, and the general custom of tide-planters is, 
immediately to flow the fields with water, keeping 
the same on from two to four days, according to 
the season and the heat of the weather. 

After the rice is some inches high, and attained 
a little strength, it requires hoeing. This is a 
very necessary business, as without it the plant 
will sometimes sicken and die. Three or more 
of these hoeings are commonly given to rice 
during its growth ; and at the second hoeing the 
toil becomes more serious, for the grass and 
weeds are then hand-picked from the roots of the 
rice. After the operation is over, a flowing of 
tide-lands is commonly given, and continued 
from 10 to 20 days, in order to give the rice a 
stretch, and to prepare it for branching, which 
it now begins to do. After this the water is run 
gradually off, and the rice remains dry for some 
time. This is a critical period of the crop, as 
the harvest proves good or bad in proportion to 
the branching of the rice, and as every branch 
produces one ear, containing from 100 to 300 
grains, as the lands may prove productive. In 
dry seasons the rice is liable to attacks from a 
small bug, equally injurious to it as the Hessian 
fly is said to be to wheat, or the blast to sugar- 
canes. These insects attach themselves to the 
rice, and suck out all the nourishment of the 
plant. In tide-plantations this mischief is easily] 



404 



SAVANNAH RIVER. 



[remedied, by opening the sluices, and flowing 
the fields with water ; but the inland planter has 
not this convenience ; patience and hope are the 
only sources to which he can then apply for con 
solation. 

Three months after the sowing of rice it begins 
to joint, blossom, and form the ear ; water is 
now absolutely necessary, for without it there is 
much light rice ; and whenever it can be thrown 
on from rivers or reservoirs it is immediately 
done, and is retained thereon, with a change of 
water, if convenient, until a few days before the 
harvest. This curious operation in agriculture 
generally begins on tide-lands towards the end 
of August, and in September the harvest be 
comes general throughout the state. In August, 
when the rice is flowed, and, as it is termed, the 
hoes laid by, the cooper-stuff is procured, which 
is necessary for exporting the rice in barrels : for 
this purpose, Negroes are then sent into the 
pine-lands to split staves and heading for bar 
rels, while others afterwards cut hoop-poles for 
making them. Now the barns and barnyards 
are put in order, and the rice-mill is prepared 
for manufacturing the rice for market. 

The produce of rice to the acre is different on 
different soils, and in proportion to the skill with 
which it is managed. On tide-lands, 2400 Ibs. 
have been made to the acre ; but, in general, the 
produce is from 1200 to 1500 Ibs. weight each 
acre. The inland plantations do not average so 
much, ranging only between 600 and 1200 Ibs. of 
clean rice to the acre. They, however, in addi 
tion to this, generally furnish their own pro 
visions, which is an advantage that the tide- 
planters seldom enjoy, in consequence of the po 
verty of their high grounds. 

After harvest the crop is placed in the open 
barnyards, either in stacks or in large ricks. It 
is then threshed out by hand-flails, and being 
winnowed from the straw, is ready for beating. 
This operation was formerly performed by ma 
nual labour, with a pestle and mortar, and is 
still so done, in some parts of the state ; but, 
from public encouragement, aided by private 
necessity and invention, the rice-mills of S. Ca 
rolina are now arrived to a perfection unequalled, 
perhaps, by those of any part of the world. 

As you proceed a few miles further up the 
river, you frequently may see a great number of 
alligators of various sizes ; the largest of which 
are about eight feet long, and from 16 to 18 
inches diameter in the thickest part of the body. 
They may be seen either swimming along shore, 
with their heads iust above water, or basking in 



ting 



the sun upon the branches of trees which project 
into the river. Their colour, when just coming 
out of the water, is a dark green or brown ; but 
when dry, it resembles that of a log of wood. 
If you fire at them, the effect is just the same as 
though the bullet had struck against a coat of 
mail. The eye, or the breast, are the most vul 
nerable places. In the upper parts of the river 
they abound in great numbers, and of a very for 
midable size, growing frequently to the length 
of 18 or 20 feet. 

This river abounds also with a great many 
tortoises or terrebins, which bask in the sun like 
the alligators, upon the trunks and branches of 
trees that grow in the water along shore. They 
are of various sizes, and are said to live in har 
mony with the alligator, in the same hole ; in 
which case the terrebins cannot form an article 
of food for that voracious animal, otherwise they 
would fly from his presence. The variety offish 
with which the Savannah abounds, affords the al 
ligator abundance of provision, without infringing 
the rights of hospitality. 

In navigating this river it is necessary to keep 
some distance from the trees and shrubs which 
hang over the banks of the river, as there are a 
great number of water vipers reclining upon the 
branches. They are apt to spring into the boat, 
if it approaches too close, which is dangerous, as 
their bite is said to be venomous. Besides these 
vipers, the shores abound with a species of 
water rattle-snake, whose bite is also of a deadly 
nature. 

The winter of Savannah is warm and mode 
rate, but the weather is unsettled. Trees, shrubs, 
and plants, are then destitute of their beautiful 
foliage and fragrant blossoms : and the fields, 
plantations, and gardens, want their verdant 
crops, their gay and lively flowers. At that sea 
son we see nothing but the deep unvarying tint 
of pines, firs, laurels, bays, and other evergreens. 
The summer is too sultry to admit of frequent 
exposure in the open air, and the autumn gene 
rally brings with it, in the country parts, fever 
and ague, and in the towns, the typhus icterodes, 
or yellow fever. 

In the plantations, the Negro men and w r omen, 
boys and girls, are alike engaged ; and each has 
a separate piece of ground marked out for their 
day s work. When their task is finished, some 
planters allow their slaves to work for them 
selves, on small gardens which are usually al 
lotted to them. Where they have the good for 
tune to fall into the hands of a liberal-minded 
man, their situation is far from irksome, and] 



SAVANNAH RIVER. 



406 



[they frequently know nothing of slavery but the 
name. In such cases, Negroes have been known 
to save up enough from the produce of their 
little gardens and live stock, to purchase their 
freedom, which is generally equivalent to 500 or 
600 dollars. 

Cotton is raised from the seed, and managed 
nearly in the following manner: About the latter 
end of March, or beginning of April, commences 
the season for planting cotton. In strong soils 
the land is broken up with ploughs, and the cot 
ton is sown in drills, about five feet from each 
other, and at the rate of nearly a bushel of seed 
to the acre ; after which, when the cotton is a 
few leaves high, the earth is thrown up in a 
ridge to the cotton, on each side, by a plough, 
with a mould-board adapted to that purpose ; 
or, in the first instance, beds are made rather 
low and flat, and the cotton is sown therein. 
By some they are sown in holes, at about 10 
inches distance ; but the more general practice 
is to sow the cotton in a drill along the length of 
of the bed ; after which it may be thinned at 
leisure, according to its growth. In rich high 
land soils, not more than 15 of these beds are 
made in a quarter of an acre; but in inferior 
lands, 21 beds are made in the same space of 
ground. When the plants are about four or six 
leaves high, they require a thinning ; at which 
time only a very few plants are left at each dis 
tance, where it is intended the cotton is to grow : 
and from time to time these plants are thinned, 
until at length two plants, or only one, are left 
at each distance. 

Where the land is not rich, the plants remain 
within 10 or 12 inches of each other; but when 
a luxuriant growth is induced, they are thinned 
to 18 inches and two feet, and in rich swamp 
lands, to four feet distance in the rows. At the 
time of thinning also the first hoeing is generally 
given, and the rule is, not to draw the earth 
down, but constantly to draw up a little earth 
at each hoeing, to the plant ; and to give the 
fields a hoeing every two or three weeks. With 
some planters the practice of topping the main 
stalk has been used when the plants are too 
luxuriant ; but the plant throwing out conse 
quently an abundance of suckers, and thereby 
increasing the toil of the Negroes to pull them 
away, has induced its discontinuance. Towards 
the middle of September, however, it may be 
advantageous to top the cotton to the lowest 
blossoms ; as from that time no blossoms will 
produce cotton. By this treatment also the sun 
has a greater influence with the plant, the pods 



open sooner, and the strength of the plant is not 
drawn unnecessarily from those pods which are 
likely to come to maturity. 

Towards the middle of June the plants begin 
to put forth their beautiful blossoms, and con 
tinue blossoming and forming the pods until the 
frosts set in ; at which time all the pods that are 
not well grown are injured and destroyed. Early 
in August the cotton harvest begins, and in Sep 
tember it is general throughout the state, con 
tinuing until December. The cotton wool is 
contained in the pod, in three or four different 
compartments ; which bursting when ripe, pre 
sents the cotton full blown to the sight, sur 
rounding its seed. The cotton is then picked 
from the pods, and put into small bags of Osna- 
burg, which are slung over the Negroes 7 
shoulders for that purpose, and afterwards car 
ried to the cotton-house. From thence it is, in 
a day or two after, taken out, and spread on a 
platform to dry, after which it is ready for gin 
ning. For this purpose a suitable house is ne 
cessary, sufficiently large to receive both the 
cured cotton, and that which has been lately 
brought in. When the cotton is well opened, a 
Negro will gather 60 or 70 Ibs. of cotton in the 
seed in one day. The produce of cotton is va 
rious, according to its different situations and 
kinds. In the lower country the black seed pro 
duces from 100 to 300 Ibs. of clean cotton per 
acre. In the middle and upper country green 
seed does the like. Upon indifferent lands, only 
from 60 to 100 Ibs. of clean cotton is made to the 
acre ; on better lands from 100 to 200 Ibs. ; and 
on the best lands, in good seasons, upwards of 
300 Ibs. have been made in Beaufort district. 
The planter, however, is satisfied with from 
150 to 200 Ibs. of clean black seed cotton to the 
acre. The green seed planter expects somewhat 
more. 

There are several kinds of gins in use, but 
the saw gins are reckoned to clean the most cot 
ton in the shortest time. The saw gins are used 
particularly for extracting the cotton from the 
green seed, to which it closely adheres. This 
mill is worked either by oxen or water, and con 
sists of an horizontal cog-wheel, or a water- 
wheel working a band which puts the pulleys of 
the saw-mill in motion. One of these pulleys 
turns a cylinder, round which is affixed from 
20 to 40 circular iron plates, about three-fourths 
of an inch distant from each other, serrated at 
the edge ; these continually revolve between iron 
straps into the compartment where the cotton is 
placed, and thus tear the cotton from the seeds,] 



106 



S A V 



[as the space through which they revolve is not 
sufficiently large to let the seeds pass through. 
Another pulley moves a cylinder with a set of 
brushes opposite each saw, which take the clean 
cotton from the teeth of the saw, and discharge 
it from the gin. One person, besides the packers 
and those who drive the oxen, is sufficient to at 
tend this gin, and the cotton cleaned by it daily 
may be from 600 to 900 Ibs. weight. 

After the cotton is thus ginned, a number of 
hands are employed in picking from it any dirt, 
or bits of seed, which may remain in it : it is then 
packed up in bags, weighing from 250 to 300 Ibs. 
and is ready for market. Such is the growth of 
cotton in S. Carolina, and the mode of preparing 
it for market ; but it is not all of the same in 
trinsic value, as that raised on lands adjacent to 
the sea and salt-water, called island or sea-shore 
cotton, being black seed, is preferred to the 
green-seed cotton, which is raised in the interior 
of the country. Cotton is also grown at Berbice, 
Demerara, Surinam, Cayenne, St. Domingo, To 
bago, Jamaica, and other parts of the W. Indies, 
as well also in the E. Indies ; but Great Britain 
has lately received her chief supplies of that 
article from the American States.] 

[SAVANNAH River, Little, falls into the Gulf 
of Mexico, n. w. of St. Joseph s Bay.] 

[SAVANNAH LA MAR, at the c. end of the 
island of St. Domingo, is a settlement on the s. 
side of the Bay of Samana, opposite the city of 
Samana on the n. side, and lies between the Bay 
of Pearls (which is an excellent port) and the 
point of Icaque. It has its governor and rector, 
and is situate at the end of a plain, which is 
more than 10 leagues from e. to no. and four wide 
from n. to s. The city of Samana and this town 
were both begun in 1756, and together do not 
contain more than 500 souls. The anchorage 
here is only fit for small vessels : shallows and 
breakers render the navigation very dangerous 
between this and the point of Icaque, four leagues 
and a half distant.] 

[SAVANNAH LA MAR, on the s. side of the 
island of Jamaica, in Cornwallis County, has a 
good anchorage for large vessels. It was almost 
entirely destroyed by a dreadful hurricane and 
inundation of the sea in 1780: it is now partly 
rebuilt, and may contain from 60 to 70 houses. 
It bears from Bluefield s Point w. by n. \ n. about 
three leagues. Lat. 18 13 n. long. 78 2 w.~] 

SAVANNAS, a settlement of Indians of the 
province of Georgia in N. America, on the shore 
of the river Apalachicola. 

SAVANNAS, another settlement of Indians, in 



S A V 

the province and colony of S. Carolina, on the 
shore of the river Albama. 

SAVARIMA, a strand of the island of Cuba, 
near the city of Havannah ; and at the front of it 
is a shoal on which, in 1698, was wrecked a very 
valuable galleon. 

SAUCE, PUNTA DE, a settlement of the pro 
vince and government of Tucuman in Peru; si 
tuate on the shore of the river Quinto, near the 
lake into which this runs, and in the road of the 
port from Chile to Buenos Ay res. 

SAUCE, a small river of the province and go 
vernment of Buenos Ayres, which runs 5. and en 
ters the river Plata, by the side of the colony of 
Sacramento, which belonged to the Portuguese. 

SAUCE, another, also a small river, of the same 
province as the former. It runs w. and enters 
the Uruguay between those of Gracian and Vi- 
bora. 

SAUCE, another, with the surname of Roto, in 
the same province ; which runs w. and enters the 
Santa Lucia Chico. 

SAUCE, a fort, in the province and government 
of Tucuman, to restrain the barbarian Indians. 

SAUCE, a fertile and large valley of the pro 
vince and corregimiento of Melipilla and king 
dom of Chile. 

SAUCES, a settlement of the province and go 
vernment of Tucuman in Peru, near the river of 
Pasage. 

SAUCES, another settlement of the same pro 
vince, on the shore of the river Dulce, between 
the settlements of Tamisqui and La Dormida. 

SAUCES, another, also in the same province, with 
the denomination De Rio, in the jurisdiction of 
the city of Cordoba. 

SAUCES, another, of the province ofTepequana 
and kingdom of Nueva Vizcaya in N. America. 

SAUCES, a river, in the province and govern 
ment of Paraguay, which laves the territory 
called Pampas. It receives in the s. part of its 
course the waters of several rivers flowing down 
from the Cordillera of the kingdom of Chile; and, 
after running 126 leagues to the s. it turns e. and 
disembogues itself on the sea of Magellan, form 
ing a great bay. In lat. 40 42 s. 

SAUCES, a river of the island of La Laxa in 
the kingdom of Chile, which runs w. and turn 
ing its course to n. enters the Pecoiquen. 

[SAUCON, UPPER and LOWER, townships in 
Northampton County, Pennsylvania.] 

SAVIANGO, a large river of the province of 
Loxa in the kingdom of Quito. It rises in the 
mountain of Pandomine and runs a?, till it enters 
by the n, part into the Macant, in lat. 4 25 s. 



S A U 



SAD 



40? 



[SAVILLA, ST. a small town of Georgia, mid 
way between Savannah and St. Mary s.] 

sAVIRE, a small river of the province and 
government of Guayana or Nueva Andalucia, 
which rises near the mountain of Barragan, and 
enters the Orinoco by the e. side, near the settle 
ment of Urana. 

[SAUKIES, or SAIKIES, called also Renars or 
Foxes, an Indian tribe in the N. W. Territory, 
and one of the savage nations of N. America. 
The Saukies or Renars are so perfectly con 
solidated, that they may, in fact, be considered 
as one nation only. They speak the same lan 
guage : they formerly resided on the e. side of 
the Mississippi, and still claim the land on that 
side of the river, from the mouth of the Oisconsin 
to the Illinois River, and e. towards Lake Michi 
gan ; but to what particular boundary we are 
not informed : they also claim, by conquest, the 
whole of the country belonging to the ancient 
Missouris, which forms one of the most valuable 
portions of Louisiana : but what proportion of 
this territory they are willing to assign to the 
Ayouways, who also claim a part of it, we do 
not know, as they are at war with the Sioux, who 
live n. and n. w. of them, except the Yankton 
Ahnah. Their boundaries in that quarter are 
also undefined : their trade woukl become much 
more valuable if peace were established between 
them, and the nations w. of the Missouri, with 
whom they are at war : their population has re 
mained nearly the same for many years : they 
raise an abundance of corn, beans, and melons : 
they sometimes hunt in the country w. of them, 
towards the Missouri, but their principal hunt 
ing is on both sides of the Mississippi, from the 
mouth of the Oisconsin to the mouth of the Illi 
nois River. These people are extremely friendly 
to the whites, and seldom injure their traders ; 
but they are the most implacable enemies to the 
Indian nations with whom they are at war. To 
them is justly attributable the almost entire de 
struction of the Missouris, the Illinois, Cahokias, 
Kaskaskias, and Piorias.] 

SAUMON, a small river of the island of 
San Juan in Nova Scotia. It rises from two 
small lakes, runs n. and enters the sea be 
tween the Bay of Basque and the island of Sea 
Wolves. 

SAUMON, another, also small, of the same pro 
vince which runse. and enters the sea in the port 
of Chedaboucto. 

SAUMON, another, also small, in the country 
and land of Labrador, which runs s. and enters 
the sea in the Gulf of St. Lawrence. 



SAUMON, a port on the e. coast of Newfound 
land, within Cork Bay. 

[SAUMON, See SALMON.] 

SAUMONS, a river of New France or Canada, 
which runs w. and enters the St. Lawrence. 

SAUNDERS, a settlement of the island of 
Barbadoes, in the district of the parish of St. 
Thomas. 

[SAUNDERS Island, in the S. Atlantic Ocean: 
one of the small islands which surround the two 
chief of the Falkland Isles.] 

[SAUNDERS Island, one of the Sandwich Is 
lands in the S.Atlantic Ocean, is about 13 leagues 
n. of Cape Montague. Lat. 58 8 5. Long. 
29 8 a.] 

[SAUNDERS Island, or SIR CHARLES SAUN 
DERS Island, called by the natives Tapoamanao, 
in the S. Pacific Ocean, is reckoned one of the 
Society Islands. When Port Royal Bay, at Ota- 
heite, is 70 45 5. distant 61 miles e. this island 
bears s. s. w. Lat. 17 28 X s. Long. 151 4 w. 
It is about two leagues long.] 

SAVORY, a settlement of the same island as 
the former ; situate in the district of the parish 
of S. Joseph, near the e. coast. 

[SAURA Lower Town, is situated on the s. 
side of Dan River in N. Carolina. It was for 
merly the chief town of the Saura Indians.] 

[SAURA Upper Town, in the same state, an 
ancient and well peopled town of the Saura In 
dians ; situate in Stokes County, on the 5. side of 
Dan River.] 

SAURA, a river of the province and corregimi- 
ento of Piura in Peru, which runs w. and enters 
the Piura. 

SAUS, a settlement of the head settlement of 
the district of Tamazunchale, and alcaldia mayor 
of Valles in Nueva Espana. It is of Pames In 
dians, who live like barbarians in that sierra. 

SAUS A, a small settlement of the kingdom of- 
Peru, between Cuzco and Caxamarca ; celebrated 
for the imprisonment and death of the emperor 
Huascar Inca, fourteenth monarch of Peru ; who 
was quartered by order of Atahualpa, usurper of 
the crown, in 1532. 

SAUTEURS, a river of Canada in N. Ame 
rica, which runs through the territory of the 
Messesagues Indians to the s. w. and enters Lake 
Huron. 

[SAUTEURS, LE MORNE DBS, or LEAPER S 
Hill, a precipice near the river Sauteurs, at the 
n. end of the island of Grenada. After the year 
1650 the French gradually exterminated the Cha- 
raibes : near this place they butchered 40 of them 
on the spot ; and 40 others, who had escaped the 



408 



SAY 



sword, threw themselves headlong into the sea 
from this precipice, and miserably perished. A 
beautiful young girl, of 12 or 13 years of age, 
who was taken alive, became the object of dis 
pute between two of the French officers, each 
claiming her as a lawful prize, when a third of 
those white savages put an end to the contest, by 
shooting the girl through the head.] 

SAU VEUR, S. a fort of the English in the 
province and colony of Sagadahook, on the shore 
of the Bay of Penobscot, and entrance or mouth 
of the river Casteens. 

SAUWANOUS, a settlement of Indians of 
the province and colony of S. Carolina, near the 
river Cousas. 

[SAWYER S Ferry, a small post-town of N. 
Carolina, 14 miles from Nixonton, 10 from In- 
diantown, and 482 from Philadelphia, including 
the windings of the roads.] 

[SAWYER S, or AFFERADORES, Island, on the 
w. coast of Mexico ; is of a small size, and has 
on its s. e. side a small creek of its name, which 
boats can only enter at high water. It is 12 
miles from the bar of Realejo.] 

[SAXAPAHAW, the upper part of the n. w. 
branch of Cape Fear River in N. Carolina. It 
is formed by Aramanche and Deep Rivers, and it 
is said may be made navigable for boats about 50 
miles.] 

[SAXEGOTHA, a village or settlement in 
S. Carolina, on the 5. bank of Congaree River; 
about 48 miles n. of Augusta in Georgia.] 

[SAXTON S River, in Vermont, empties into 
the Connecticut at Westminster.] 

SAYAN, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Chancay in Peru. 

SAYANCA, an ancient province of Peru, com 
prehended in the province of Chimu, and now in 
that of Santa. It is one of those which were 
conquered by Huaina Capac, thirteenth emperor 
of Peru. 

SAYANI, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento ofAsangaro in Peru; annexed to 
the curacy of the settlement of Sandia in the pro 
vince of Carabaya. 

SAYAUSI, a small settlement of the province 
and corregimiento of Cuenca in the kingdom of 
Quito ; in the vicinity of which is an excellent 
stone quarry not worked. 

[SAYBROOK, a post-town of Connecticut, 
Middlesex County, on the w. side of Connecticut 
River, across which is a ferry, on the road lead 
ing to New London. It is 22 miles e. of New 
Haven, and 15 w. of New London. This is the 
most ancient town in the state, having been set- 



S C A 

tied by Mr. Fen wick in 1634, who gave it its 
present name in honour of Lord Say and Seal 
and Lord Brook.] 

SAYU, a settlement of the province and go 
vernment of Cartagena, in the Nuevo Reyno de 
Granada ; situate to the s. s. w. of the town of 
San Benito Abad. 

SAYULA, a settlement of the head settlement 
of the district and akaldia mayor of Acaponeta. 
It has a convent of religious of St. Francisco, and 
is 2| leagues s. of its capital. 

SAZEVOUT, Bay of, on the n. e. coast of 
the island Martinique, between the small river 
Salee and the point of Housaye. 

SCABOUKS, a small island of the N. Sea, on 
the coast of the province and colony of Georgia, 
at the mouth of the river Pompon. 

SCAL, Bank of, on the w. coast of Nova 
Scotia, at the same rhumb as is Point Sable. 

SCALP, a small river of the province and co 
lony of Virginia in N.America. It runs n. w. 
and enters the Ohio in the county of! Hamp 
shire. 

SCAMBAY, or SCAMBAYO, a river of the pro 
vince and corregimiento of Cicasica in Peru ; 
which rises in a mountain to the e. of the settle 
ment of Caracoto, runs n. and enters the Chu- 
quiabo or La Paz. 

SCARBOROUGH, a city and capital of the 
island of Tobago, one of the Caribes. It was 
begun to be built in 1763, when this island was 
ceded by the French to England. It is likely to 
arrive at a great pitch of excellence. 

SCARBOROUGH, a settlement of Indians in the 

Erovince of Continent, one of those of New Eng- 
md; situate on the coast, between the rivers 
Saco and Kenebank. 

[SCARBOROUGH, a township of the district of 
Maine ; situate in Cumberland County, on the 
sea-coast, between Pepperelborough and Cape 
Elizabeth. It was incorporated in 1658 ; and 
contains 2235 inhabitants.] 

[SCARBOROUGH Cove, in the harbour of Che- 
bucto, on the s. coast of Nova Scotia, is on the 
middle of the w. side of Cornwallis Island. It is 
five or six furlongs broad, and nearly the same* 
in depth J 

[SCARSDALE, a township in W. Chester 
County, New York ; bounded w. by Bronx River, 
and s. by the town of E. Chester. It contains 
281 inhabitants, of whom 33 are electors. See 
NEW ROCHELLE.] 

[SCATARI, a small uninhabited island, on 
the e. coast of Cape Breton Island. It is about 
six miles long and two broad. It serves as a 



S C H 

shelter to a bay from the e. and s. which lies s. 
of Miray Bay, called Menadou or Panadou Bay. 
Lat. 46 n. Long. 59 36 X w. It was formerly 
called Little Cape Breton.] 

[SCAUYACE, a river of New York, which 
issues from the n. e. corner of Seneca Lake, and 
separating the township of Romulus from that of 
Junius on the n. empties into Cayuga Lake.] 

SCHACHTACOOKS, a settlement of Indians 
of the province and country of the Iroquees In 
dians in N. America; where the French have a 
fort and establishment on the shore of the Lake 
of Iroquees. 

[SCHACTECOKE, or SCAGHTIKOKE, a town 
ship of New York, in Rensselaer County, lies n. 
of the township of Rensselaer Wick, on Hudson s 
River. In 1796, 275 of the inhabitants were 
electors.] 

[SCHLOSSER Fort, or SLUSHER, in the state 
of New York, is situate on the e. side of Niagara 
River near the celebrated falls, on the n. bank of 
a bend of the river, and opposite to the n. w. end 
of Navy Island.] 

[SCHODACK, or SHUDACK, a township in 
Rensselaer County, New York, taken from Rens 
selaer Wick township, and incorporated in 1795. 
It is 14 miles e. of Albany ; and, in 1796, there 
were 377 of its inhabitants electors.] 

[SCHOEN-BRUNN, or the BEAUTIFUL 
SPRING, one of the easternmost settlements of 
the Moravians, on Muskingum River. See 
G.VADENHUTTEN. This settlement of Christian 
Indians was established in 1772, on a tract of 
land granted by the Delaware Tribe. In 1775, 
the chapel, which could contain 500 people, was 
found too small for the hearers, who came in 
great numbers. It was situated about 30 miles 
from Gekelmuckpechuenk, 70 from Lake Erie, 
and 50 w. from Fort M Intosh. It had a good 
spring, a small lake, good planting grounds, much 
game, and every other convenience for the sup 
port of an Indian colony. It appears that a large 
fortified Indian town formerly stood here ; some 
ramparts, and the ruins of three Indian forts, 
being still visible. The Delawares granted to the 
Christian Indians all the tract from the entrance 
of Gekelmuckpechuenk Creek into the Musk 
ingum to Tuscarawi. This thriving settlement 
was destroyed in 1782, when the Huron Indians 
carried the inhabitants to Sandusky ; and when 
these peaceable Indians were permitted to return 
to reap their harvest, they were cruelly butchered 
by the American settlers, while praising God and 
forgiving their enemies. Congress granted 4000 
acres of land here to the society of the United Bre- 
VOL. iv. 



S C H 



409 



thren, for the purpose of propagating the gospel, 
on September 3, 1788.] 

[SCHOHARIE, a county of New York, taken 
from those of Albany and Otsego, and incorpo 
rated in 1795. The land is variegated with hills ; 
is in general fertile and well watered by Schoha- 
rie, Cobus Kill, and several other streams. The 
county is bounded n. by Montgomery, s. by Ul 
ster, e. by Albany, and w. by Otsego. By a law 
passed March 17, 1797, this county was divided 
into the six following towns, viz. Schoharie, 
Middleberg, Blenheim, Bristol, Cobleskill, and 
Sharon.] 

[SCHOHARIE, the principal town in the above 
county, is on Schoharie Creek or River, and is 
one of the wealthiest inland farming towns in 
the state. The inhabitants are Dutch, and be 
fore its division, in 1797, were 2073 in number. 
It is between 25 and 30 miles w. of Albany.] 

[SCHOHARIE River runs with its windings a 
n. course of about 80 miles from the Kaats Kill 
Mountains, and empties into Mohawk River at 
Fort Hunter. The w. branch of this river is 
called Cobus Kill. On the e. side of Cobus is the 
settlement of its name. The towns and settle 
ments on Schoharie were, in 1796, as you pro 
ceed from S. to N. Batavia, Fountain s Town, 
Schoharie, Smith s Town, and Fox Town.] 

[SCHOODUCK. See FRENCHMAN S Bay, 
and SCOODICK.] 

SCHOOGUN, a fall of the river Kenebec, in 
the province of Hampshire, one of those of New 
England. 

SCHORAGE, a settlement of Indians of the 
province of Pennsylvania in the United States, 
on the shore of the e. arm of the river Susque- 
hanna. 

SCHUCADERO, a settlement of the province 
and government of Darien, and kingdom of Ti- 
erra Firme, on the e. shore of the mouth or en 
trance of the river Santa Maria, on an eminence 
opposite the Gulf of San Miguel. It is thus 
ventilated by two winds or breezes from the S. 
Sea, which make it very healthy, and has a stream 
of pure water, which serves as a place of refresh 
ment to the miners. 

[SCHUYLER, Fort, New, in the township 
of Rome, stands on the u9. side of a bend of Mo 
hawk River, about seven miles n. w. of Whites- 
town.] 

[SCHUYLER, Fort, Old, is on the s. side of 
Mohawk River, four miles e. n. c. of the compact 
part of Whitestown, and 20 above the German 
Flats. Here were, in 1796, 35 compact houses, 
situate partly in each of the townships of Whites- 

3 G 



410 



S C 1 



town and Frankfort. In 1790, there were but 
three small huts here.] 

[SCHUYLER, a township of New York, Herk- 
emer County, between Mohawk River and Ca 
nada Creek, 20 miles above the town of German 
Flats. In 1796, according to the state census, 
it contained 1219 inhabitants, of whom 222 were 
electors. It was incorporated in 1792. This 
town was divided by act of the legislature in 
1797.] 

[SCHUYLER S Lake, in New York State, is 10 
miles w. of Lake Otsego. It is nine miles long, 
and four or five broad.] 

[SCHUYLKILL, a river of Pennsylvania, 
which rises n. w. of the Kittatinny Mountains, 
through which it passes into a fine champaign 
country, and runs, from its source, upwards of 
120 miles, with windings in a 5. e. direction, and 
passing through the limits of the city of Phila 
delphia, falls into the Delaware, opposite Mud 
Island, six or seven miles below the city. It 
will be navigable from above Reading, 85 or 90 
miles to its mouth, when the canal begun at 
Norriton is completed. This will pass by the 
falls, and also form a communication with the 
Delaware above the city. There are four float 
ing bridges thrown across it, made of logs fas 
tened together, and lying upon the water, in the 
vicinity of Philadelphia. Little Schuylkill River 
falls into this river from the n. at Reading. On 
the head waters of Schuylkill are quantities of 
coal.] 

SCIMIGAEYES. See SEMIGUES. 

[SCIOTA River, which falls into the Ohio in 
the territory of the United States, n. 10. of the 
Ohio, is larger than either the Muskingum or 
Hockhocking, and opens a more extensive navi 
gation. It is passable for large barges for 200 
miles by its course, with a portage of only four 
miles to the Sandusky, a boatable water which 
fells into Lake Erie. Through the Sandusky 
and Sciota lies the most common pass from Ca 
nada to the Ohio and Mississippi ; one of the 
most extensive and useful communications that 
are to be found in any country. Prodigious ex 
tensions of territory are here connected ; and 
from the rapidity with which the w. parts of Ca 
nada, Lake Erie, and the Kentucky countries 
are settling, we may anticipate an immense in 
tercourse between them. The flour, corn, flax, 
and hemp, raised for exportation in that great 
country between the Lakes Huron and Ontario, 
will find an outlet through Lake Erie and these 
rivers, or down the Mississippi. The Ohio mer 
chant can give a higher price than those of Que- 



S C I 

bee for these commodities ; as they may be trans 
ported from the former to Florida and the W. 
India islands, with less expense, risk, and in 
surance, than from the latter ; while the expense 
from the place of growth to the Ohio will not be 
one-fourth of what it would be to Quebec, and 
much less than even to the Oneida Lake. The 
stream of the Sciota is gentle, no where broken 
by falls. At some places, in the spring of the 
year, it overflows its banks, providing for large 
natural rice plantations. Salt springs, coal 
mines, white and blue clay, and free-stone, 
abound in the country adjoining this river. Its 
mouth is in lat. 38 24 n. long/82 48 w. about 
300 miles by the course of the Ohio below Pitts- 
burg, and is navigable to its source in canoes.] 

[SCIPIO, a post-town of New York, Onon- 
dago County, on the e. side of Cayuga Lake, 14 
miles s. e. of Geneva, 27 5. w. by w. of Ononda- 
go, and 18,2 n. w. by n. of Philadelphia. This 
township was incorporated in 1794, and compre 
hends in its jurisdiction the township of Sempro- 
nius, together with that part of the lands re 
served to the Cayuga nation of Indians, on the 
e. side of the Cayuga Lake; s. of a w. line drawn 
from the s. w. corner of the township of Aurelius, 
in the e. bounds of the said reservation to the 
said Cayuga Lake. The county courts of Onon- 
dago County are held at Manlius and Scipio al 
ternately. The lands are very fertile. The courts 
are at present held in the pleasant village of 
Aurora, on the bank of Cayuga Lake.] 

SCIQUITA, a river of the province and coun 
try of Las Amazonas ; which runs s. through the 
territory and woods to the n. of the Maranon or 
Amazon, e. of the settlement of San Ignacio de 
Pevas ; laves the territory of the barbarous na 
tion of Indians, the Yahuas, who dwell in the 
woods close to its source, and enters the Maranon 
by the n. part, in lat. 3 1 s. 

[SCITU ATE, a township of Massachusetts, 
on the bay of that name, in Plymouth County, 
17 miles s". e. of Boston. It was incorporated in 
1637, and contains 2856 inhabitants. Scituate 
harbour is n. w. of Marshfield Point, and s. s. e. 
of the Haddock Rock, and about 11 miles n. of 
Plymouth, in the direction of the land. A mill- 
pond in this town being suddenly drawn off by a 
breach in the dam, in the winter season, some 
years ago, exhibited a matter of speculation to 
many of the inhabitants. The swine of the 
neighbourhood rooted up house swallows in 
great quantities, from the spot which the water 
had left, which they ate greedily. Swallows 
have been found in several other places ; at Egg 



SEA 



411 



Harbour, in New Jersey, in a marshy place, a 
large cedar being blown down, a vast number of 
swallows were found in the mud of the root.] 

[SCITUATE, a township of Rhode Island, Pro 
vidence County, bestween Foster and Johnston. 
It contains 2315 inhabitants. It is 27 miles n. w. 
of Newport, and 16 s. w. by w. of Providence. 
On the line which separates the town from Kent 
County, s. is the foundery for cannon and bells, 
called Hope Furnace.] 

[SCOODICK, orScHUDicK, a river of Wash 
ington County, district of Maine. It is properly 
an arm of the inner bay of Passamaquoddy. De 
Mons and Champlaine called it Etchemins. Its 
main source is near Penobscot River, to which 
the Indians have a communication ; the carrying- 
place across is but three miles. Scoodick lakes 
lie in a chain between Scoodick and Penobscot 
rivers.] 

SCOT, a settlement of the island of Barba- 
does, in the jurisdiction and district of the city of 
Bridgetown. 

SCOT, another settlement in this island, dis 
tinct from the former, and of the same jurisdic 
tion. 

[SCOTCH Plains, a village in Essex County, 
New Jersey, on a n. e. branch of Rariton River, 
between Westfield and Turkey ; 11 miles w. of 
Elizabeth Town, and as far n. of New Bruns 
wick. ] 

SCOTLAND. See NOVA SCOTIA. 

[SCOTLAND Neck, a village of N. Carolina, 
where is a post-office. Three hundred and ninety - 
six English miles, including the windings of the 
road, from Philadelphia.] 

[SCOTLAND River, in the island of Barbadoes, 
is scarcely deserving notice, otherwise than being 
almost the only rivulet in the island, except St. 
Joseph s River, another small brook. It rises 
in St. Andrew s parish, and falls into Long Bay 
on the e . side of the island, 2{ miles n. w. of St. 
Joseph s River.] 

[SCOTT, a new county of Kentucky.] 

[SCOTS Bay, on the s. w. coast of the island 
of Dominica, towards the s. extremity of the 
island. It lies in St. Martin s parish, having 
Scots Head on the s. and Vaughan s Point on 
the w.] 

[SCOTS Cove, on the s. zv. part of the island of 
Jamaica.] 

[SCOWHEGAN Falls, in Kennebeck River, 
in the district of Maine, are near the town of 
Canaan. Boats cannot pass this fall.] 

SCRIBAN, a large and handsome port of the 
e. coast of the isthmus of Panama and kingdom 



of Tierra Firme. Its entrance is so full of rocks 
as to be impassable for vessels save with a well 
practised pilot. [It is three leagues w. of San- 
ballet Point, and 17 e. of Porto Bello.] 

[SCRIVEN, a new county in the lower dis 
trict of Georgia.] 

[SCROON Lake, in the State of New York, 
lies w. of Lake George, and is a dilatation of the 
e. branch of Hudson s River. In some maps it 
is called Scaron. A small but rapid stream en 
ters into it, which, in Montgomery County, runs 
under a hill, the base of which is 60 or 70 yards 
diameter, forming a most curious and beautiful 
arch in the rock, as white as snow. The fury of 
the water, and the roughness of the bottom, 
added to the terrific noise within, has hitherto 
prevented any person from passing through the 
chasm.] 

SCRIJB, an island of the N. Sea : one of the 
small Virgins ; o&amp;gt;. of the Virgen Gorda, and e. 
of the w. extremity of Tortola. on which it de 
pends. In long. 62 57 . lat. 18 25 . 

SCURBY, a small island of the N. Sea, near 
the e. coast of Newfoundland, at the entrance of 
Trinity Bay. 

[SEA. See MAR.] 

[SEABROOK, a township of New Hampshire, 
in Rockingham County, on the road from Ports 
mouth to Newbury Port : about 16 miles s. of 
the former, and six n. of the latter. It was for 
merly part of Hampton : was incorporated in 
1768, and contains 715 inhabitants.] 

[SEAKONNET Point and Rocks, the s. ex 
tremity of the e. shore which forms the entrance 
of Narraganset Bay, in the state of Rhode Island; 
about six miles e. s. e. of Newport.] 

[SEAL Island, Machias, on the coast of the 
district of Main. From thence to Grand Manan 
Island the course is e. n. e. two leagues ; and to 
Matinicus Island w. s. w. 98 mile&amp;. Lat. 44 37 
n. long. 66 48 a;.] 

[SEAL River, in New N. Wales, runs e. to 
Hudson s Bay, into which it empties e. of Moose 
River.] 

[SEA OTTER Sound, on the n. w. coast of 
N. America, lies .1. e. of the Hazy Islands. Lat. 
55 18 H. long. 133 47 30" a;.] 

SEARA, a province and captainship of the 
kingdom of Brazil ; one of the 14 which is said 
to compose it : bounded zs. by the province of 
Marananj n. by the Brazilian Sea, e. by the pro 
vince and captainship of the Rio Grande, and s. 
by the inaccessible mountains of the Infidel In 
dians. It is watered by a river of its name, and 
comprehends two small districts or provinces, 
3c 2 



41-2 



8 E B 



called Dele and Pataguey, which are independent 
of the Portuguese government, and belong to the 
Infidel Indians. The climate is hot, but healthy, 
abounding in cotton, tobacco, Brazil-wood, and 
much sugar, which is made in its engines. 

[This captainship contains about 10,000 souls. 
It carries on very little commerce. The harbour, 
which bears the same name, can only be entered 
by small locks; it is defended by a small for 
tress, containing a garrison of about 100 or 150 
men.] 

SEARA. The capital of the same name, is 
small, and situate on a hill to the right of the 
port, and near the river. It has united to it a 
fort, which defends it, and another fort united to 
the port, with the name of San Lucas ; and is at 
the mouth of a small stream, navigable only for 
canoes. The port is large, convenient and se 
cure, but of little depth, and consequently fit 
only for small vessels. [In lat. 3 31 s. and long. 
38 28 38" a?.] 

SEARA. The aforesaid river rises in the moun 
tains in the interior of the province, runs n. e, 
and enters the sea in lat. 3 30 s. 

[SEARSBURGH, a township of Vermont, 
Bennington County, 12 miles e. of Bennington.] 
[SEAVEY s Island. See PASCATAQUA 
RIVER.] 

SEBACO, a small island of the S. Sea, near 
the coast of the province and government of Ve- 
ragua in the kingdom of Tierra Firme, in the 
Bay of Soledad, and to the s. of the island of La 
Gobernadora. 

[SEBACOOK, or SEBAGO, a pond or lake of 
the district of Maine, 18 miles n. w. of Portland, 
is equal in extent to two large townships, and is 
connected with Long Pond on the n. w. by Sun- 
go, or Songo River. The whole extent of these 
waters is nearly 30 miles n. w. ands. e.~\ 

SEBALD Isles, in the S. Sea, and Straits of 
Magellan, discovered by Sebald Waert in 1590, 
from whom they are named. They are three, 
disposed in the form of a triangle, the larger be 
ing to the s. They shelter the cape of Becerra 
and the river Santa Cruz. Some geographers 
have confounded them with the Malvine or Falk 
land Isles; but they were reconnoitred in 1711 
by Mr. Brignon, as lying distant from these, 
which are to the e. and as being divided from 
these by a channel of eight or 10 leagues wide. 
Its situation is in lat. 50 45 s. 

[We cannot, after great search, find any trace 
of these islands, and we believe, from the vague 
ness of their description, that they do not in 
reality exist.] 



S E B 

SEBARIMA, a small river of the province 
and government of Cumana in Nueva Andalucia. 
It runs towards the n. between the rivers Aguirre 
and Maritore, and enters the Orinsco at its 
great mouth, called De Navios. 

[SEBASCODEAGAN Island. See HARPS- 

WELL.] 

[SEBASTACOOK, a river of the district of 
Maine, that rises in lakes nearly n. from its 
mouth ; and in its windings receives brooks and 
small streams for the space of 150 miles, includ 
ing its various windings, and joins the Kenne- 
beck at Taconnet Fall, where Fort Halifax was 
erected in 1754. The fall is 18 miles from Fort 
Western, which was built in 1752. . Its nu 
merous streams abound with small fish, as ale- 
wives, &amp;c.] 

SEBASTIAN, S. a city and capital of the pro 
vince and captainship of Rio Janeyro in Brazil. 
See JANEYRO. 

SEBASTIAN, another city, with the additional 
title De los Reyes, in the province and govern 
ment of Venezuela and Nuevo Reyno de Gra 
nada, on the n. shore of the river truarico. It 
is inhabited, besides the Spaniards, by many 
people of other casts, some of whom live within 
the town, and others in the neighbouring fields, 
where they have their crops of corn, and other 
seeds, also some sugar plantations, and herds of 
neat cattle, mules, and horses. The parochial terri 
tory, which formerly comprehended a part which 
was dismembered by the erection of two other 
parishes, the one in the place of San Juan de los 
Morros, and the other in the town of San Luis, 
is 13 leagues long from e. to w. and 1 1 from n. to 
s. On the e. with a slight inclination to the n. it 
is bounded by the settlement of Tacata of the val 
leys of Tuy, 20 leagues distant, and many ser- 
ranias intervening ; on the w. by the aforesaid 
new parish of San Juan de los Morros, which is 
six leagues distant ; n. with an inclination to the 
w. by the settlement of La Victoria, of the vi 
carage of the valleys of Aragua, 18 leagues dis 
tant ; s. w. by the settlement of Parapara, 16 
leagues distant ; and at this rhumb, with an in 
clination to the e. by the settlement of San Fran 
cisco de Cara, eight leagues distant. 

This city has, besides the parish church, an 
other small one, with the name of Nuestra Senora 
de la Caridad, and an hospital with the same 
title. Its population consists of 2907 souls, of 
whom 722 are whites, and the rest Mulattoes, 
Indians, and Negroes. 

SEBASTIAN, a town of the province of Sonora 
in Nueva Espana, situate on the skirt of the 



S B 



S E B 



sierra. It is of an hot temperature, and abound 
ing in maize and French beans ; but the prin 
cipal commerce of its natives is in its fisheries, 
carried on in the large river Mazatlan. The 
population is numerous, consisting as well of 
Spaniards as of Mulattoes, Mustees, and Indians. 
[In long. 106 w. lat. 24 n.~] 

SEBASTIAN, a settlement of the alcaldia mayor 
of San Luis de Potosi in the province and 
bishopric of Mechoancan. It contains 166 fami 
lies of Indians, and a convent of religious of San 
Agustin, s. e. and very near its capital, which it 
provides with victuals. 

SEBASTIAN, another, of the head settlement 
of the district and alcaldia mayor of Cholula in 
Nueva Espana. It contains 24 families of Indi 
ans, and is one quarter of a league from its 
capital. 

SEBASTIAN, another, of the head settlement 
of Palmar and alcaldia mayor of Tepeaca in the 
same kingdom. It contains four families of Mus- 
tecs, and 17 of Indians, and is one league from 
its head settlement. 

SEBASTIAN, another, of the head settle 
ment of Nopalauca in the same alcaldia and 
kingdom as the former. It contains 67 families 
of Indians, and is one league distant from the 
same head settlement. 

SEBASTIAN, another, of the head settlement 
and alcaldia mayor of Ostotipac, where the alcal 
dia mayor regularly resides, and, although it be 
not the capital, it has a large population of Spa 
niards, Mustees, Mulattoes, and Indians; these, 
however, for the most part, residing without the 
town, in the wards of its district : w. of Osto 
tipac. 

SEBASTIAN, another, of the head settlement 
of the alcaldia mayor of Analco. It contains 20 
families of Indians, who occupy themselves in 
carrying for sale to the city of Guadalaxara wheat, 
maize, seeds, and fruits : at a small distance e 
of its head settlement. 

SEBASTIAN, another, of the head settlement 
of Taximaroa and alcaldia mayor of Maravatio 
in the province and bishopric of Mechoacan. It 
contains 18 families of Indians, and is 12 leagues 
s. of its head settlement. In its district much 



su 



ar-cane is gathered. 



SEBASTIAN, another, which is the head settle 
ment of the district of the alcaldia mayor of Sen- 
tipac. It contains 25 families of Indians, who 
trade by the oyster fisheries of their coasts. Four 
leagues &amp;. of its capital. 

SEBASTIAN, another, of the head settlement 
of Malacatepec and alcaldia mayor of Nexapa. It 



contains 38 families of Indians, and is two 
leagues from its head settlement. 

SEBASTIAN, another, of the head settlement 
and alcaldia mayor of Marinalco in Nueva 
Espana ; from whence it is more than half a 
league s distance, at the foot of a lofty moun 
tain. 

SEBASTIAN, another, a small settlement or 
ward of the head settlement of S. Juan del Rio 
and corregimiento of Queretaro in the same king 
dom as the former ; annexed to the curacy of 
Tequisquiapan. It contains 27 families of In 
dians. 

SEBASTIAN, another, also a ward, of the head 
settlement of Ocuila and alcaldia mayor of Mari 
nalco, in the same kingdom. 

SEBASTIAN, another, of the head settlement 
and alcaldia mayor of Sapotlan and Tuispa, in 
the same kingdom ; three leagues from its capital. 

SEBASTIAN, another, of the province and go 
vernment of Cartagena in the Nuevo Reyno de 
Granada. It is of the district and jurisdiction of 
the town of Sinu, and stands on the shore of the 
river of this name, to the e. of the town of 
Loriea. 

SEBASTIAN, another, of the province and go 
vernment of Santa Marta, in the same kingdom 
as the former ; on the shore of the river of its 
name, and near its source. 

SEBASTIAN, another, of the province and go 
vernment of Popayan, in the same kingdom, of 
the district and jurisdiction of the city of Pasto. 

SEBASTIAN, another, of the province and 
country of Las Amazonas, in the part possessed 
by the Portuguese. It is a reduction of Indians of 
the missions held by the Carmelite fathers, on the 
shore of the lake Mariava, between the rivers 
Jamunda and Pariquices. 

SEBASTIAN, another, of the province and go 
vernment of Nicaragua in the kingdom of Gua 
temala ; in a small island of the same name as 
the lake. 

SEBASTIAN, another, in the province and king 
dom of Guatemala. 

SEBASTIAN, another, of the province and cap 
tainship of Pernambuco in Brazil; between the 
sources of the rivers Antonio Grande and Pe- 
queno. 

SEBASTIAN, a river of the town and govern 
ment of Florida, on the e. coast of N. America. 
It is small, passes before the city of San Agustin, 
runs e. and enters the sea in the Atlantic Ocean, 
opposite the island of San Anastasio. 

SEBASTIAN, another river, of the province and 
government of Santa Marta in the Nuevo Reyno 



414 



SEC 



de Granada. It rises in the valley of Upar, 
runs n. and enters the Swamp of Santa Marta. 

SEBASTIAN, a large island of the N. Sea, very 
close to the coast of the province and captainship 
of San Vincente and kingdom of Brazil ; e. of 
the bay of its name. It is large, of a triangular 
figure, and divided from the continent merely by 
a narrow channel. 

SEBASTIAN, a channel of the Straits of Magel 
lan, which communicates with the N. Sea, ac 
cording to the description of Seixas ; but fit only 
for small vessels. 

SEBAYES, a small port on the n. n. e. coast 
of the island of Cuba, in the head between the 
ports of Tanabo and Bayana. 

[SEBOU, or SIBOU, small islands on the coast 
of Cape Breton Island, off the s. point of Port 
Dauphin.] 

SEBUNDOI. See SIBUNDOI. 

SECA, a small island of the coast of Brazil, in 
the province and captainship of Portoseguro, close 
to the bank of Los Escollos. 

SECA, a point of land on the coast of the pro 
vince and government of Venezuela and Nuevo 
Reyno de Granada, between Cape San Roman 
and the GulfTriste. 

SECAS. Some isles or rocks of the S. Sea, 
near the coast of the province and government 
of Veraguaand kingdom of Tierra Firme ; [about 
38 miles n. w. of Quibo Islands.] 

SECHE, a small river of the island of St. Do 
mingo. It rises in the sierras of the s. coast, runs 
to this rhumb, and outers the sea between the Bay 
of Ocoa and that of Neiva. 

SECHIJRA, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Piura in Peru, and the last of this 
jurisdiction by the s. It was formerly situate on 
the coast of the S. Sea, not far from a point of 
land called De la Abuja; but, it having been in 
undated by the sea, was removed to where it 
now stands, one league from the coast, on the 
s. shore of the river Piura, which has water only 
when it rains in the sierra, it being then very 
full, and it being necessary to pass it in rafts : 
this river, when it does not rain, is entirely dry, 
so that the inhabitants are obliged to make wells 
for their drinking water. It has 200 houses, built 
of cane, and a beautiful churcli of brick. The 
inhabitants, who should amount to 400 families, 
are all Indians, occupied as fishermen and mu 
leteers, and speaking an idiom distinct from that 
of the other Indians of Peru. They are of high 
stature, of good disposition, and excel in every 
thing they undertake ; neither are they addicted 
to the superstition and vices of the other Indians. 



In short, they differ from them in every thing 
but colour, and are altogether great observers of 
moderation and order. In lat. 5 33 33" s. long, 
80 42 . 

SECHURA, a celebrated unpeopled tract of the 
same kingdom as the former settlement, begin 
ning from the same, and lying in the direct road 
to Lima. It is an immense llanura of sand ex 
tending for more than 40 leagues as far as the 
settlement of Morrope in the province of Sana, 
the journey to which place is made in a litter. 
The extent and uniformity of this llanura, and 
the perpetual motion of the sand by the winds, 
which obliterate all traces of the road, have fre 
quently caused the most experienced muleteers 
to lose their way ; and then the method by which 
they regain it is truly curious, namely., by put 
ting their face to the wind in going, and their 
back when returning : nor indeed does this sys 
tem ever fail, since the wind here always blows 
from the s. They have also a way of occasionally 
collecting a handful of sand, to which they smell, 
for the purpose of knowing- whether it may con 
tain any thing of the dung of animals that may 
have passed that way ; by which means they like 
wise regain their rout. Those, however, who 
are not well skilled in the travelling this vast 
desert, run infinite risk of perishing ; since,, 
should they give themselves up to sleep, the dif 
ficulty of again finding their right way is so great, 
that little short of a miracle can save them ; and 
many are those who have thus perished by hun 
ger and thirst. 

Here the whole prospect consists of mountains 
of sand, heaped promiscuously by the winds, 
without a single tree, herb, or green thing ; and 
thus the traveller must be well provided with 
provisions for himself, as with fodder for his 
horses. At 32 leagues distance from the settle 
ment of Sechura is the river of Pozuelos, the 
first water to be discovered in this perilous rout. 
The sagacity of the animals at approaching this 
acceptable stream is astonishing : they scent it at 
four leagues distance, and, although harassed 
and fatigued, immediately spring forwards with 
an impetuosity which cannot be restrained, and, 
having arrived at it by the shortest way, pro 
ceed with spirits and alacrity on the rest of the 
journey. 

[SECKLONG, a town of Nueva Espafia, on 
the Mosquito shore, on the n. w. side of Golden 
River; about 100 miles from Cape Gracias a 
Dios, at the mouth of the river.] 

SECO, SAN SALVADOR EL, a principal and 
head settlement of the district of the alcaldia 



S E D 



S E G 



415 



mayor of Tepeaca in Nueva Espana. It is of a 
cold temperature, scarce of current waters, so 
that it is supplied with wells, this water being 
far from indifferent. It contains 10 families of 
Spaniards, three of Mulattoes, and 271 of Otomies 
Indians. Its territory is composed of some fer 
tile and extensive llanuras^ in which graze an 
nually 70,000 head of large cattle ; and these, 
with vast breeds of fat swine, and certain sorts 
of grain, of 14 country estates of its district, 
form its commerce. Eight leagues n. e. of its 
capital. 

SECO, a river of the province and government 
of Venezuela in the Nuevo Reyno de Granada. 
It rises in the mountains close to the valley of 
Tucuyo, runs forming the figure of an S, and 
enters the sea in the little Gulf of Coro. 

SECO, another, of the province and govern 
ment of Tucuman in Peru ; which runs e. and 
enters the Dulce or Del Estero. 

SECO, another, of the island of St. Domingo; 
which rises near the s. coast, runs to this rhumb, 
and enters the sea between the river Gugua and 
the Morro (mount) Chico. 

SECO, another, called Cafio Seco, which is an 
arm of the river San Francisco in the province 
and government of Venezuela in the Nuevo Reyno 
de Granada. It forms a bow, returning to enter 
its parent stream, and leaves formed an island. 

SECO. A point of land called De Palo Seco, 
on the coast of the S. Sea and Bay of Panama, 
in the kingdom of Tierra Firme ; and one of the 
points which form that bay. 

SECOURS, a river of the island of Anticosti, 
in the Gulf of St. Lawrence, and province of Nova 
Scotia in N. America. 

[SED, Cape, a promontory on the n. side of 
the island of Cuba, and 18 leagues from the Ha- 
vannah.] 

SEDA, a settlement of the head settlement of 
the district and alcaldia mayor of Guejolotitlan in 
the province and bishopric of Oaxaca. It has 
this name from an abundance of silk-worms for 
merly found in it, and from which the natives 
derived great emolument ; but these being per 
suaded that through the use of this traffic it was 
that they suffered persecution, abandoned it, and 
gave themselves up to the culture of cochineal. 

SEDGER, a river which enters the sea on the 
n. coast of the Straits of Magellan; where, ac 
cording to the journals of the Admiral Pedro Sar- 
miento, it is necessary to be cautious in the 
soundings of the channel as far as the N. Sea, 
in as much as the depth does not exceed 50 fa 



thom. It runs e. and disembogues itself into the 
sea at Port Redondo. 

[SEDGWICK, a township of the district of 
Maine, Hancock County, onNaskeag Point, which 
bounds Penobscot on the n. e. It extends up to 
the town of Penobscot.] 

[SEEKHONK River is the name of that part 
of Pawtucket River below Pawtucket Bridge and 
Falls ; from which, to its mouth at Fox Point, 
in the town of Providence, is a little more than 
four miles. Over it are two bridges, connecting 
Providence in Rhode Island with the State of 
Massachusetts, viz. India Bridge, and three- 
fourths of a mile above that central bridge. See 
PAWTUCKET.J 

[SEEWEE Bay, or BULL S HARBOUR, on 
the coast of S. Carolina, lies nearly at an equal 
distance s. w. of Cape Roman, and n. e. of 
Charlston Entrance, having several isles which 
form the bay.] 

SEGOVIA, NUEVA. See BARIQUISIMETO. 

SEGOVIA, another, a small city of the province 
and government of Nicaragua in the kingdom of 
Guatemala, founded by Pedrarias Davila, on 
the shore of the river Yare or Segovia, on the 
confines of the province of Honduras. It is a 
small town, and of scanty population. It has in 
its district some gold-mines, which might be 
worked to advantage ; two convents of religious 
orders, the one of San Francisco, and the other 
r of La Merced. Ninety miles w. from the capital 
Leon, as many from the city of Granada, and 400 
from Mexico, in long. 86 30 w. lat. 13 45 n. 

[SEGUATANEIO. See CHEQUETAN.] 

[SEGUINE Island, or SEGUM, on the coast 
of the district of Maine, is one of the s. islands 
in Caso Bay ; between Cape Small Point and 
George Town. There is a light-house on this 
island which contains a repeating light, so con 
structed as to disappear once every minute and a 
half, which distinguishes it from Portland light.] 

SEGUNDO, a river of the province and go 
vernment of Tucuman in Peru, which rises in 
the mountains to the w. of the city of Cordoba, 
runs e. and enters a lake, by which stands a fort, 
called El Tio, built by the Spaniards to restrain 
the incursions of the Infidel Indians, 

SEGURA, DE LA FRONTERA, a city of the 
province and alcaldia mayor of Tlaxcala in Nueva 
Espana : founded by Captain Gonzalo de San- 
doval, by order of Hernan Cortes, in 1520, to 
ensure the road to the Spaniards from that re 
public to Mexico. Upon its frontier lived the 
Indians of Tepeaca, from whence it was also 



416 



SEN 



named. It is of a very mild climate, and fertile 
territory, and produces many kinds of grain and 
fruit, particularly grapes, although the making 
of wine is prohibited. It has a convent of reli 
gious of San Francisco, and upwards of 1000 in 
habitants, including Spaniards, Mustees., Mulat- 
toes, and Indians. Seventy miles from Xalapa. 

SEIVA, a small river of the province and go 
vernment of Maracaibo in the Nuevo Reyno de 
Granada ; one of those which enter that lake by 
the . side. [About 25 miles s, w. of Maracaybo.] 

SEIVA, a point of land on the interior coast 
of the lake of the same province and kingdom. 

SEIVA, a bay on the coast of the province and 
government of Yucatan. 

SEJADA. SEE SANTA MONICA. 

SEL, a small river of New France or Acadia, 
thus called from its abounding in salt. It runs s. 
near the river of Femmes Blanches. 

SELLADO CERRO, a very lofty mountain 
of the territory of Cuayba in the kingdom of 
Brazil, on the shore of the river Camapoa. 

SELVA, SAN FRANCISCO DE LA, a town of 
the kingdom of Chile, capital of the province 
and corregimiento of Copiapo. Although an an- 
tient town, it was without order or proper ar 
rangement till 1742, when it was regularly built 
by the president of that kingdom, Don Joseph 
de Manso, Count of Superunda, its streets being 
drawn in straight lines. In lat. 27 19 30" s. 

SELVA FLORIDA. See COTOCOLLA. 

SEMIGAES, or SIMIGAYES, a barbarous na 
tion of Indians ; in antient times very numerous. 
They inhabited the woods near to the river Pas- 
taza ; and now are much diminished, living re 
tired in the forests between the rivers Tigre and 
Cururay. 

[SEMINOLES, a division of the Creek nation 
of Indians. They inhabit the flat level coun 
try, on the rivers Apalachicola and Flint. See 
CALOS.] 

[SEMPRONIUS, or SEMPERVILLE, a town 
ship of New York, nearly in the centre of the 
county of Onondago, is 16 miles e. from the ferry 
on Cayuga Lake. It is within the jurisdiction of 
the township of Scipio.] 

SENAMBOCA, a settlement of the province 
and captainship of Para in Brazil, on the coast, 
near the city of Caete. 

SENAQuIA, a river of the province and go 
vernment of Darien and kingdom of Tierra 
Firme. It rises in the mountains of the n. and 
enters the sea by the Playon Grande, opposite 
the Mulatto Isles. 



S E IN 

SENCE, a small river of the island of Gna- 
daloupe ; which rises in the mountains, runs 
s. s. w. and enters the sea between those of Ga- 
lion and Salle. 

SENECA, a settlement of the province of Ta- 
raumara and kingdom of Nueva Vizcaya in N. 
America. 

[SENECA, a town of New York, Onondago 
County, lately laid off" into streets and squares, 
on the n. side of Seneca Falls. The enterprising 
proprietors have erected flour and saw mills, of 
the best kind, on this never failing stream ; and 
from its central situation, both by land and 
water, between the e. and w. countries, being at 
the carrying place, it promises a rapid increase. 
The proprietors have expended large sums of 
money, not only in erecting mills, but in build 
ing a convenient bridge across Seneca River, and 
have lately co-operated with the enterprising 
General Williamson in making a good waggon- 
road to Geneva.] 

[SENECA Creek, in Maryland, has two 
branches; one of which is called Little Seneca. 
It empties into Patowmac River, about 19 miles 
n. w. of the mouth of Rock Creek, which sepa 
rates George Town from Washington City.] 

[SENECA Lake. See CANADA SAGO LAKE.] 

[SENECA River, in the State of New York, 
rises in the Seneca country ; runs e. and in its 
passage receives the waters of Seneca and Cay 
uga Lakes, (which lie n. and s. 10 or 12 miles 
apart ; each is between 20 and 30 miles in length, 
and a mile in breadth) and empties into the 
Onondago River, 14 miles below the Falls, at 
a place called the Three Rivers. The river is 
beatable from the lakes downwards. Within half 
a mile of the river is the famous Salt Lake. See 
ONONDAGO COUNTY, and MILITARY TOWN 
SHIPS.] 

[SENECAS, a tribe of Indians, one of the 
Six Nations. They inhabit on Genessee River, 
at the Genessee Castle. The tribe consists of 
about 1780 souls. They have two towns of 60 
or 70 souls each, on French Creek in Pennsylva 
nia, and another town on Buffaloe Creek, and two 
small towns on Alleghany River.] 

SENEGANTI, a river of the province and 
government of Darien and kingdom of Tierra 
Firme. It has its origin in the mountains to the 
e. runs w. and enters the grand river Charqu- 
nagui. 

SENEGAR. [See SENECA.] 

SENEGE, a settlement of Indians in the pro 
vince of Pennsylvania. 



SEP 

SENEGUALAP, a very lofty mountain, al 
ways covered with snow, in the kingdom of 
Quito. 

SENEGUIA, SANTA CATALINA DE, a settle 
ment of the head settlement of the district of 
S. Juan Otzolotepec and alcaldia mayor of Mia- 
huatlan in Nueva Esnana ; situate at the foot of 
a lofty mountain, which they call La Sirena, and 
which is so lofty as to serve to mariners as a 
landmark. Thirty leagues from its capital. 

SENERE, a river of the province and country 
of Las Amazonas, in the territory of Matogroso. 
It rises e. of the town of Oro, runs nearly due 
s. and enters the Itenes or Guapore, to the w. of 
the town of S. Francisco Xavier. 

SENIOR, a port of the s. coast of Nova 
Scotia, between Ports Rosignol and Medway. 

SENIS, S. FRANCISCO DE LOS, a settlement 
of the missions which are held by the religious 
of S. Francisco in the province and government 
of Los Texas in N. America; founded in 1721, 
when the garrison, which used to be in these 
parts, was abolished : 1 12 leagues n. e. of the set 
tlement of S. Antonio de Bejar. 

SENORA NUESTRA, a very lofty mountain 
of the coast of the S. Sea, in Peru, and in the 
district of the province and corregimiento of Ata- 



S E R 



417 



cama. 



[SENTER Harbour, in the n. w. part of Lake 
Winnipiseogee.] 

SENTIPAC, a province and alcaldia mayor 
of the kingdom of Nueva Galicia and bishopric 
of Guadalaxara in N. America. It was the first 
jurisdiction that was begun to be peopled by its 
conqueror Nuno de Guzman. Its district is of 
short extent, and scarce in vegetable productions, 
since it produces only maize and some cattle. 
Its population consists of the following settle 
ments : 

SENTIPAC, the capital, which is of the same 
name, is of an hot temperature, and contains a 
convent of the religious of S. Francisco. Its po 
pulation is composed of 58 families of Spaniards, 
Mustees, and Mulattoes, and 105 Indians, who 
employ themselves in labour and in breeding 
cattle of the large kind : w. of Guadalaxara, and 
100 leagues nearly at the same rhumb from 
Mexico. 

Mezca, S. Sebastian, 

Santiago, Acatlan, 

Zapotitlan, Axacala. 

Ixcuntla, 

[SEPARATION Bay, in the Straits of Ma 
gellan, is three leagues within Cape Pillar, at 

VOL. IV. 



the w. end of the straits, and lies w. of Tuesday 
Bay.] 

SEPT ISLES, SEVEN ISLES, near the coast 
of the country and land of Labrador in N. Ame 
rica, and the river St. Lawrence. They are few 
and uncultivated. 

SEPTENTRIONALE BRANCHE, or North 
ern Branch, a river of the province and colony of 
Virginia in Albemarle County, which runs 5. and 
enters the river James. [See NORTH RIVER, 
or rather Cow AND CALF PASTURE.] 

SEQUE, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Guanta in Peru, annexed to the 
curacy of the settlement of Lauricocha. 

SEQUISCA, a settlement of the province 
and government of Maracaibo in the Nuevo 
Reyno de Granada ; on the shore of the river 
Mazatan, to the n. of the city of Truxillo. 

S. SERAFIN, a settlement of the province 
and government of Sonora in N. America, in the 
country of the Papagos Indians. 

SERECON, a river of the province and colony 
of Surinam, in the part of Guayana or Nueva 
Andalucia possessed by the Dutch. It runs s. and 
enters the Caroni in the beginning of its course. 

SEREDO. See MONTE-VIDEO. 

SEREGIPE, or SEREGIPE DEL REY, as some 
have it, a province and captainship of the king 
dom of Brazil : one of the fourteen which are 
said to compose it : between the provinces of 
Pernumbaco to the n. the river Alagoa or De 
San Francisco running between, and the province 
of Todos Santos to the s. the river Real inter 
vening : bounded e. by the sea, and w. by the 
unknown territory of the infidel Obacatiares 
and Tapuyes Indians. 

It is very fertile and well cultivated, abound 
ing particularly in cattle, grain, and tobacco ; by 
all of which, as well as by sugar, it carries on a 
flourishing trade. It is watered and fertilized 
by the river of its name. [According to later 
accounts we find that it contains about 20,000 
souls, 25 manufactories, of sugar, tobacco, lea 
ther, &amp;c. ; but its ports do not admit large vessels, 
which proves a great drawback on its commerce.] 
The capital is also so called, [though now more 
properly known by the title of St. Christopher,] 
and the other principal settlements are the fol 
lowing : 

S. Amaro de los Brotas, 
S. Antonio de Tabayana, 
S. Antonio del Rio de S. Francisco, 
Nuestra Seilora de la Piedad, 
Villa Real de Piagui. 
SH 



S E R 



S E R 



SEREGIPE, the capital, has the dedicatory title 
of S. Christoval, and its right title was Ciriji, 
which has been corrupted into Seregipe. It is 
situate on the shore of the river Vazabaris, five 
miles from the coast, on an eminence, and has a 
good fort for its defence, although the same be 
badly built. The parish church, with the title 
of Nuestra Senora de la Victoria, is very hand- 
as is also the house of Misericordia, and 



some, 



the convents of the religious Carmelites of S. 
Francisco, and a chapel of Nuestra Senora del 
Rosario. In the suburb is an hermitage of S. 
Gonzalo, much frequented by the people of the 
neighbouring settlements. 

In this city resides the governor of the Portu 
guese, called the capitan mayor, with a fixed gar 
rison. Towards the part called Cotinguiba is 
another parish with four chapels, and towards 
the river Vasa-Barriz are five others. The po 
pulation, which was formerly numerous, is now 
reduced to 500 housekeepers. [In lat. 11 40 s. 
long. 37 30 30" a?.] 

SEREGIPE, a river in the same province and 
kingdom, which rises in the mountains which 
lie between the rivers Real and Grande of S. 
Francisco, runs s. s. e. and enters the sea in the 
bay. 

SERENA. See COQUIMBO. 
[SERGIPE DEL REY. See SEREGIPE.] 
SERINHAIM, a small river of the province 
and captainship of Todos Santos in Brazil, which 
rises in the sierra Chapada, runs e. and enters 
the sea between the point of its name and the 
island of Quepa. 

SERINZA, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Tunja in the Nuevo Reyno de 
Granada; of a very cold temperature, abounding 
in wheat, maize, papas, barley, &amp;c. It has more 
than 100 Indians, and a few whites. Ten leagues 
n. of Tunja. 

SERINZA, another settlement, with the dedi 
catory title of Nuestra Senora de Belen del Vaile, 
in the same province and kingdom as the former; 
annexed to the curacy of Santa Rosa. It is of a 
good temperature, abounding in vegetable pro 
ductions and cattle, and contains more than 300 
housekeepers, who live very comfortably. 

SERIS, CIENEGA DE LOS, a lake of the pro 
vince and government of Sonora in N. America, 
near the coast of the Gulf of California. 
SERPA. See ANDALUCIA. 
[SERRA DO FRIO, some diamond mines in 
the province of Minas Geraes in Brazil. Mr. 
Mawe obtained permission to explore them, a 



favour which had never yet been granted to any 
foreigner. From the moment that he entered 
w r ithin the limits of this El Dorado of Portugal, 
the condition of the people bore the most striking 
marks of wretchedness ; and the further he pro 
ceeded the worse it became. The occupant of 
every house and farm seemed as if on the point 
of abandoning it, and all the buildings were 
falling into decay. 

The principal of these diamond works, ac 
cording to Mr. Mawe, is at Mandango, on the 
river Jisjitonhonha, in the district of Serra do 
Frio. Formerly they were farmed out, but, 
for many years back, the establishment has been 
entirely in the hands of government. The pro 
duce was mostly sent to Holland, where the 
stones were cut and set ; but of late they have 
found their way to the London market. Mr. 
Mawe tells us, that the establishment is still in 
debt to foreigners for considerable sums advanced 
to them on security of the produce of the mines. 
We have also heard, and it is a curious fact, that 
a single house in London raised a loan of one 
million sterling for the service of Portugal, and 
took in pledge the produce of the mines of Serra 
do Frio/J 

[SERRANA, or, as some will have it, SER- 
RANILLA, an isle between Jamaica and the coast 
of Nicaragua, which took its name from one Ser- 
rana, who parted with the fleet from Spain, in 
the time of Charles V. and was shipwrecked on 
the rocks of this island ; but having gained the 
shore by swimming, he found there neither herbs, 
trees, nor water, and went over all the island, 
which is about six miles in circuit, without find 
ing any thing to quench thirst or satisfy hunger. 
Pressed at last with extreme hunger, he caught 
some crabs on the shore, which were his food 
for some days ; and then seeing large turtles 
which came ashore, he caught some of them. 
Having lived for three years in this manner 
on crabs and turtles, and drank nothing but rain 
water which he gathered in turtle-shells, he dis 
covered another companion in misfortune, who 
had also been shipwrecked. This companion 
was some comfort to him, and they lived four 
years together ; at the end of which time a vessel 
coming near the island carried them both to 
Spain. The last of these died on the way thither; 
but Serrana was carried to Germany, and pre 
sented to Charles V. as a kind of prodigy ; for 
all his body was overgrown with hair like a bear, 
and his beard came down to his waist. The em 
peror bestowed on him 4800 ducats to be paid in 



SET 

Peru ; but he died on his way to Panama, as he 
was going to receive them. Lat. 14 27 n. long. 
80 W w.~\ 

SERRE, a river of the province and country 
of Las Amazonas in the country of Matogroso. 
It rises in the confines of the province of the 
Chiquitos and mountains of the Guarayos In 
dians, runs n. and enters the Itenes or Guapore, 
opposite the settlement of San Joseph of the 
Missionaries, the Portuguese clergy. 

SERVITA, a settlement of the province of 
Muzo and government of Pamplona in the Nuevo 
Revno de Granada ; the head settlement of the 
corregimiento ; of a cold but healthy and pleasing 
temperature. It has plenty of fine water, and 
its territory is extremely fertile, enjoying both 
hot and cold situations. It produces much wheat 
of excellent quality, much sugar-cane, maize, 
tartuffles, beans, vetches, onions, cabbages, and 
other vegetables, and an infinite number of neat 
cattle and goats. It contains 400 whites and 200 
Indians ; is 24 leagues from Pamplona, being 
bounded by the settlement of Tequia, just by 
which is the tenmnary of the jurisdiction of 
Tunja and Pamplona, and it is to the n. of the 
former and that of Santa Fe. 

[SESEME QUIAN, a river of the.N.W. Ter 
ritory, which empties through the w. bank of 
Illinois River, about 180 miles by the course of 
the Manois from the Mississippi. Its mouth is 
40 yards wide, and the land bordering on it is 
very good. It is beatable 60 miles by its curva 
ture course.] 

SESQUILE, a settlement of the corregimiento 
of Guatavita in the Nuevo Reyno de Granada, 
situate on the skirt of a small mountain which is 
in the middle of an extensive and beautiful plain. 
It is of a cold temperature, but healthy ; and 
abounding in wheat, maize, barley, papas, and 
other vegetable productions of a cold climate. 
Here the natives fabricate many jars, pitchers, 
and other earthenware articles highly esteemed, 
and which they carry for sale to Santa Fe and 
other parts. It contains 100 housekeepers, and 
as many other Indians, and is nine leagues from 
Santa Fe to the n. 

SETEGANTI, a river of the province and 
government of Darien and kingdom of Tierra 
Firme ; which rises in the mountains of the in 
terior, runs nearly w. passes by the skirt of the 
mountain of Espiritu Santo, and enters the River 
Cupe. 

SETIQUO, a settlement of Indians of the 
province and colony of N.Carolina; on the shore 
of the river Tanassee. 



S E W 



419 



SEVEN, a small island of the N. Sea, near 
the coast of the province of Jersey, one of the 
United States, between the islands Ludley and 
Five Miles. 

SEVEN, a bay on the n. coast of the river St. 
Lawrence, very convenient and secure from the 
winds, and fit for vessels. Twenty-five leagues 
w. of Anticosti; in lat. 50 20 X s. It was one of 
the royal establishments of the French for their 
trade with the Indians. 

[SEVEN BROTHERS, small islands on the n. 
coast of the island of St. Domingo. They lie 
opposite the mouth of Monte Christ River, or 
Grand Yaqui. They have occasioned several 
wrecks, and prove a shelter to privateers.] 

S. SEVERING, a river of the province and 
government of Guayana, or Nueva Andalucia. 
It runs s. and enters the Orinoco, according to 
the description of Mr. Bellin, engineer to the 
King of France. 

[SEVERN, a small river of Maryland, of 
short course, which runs s. e. to Chesapeak Bay. 
It passes by Annapolis City on the n. and 
empties into the bay about two miles below the 
city.] 

[SEVERN, a river of New South Wales, which 
parsues a n. e. course, and enters Hudson s Bay 
at Severn House, which is ICO miles e. of York 
Fort.] 

SEVI, a small river of the province of Georgia 
in N. America, which runs $. and enters the sea 
between those of Congaree and Cooper. 

SEVIER, a country of Tennessee, Hamilton 
District. In 1795 it contained, according to the 
state census of 1792, 3578 inhabitants, including 
129 slaves.] 

SE VILLA, a city of the island Jamaica, founded 
by Juan de Esquivel on the n. coast, with a 
small port. When it belonged to the Spaniards 
they had in it a college with an abbot. 

SEVILLA, another city, with the additional 
title of Oro. See MACAS. 

SEVILLA, a settlement of the island of Cuba, 
with a good port, on the s. coast, on the shore of 
a river of its name. In its vicinity are some 
copper-mines, from whence very much of this 
metal has been extracted. 

SEVILLA. The above river rises near the s. 
coast, runs $. and enters the sea between the rivers 
Turino and Puerto de San Pedro, and has at its 
mouth a good port. 

[SEWEE Bay, or BULL S Harbour, on the 
coast of S. Carolina, is s. to. of Cape Carteret. 
The long and narrow island called Racoon Keys 
is between Cape Carteret Island and the entrance 



420 



S H A 



S II A 



to this harbour, which is at the n. e. end of Bull s 
Island. SeeSfiEWEE.] 

[SEYBO, or SEY vo, a settlement in the 5. e. 
part of the island of St. Domingo, on the upper 
road from Higuey to St. Domingo City ; 18 leagues 
w. by n. of the former, and 24 n. e. of the latter. 
It is also 12 leagues n. of the little island of St. 
Catherine, on the s. coast of the main land. It 
is not that founded in 1502 by John of Esquivel, 
but a settlement formed in the same canton about 
60 years ago by several graziers, and has a place 
of worship. Towards the year 1780 it had aug 
mented, but is now falling to decay. The parish 
contains more than 4000 persons, the greatest 
part of whom are graziers or herdsmen, free 
Negroes, or people of colour.] 

SHADDOCK, a mountain of the country of 
Hudson ; on the shore of this bay on the e. 
coast. 

[SHAFTSBURY, a considerable and flourish 
ing township of Vermont. It has Arlington on 
the n. and Bennington on the s. and contains 
1999 inhabitants/) 

[SHAG Island, near the entrance into Christ 
mas Sound, on the s. coast of the island of Terra 
del Fuego. The entrance to Port Clerke in this 
sound is just to the n. of some low rocks which 
lie off a point of Shag Island.] 

SHALLOT, a small river of the province and 
colony of S. Carolina ; which runs 5. and enters 
the sea in Long Bay. 

[SHALLOW Ford, is that part of Tennessee 
River which is 1200 yards broad; 12 miles above 
the Whirl. It lies between Chatanuga and 
Chickaugo Rivers, which fall in from the s. e.] 

[SHALLOW WATER, Point, on then.zo. coast 
of N. America, lies in lat. 63 9 n. Between 
this point and Shoal Ness, which is three degrees 
of latitude to the s. Captain Cook did not explore 
the coast, on account of the shallow water he 
met with.] 

[SHAMBE, a small river of W. Florida, which 
empties into Pensacola Bay. It admits shal 
lops some miles up, and boats upwards of 50 
miles.] 

SHAMOKIN, a settlement of Indians of the 
province of Pennsylvania of the United States : 
on the shore of the river Susquehannah. 

SHANASSINS, a settlement of Indians of 
province as the former; on the shore of the 
Ohio. 

[SHANNOCK Country. See RHODE ISLAND 
STATE.] 

[SHAPLEIGH, a township of the district of 
Maine, on the w. line of York County, at the 



head of Mousom River. It was incorporated in 
1785, contains 1329 inhabitants, and lies 75 miles 
n. of Boston.] 

SHARK, a small river of the province of 
New Jersey of the United States, which runs e. 
and enters the Shrewsbury and the Squaii. 

[SHARKSTOWN, in Queen Anne s County, 
Maryland. See KENT COUNTY.] 

[SHARON, a township of Vermont, Windsor 
County, e . of Royalton, and w. of Norwich on 
White River. It contains 569 inhabitants.] 

[SHARON, a township of Massachusetts, Nor 
folk County, 10 miles s. w. of Boston. It was 
taken from Stoughton, and incorporated in 1765, 
It contains 1994 inhabitants.] 

[SHARON, a township of Connecticut in Litch- 
field County, bounded e. by Cornwall, from 
which it is separated by Hausatonic River, and 
ay. by the e. line of New York State. It is about 
12 miles n. w. of Litchfield.] 

[SHARON, a village in Georgia, about five 
miles from Savannah. In this place, just at the 
close of the war, General Wayne was attacked 
in a furious manner by a body of Cherokee In 
dians, headed by a British officer. They fought 
hand to hand manfully, and took two pieces of 
artillery. But General Wayne, at the hazard of 
his own life, gained the victory.] 

[SHARON, a new town in Schoharie County, 
New York, incorporated in 1797.] 

SHARP, a settlement of the island Barbadoes, 
in the district of the parish of St. Thomas. 

[SHARPSBURG, a post town of Maryland, 
Washington County, about two miles from Pa- 
towmac River, and nearly opposite to Shepherds- 
town, in Virginia, at the mouth of Shenandoah 
River. It contains a church, and about 20 
houses. It is nine miles n. n. w. of Williams s 
Port, 49 w. by n. of Baltimore, and 123 w. s. w. 
of Philadelphia.] 

[SHAWANEE, and SHAVANON ; the former 
the Indian, and the latter the French name of 
Cumberland River, in the state of Tennessee. It 
is also called Shawanoe.] 

[SHAWANESE, or SHAWANOES, an Indian 
nation, great numbers of whom have joined the 
Creek confederacy. They have four towns on 
the Tallapoose River, containing 300 warriors ; 
and more are expected to remove thither. By 
the treaty of peace, Aug. 3, 1795, the United 
States agreed to pay to this tribe a sum in hand, 
and 1000 dollars a year for ever, in goods. They 
inhabit also on Scioto River, and a branch of the 
Muskingum, and have their hunting-grounds be 
tween Ohio River and Lake Erie. They are 



SHE 

generally of a small size, rather handsome in 
their features, and are very cheerful and crafty 
people. Counselling among their old people, 
and dancing- among their young men and women, 
take up a great part of their time.] 

[SHAWANGUNK, a township in Ulster 
County, New York; bounded e. by Newburgh 
and Marlborough, and s. by Montgomery and the 
Platte Kill. It contains 2128 inhabitants; of 
whom 323 are electors, and 350 slaves. It is 20 
miles from Goshen, and 12 from New Paltz.] 

SHAWANOAH, a settlement of the province 
and colony of Virginia in N.America. 

[SHAWSHEEN, a considerable stream of 
Massachusetts, which rises in Bedford, in Mid 
dlesex County, and passing through Billerica, 
Tewksbury, and Andover, discharges itself into 
Merrimack River.] 

[SHEBA Island. See SABA.] 

[SHECATICA, a bay of very irregular shape 
and breadth, on the coast of Labrador, N. Ame- 
having an island of its name at its mouth. 



SHE 



421 



rica 



n. 



It is situate between lat. 51 14 and 51 28 
and between long. 58 IV and 58 22 w.~] 

[SHECHARY, a lake of New N. Wales, 
formed like a bow. It receives Churchill River 
from the s. w. and at its n. e. end has communi 
cation with Berbazon Lake, which lies due n. 
and s. At the s. end of the latter, the waters of 
both lakes run e. under the name of Seal River, 
which empties into Hudson s Bay not far from 
Churchill Fort, between Button s Bay on the n. 
and Cape Churchill on the s.e. Both lakes are 
long and narrow.] 

[SHEDIAC, a harbour on the e. coast of New 
Brunswick, and on the w. side of the Gulf of St. 
Lawrence. Fifty-three miles s. e. of Miramichi 
Bay.] 

[SHEEPSCOT, or SHEEPSCUT, a river of the 
district of Maine, which empties into the ocean 
to the e. of Kennebeck, and is navigable 20 or 30 
miles. On the w. side of this river is the excel 
lent port called Wiscasset, in the township of Pow- 
nalborough. Newcastle township is at the head 
of navigation on this river, and extends from 
Sheepscot to Damariscotta River. The compact 
part, which is a post-town, is 10 miles n.e. of 
Wiscasset. Sheepscot Harbour has high water, 
at full and change, 45 minutes after ten o clock ; 
depth, nine fathoms.] 

[SHEEP S Cove, on thee. coast of Newfound 
land, lies between Bay Robert and Port Grave.] 

[SHEFFIELD, a township in the n. part of 
Caledonia County, Vermont.] 

[SHEFFIELD, a post-town of Massachusetts, 



Berkshire County, 23 miles s. e. of Hudson, in 
the State of New York, and 100 w. of Boston. 
It was incorporated in 1733, and contains 1899 
inhabitants. Housatenic River, which is nine 
rods in breadth, passes through it from n. to s. 
which with its branches supply water for several 
mills and iron-works. South Mountain extends 
the whole length of the town, along the e. side of 
the river.] 

[SHELBURNE, a township of Vermont, Chit- 
tenden County, on the e, side of Lake Cham plain. 
It has Burlington on the n. and Charlotte on the 
s. and contains 389 inhabitants.] 

[SHELBURNE, an interior township inGraftoa 
County, New Hampshire. It was incorporated 
in 1769, and contains 35 inhabitants.] 

[SHELBURNE, a township in HampshireCounty, 
Massachusetts, adjoining Greenfield.] 

[SHELBURNE, a town of Nova Scotia, at the 
head of a bay which runs up from Port Rose- 
way, at the s. w. part of the province. In 1783, it 
contained 600 families, but is now less populous. 
It is 18 miles n. e. of Barrington, and 88 j. w, by 
s. of Halifax.] 

[SHELBY, a new county of Kentucky.] 

[SHELTER Island, at the e. end of Long 
Island, in Suffolk County, New York ; lies three 
leagues w. of Gardner s Island. It is about five 
miles from e. to w. and seven from n. to s. It is 
a fruitful spot, containing about 8000 acres ; was 
incorporated in 1788, and contains 201 inhabi 
tants, of whom 34 are electors. Considerable 
numbers of cattle, sheep, and poultry are raised 
here. When you leave Shelter Island on your 
larboard hand, and run w. by n. about five or six 
miles, you will open a large bay where 100 sail 
of vessels may lie safe, and anchor in three or 
four fathoms.] 

[SHENANDOAH, a county of Virginia, 
bounded n. by Frederick, and s. by Rocking- 
ham. It contains 10,510 inhabitants, including 
512 slaves. Chief town, Woodstock.] 

[SHENANDOAH, a river of Virginia, which rises 
in Augusta County, and after running a w. e. 
course of about 200 miles, it joins the Patow- 
mack in about lat. 3923 / , just before the latter 
bursts through the Blue Ridge. It is navigable 
about 100 miles ; and may be rendered so nearly 
its whole course at a small expense. When this 
is done, it will bear the produce of the richest 
part of the state.] 

[SHENANDOAH Valley, extends from Winches 
ter, in Virginia, to Carlisle and the Susquehan- 
nah, in Pennsylvania, and is chiefly inhabited by 
Germans and Dutch.] 



422 



S H I 



SHENANGO, or CHENINQUE, a settlement 
of the English in the province and country of 
Iroquees Indians, on the shore of the Ohio. 

SHENECTADY, a city of the county of Al 
bany in the province of New York. 

[SHEPHERDSFIBLD, a plantation of the 
district of Maine, in Cumberland County, con 
taining 330 inhabitants.] 

[SHEPHEimSTOWN, or SHEPHERDSBURG, 
a post-town of Virginia ; situate in Berkeley 
County, on the s. side of Patowmack River. Its 
situation is healthy and agreeable, and the neigh 
bouring country is fertile and well cultivated. It 
contains about 2000 inhabitants, mostly of Ger 
man extraction. It lies at the mouth of Shouan- 
doah River, 12 miles e. by*, of Martinsburg, and 
127 s. w. by K&amp;gt;. of Philadelphia.] 

SHEPODY, a settlement of the province of 
Nova Scotia in N. America, at the entrance of 
the river of its name. 

SHEPODY, this river runs e. and enters the sea 
in the interior of the Bay of Fundy. 

SHEPODY. Some mountains of this province, 
which run s. e. between the river Patcootyeak 
and the e. coast. 

SHEPSCUT, a river of the province of Saga- 
dahock in the United States. It rises fiorn a 
small lake, runs s. and enters the sea in the Bay 
of Sagadahock. 

SHEPSCUT, a fort built by the English on the 
shore of the above river. 

[SHERBURNE, in Massachusetts. See 
NANTUKET.] 

[SHERBURNE, a township of New York, Her- 
kemer County. By the state census of 1796, it con 
tained 483 inhabitants, of whom 79 are electors ] 

SHERON, a town of the province and colony 
of New York in the United States. 

[SHETUCKET, a river of Connecticut, which 
is formed by the junction of Willomantic and 
Mount Hope Rivers, and after running e. a few 
miles, pursues a s. course, and uniting with Qui- 
nabaug River, empties into the Thames in the s. 
part of the township of Norwich.] 

[SHIMENE Port, on the n. side of the Island 
of St. John, in the Gulf of St. Lawrence. Its 
entrance, w. of St. Peter s Harbour, is very nar 
row ; but the bason within is very spacious.] 

SHINGOES, a settlement of Indians, of Ca 
nada in N. America, on the shore of the river 
Little Bever. 

[SHINING Mountains, in the n. w. part of 
N. America, are little known. It is conjectured 
that they terminate in about lat. 47 or 48 n. 
where a number of rivers rise, and empty them 



selves either into the N. Pacific Ocean, into 
son s Bay, into the waters which lie between 
them, or into the Atlantic Ocean. They are 
called also, The Mountains of Bright Stones, on 
account of the immense number of large crystals 
shooting from the rocks and sparkling in the rays 
of the sun, so as to be seen at a great distance.] 

SHIP Channel, between the islands of Sigateo 
and St. Salvador of the Lueayes. 

SHIP, a point of land on the s. coast of New 
foundland, within the great Bay of Plaisance. 

[SHIP Island, lies between Horn and Cat 
Island, on the coast of W. Florida, and is about 
10 miles s. of the Bay of Biloxi. It is nine miles 
long and two broad ; produces pine trees and 
grass, and has a tolerable well of water in it.] 

[SHIPPANDSTOWN, in Virginia, on the s. 
side of the Patowmack, 40 or 50 miles from Alex 
andria.] 

[SHIPPENSBURG, a post-town of Pennsyl 
vania, Cumberland County, on a branch of Cone- 
dogwiuno* Creek, which empties into the Susque- 
hannah ; and contains about 60 houses, chiefly 
built of stone. It is 1 1 miles n. by e. of Cham- 
bersburg, 17 s. w. of Carlisle, and 107 w. of Phi 
ladelphia.] 

[SHIRLEY, a township of Massachusetts, in 
the n. w. part of Middlesex County, 41 miles n. w. 
of Boston. It was incorporated in 1753, and con 
tains 677 inhabitants.] 

[SHIRLEY, a township of Pennsylvania ; si 
tuate in Huntingdon County.] 

SHOALS, Islands of, on the n. coast of New 
England, in the district and jurisdiction of the 
province of Hampshire. They are many, all 
small, and opposite the mouth of the river Pis- 
cataqua. 

[1 hese shoals or islands, which are seven in 
number, constitute that group to which the cele 
brated Captain John Sn.ith gave his own name, 
but the ingratitude of man has denied his me 
mory that small honour. From the Isle of Shoals 
to the Dry Salvage Rock, the course is s. half 
w. eight leagues ; to Portsmouth n.n.w. three; 
to Newbury Port Bar s. w. seven : to York Har 
bour n. half e. five. Lat. 42 57 n. Long. 70 
41 w.l 

[SHOENECK, a Moravian settlement in Penn 
sylvania, near Nazareth ; begun in 1757.] 

SHOP. Soe CONCEPCION. 

[3HOREHAM, a township of Vermont, Ad- 
dison County, on the e. side of Lake Champlain 
having Orwell on the s. and Bridport on the n. 
a little . e. of Ticonderoga. It contains 721 ir&amp;gt;- 
habitants.] 



S I A 



S I 



SHOWTON. Some islands of the S. Sea; 
called by some the Islands of the Dogs, and by 
others the Islands of Pigs. They are 15 in num 
ber, and were discovered by William Showten 
in 1616, from whom they took their name : n. of 
New Zealand ; 1200 leagues from the coast of 
Chile : between lat. 15 and 20 s. 

[SHREWS BURY, a post-town of New Jersey, 
Monmouth County, on the sea-board, having 
Middletown on the n. Freehold w. and Dover 
s. w. North River divides it from Middletown, 
and is navigable a few miles. This town is 11 
miles e. of Monmouth Court-house, 14 s. e. of 
Middletown Point, 36 e. of Trenton, 23 s. c. by 
e. of Brunswick, and 57 e. n. e. of Philadelphia. 
The compact part of the town is pleasant, and 
contains an Episcopal and a Presbyterian church, 
and a meeting-house for Friends. On the side 
of a branch of Navesink River, in this town, is 
a remarkable cave, in which are three rooms, 
arched with a soft porous rock, through which 
the moisture slowly exudes, and falls in drops on 
the sand below. The township contains 4673 
inhabitants, including 212 slaves. Much genteel 
company from Philadelphia and New York re 
sort here during the summer months, for health 
and pleasure.] 

[SHREWSBURY, a township of Vermont, in 
Rutland County, between Clarendon on the w. 
and Saltash on the e. and contains 383 inhabi 
tants.] 

[SHREWSBURY, a township in York County, 
Pennsylvania.] 

[SHREWSBURY, a township in Worcester 
County, Massachusetts ; six miles e . of Worces 
ter, and 31 w. by s. of Boston. It was incorpo 
rated in 1727, and contains 963 inhabitants.] 

[SHUBENACADIE, a river of Nova Scotia, 
which rises within a mile of the town of Dart 
mouth, on the e. side of Halifax Harbour, and 
empties into Cobequid Bay, taking in its course 
the Slewiack and Gay Rivers. The great lake 
of the same name lies on the e. side of the road 
which leads from Halifax to Windsor, and about 
seven miles from it, and 21 from Halifax.] 

SHUCKOSPAGA, a settlement of Indians of 
the province and colony of S. Carolina, at the 
source of the river Alabama. 

[SHUTESBURY, a township of Massachu 
setts, Hampshire County, on the e. side of Con 
necticut River, about 16 miles n. e. of Northamp 
ton, and 69 w. by w. of Boston.] 

SIACHOQUE, a settlement of the province 
and corregimiento of Tunja in the Nuevo Reyne 



de Granada. It is of an extremely cold tem 
perature, produces in abundance wheat, maize, 
papas, and other fruits of its climate ; much sheep 
cattle, of the wools of which they make woven 
stuffs, these being the principal commerce of its 
inhabitants, who amount to 300, with as many 
Indians. Haifa league n. e. of Tunja. 

SIANCAS, a river of the province and go 
vernment of Tucuman in Peru. It rises near the 
city of Salta, from various streams which unite, 
runs w. and enters the Vermejo. 

SIANCAS, a valley of this province and govern 
ment, in the district and jurisdiction of the city 
of Salta, where there was formerly a settlement, 
but which was destroyed by the barbarian In 
dians in 1736, when 500 persons who were in it 
were put to death, not even the innocent being 
spared. The town was also then entirely burnt. 

[SIARA. See SEARA.] 

SIBARONA, a settlement of the province and 
government of Guayana, in the part possessed 
by the Dutch. 

SIBAYO, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Collahuas in Peru. 

SIBIRIJOA, a settlement of the province of 
Cinaloa, and real of silver mines in former times, 
but these have ceased to be worked. The set 
tlement is situate on the shore of the abundant 
river of Fuerte. 

SIBUNDOI, a settlement of the province of 
Sucumbios in the kingdom of Quito ; in a beau 
tiful and extensive valley, on the shore of the 
river Putumayo, near its source. It is celebrated 
for a miraculous image of Christ, which is vene 
rated in its church, which is a very good one. 
Five leagues s. of the lake of Mocoa, and three 
n. w, of the settlement of San Pedro, in lat. 1 
7" 39" n. 

[SICA-PUNTA, or DRY POINT, on the n. 
coast of S.America, on the Spanish main, is the 
rt. w. limit of Trieste Bay, and s. of the island of 
Cura^oa.] 

SICASICA. See CICASICA. 

SICAYA, a settlement of the province and cor- 
regimiento of Xauja in Peru. 

SICCHA, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Yamparaes, in the same king 
dom as the former. It belongs to the archbi 
shopric of Charcas, and is annexed to the curacy 
of the settlement of Huanipaya. 

SICCHOS, MAYOR, a settlement of the pro 
vince and corregimiento of Tacunga in the king 
dom of Quito ; in the district of which are some 
silver mines which, in former times, were worked 



424 



S I E 



S I L 



to tolerable profit, but are now abandoned. 
Eighteen leagues from the settlement of Sara- 
pullo. 

SICCHOS, another settlement, in the same pro 
vince and kingdom, with the addition of Menor 
to distinguish it. 

SICCIAN, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Conchucos in Peru ; annexed to 
the curacy of Huary, its capital. 

SICHA, a settlement of the province and go 
vernment of Tucuman, of the district and juris 
diction of Salta ; annexed to the curacy of Chi- 
quiana. 

[SICHEM, formerly a settlement of the Mo 
ravians, on the e. line of New York State. 
Twenty-five miles e. s. e. of Kingston, on Hud 
son s River.] 

SICOWI, a settlement of Indians of the pro 
vince and colony of N. Carolina, on the shore 
and at the source of the river Tennessee. 

SICSID, a settlement of the province and cor- 
regimiento of Cuenca in the kingdom of Quito, 
on the shore of a river. In its district to the n. 
are two large estates, called Hacienda de la Vir- 
gen, and Castillo del Inca. 

SICUANI, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Tinta in Peru. 

SICU-LEUVU, a river of the province and 
corregimiento of Maule in the kingdom of Chile. 
It rises from the volcano of Tucapel, runs di 
rectly s. and forms the lake of Huenchun. 

[SIDELING Hill, a range of hills which lie 
in the n. w. part of Maryland, between Alleghany 
and Washington Counties, which are divided by 
the creek of the same name.] 

[SIDNEY Island. See SYDNEY.] 

[SIDNEY, a township of New York State, on 
the n. line of Pennsylvania, opposite to the mouth 
of Chenengo River, having Susquehannah for its 
n. and &amp;lt;?. boundary.] 

SIERRA, SALADA, a river of the province 
and captainship of Seara in Brazil. It runs into 
the sea between the river Omoneses and the Bay 
of Inobu. 

SIERRAS, Cape of the, on the coast of the 
same province and kingdom as the former, be 
tween the port of Mocoripe and the river 
Acuma. 

[SIERRE MADRE. See ANDES.] 

SIETE, a small river of the province and cor 
regimiento of Cuenca in the kingdom of Quito. 
It rises w. of the capital, and runs, following the 
same rhumb, until it enters the sea in the Gulf 
of Guayaquil, opposite the island of Puna. 



SIGUAS, a river of the province and govern 
ment of Veragua in the kingdom of Tierra Firme. 
It rises in the mountains of the s. coast, and en 
ters the sea near the Morro de Puercos. 

SIGUAN-GUAYACU, a small river of the 
province and government of Mainas in the king 
dom of Quito. It runs n. n. w. and enters the 
Yana. 

SIGUATE, or SIGATEO, an island of the N. 
Sea, one of the Lucayas, which is close to that 
of San Salvador. The English call it also Ala- 
bastar. 

SIGNAO, a settlement of the province of Cu- 
liacan in Nueva Espana. 

SIGUENZA, PUNTA DE, a cape of the coast 
of the island of Santa Rosa, in the province and 
government of Florida ; named by Admiral D. 
Andres de Pez, when he passed to reconnoitre it 
in 1693, by order of Charles Sigiienza, professor 
of mathematics at Mexico. 

SIGUINAM, SANTA MARIA DE, a principal 
and head settlement of the district and alcaldia 
mayor of Valladolid, in the province and bishop 
ric of Mechoacan ; the district of which compre 
hends other three settlements. It is of a cold 
temperature, and contains 30 families of Indians, 
exercised alone in sowing maize, the sole fruit of 
the territory, inasmuch as the frosts are such as 
to destroy the other seeds. Eight leagues w. of 
its capital. 

SIHUA, SAN JUAN DE, a settlement of the 
province and corregimiento of Quispicanchi in 
Peru ; annexed to the curacy of the settlement 
of Pomacanchi. 

SIHUAS, a settlement of the province and cor 
regimiento of Conchucos, in the same kingdom as 
the former. 

SIHUAS, another, in the province and corregi 
miento of Collaguas in the same kingdom. 

SIHUAS, a large and beautiful valley of the 
province and corregimiento of Arequipa. 

SIHUAS, another, which belongs in part to the 
province of Camana, and in part to that of Col- 
lagues. It is 10 leagues long, and of a delightful 
climate, and very abundant in wheat, vines, and 
olive trees ; as also in maize, and all sorts of de 
licate fruits. 

SILAI, an abundant river of the province and 
government of Quito ; which rises in the interior 
of the mountains of the province of Chachapoyas, 
and enters the Chupana or Cahuapana to run into 
the Maranon. 

.SILAN, a settlement of the province and go 
vernment of Yucatan in N.America, on the coast, 



S I L 



S I M 



425 



between the river of Lagartos and that of Santa 
Clara. 

SILANCHI, a river of the province and go 
vernment of Esmeraldas in the kingdom of Quito. 
It runs n. w. as far as the new road which leads 
to this capital ; from thence turns to w. and thence 
to s. w. to join the Caoni ; with the which it 
enters the river Blanco by the n. part, in lat. 
9 



.v. 



SILAO,a large settlement of the alcaldiamayor 
of Guanajuato, in the province and bishopric of 
Mechoacan. It contains 1000 families of In 
dians, Spaniards, Mustees^ and Mulattoes ; is of 
a dry and hot temperature, and seven leagues 
from its capital. 

SILCO, a settlement of the province and cor- 
regimiento of Aimaraez in Peru ; annexed to the 
curacy of the settlement of Mollebamba. 

SILINGATE, a settlement of the province 
and government of Jaen de Bracamoros, in the 
kingdom of Quito. 

SILIPICA, a settlement of the province and 
government of Tucuman in Peru; of the district 
and jurisdiction of the city of Santiago del Es- 
tero, on the shore of the river Dulce. 

SILLA. See PACAMOROS. 

SILLAPATA, a settlement of the province 
and corregimiento of Guamalies in Peru ; annexed 
to the curacy of the settlement of Pachas. 

SILLER Y, a settlement and colony esta 
blished by the French in Canada, on the n. 
shore of the river St. Lawrence, nearly a mile 
from the city of Quebec, thus called from an ap 
pellation of a French gentleman, its founder. 
It had a fort, which belonged to the Jesuits, 
before its capture by the English. 

SILOS, a settlement of the government and 
jurisdiction of Pamplona in the Nuevo Reyno de 
Granada. It is of a very cold temperature, pro 
duces the vegetable productions of the same, al 
though with scarcity, and has a population of 
100 Indians, with about as many poor Spaniards. 
Seven leagues s. e. of Pamplona. 

SILQUE, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Calca and Lares in Peru ; an 
nexed to the curacy of the settlement of Ol- 
lantay. 

[SILVER Bluff, a considerable height upon 
the Carolina shore of Savannah River, perhaps 
30 feet higher than the low lands on the oppo 
site shore, which are subject to inundations in 
the spring and fall. This steep bank rises per 
pendicularly out of the river, discovering vari 
ous strata of earth. The surface of the ground 
upon this bluflj which extends nearly two miles 

TOL. IV. 



on the river, and from half a mile to a mile in 
breadth, is nearly level, and a good fertile soil, 
as appears by the vast oaks, hickory, mulberry, 
black walnut, and other trees and shrubs left 
standing in the old fields, which are spread 
abroad to a great distance. Here are various 
vestiges of the ancients, as Indian conical mounts, 
terraces, areas, &amp;c. as well as traces of fortresses 
of regular formation, as if constructed after the 
modes of European military architects ; which 
some suppose to be the ancient camps of the Spa 
niards, who formerly fixed themselves here in 
hopes of finding silver.] 

SILVER-SPRING, a city of the county of 
Barnstable in Plymouth County. 

SILVESTER, S. Point of, on the s. coast of 
the Straits of Magellan ; between the grand bay 
of San Bartolome and that of Santa Catalina. 

SILVESTER, S. another. See PAPAGAYOS. 

SIMACO, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Larecaxa in Peru ; annexed to 
the curacy of the settlement of Challana. 

SIMANA, a small river of the province and 
government of Santa Marta in the Nuevo Reyno 
de Granada, which enters the Grande de la Mag- 
dalena between the port of Ocana and the town 
of Tamalameque. 

SIMANCHI, a settlement of the province and 
government of Jaen de Bracamoros in the king 
dom of Quito, on the shore of the river of its 
name, and s. of the city of St. Lawrence. 

SIMANCHI, the aforesaid river, unites itself 
with the Palanda to enter the Maranon. 

SIMARA, a small river of the province and 
government of La Guayana. It rises between 
the table land of Guanipa and the river Guara- 
piche, runs e. and enters the channel of Manano 
Grande, one of the arms by which the Orinoco 
runs into the sea. 

SIMATLAN, a river of the province and al- 
caldia mayor of Tecoantepec in Nueva Espana. 
It runs e. and enters the S. Sea between the 
river Capolita and the port of Salinas. 

SIMATO, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Tunja, in the Nuevo Reyno de 
Granada. 

SIMBAL, SAN JUAN BAPTISTA DE, a settle 
ment of Indians of the province and corregimi 
ento of Truxillo in Peru, founded in the valley 
of Chimo. It is very small and poor, producing- 
only some pulse, which the natives carry for sale 
to the other provinces. These natives have the 
advantage of a foundation for the relief of seven 
settlements of Indians from a tribute (which 
they would otherwise be obliged to pay) through 

o I 



426 



S I M 



SIM 



the charity of Dona Florenca de Mora, the wife 
of Don Juan de Sandoval, whadied without heir. 
Six leagues n. e. of the capital. 

SIMBOLAR, a settlement of the province and 
government of Tucuman in Peru, on the con 
fines of the kingdom of Chile. 

SIMBOLAR, a settlement of the same province 
and government, on the shore of the river Dulce. 

SIMENA, a settlement of the missions which 
were held by the Jesuits, in the province and 
government of San Juan de los Llanos and 
Nuevo Reyno de Granada : now under the 
charge of the Barefooted Franciscans. 

SIMIGAYES. See SEMIGAES. 

SIMIJACA, a settlement of the corregimiento 
of Ubate in the Nuevo Reyno de Granada. Of 
a cold and healthy temperature, abounding in all 
the productions of a cold climate ; close to the 
settlement of Chiquinquira, and 16 leagues s. w. 
of Santa Fe. 

SIMILAES, a settlement of the province and 
government of Mainas in the kingdom of Quito. 

SIMITI, a settlement of the province and go 
vernment of Cartagena, in the Nuevo Reyno de 
Granada. It was formerly rich, populous, and 
had an abundant gold-mine which afterwards 
failed, from that time its riches and consequence 
having been on the decline. 

SIMOCHOQUI, SANTIAGO DE, a principal 
and head settlement of the district of the alcaldia 
mayor of Tepic in Nueva Espana. It contains 
25 families 6f Indians, and is 18 leagues n. of its 
capital. 

SIMON, S. a settlement of the head settle 
ment of the district, and alcaldia mayor of Mari- 
nalco in Nueva Espana. Its natives maintain 
themselves by trading in fuel, coal, and some 
maize. At a league s distance it has the large 
engine of Xalmolonga, which belonged to the 
Jesuits, and at which upwards of 200 slaves were 
employed. This settlement is so extensive as to 
reach as far as the jurisdiction of Tasco, and in 
it is a beautiful church. At three-quarters of a 
league to the w. is the estate of Pastla, which 
belongs to the religious of St. Augustin. Two 
leagues and a half from its capital. 

SIMON, S. another settlement, of the head set 
tlement of Amatepec, and alcaldia mayor of Zul- 
tepec in the same kingdom. It contains 12 fa 
milies of Indians, and is close to its head settle 
ment. 

SIMON, S. another, of the head settlement of 
Tepuxilco, and of the same alcaldia and kingdom 
as the former. It contains 30 families of Indians, 
who exercise themselves in the labour of the 



mines. Close to the settlement of Arismendi by 
the n. 

SIMON, S. another, of the head settlement of 
Tlacotepec, and alcaldia mayor of Tepeaca in the 
same kingdom. It contains 95 families of In 
dians, and is three leagues from its head settle 
ment. In its district are 13 cultivated estates, 
in which most of the population are employed, 
as the territory is scanty in productions. 

SIMON, S. another, of the same alcaldia mayor 
as the former, and of the head settlement of the 
capital, from whence it lies five leagues. 

SIMON, S. another, of the head settlement of 
Quechula, in the same alcaldia mayor and king 
dom as the former. It contains 20 families of 
Indians, and is very close to its head settlement. 

SIMON, S. another, of the head settlement of 
Ahuacatlan and alcaldia mayor of Zacatlan in 
the same kingdom. Two leagues distant from its 
head settlement. 

SIMON, S. another, of the province and go 
vernment of Moxos in the kingdom of Quito, on 
the shore of the river Itenes. It is now nearly 
abandoned, and has in it only a few Indians. 

SIMON, S. another, of the same province and 
kingdom as the former, on the shore of the river 
Baures, near a lake formed by an arm of this 
river. 

SIMON, S. an island, near the n. mouth of the 
river Alatamaha, in the .province of Georgia in 
N.America; 11 miles long and four wide. It 
is of a fertile and rich territory, full of oaks, 
meadows, and fields, cultivated after the In 
dian manner. In the centre is situate the city 
of Frederick, and it has a good fort and bat 
tery built by the English in 1742, for the defence 
of the Strait of Jekyl, in the which may lie from 
10 to 12 ships in perfect security. 

[SIMON, S. a fort at the s. end of the above 
island. It is nine or 10 miles from St. Simon s 
Bar, and is remarkable for its white appear 
ance.] 

SIMON, S. a small island of the Gulf of Cali 
fornia, or Mar Roxo de Cortes, near the coast, 
between the islands San Joseph and Espiritu 
Santo. 

SIMON, S. another island, with the surname of 
Grande, near the coast of Florida, one of the 
Georgean Isles. 

SIMON, S. another, with the surname of Chico 
or Little, on the same coast, and one of the 
Georgean. 

SIMON, S. a river of the province and govern 
ment of Moxos in the kingdom of Quito. It 
rises between those of Baures and Itenes, runs 



S I N 

n. n. w. and enters the second of these, close to 
the settlement of its name. 

SIMON, S. a bay on the s. coast of the Straits 
of Magellan, one of the Snowy Islands, and close 
to the Bay of Chartier. 

SIMON, S. a port on the *. e. coast of the island 
of Martinique, close to the Cul de Sac Frai^ois, 
behind Point Vauclain. 

SIMON, S. a point of land or cape of the coast 
of Brazil, in the province and captainship of Rey. 

SIMON, S. a fort in the province and govern 
ment of Tucuman and kingdom of Peru, in the 
llanos of Manso and on the shore of the river 
Vermejo, to restrain the Abipones and infidel 
Indians. 

[SIMON, S. a channel in the Orinoco, for an 
account of which, see Vol. iii. p. 490, of this 
Dictionary.] 

SIMON, S. a narrow passage in the Straits of 
Magellan, the second to enter the S. Sea. 

SIMOQUIPA, a settlement of the province 
and government of Senora in N.America, on the 
shore of a river, and w. of the town and garrison 
of San Felipe de Guevabi. 

[SIMSBURY, a township of Connecticut in 
Hartford County, 14 miles n. w. of Hartford. 
Copper ore has been found here.] 

SIN A, a settlement of the province and corre- 
gimiento of Carabaya in Peru ; annexed to the 
curacy of the settlement of San Juan del Oro. 

SINAMARI, a large river of equinoctial 
France, which empties itself into the Atlantic, 
between the river Marowine and the island of 
Cayenne. At its entrance is a great sand-bank, 
which impedes the passage to vessels ; and on the 
n. shore, near its mouth, is a fort built by the 
French for its defence. Some geographers con 
found it with another river, called Manamari, 
which enters the sea near Cayenne, and has its 
mouth farther e. than is the mouth of the Sina- 
mari, which is in lat. 5 39 n. 

SINANGUEI, a large settlement of the pro 
vince and government of Santa Marta in the 
Nuevo Reyno de Granada, in a fertile and de 
lightful spot, although of a hot temperature. It 
belongs to the nation of the Tacrinas Indians, 
and is governed by a cazique. 

SINAPECU, a settlement of the province and 
alcaldia mayor of Valladolid in the kingdom of 
Nueva Espana, near its capital. 

SINARUCO, or SIN ARUC A, a large and abun 
dant river of the llanos of San Juan, and king 
dom of Grenada. It rises at the foot of the snowy 
paramo of Chisgas in the mountains of Bogota, 
to s. e. of Pamplona. Whilst running through 



8 I N 



42? 



those woods it has the name of Canaguata ; it 
then turns to the llanos of San Juan, and changes 
its title to Ravanal. It is afterwards called Ma- 
sibuli, and runs through the llano of Arauca. It 
is then joined by the Canaguata, and takes the 
name of the Sinaruco, and enters the Orinoco. 
38 miles below the Meta. On its shores the Je 
suits founded various settlements, being reduc 
tions of Indians of the Salivas nations, in 1682 ; 
but the same were destroyed two years after 
wards by the Caribes. 

SINCHE, a settlement of the alcaldia mayor 
of San Miguel el Grande, in the province and 
bishopric of Mechoacan. 

SINCHOLAGUA, a paramo, or mountain, 
covered with perpetual snow, in the province 
and kingdom of Quito. It is opposite the paramo 
of Pichincha, the valleys of Turubamba and 
Chill o intervening. From it rises the river Alan- 
gasi, and in 1660, at the irruption of the volcano 
of Pichinche, the aforesaid mountain split in 
twain, so that one side of it perverted the course 
of the river ; and the consequence was that im 
mense mischief was done to the neighbouring 
plains, by a prodigious influx of mud. 

SINCOMAI, a mountain of the province and 
colony of Surinam, in the part of Guayana pos 
sessed by the Dutch, close to the sierra of Rino- 
cote, and at its beginning. 

[SINEMAHONING, a n. westernmost branch 
of Susquelnnnah River.] 

[SINEPUXENT, a very long bay on the 
s.e. coast of Maryland ; a number of long and 
narrow islands separating it from the Atlantic 
Ocean. Sinepuxent Inlet is in about lat. 38 
11 30" n. and nearly 12 miles e. of the town of 
Snowhill.1 

SINGES, Islands of the, near the coast of the 
province of Guayana, in the part of the French, 
at the entrance or mouth of the river Ovia. 

SINGLA, a natural wall of stone, in the 
Nuevo Reyno de Granada, which traverses the 
whole province of Guane from n. to s. 

[SING-SING, an inconsiderable village on 
the e. side of Haverstraw Bay, in W. Chester 
County. Thirty-five miles n. of New York 
City.] 

SINGUIO, a small settlement of the head 
settlement of the district of Xacona and alcaldia 
mayor of Zamora in Nueva Espana. It is of a 
cold temperature, and contains 95 families of 
Mustees and Mulattoes. Three leagues w. of the 
settlement of Santiago. 

[SINICA, a considerable Cherokee town, on 
the banks of Keowee River. The houses on the ^ 
3i2 



428 



S I N 



f. side are on an elevated situation, and com 
mand a delightful and extensive prospect of the 
whole settlement. The inhabitants, about 500 
in number, can muster 100 warriors.] 

SINIYLJ, SAN PEDRO DE, a settlement of the 
head settlement of the district of Pinotepa and 
alcaldia mayor of Xicayan in Nueva Espana. 
It contains -30 families of Indians, who exercise 
themselves in the cultivation and commerce of 
tobacco, and is eight leagues s. e. of its head set 
tlement. 

[SINKING SPRING Valley. See BALD 
EAGLE Valley.] 

SINN, a mountain and volcano of the king 
dom of Chile in the district of Agualay ; 37 
leagues distant Yrom the lake of Aguas Calientes 
to the s. and 116 to the e. of Chiloe. In lat. 46 
15 s. 

[SINO. See SINU.] 

SINOS, a small river of the province and 
captainship of Rey in Brazil. It runs w. and en 
ters the river Grande, between the rivers Cahi 
and Garabatay. 

SINSALADA, a settlement of the jurisdiction 
of the town of St. Gil in the Nuevo Reyno de 
Granada ; very close to that town and to the w. 
of it. 

SINS ft, a settlement of the province and go- 
vernm^nt of Cartagena, in the same kingdom as 
tho former : founded by th^ re-union made in 
1776 by the governor Don Francisco Pimienta. 
It lies in the Great Sabana, n^ar the river, to 
the e. of the settlement of Santo Tomas Can- 
tuariense. 

SINSICAPA, a eottloment of the province and 
corregimiento of Gaamachuco in Peru. 

SINSICATE, a settlement of the province and 
government of Tucuman, in the same kingdom 
as the former ; of the district and jurisdiction of 
the city of Cordoba, on the shore of the river 
Primero. 

SINSILEJO, a settlement of the province and 
government of Cartagena, in the Nuevo Reyno 
de Granada ; founded in the Sabanas, by the 
re-union of other settlements made by the go 
vernor Don Francisco Pimiento in 1776. 

SINU, a settlement of the same province and 
kingdom as the former, with a port, large, con 
venient, and fit to contain many vessels. In its 
district are some abundant salines, by which it 
carries on a good trade. It stands on the shore 
of the river of its name ; 25 leagues from Carta 
gena, and was conquered by Pedro de Heredia 
in 1534, who found in it much gold. 

SIN.U, the above river, runs n. in the province 



S I P 

of Tolu, and enters the sea opposite the island oi 
San Bernardo. The territory which it laves is 
fertile and abundant in fruits and pulse, with 
which it provides the capital. [Its mouth is in 
lat. 9 29 w.] 

SION, JESUS DE, a settlement of the missions 
held by the religious of San Francisco, of the 
province and corregimiento of Caxamarquilla in 
Peru, on the shore of the river Guallaga. It is 
composed of Indians of various nations reduced 
to the faith. 

[SIOUS, or Sioux, a powerful nation of In 
dians, consisting- of three different tribes, which 
can furnish 9500 warriors ; the Sious, who in 
habit the head waters of the Mississippi and Mis 
souri, 3000 warriors ; the Sious of the meadows, 
2500; and the Sious of the woods, 4000. The 
two last inhabit on the head and w. waters of the 
Mississippi, and the islands of Lake Superior. 
For a farther account of them, see Vol. iii. p. 274. 
of this work.] 

SIOUX, a small river of the province and go 
vernment of Louisiana. 

Sioux, a lake of Canada, called also Issatis. 

SIPAPU, a river of the province and govern 
ment of Guayana or Nueva Andalucia. It rises 
near the settlement of San Josef de Mapoyes, 
runs s. and enters, much swelled, into the Ori 
noco, opposite the mouth, by which it is joined 
by the large river Vichada. 

SIPARAPU, a small river of the same pro 
vince and corregimiento as the former, which 
rises in the serranias of Parime, runs e. and en 
ters the Parime just at its source. 

SIPATUBA,a small river of the province and 
captainship of Maranan in Brazil, which runs 
n. n. e. and enters the sea opposite the island of 
its name. 

This river rises near the coast, of the same 
province, between the river Para and Bay of 
Casapoeira. 

SIPAYA, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Cochabamba in Peru ; annexed 
to the curacy of the settlement of Capinota. 

SIPEE, a small river of Canada, in the coun 
try and territory of the Iroquees Indians. It 
runs e. and enters the Niagara. 

SIPIAJO, a settlement of the head settlement 
of the district of Trindaro, and alcaldia mayor 
of Valladolid, in the province and bishopric of 
Mechoacan, at the foot of a lofty sierra. It con 
tains 64 families of Indians, and is a quarter of 
a league s. of its head settlement. 

SIPIRI, or ESECURE, a river of the province 
and government of Moxos in the kingdom o 



S I R 

Quito ; formed by two streams to the . of the 
lake, from which rises the river Eseneru, runs n. 
and enters the Marmore Grande, opposite the 
settlement or town of La Trinidad. 

SIPISA, a settlement of the province and cor- 
regimiento of Arica in Peru ; annexed to the cu 
racy of the settlement of Camina. 

SIPO, a river of the province and government 
of Guayana, which rises from a lake, and enters 
another lake called Pilala. 

SIPOMO, a river of the same province as 
the above ; formed from two streams which run 
w. and, then being very considerable, enters the 
Caura, opposite the settlement of Tauca. 

SIPORO, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Porco in Peru. 

[SIPSEY S, a branch of Tombeckbee River, 
in Georgia, which runs a s. w. by s. course. 
Its mouth is in about lat. 31 55 n. and 40 
miles n. by w. of the upper mouth of Alabama 
River.] 

SIQUIMA, a settlement of the province and 
government of Mariquita, and of the jurisdiction 
of Tocaima in the Nuevo Rev no de Granada ; 
annexed to the curacy of the settlement of Ano- 
laima. It is of an hot temperature, and fertile 
in sugar-canes, maize, yucas, and plantains : 
nearly eight leagues from Santa Fe. 

SIQUISAY, SANTISSIMA TRINIDAD DE, a 
small settlement of Indians of the province and 
government of Venezuela in the Nuevo Reyno 
de Granada ; annexed to the curacy of the set 
tlement of Santa Ana, in the district of the city 
of Truxillo ; from whence it is 15 miles distant 
to the n. ; also 65 from Carora, with an inclina 
tion to the w. It contains 188 souls. 

SIQUISIQUE, SAN JOSEPH DE, a settlement 
of the same province and kingdom as the former, 
of the district of the curacy of the city of Ca 
rora. It was founded as a doctrinal establishment 
for Indians at the end of the 16th century ; but 
those who inhabit it at the present day are tri 
butary. It also contains some Spaniards and 
people of colour. Its territory extends 12 leagues 
from e. to w. and 16 from n. to s. It is bounded 
by this rhumb and by the e. with the jurisdiction 
of the settlement of Ayamanes, being eight leagues 
from the same ; w. by the settlement of Santiago 
del Rio de Tucuyo, at 18 leagues distance; and 
n. by that of Pedregal, of the vicarage of Coro, 
37 leagues distance. Its principal productions 
are the breeds of small cattle, in which its in 
habitants, amounting to 2065 souls, and chiefly 
living in the country estates, are occupied. 

[SIR CHARLES SAUNDERS S Island, in 



SIS 



429 



the S. Pacific Ocean, discovered by Captain Car- 
teret, is about two leagues in length from e. to w. 
Lat. 17 28 s. long. 151 a&amp;gt;.] 

SIRCA, a settlement of the province and cor- 
regimiento of Aimaraes in Peru. 

SIREN A, a settlement and asiento of silver- 
mines of the alcaldia mayor of Guanajuato in the 
province and bishopric of Mechoacan. 

SIRICAGUI, a great sierra of much elevation 
and extent in the province of Sonora in N. 
America. 

SIRIMENA, a settlement of the missions 
which were held by the Jesuits in the province 
of San Juan de los Llanos and Nuevo Reyno de 
Granada ; on the shore of the river Meta ; and 
now under the charge of the religious barefooted 
Franciscans. 

SIRUGIPA, a river of the province and 
captainship of Seregipe in Brazil ; which rises 
near the coast, runs s. s. e. and unites itself with 
the Cirii to enter the sea. 

[SISAL, on the n. coast of Yucatan, in the 
Gulf of Mexico, is four leagues w. of Linchan- 
chee, and eight e. of Cape Condecedo. It is the 
highest look-out on the whole coast.] 

SISAMBE, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Riobamba in the kingdom of 
Quito ; very fertile and pleasant, and having in 
its district the great estate called De Chusay. 

SISAPONGO, a paramo or very lofty snow- 
clad mountain of the cordillera of the kingdom 
of Quito. 

SISIDIN, a small river of the province and 
government of Guayana, or Nueva Andalucia; 
which enters the Orinoco. 

SISOHUICHI, a settlement of the missions 
which were held by the Jesuits in the province of 
Taraumara and kingdom of Nueva Vizcaya. 
Thirty-seven leagues s. w. of the town and real 
of mines of Chiguagua. In its vicinity are some 
large estates called Teubachi, Cogunapuchi, and 
Lechuguilla. 

[SISSATONE, Indians of N. America, who 
claim the country in which they rove, embracing 
the upper portions of the Red River, of lake 
Winnipie, aud St. Peter s : it is a level country, 
intersected with many small lakes ; the land is 
fertile and free of stone ; the major part of it 
open plains. This country abounds more in the va 
luable fur animals, the beaver, otter, and martin, 
than any portion of Louisiana yet known. This 
circumstance furnishes the Sissatones with the 
means of purchasing more merchandise, in pro 
portion to their number, than any nation in this 
quarter. A great proportion of this merchandise 



430 



S I X 



SKA 



is reserved by them for their trade with the Te- 
tons, whom they annually meet at some point 
previously agreed on, upon the waters of James 
River, in the month of May. This Indian 
fair is frequently attended by the Yanktons of 
the North and Ahuah. The Sissatones and Yank- 
tons of the North here supply the others with 
considerable quantities of arms, ammunition., 
axes, knives, kettles, cloth, and a variety of other 
articles; and receive in return principally horses, 
which the others have stolen or purchased from 
the nations on the Missouri and zo. of it. They 
are devoted to the interests of their traders.] 

[SISSIBOU, in Nova Scotia, lies on the e. 
side of St. Mary s Bay, 28 miles s. e. of Anna 
polis.] 

SISTER S Ferry, a village in S. Carolina, 25 
miles from Coosawatchie, not far from Port- 
Royal.] 

SITAS, a settlement of Nuevo Mexico in N. 
America ; near the river Grande del Norde. 

SITAWINGO, a settlement of Indians of the 
province of Pennsylvania, one of the United 
States ; on the shore of the river Ohio. 

SITIO, S. FRANCISCO DEL, a town of the 
province and captainship of Todos Santos in 
Brazil. 

SITIPITI, a river of the province and corre- 
gimiento of Pataz in Peru, of the district and 
territory of the missions of Caxamarquilla. It 
runs n. and, after many leagues, joins the Maxa- 
merique to enter the rangon. 

SITIPO, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Caxamarquilla in Peru. 
SITUATE. SeeScixuATE. 
SITUJAS, a barbarous nation of Indians of 
the Nuevo Reyno de Granada ; to the n. of the 
river Apure : these savages are of a quiet and 
peaceable nature, and were converted and re 
duced to a settlement in 1689. They subsist by 
fishing and the chase. 

SI V^ARIMA, a shoal of rock, of the N. Sea, 
near the coast of the island of Cuba and the 
Bay of Matanzas ; on which was wrecked the 
admiral s ship of the galleons in 1698. 

[SIX MEN S Bay, on the w. side of the island 
of TBarbadoes, towards the n. end. It lies be 
tween Sunderland Fort to the s. and Six Men s 
Fort to the n.~\ 

[SIX NATIONS, a confederacy of Indian 
nations so called by the British and Americans. 
The French call them Iroquois. Formerly they 
were called the Five Nations, five only being 
joined in that alliance ; but they now consist of 
six nations, and call themselves Aganuschioni, 



that is, the United People. Some call them Min- 
gos ; others Maquais. 

These six nations are the Mohawks, Oneidas, 
Onondagas, Senecas, Cayugas, and Tuscaroras. 
The latter joined the confederacy about 100 
years ago. In the late war with Great Britain 
they were allies of that power, and in 1779 they 
were entirely defeated by the troops of Congress, 
and their towns all destroyed. They now live 
on grounds called the State Reservations, which 
are intermediate spaces settled on all sides by- 
white people. In their present cramped situation, 
they cannot keep together a great while ; they 
will probably quit the United States, and retire 
over the lakes Ontario and Erie. All the Mo 
hawks, and the greater part of the Cayugas, have 
already removed into Canada. The number of 
souls in all the six nations was, in 1796, 4058. 
The Stockbridge and Brotherton Indians, who 
now live among them, added, make the whole 
number 4508, of whom 760 live in Canada, the 
rest in the United States. By a treaty made in 
1794, between the United States on the one part, 
and the Six Nations and their Indian friends re 
siding with them, on the other part, it was sti 
pulated that " the sum of 4500 dollars should be 
expended annually, and for ever, in purchasing 
clothing, domestic animals, implements of hus 
bandry, and other utensils, and in compensating 
useful artificers who shall reside among them, 
and be employed for their benefit." This al 
lowance is under the direction of a superintend- 
ant. and is not distributed for any private pur 
poses. It is apportioned among them according 
to their numbers, in order to which there is an 
nually taken an exact census of all these In 
dians. 

In 1796, the Friends, commonly called Quakers, 
in their benevolence and zeal to promote the 
welfare of these Indians, raised a fund to support 
a number of their society, who offered to go and 
reside among them, with a view to promote their 
civilization, moral improvement, and real wel 
fare. A committee of their society was appointed 
to accompany these friends to humanity, and they 
were actually on the spot, and commenced their 
work of charity about nine years back. The state 
of New York have taken these Indians under 
their protection, and appointed commissioners 
to take care that they receive no wrong from in 
terested individuals.] 

[SKANEATETES, a lake in Onondaga 
County, New York, 14 miles long from s. e. to 
n. w* and little more than one mile wide where 
broadest. It waters the military townships of 



S K E 

Marcellus and Sempronius, and sends its waters 
. to Seneca River.] 

[SKENECTADY, an ancient and respectable 
town in Albany County, New York, 13 miles 
n. w. of Albany City, pleasantly situate in a vale 
bordered with hills to the s. and e. on the margin 
of Mohawk River. The houses, about 150 or 
200 in number, are compactly built, chiefly of 
brick, on regular streets, in the old Dutch style, 
on the s. side of the river : few of them are ele 
gant. The public buildings are a Dutch and a 
Presbyterian church. The windings of the river 
through the town and fields, which are often 

overflowed in the spring, afford a rich and charm- 

11 

ing prospect about harvest time. 

This town, being at the foot of navigation, on 
a long river which passes through a very fine 
country rapidly settling, it would be natural to 
conclude would embrace much of its commerce ; 
but originally knowing no other than the fur 
trade, which, since the revolution, has almost 
ceased, and having taken no advantage of its 
happy situation for other commerce, the place 
has considerably decayed. The chief business 
of this town now is to receive the merchandise 
from Albany, and put it into batteaux to go up 
the river, and forward to Albany the returns 
from the back country. See MOHAWK RIVER. 
Union College was established and incorporated 
here in 1794, and is under the direction of 24 
trustees. It took its name from the union of 
various denominations of Christians in its esta 
blishment. The Dutch were, however, by far 
the most liberal benefactors to this institution. 
It is well situated for the conveniency of the n. 
and w. parts of the state. In June, 1796, there 
were 40 students, divided into four classes, viz. 
1st. Languages ; 2d. History and Belles Lettres ; 
3d. Mathematics ; 4th. Philosophy. The annual 
expense of education here, including board, 
tuition, &amp;c. is less than 100 dollars. The pro 
perty of the college consists in various articles, 
to the following amount, viz. 

dolls. cts. 

Bonds and mortgages, producing an 

annual interest of 7 per cent. - 21,301 6 
Subscriptions and other debts due 

on the books of the treasurer - 4,983 10 
Cash appropriated for the purchase 

of books -------- 1,356 45 

House and lot for the president - 3,500 
Lot for the scite of the college - 3,250 
House and lot heretofore occupied 

for the academy, a donation from 

the consistory of the Dutch church 5,000 



S K E 

Books, &amp;c. in the possession of the 
trustees, and on the way from 
Europe 

Cash appropriated by the regents for 
the purchase of books in the hands 
of the committee - - - - - 

Legacy by Abraham Yates, jun. Esq. 
of Albany 



431 



2,381 99 



400 
250 
42,422 60 



And 1604 acres of land. The faculty of the 
college consisted, in 1797, of the president and 
one tutor ; and the salary of the former, with an 
house for his family, is 1100 dollars, and of the 
latter 665 dollars per annum, with an additional 
allowance at present of 250 dollars, on account of 
the extraordinary price of the necessaries of life. 
There were, in 1797, 37 students, eight in the 
class of languages, 20 in the class of history and 
belles lettres, six in the class of mathematics, 
and three in the class of philosophy. The course 
of studies is, the first year Virgil, Cicero s Ora 
tions, Greek Testament, Lucian, Roman anti 
quities, arithmetic and English grammar; the 
second year, geography and the use of the globes, 
Roman history, history of America, and the 
American revolution, 3enophon, Horace, criti 
cism, and eloquence ; the third year, the various 
branches of mathematics, and vulgar and decimal 
fractions, and the extraction of the roots, geo 
metry, algebra, trigonometry, navigation, men 
suration, Zenophon continued, and Homer ; and 
the fourth and last year, natural philosophy, the 
constitution of the United States and of the dif 
ferent states, metaphysics, or at least that part 
which treats of the philosophy of the human 
mind, Horace continued, and Longinus; and, 
during the course of these studies, the attention 
of the classes is particularly required to elocu 
tion and composition in the English language. 
A provision is also made for substituting the 
knowledge of the French language instead of the 
Greek, in certain cases, if the funds should here 
after admit of instituting a French professor 
ship. The library consists of about 1000 vo 
lumes, and 500 is appropriated to the purchase 
of a philosophical apparatus. The township 
of Skenectady contains 3472 inhabitants, of 
whom 683 are electors, and 381 slaves. It is 



bounded e. by Half Moon and Water- Vliet, and 
s. by the n. bounds of the manor of Rensselaer- 
wick.l 

[SKENESBOROUGH. now called WHITE 
HALL, is a growing township in the e. side of 



132 



S K E 



[the State of New York, situate on Wood Creek, 
on the s. side of South Bay. It is situate in a 
wild romantic country, as jet but little cultivated 
or improved. It contains very few houses ; but 
its principal resources are derived from the falls 
in its vicinity, upon which are built some saw 
and flour mills ; and from the commerce carried 
on between the state of New York and Canada, 
it being the port or harbour for most of the ves 
sels employed in that trade, and in transporting 
goods to the different settlements along the lake. 
It has, however, very bad water, and is unhealthy 
in summer. It is about eight miles e. by n. of 
Fort George, and six n. by e. of Fort Ann. The 
fortifications here were destroyed by General 
Burgoyne in July, 1777. 

It is only within the last 20 or 30 years, that 
much progress has been made in settling the 
lands in this part of the country. During the 
American war they formed almost one continued 
wood, containing merely a few wretched roads 
or intricate paths. It was here that General 
Burgoyne and his army were delayed (in the 
year before mentioned) so many weeks in open 
ing roads through the woods to Fort Edward, 
which occasioned many of those difficulties that 
afterwards led to the capture of that fine army. 
It is said, that when the general found he was 
hemmed in on every side, and knew he must sur 
render, he gave permission to his officers and 
soldiers to take advantage of the night, and 
make their escape into Canada. Upwards of 
2000 escaped in this manner, and went off, in 
small parties, \\ith Indians for their guides. 
Captain Ferguson, of the Canadian fencibles, was 
then in Burgoyne s army, and went off with his 
father, who was a captain in one of the regi 
ments. They made their escape at night without 
any Indian for their guide, and were 43 days in 
the woods before they reached St. John s, during 
which they had no other subsistence than the 
leaves and bark of trees, and what little game 
they could pick up. 

The mode of travelling here is in a sort of 
waggon, common in the states, and used by the 
country peoply to carry their provisions to mar 
ket, or to transport goods from one part of the 
country to the other. A great number are con 
stantly employed on the road between Skenes- 
borough and Troy. It is a long narrow cart 
upon four wheels, and drawn by two horses 
abreast. When used as a stage for travelling, a 
couple of chairs are placed in it; but it is a very 
rough method of riding, for the waggon has no 
springs ; and a traveller ought to have excellent 



SLA 

nerves to endure the shaking and jolting of such 
a vehicle over bad roads. 

In the neighbourhood of this place the woods, 
in many places, have been cleared by burning the 
bark off the trees, and numbers of them yet re 
main standing, though vegetation is destroyed. 
The other parts of the farms are covered with 
the stumps of trees and enclosed by worm fences, 
which give to these settlements a very rough ap 
pearance. They are, however, numerous, and 
contain several good houses. 

The surrounding country is agreeably diver 
sified with hill and dale, small woods, clumps of 
trees, corn-fields, pastures, and meadow-lands. 
The soil is said to be fertile, and many very 
handsome houses and churches are to be seen 
near the road-sides, all of wood, but constructed 
very neatly with clap-boards and shingles, which 
cover the heavy timbers. Many of the houses 
are built in the style of English country dwell 
ings of the modern taste ; some of them two or 
three stories high, painted white, and ornamented 
with green Venetian shades. The churches are 
uncommonly neat, painted white, and kept in 
excellent order. They have good spires, and 
some of them bells.] 

[SKIPPACK, a township in Montgomery 
Counly, Pennsylvania.] 

[SKIPTON, a village of Maryland on the n. 
side of Patowmac River, about 11 miles s. e. of 
Fort Cumberland, and 28 s. of Bedford in Penn 
sylvania.] 

* [SKITTIKISS, a bay of about eight leagues 
extent on the e. side of Washington s Isles, on 
the n. w. coast of N. America, n. of Cumber 
land Harbour. The opening is in lat. about 
53 15 / .1 

[SKUPPERNONG, a small river of N. Ca 
rolina. A canal was finished in 1790, which 
connects the waters of this stream with the lake 
in Dismal Swamp, on the s. side of Albemarle 
Sound.] 

[SKUTOCK Hills, in Hancock County, dis 
trict of Maine, lie n. e. of the harbour of Goulds- 
borough. In sailing from Mount Desert to 
Gouldsborough, you must steer n. n. e. for these 
hills, which are more remarkable than any in the 
e. country. There are five of them, and at a dis 
tance they appear round.] 

[SL A BT OWN, a village in Burlington County, 
New Jersey, about halfway between Burlington 
and Mount Holly, four or five miles from each.] 
SLATE, a small river of the colony of Vir 
ginia. 

[SLAUGHTER Creek, a short stream on the 



S M I 

e. side of Chesapeak Bay, Dorchester County, 
Maryland.] 

SLAVE Lake and River, in the n. w. part of 
N. America. The lake is extensive, and gives 
rise to M Kenzie s river, which empties into the 
Frozen Ocean, and receives the river of its name 
from the w. end of Athapescow Lake ; besides many 
other rivers from various directions. Slave Ri 
ver runs a n. w. by n. course, and is a mile wide 
at its mouth. The latitude of Slave Lake is 61 
26 / n. and the centre of the lake is in about long. 
115 w. The n. bay is 40 leagues deep, and six 
fathoms water. The Dog-ribbed Indians inhabit 
the n. shore of this lake.] 

[SLEARING Island, on the coast of New 
foundland.] 

SLOKUMS, an island of the N. Sea; one of 
those lying at the entrance of the Bay of Buz 
zard, and which are called the Isabella Isles ; in 
the district of the county of Barnstable, of the 
colony of Plymouth in New England. It is 
nearly circular, five miles in circumference, and 
n. of Tinker s Island, and 12 miles from the 
counties of Bristol and Barnstable. 

SLONINGTON, a town of the United States. 

[SMALL Point, on the coast of Lincoln County, 

district of Maine, forms the e. limit of Casco 

Bay, and lies n. e. of Cape Elizabeth, the w. 

limit.] 

SMALL, a settlement in the island of Barba- 
does ; of the district of the parish of San Juan, 
and at the extremity of the e. coast. 

SMIENDS Bay, on the coast of the province 
and captainship of Rio Grande, in Brazil ; be 
tween the shoal of San Roque and the point of 
Potetinga. 

[SMITH, a township in Washington County, 
Pennsylvania.] 

[SMITHFIELD, a small post-town of Virgi 
nia, on Pagan Creek, which empties into James s 
River, in the Isle of Wight County. It is 57 miles 
s. e. of Richmond. The creek is navigable for 
vessels of 20 tons.] 

[SMITHFIELD, a post-town, and the capital of 
Johnson County, N. Carolina, on the e. side of 
Neus River, on a beautiful plain, about 63 miles 
n. w. of Newbern, 18 from Raleigh.] 

[SMITHFIELD, a township of Pennsylvania, 
Philadelphia County.] 

[SMITHFIELD, Upper and Lower, two town 
ships in Northampton County. Pennsylvania.] 

[SMITHFIELD, a township of Rhode Island, 
Providence County, having the State of Massa 
chusetts on the n. and Cumberland on the n. e. 

VOL. IV. 



S M Y 



433 



Here are extensive orchards ; and great quan 
tities of stone-lime are made, and transported to 
Providence and other places. It contains 3171 
inhabitants, including five slaves.] 

[SMITH S Cape, the n. point of the entrance 
into a sea called the New Discovered Sea, and 
the s. w. point of the island formed by that sea or 
sound, which communicates with Hudson s 
Straits. It is on the e. side of Hudson s Bay. 
Lat. 61 10 n. long. 79 45 x a;.] 

[SMITH S Island, on the coast of N. Carolina. 
See CAPE FEAR, and BALD HEAD.] 

[SMITH S Island, the southernmost of the range 
of islands in the Atlantic Ocean, along the coast 
of Northampton and Accomack Counties, Vir 
ginia. It is near the s. point of Cape Charles. 
Here ships frequently come to anchor to wait for 
pilots to conduct them into Chesapeak Bay.] 

[SMITH S Isles, the range of islands which line 
the above coast. They were so named in 1608, 
in honour of Captain John Smith, who landed on 
the peninsula, and was kindly received by Acco 
mack, the prince of the peninsula, part of which 
still bears his name.] 

[SMITH S Island, a small island at the e. end 
of the island of Antigua, and in Exchange Bay.] 
[SMITH S Point is the s. limit of the mouth of 
Patowmack River, on the w. side of Chesapeak 
Bay, opposite to the n. head land, called Point 
Lookout, and in about lat. 38 .] 

[SMITH S, or STAUNTON RIVER. See STAUN- 
TON RIVER, in Virginia.] 

[SMITH S Sound, on the e. coast of Newfound 
land Island, is bounded n. by Cape Bona venture.] 
[SMITHTOWN, a plantation in Lincoln 
County, district of Maine, situate on the w. side 
of Kennebeck River, and contains 521 inhabi 
tants.] 

[SMITHTOWN, a small post-town of Suffolk 
County, Long Island, New York, 41 miles e. of 
New Y ork City. The township is bounded s. by 
Islip, w. by Huntington, n. by the Sound, and 
e. by the patent of Brookhaven, including Winne- 
commick. It contains 1022 inhabitants, of whom 
167 are electors, and 166 slaves.] 

[SMITH VILLE, the chief town of Brunswick 
County, N. Carolina, situate near the mouth of 
Cape Fear River, about 23 miles s. of Wil 
mington.] 

[SMYRNA, New, a thriving town in E. Flo 
rida. It is situate on a shelly bluff on the w. 
bank of the s. branch of Mosquito River ; about 
10 miles above the capes of that river, about 30 
miles w. of Cape Canaveral, and in lat. 28 n. It 
SK 



434 



S O C 



S O C 



is inhabited by a colony of Greeks and Minor- 
quies, established not long since, by Dr. Turn- 
bull.] 

[SNAKE Indians, a tribe who inhabit the s. w. 
side of Missouri River, in lat. about 47 n. and 
long. 107 w. The Shevetoon Indians inhabit 
on the opposite side of the river. Some meagre 
account of this tribe is to be seen in Gass s Tra 
vels, who went with Lewis and Clark from St. 
Lewis in the Mississippi to the mouth of the Co 
lumbia. See Vol. III. p. 273, of this work.] 

[SNOWHILL, a port of entry and post-town 
of Maryland, and the capital of Worcester Coun 
ty, situate on the s. e. side of Pokomoke River, 
which empties through the e. shore of Chesapeak 
Bay, about 12 miles to the s. w. Here are about 
60 houses, a court-house, and gaol, and the in 
habitants deal principally in lumber and corn. 
The exports for one year, ending the 30th of 
September, 1794, amounted to the value of 4040 
dollars. It is 14 miles from Horntown in Virgi 
nia, and 59 s. of Dover in Delaware.] 

[SNOWTOWN, a settlement in Lincoln 
County, district of Maine ; situate between the 
West Ponds, seven or eight miles w. of Sidney, 
opposite to Vassalborough, and n. w. of Hallo- 
well.] 

SOANCA, SANTA MARIA DE, a settlement of 
the missions which were held by the Jesuits in 
the province and government of Sonora in N. 
America. 

SOAPARI, a settlement of the province and 
captainship of Rio Grande in Brazil ; on the 
coast, between the Point of Piedras and the Bay 
of Simiends. 

SOATA, a territory of the Nuevo Reyno de 
Granada, in the antient province of Duytama. 
It is of an hot climate, but very fertile territory, 
especially in the herb coca, which they here call 
kayo, and which is one of the chief articles of its 
commerce. 

SOBER, a settlement of the island of Barba- 
does, in the district and parish of Todos Santos. 

SOCAIBAMBA, a lake of the province and 
corregimiento of Cauta in Peru, from whence 
rises the river Carabaillo : n. of the capital, and 
close to another lake called Lorococha. 

SOCAIRE, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Atacama and archbishopric of 
Charcas in Peru : annexed to the curacy of its 
capital. 

[SOCANDAGA, or SAGENDAGA, the w. 
branch of Hudson s River, runs a s. and s. e, 
course, and about 15 miles from its mouth, takes 



a n. e. direction, and joins that river about 13 or 
14 miles w. by n. of Fort Edward.] 

SOCAY, a settlement of the province and cor 
regimiento of Moquehua in Peru, annexed to the 
curacy of the settlement of Posci. 

SOCCHA, a small river of S. Carolina, which 
runs 5. and enters the Ampola. 

SOCHA, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Tunja in the Nuevo Reyno de 
Granada. It is of a moderately cold tempera 
ture, produces good wheat, maize, papas, and 
other fruits of a cold climate ; contains 100 
housekeepers and 70 Indians, and is 12 leagues 
n. e. of Tunja. 

SOCHILA, a principal and head settlement 
of the district of the alcaldia mat/ or of Villalta in 
Nueva Espana. It is of a cold temperature, con 
tains 121 families of Indians, and is seven leagues 
s. of its capital. 

SOCHINA, a principal and head settlement 
of the district of the same alcaldia mayor and 
kingdom as the former. It contains a population 
of 70 families of Indians, and is eight leagues from 
its capital. 

SOCHIQUALT, a settlement of the province 
and alcaldia mayor of Guadalaxara in N. Ame 
rica ; near the town of Cadreita. 

[SOCIETY Islands, a cluster of islands in the 
S. Pacific Ocean. To these islands Captain Cook 
was directed by Tupia, in 1769 : and he gave 
them this name in honour of the Royal Society. 
They are situate between the latitudes of 16 and 
18 W s. and between the longitudes of 148 
and 152 W w. They are seven in number. 

The soil, the productions, the people, their 
language, religion, customs, and manners, in all 
those islands, are so nearly the same as at Ota- 
heite, that little need be added to the account 
which has already been given. Nature has been 
equally bountiful in uncultivated plenty, and the 
inhabitants are as luxurious and as indolent. A 
plantain branch is the emblem of peace, and 
changing names the greatest token of friendship. 
Their morals are differently constructed, though 
serving the same purposes. It is customary to 
give their daughters to strangers wiio arrive 
amongst them ; but the pairs must be five nights 
lying near each other, without presuming to take 
any other liberty. On the sixth evening, the 
father of the young woman treats his guest with 
food, and informs his daughter, that she must 
that night receive him as her husband. The 
stranger must not express the least dislike, 
should the partner allotted to him be ever so dis- 



s o c 

agreeable ; for this is considered as an unpardon 
able affront, and is punished with instant death.] 

SOCO, a sea-port on the coast and of the pro 
vince and g-overnment of Venezuela, within the 
GulfofTriste. 

SOCOCHA, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Chichas and Tarija in Peru, be 
longing to the district of the former, and annexed 
to the curacy of Talina ; on the shore of a small 
river, to the w. of the town of Tarija, and near 
the settlement of Yavi. 

SOCOLOMO, a settlement of the province 
and government of Tucuman in Peru, near the 
river Salado. It was destroyed by the Infidel 
Indians, and nothing- but its ruins now remain. 

SOCONE, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Larecaxa in Peru, annexed to 
the curacy of Ambana. 

SOCONEY, a small river of S. Carolina, 
which runs w. and enters the source of the river 
Chunakansti. 

SOCONUSCO, a province andalcaldia mayor 
of the kingdom of Guatemala in N. America, and 
the most western of its provinces ; bounded n. 
by the province of Chiapa, s. by the Pacific Sea, 
w. by the province of Oaxaca in Nueva Espaiia, 
and s. e. by that of Guatemala. It is 35 leagues 
long from n, to s. and as many more wide from 
e. to w. It is very fertile in vegetable produc 
tions, and especially in c#co, which is most ex 
cellent, arid of the best quality of any in America. 
It is, on this account, that the crops of this ar 
ticle are eagerly bought up by the richest fami 
lies in these parts, and that very little of it finds 
its way to Europe. 

This province, of which the conqueror was 
Pedro de Alvarado, is watered by several rivers, 
all of which run into the S. Sea; along which 
coast it extends for 30 leagues. It is nearly un 
inhabited, having in it only one or two settle 
ments besides the capital, which is called Gue- 
guetlan. It was formerly dependent on the audi 
ence of Mexico ; until the year 1569, when it was 
added to that of Guatemala. 

[SOCORA, an island on the coast of S. Ame 
rica.] 

SOCO MINES, a barbarous nation of Indians 
of Peru, who dwell in the vicinities of the river 
Plata. Although now reduced to a very limited 
number, they are exceeding fierce, cruel, and 
treacherous. 

SOCO ROMA, a settlement of the province 
and corregimiento of Arica in Peru, annexed to 
the curacy of Copta. 

SOCORRO, NUESTR A SENNORA DEL, a large 



8 GO 



435 



settlement of the jurisdiction of the town of San 
Gil, in the corregimienlo and province of Tunja 
and Nuevo Reyno de Granada: of an hot but 
healthy temperature ; and, although suffering 
from drought, producing much sugar-cane, maize, 
plantains, yucas, cotton, and fruits, it maintains 
a great commerce in articles of the country : 
such as linens, rugs, cloths, quilts, and other 
effects. It has two chapels of ease, very close to 
each other ; the one called El Paramo, the other 
San Joseph, in the valley of this name, which is 
very pleasant, fertile, and salubrious. Its popu 
lation is composed of more than 3500 inhabi 
tants ; and in 1711 the President of Santa Fe 
granted it the title of City, though the same was 
never confirmed by the king. 

[There was a revolution in this province in 
1781, joined by all the Indians of the viceroyalty 
of Santa Fe. One hundred and twenty-three 
miles n. n, e. of the capital, Santa Fe, and 76 n. 
of Tunja.] 

SOCORHO, another settlement, called also Del 
Destierro, in the province and captains hip of Rey 
in Brazil ; in the island of Santa Catalina, of 
which it is the capital. 

SOCORRO, another, of the province of Tarau- 
mara and kingdom of Nueva Vizcaya in N. 
America, e. of the garrison of the Paso del Norte. 

SOCORRO, another, of the missions held by 
the religious of San Francisco in Nuevo Mexico 
and N. America. 

SOCORRO, another, of the province and govern 
ment of Cumana; in the strand of that coast, at 
the distance of a cannon-shot from the capital. 
Its natives enjoy the privilege of exemption from 
tributes and contributions. 

SOCORRO, another, in the province and coun 
try of Las Amazonas, and that part possessed by 
the Portuguese. It is a reduccion of the missions 
established there by the Carmelites of that na 
tion, and is situate on the shore of the river Ma- 
tari, in the mouth where it is entered by the 
Marucuvaca. 

SOCOS, a settlement of the province and cor- 
regimiento of Guanta in Peru, annexed to the 
curacy of the settlement of Ticllas. 

SOCOTA, NUESTRA SENNORA DE LA CON- 
CEPCION DE, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Tunja in the Nuevo Reyno de 
Granada. It has the singularity of enjoying in 
its district all the different degrees of tempera 
ture, of cold and heat, within a very small dis 
tance of each other ; and it consequently abounds 
in every kind of vegetable production. It has 



very 



good breeds of horses, mules, and other 



436 



S O G 



cattle, and the inhabitants make good leather 
and exquisite cheeses, in which it carries on a 
flourishing commerce ; but they are afflicted with 
the disease of the cotes, or swellings in the throat, 
though not to the same degree as are the inha 
bitants of the other settlements. The population 
amounts to about 200 housekeepers, and 40 In 
dians. Sixteen leagues n. e. of Tunja. 

SOCUIGA, a river of the province and go 
vernment of Santa Marta in the Nuevo Reyno 
de Granada. It rises in the Snowy Sierra, and 
enters the Cesare. It is also known by the name 
of Badillo, given it by the governor of this title. 

SODOMS, a settlement of Indians of the pro 
vince and country of the Iroquees ; where the 
English have a fort and establishment, between 
the lake Ontario and the river Seneca. 

[SODUS, Great, a gulf connected with the s. 
side of Lake Ontario, by a short and narrow en 
trance. It is about nine miles long, and four 
broad, and has an island in the e. part. The town 
called Sodus, stands on the w. side, near the 
s. w. part of the bay, or gulf; about 20 miles n. 
of Geneva, 26 s. w. of Oswego Fort, and 90 e. of 
Niagara.] 

SOGAMOSO, an antient province of the king 
dom of Bogota : bounded w. by the province of 
Tunja, from which capital it was two leagues 
distant, and was then subject to a prince, who 
was the high priest of the nation of the Moscas 
Indians. It was conquered by Gonzalo Ximenez 
de Quesada, is of limited extent, and is watered 
by a river from whence it took its name, and 
afterwards called Iraca. It is of a benign and 
healthy temperature, and now a corregimiento of 
Indians, dependent on the province of Tunja. 

SOGAMOS, a settlement and capital of the cor 
regimiento of the former province and kingdom. 
In the time of the Indian gentilism it was the 
capital and residence of the prince and high 
priest, called Sogamuxi, whicli has been cor 
rupted to Sogamoso. Here it was that the In 
dians had their temples, extremely sumptuous, 
and the inner parts adorned with gold and pre 
cious stones; the same being the deposits of their 
idols. These temples were one night accidentally 
set fire to by two Spanish soldiers, who had en 
tered to rob them; and, according to all the his 
torians, the fire lasted in this settlement for the 
space of five years. 

It is situate on a fertile and extensive plain, of 
a cold temperature, but healthy, and abounding 
in wheat of the best quality, as well as in barley, 
maize, tartuffles, and other productions of a cold 
climate. Here they make many woven stuffs of 



SOL 

wool ; such as quilts, baizes, hats, &amp;c. by which the 
natives carry on a great trade ; especially on Fri 
days, which is a market-day, at which assemble 
the people from the neighbouring parts. Its po 
pulation is composed of more than 500 house 
keepers, and 200 Indians. In the parish, which 
has the title of San Sebastian, is venerated an 
efiigy of this saint, sent by the Emperor 
Charles V. 

In this valley is the mouth of a path made by 
hand through the mountains ; and which begin 
ning in the Llanos of San Juan, extends for up 
wards of 100 leagues. It is asserted that by this 
road came the Bochica, which, in their idiom, 
means apostle, to preach to them the faith; and 
this matter is largely treated of by the authors 
Zamora, Oviedo, Castellanos, and Piedrahita. 
[Twenty-eight miles n. e. of Tunja.] 

SOGAMOSO, another, a small settlement of the 
district and government of S. Juan Giron, in the 
same kingdom ; which should have about 40 
housekeepers. Eight leagues from its capital. 

SOGAMOSO, a river of the same province. See 
CHICAMOCHA. 

SOGOCHI, a settlement and head settlement 
of the district of the same alcaldia mayor and 
kingdom as the former. It is of a cold tempera 
ture ; contains 211 families of Indians, and is b\ 
leagues s. of its capital. 

[SOIL Cove, a settlement on Desert Island in 
the district of Maine.] 

SOL Bay, on the coast of the river Amazonas, 
and the arm which forms the island of Marajo, 
between the river Tama and the settlement of 
Cutiguba. 

SOLA, a small island of the N. Sea ; between 
those of Margarita and Los Testigos ; and closest 
to the former, on the e. 

SOLAGA, a principal and head settlement 
of the district of the alcaldia mayor of Villalta in 
Nueva Espana. It is of a cold temperature, con 
tains 172 families of Indians, and is 4 leagues 
s. w. of its capital. 

[SOLANGO, an island on the coast of Peru; 
21 miles n. by w. from Colanche River, and 12 s. 
ofPortCallo.] 

SOLANO, S. FRANCISCO, a bay of the coast 
of the S. Sea, in the province and government of 
Choco and Nuevo Reyno de Granada. It keeps 
this name from a settlement which it had in it, 
and of which nothing but the vestiges remain. 

SOLANO, a river of the province and govern 
ment of Costarica, in the kingdom of Guatemala. 
It runs w. and enters the S. Sea, two leagues from 
the settlement of Esparza. 



SOL 



SOL 



437 



[SOLAR, MORRO, or CAPE SOLA, on the 
coast of Peru, is 10 miles s. of Lima.] 

SOLDADO, Island of, a small island, in the 
interior of the Bay of Chaguaramas, formed by 
two channels of the river Orinoco : discovered 
by Admiral Christoval Colon, in his fourth voy 
age, and who named it Escollo del Gallo. It 
is at the entrance of the channel- mouth of 
Sierpe. 

SOLDADO, SAN MIGUEL DE, a settlement 
of the head settlement of the district of Tlacolula 
and alcaldia mayor of Xalapa in Nueva Espana : 
founded 40 years since in the sierra of the same 
name, and which is in the high road to Mexico. 
It contains 45 families of Indians, dedicated to 
the cultivation of the soil, and breeding of swine- 
cattle. One league n. of its head settlement. 

[SOLDIER S Gut, on the n. e. coast of the 
island of St. Christopher s, in the W. Indies, e. 
of Half Moon Bay, and alsoe. of Christ Church.] 

SOLDINA, or MERCADILLO, a river of the 
province and corregimiento of Panches in the 
Nuevo Reyno de Granada. It rises in the Pa 
ramo of Rueiz, and enters the grand river Mag- 
dalena. 

SOLDOS, a settlement of the province and 
government of Tucuman in Peru, belonging to 
the district and jurisdiction of the city of Santi 
ago del Estero ; n. of this, and on the shore of 
the river Dulce. 

[SOLEBURY, a township in Buck s County, 
Pennsylvania.] 

SOLEDAD, DE LAS CANOAS, a settlement of 
Indians of the Mecos nations, in the head settle 
ment of the district of Tamazunchale and alcal 
dia mayor of Valles in Nueva Espana. It has 
12 Spanish families, with whom dwell upon very 
sociable terms about 30 families of Indians. The 
temperature is benign, and the soil yields abun 
dant crops of vegetable productions, particularly 
maize, which they sell in the neighbouring juris 
dictions with sufficient profit. This settlement is 
formed from a reduction of Indians, when the 
Count Fuenclara was viceroy. Thirty leagues 
n. of its capital. 

SOLEDAD, another, in the head settlement of 
the district of Tlapacoya and alcaldia mayor of 
Quatro Villas. It contains 49 families of Indi 
ans, who cultivate some cochineal, maize, seeds, 
and fruits, and cut wood, in which they trade. 
Three leagues n. w. of its head settlement. 

SOLEDAD, another, of the province and go 
vernment of Cartagena in the Nuevo Reyno de 
Granada ; on the shore of the grand river Mag- 



dalena, and at the extremity of the island, on 
which is the capital. 

SOLEDAD, another, of the missions which were 
held by the Jesuits, in the province and govern 
ment of Mainas and kingdom of Quito ; on the 
shore of the river Napo. 

SOLEDAD, another, of the province and go 
vernment of Sonora in Nueva Espana ; s. of the 
settlement of Santa Maria Magdalena. 

SOLEDAD, another, of the Nuevo Reyno de 
Leon, in N. America. 

SOLEDAD, another, with the surname of the 
Rio del Norte ; of the missions which were held 
by the religious of San Francisco, in New 
Mexico. 

SOLEDAD, another, which is an asciento of 
silver-mines, in the province and corregimiento 
of Caxamarquilla in the kingdom of Peru, an 
nexed to the curacy of Chilia. 

SOLEDAD, a bay of the coast of the S. Sea, in 
the province and government of Veragua and 
kingdom of Tierra Firme. It is a very large 
semicircle, and in its centre are three islands, 
called Sebaco, La Gobernadora, and Los Le- 
ones, besides two others, smaller. 

SOLEDAD, a desert place, or monastery of the 
barefooted Carmelites, in the province and king 
dom of Nueva Espana ; situate on the top of a 
mountain, three leagues n. w. of Mexico; the 
same spot being surrounded by a high stone 
wall, seven leagues in circumference, and there 
being in this wall certain caves formed out of 
the stone, which serve as so many chapels ; after 
the same manner as the chapels of Montserrat in 
Cataluna. In this convent the provincial chapter 
is celebrated; and here are gardens of more than 
two miles in extent, in which grow the most de 
licate European fruits. 

SOLENTINAZ, a settlement of the province 
and government of Nicaragua in the kingdom of 
Guatemala ; in a small island in the lake of Ni 
caragua. 

[SOLIMOES. See MADERA RIVER; also 
the article MARANNON.] 

SOLIS, a settlement of the province and alcal 
dia mayor of Los Zoques in the kingdom of 
Guatemala. 

SOLIS, another, with the addition of Grande, 
a river of the province and government of Bue 
nos Ayres in Peru ; which runs from n. to 5. and 
empties itself in the Plata at its entrance between 
the islands of Flores and Maldonado. 

SOLIS, another river of the same province and 
kingdom as the former, with the surname of 



438 



SOL 



S O M 



Chico, to distinguish it. It has the same course, 
and terminates to the s. w. of the former. 

SOLI-VINOKOU, a river of the province and 
corregimiento of Copiapo in the kingdom of Chile. 
It rises at the skirt of the mountain and volcano 
of Tucapel, runs straight to the s. and enters the 
Biobio. 

SOLOCO, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Luya and Chillaos in Peru ; 
annexed to the curacy of the settlement of Cheto. 

[SOLODAD, or SOLEDAD Port, on the e. side 
of the easternmost of the Falkland Islands, was 
formerly called Port Louis. The inner part of the 
harbour lies in lat. 51 34 s. and in long. 58 a&amp;gt;.] 

SOLOLA, and ATITAN, a province and alcal- 
dia mayor of the kingdom of Guatemala in N. 
America; bounded n. by the provinces of Quesal- 
tenango and Totanicapan, s. by the sea, w. by 
the province of San Antonio de Suchitepeque, 
and e. by the valley of Guatemala. It is of a 
limited extent but very fertile in wheat of excel 
lent quality, especially in that part called De 
Polopo, and this wheat, together with the gar- 
banzos, is highly esteemed. It produces many 
vegetables and fruits, amongst which the Chumbo 
figs pass for the best in the kingdom. It fabri 
cates a considerable portion of cotton, and with 
all the above articles carries on a considerable 
trade with the other provinces. 

The Lake of Atitan occupies the greater part 
of the extent of this province. This lake is six 
or seven leagues in circumference, and on its 
shores are established the finest settlements ; and 
it has this singular property, that although it be 
entered by several very considerable rivers, it al 
ways keeps the same level ; the natural inference 
of which is, that it has some subterraneous vent. 
In the s. part of this lake the currents are vio 
lent, and the sounding is not to be found, nor is 
there any strand save that by Atitan and Polopo. 
The water is extremely cold, notwithstanding 
the temperature of the province is hot. No fish 
breed in this lake, a circumstance attributed to 
its coldness, though the Indians have an idea 
that it is owing to a visitation of providence 
on a certain alcalde mayor who had committed 
many excesses against the fisheries. 

The greater part of the traffic of the province 
is carried on by great canoes, inasmuch as the 
land-routs are extremely rocky and difficult, and 
the whole of the country is mountainous and full 
of ravines. Here are two volcanoes, the one of 
which is called Atitan, and the other Solola. 
Both at no great distance from the lake. 



Magda- 



Santiago Atitan, 
San Lucas Tollman, 
San Pedro de la La- 

guna, 

Santa Clara, 
La Visitacion. 



SOLOLA, the capital, is of the same name, with 
the dedicatory title of Nuestra Seiiora de la 
Asuncion. It has a convent of the religious of 
S. Francisco, who were the curates, until the ap 
pointment of the regular clergy. It is a large 
town, and full of inhabitants, the which amount 
to 4700 Indians of various nations, such as the 
Quiches, Sotohiles, and Kazehiqueles. Twelve 
leagues from the capital of the kingdom of Gua 
temala. 

The other settlements are, 

Santa Lucia Utatan, San J nan de los Le- 

Santa Cruz, prosos, 

San Francisco Pana- San Joseph, 
jachel, 

La Concepcion, 

San Miguel Pochuta, 

San .Forge, 

San Andres, 

Santa Maria 
lena del Patului, 

[SOLOMON S Isles, or LAND OF THE ARSA- 
CIDES, a group of islands, concerning the exist 
ence of which there has been much dispute, lie 
about 1850 Spanish leagues w. of the coast of 
Peru, in the vicinity of New Guinea, between 
lat. 5 and 12 8 s. and between long. 154 and 
163 e. They were first discovered by Mendana, 
in his first voyage in 1567. Herrera, in his de 
scription of these islands, reckons 18 principal 
ones belonging to the group, from 50 to 300 
leagues in circumference, besides many of a 
smaller size. The air of these islands is salubri 
ous, the soil fertile, the inhabitants numerous, 
and of different shades from white to black. The 
principal of these islands are, St. Isabella, (which 
see); St. George, St. Mark, St. Nicholas, Florida, 
the Island of Palms, &amp;c.] 

[SOLON, a military township of New York, 
Onondago County ; about 29 miles n. w. from 
Susquehannah River, and 31 s. from Lake Oneida. 
It is under the jurisdiction of the town of Homer, 
which was incorporated in 1794.] 

SOLOYA, a river of the province and coun 
try of Las Amazonas ; which, according to Mr. 
Bellin, engineer in ordinary to the king of France, 
in his general map and description, runs e. and 
enters the Iza or Putumayo. 

SOMA, a small river of the province and go 
vernment of Cumana, which rises in the sierra 
of Imataca, runs s. and enters the Cuyuni by the 
n. side. 

[SOMBAVERA Islands, in the W. Indies. 
See SOMBRERO.] 



S O M 

[SOMBELLO Point, w. of the Gulf of Darien, 
is five miles n. of Francisco River.] 

SOMBRERETE, a settlement of the province 
and government of Venezuela, in the Nuevo 
Reyno de Granada, at a small distance from the 
city of San Carlos to the s. 

SOMBRERETE, another settlement, in the Nu 
evo Reyno de Leon. 

[SOMBRERETE, the head town and residence 
of a deputation de minerid, (deputation of mine 
ralogy) in the intendancy of Zacatecas in Nueva 
Espana.] 

SOMBRERO, or SAMBRERO, a small island 
of the N. Sea, one of the Antilles or Caribes, of 
the figure of a hat, and thus called by the Spa 
niards, who discovered it. It is about a league 
long, and the same broad, and lies between the 
island of Anguila and that of Anegada one of the 
Virgin Islands, 33 miles n. w. of the former. It 
is entirely desert and abandoned. 

[It was on this island that the unfortunate sea 
man Jeffery was so inhumanly left by order of 
his captain, for the offence of having tapped a 
barrel of beer when the water of his Britannic 
Majesty s brig ran short and the crew were al 
lowanced. After eight days suffering from thirst 
and hunger, supporting life by a few limpits that 
he picked up on the shore, and a little rain water 
he found in the crevices of the rocks, he was pro 
videntially delivered from his distressing situa 
tion by the schooner Adam, of Marble Head, 
John Dennis, which touched at the isle, took hirn 
off, and landed him in the county of Essex. Som 
brero is in lat. 18 37 40" n. long. 63 28 30" w.~] 

SOMBRERO, a settlement of the province and 
government of Venezuela, in the Nuevo Reyno 
de Granada on the shore of the river Guarico, 
and at the foot of the sierra of Carrizal by the n. 
part. 

SOMBRERO, another, with the dedicatory title 
of Nuestra Senora de la Concepcion, in the same 
province and kingdom as the former, and in the 
district of the city of S. Sebastian de los Reyes ; 
bounded e. by the settlement of Barbacoas, from 
whence it is 4| leagues w. by the town of Cala- 
bazo, 40 miles to the s. w. ; n. by the settlement 
of Ortiz, 13 leagues. 

Its territory is nearly full of sabanas, in which 
breed an infinite number of neat cattle, mules, 
and horses, of which consists its principal com 
merce. In the parish-church is venerated on an 
altar by the side of the epistle-side a miraculous 
image of Nuestra Senora, called Del Arroyo, 
painted on a stone which is said to have been 



S O M 



439 



found some 50 years ago by two bovs whilst 
bathing. The population of this settlement is 
composed of 2182 persons of Spaniards, Indians, 
Mulattoes, Mustees, and Negroes. 

SOMBRERO, a river of the province and go 
vernment of Buenos Ayres in Peru, which runs 
w. and enters the Plata, near the city of Cor- 
rientes. 

SOMELSDYCK, a colony of the Dutch or 
part of Surinam, in the part where the rivers 
Commewine and Cotich unite, and where there 
is a good and well-furnished fortress. Here the 
Dutch carry on a lucrative trade, as the soil is 
very fertile, and abounding in sugar-canes, cot 
ton, tobacco, and coffee. 

SOMERS. See BERMUDAS. 

[SOMERS, a township of Connecticut, on the 
n. line of Tolland County, which separates it 
from the State of Massachusetts. It contains 
about 1200 inhabitants, and is 15 miles n. e. of 
Hartford.] 

SOMERSET, a county of Maryland. 

SOMERSET, a city of this county. 

SOMERSET, a town of the United States. 

[SOMERSET, a township in Washington County, 
Pennsylvania.] 

[SOMERSET, a township of Vermont, Wind- 
ham County ; 10 or 12 miles n. e. of Ben- 
nington.] 

[SOMERSET, a post-town of Massachusetts, 
Bristol County, and on Taunton River. It was 
incorporated in 1790, and contains 1151 inhabi 
tants. It is nine miles e. of Warren in Rhode 
Island, and 38 s. of Boston.] 

[SOMERSET, a well-cultivated county in New 
Jersey, on the n. side of the great road from New 
York to Philadelphia. The soil, especially on 
Rariton River and its branches, is good, and 
produces good crops of wheat, of which great 
quantities are annually exported. It is divided 
into six townships, which have three churches for 
Presbyterians, five for the Dutch reformed, one 
for Dutch Lutherans, and one for Anabaptists. 
It contains 12,296 inhabitants, including 1810 
slaves.] 

[SOMERSET, the capital of the above county : 
situate on the w. side of Millstone River. It 
contains a court-house, gaol, and about 30 
houses. It is 23 miles n. of Trenton.] 

[SOMERSET, a county of Maryland : bounded 
e. by the State of Delaware and Worcester 
County, and ay. by the waters of Chesapeak Bay. 
It contains 15,610 inhabitants, including 7070 
slaves. Washington Academy, in this county, 



440 



SON 



SON 



was institued by law in 1779. It was founded, 
and is supported by voluntary subscriptions and 
private donations ; is authorised to receive gifts 
and legacies, and to hold 2000 acres of land.] 

[SOMERSET, a new county of Pennsylvania ; 
bounded n, by Huntingdon and &amp;lt;?. by Alleghany 
County in Maryland, and is divided into five 
townships.! 

[SOMERSWORTH, a township of Stratford 
County, New Hampshire, 19 miles from Ports 
mouth, containing 943 inhabitants. It was taken 
from Dover, from which it lies adjoining to the 
n. e. ; and incorporated in 1754. A dreadful 
storm of thunder and lightning happened here 
in May 1779.] 

SOMONDOCO, a settlement of the province 
and corregimiento of Tunja, in the Nuevo Revno 
de Granada ; in the ancient province of Tensa, 
and in the valley of this name. It is of a mild 
temperature, and produces fruits of a warm cli 
mate, such as sugar-canes, plantains, maize, 
yucas, anniseed, and a quantity ofgarbanzos. In 
its district is the celebrated mineral mountain 
abounding in emeralds, which was discovered in 
1537, by Pedro Fernandez Valenzuela, and An 
tonio Diaz Cardoso ; from whence immense riches 
have been extracted, and by which the settle 
ment has been well peopled, though the above 
labour having decreased, the population is now 
reduced to 200 housekeepers and 100 Indians. 
[Twenty-nine miles s. e. of Tunja, and 61 n. e. 
of Santa Fe.l 

SOMPALLON, SANTIAGO DE, a city of the 
Nuevo Reyno de Granada ; founded in 1544 by 
Fernando Valdes, on the shore of the grand river 
Magdalena : 40 leagues distant from Teneriffe, 
14 from Talameque, and 70 from the mouth of 
the river. It took its name from a settlement of 
Indians that was established there, called Som- 
pallos. But this unfortunate city was demolished 
by the infidels as soon as it was founded, and no 
thing but the memory of it remains. 

SONAITA, a river of the province and go 
vernment of Sonora in N. America. 

SONCHE, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Chachapoyas in Peru ; annexed 
to the curacy of the settlement of Levanto. 

SONCOR, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Atacama, and bishopric of Char- 
cas in Peru ; annexed to the curacy of its capital. 

SONDA. See SAMBALLOS. 

SONDA, BUENA, a shoal of the coast of Bra 
zil, in the province and captainship of Rio Ja 
neiro, near Cape Santo Tome. 



SONDONDO, a settlement of the province 
and corregimiento of Lucanas in Peru ; annexed 
to the curacy of the settlement of Cabana. 

SONDOR, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Piura in Peru ; annexed to the 
curacy of Huancabamba. It was formerly of 
consideration, but has now fallen into great 
decay. It is situate on the confines of the king 
dom of Quito, and of the province of Jaen, on 
the n. shore of the river Huancabamba, on a 
beautiful and pleasant spot, in the high road lead 
ing to Jaen and to Tomependa. Its whole popu 
lation is composed of Indians. In lat. 5 s. 

SONDORILLO, a settlement of the same 
province and eorregimiento as the former, on the 
shore of the river upon which that stands. This 
is small. 

SONETES, Island of Rattle-Snakes, is in 
Lake Erie of Canada, near its w. coast, and op 
posite the mouth of the Strait of Misisagues. 

SONGO, a large settlement of Indians, of the 
province and corregimiento of Larecaxa, and arch 
bishopric of Charcas in Peru : situate in a moun 
tainous and rough spot. The natives rose against 
the Spaniards in 1723, putting many to death ; 

but in the following; year they returned to their 

, ,. &amp; J J 

obedience. 

[SONGO River, in the district of Maine, is 
formed by two branches which unite in Ray- 
mondtown, about three miles from Sebago Pond. 
The longest branch rises in Greenland, about 
three miles from Amariscoggin River, where is a 
pond called Songo Pond, two miles long. This 
stream, which pursues a s. course for at least 70 
miles, is so free from rapids, that timber may be 
brought conveniently from within a few miles of 
its head. The other branch comes from Water- 
ford and Suncook, and passes through a number 
of small ponds ; then falling into Long Pond, it 
proceeds through Brandy Pond, and meets the 
other branch. It is beatable its whole length, 
25 miles. See ORANGETOWN or GREENLAND, 
and SEBAGO Pond.] 

SONLAHUE, a river of the province and 
government of Louisiana, which runs s. and en 
ters the sea very abundantly, to the w. of the 
Movila. 

SONO, a settlement of the province and go 
vernment of Guayaquil, and kingdom of Quito, 
at the entrance of the river Guayaquil, in the s. 
part, and on the shore opposite the capital. 

SONO, a river of the kingdom of Brazil, which 
is small, runs n. n. zo. and enters the Paratinga, 
just before this joins the Tocantines. 



SON 



S O 



441 



SONOMARE, a settlement of the province 
and corregimiento of Caxamarquilla in Peru. 

SONORA, S. JUAN BAPTISTA DE, a province 
and government ; bounded n. by nations of In 
dians but little known, s. by the province of Si- 
naloa, e. by the province of Taraumara, and w. 
by the coast of the sea of Californias, following 
the coast its whole extent for more than 100 
leagues, and being about 350 leagues in circum 
ference, as to that part which has been recon 
noitred and is settled. It was discovered in 
1596 by Captain Sebastian, a Vizcayan, when 
he went to discover and reconnoitre the Cali 
fornias. 

It takes its name from a valley it has, of more 
than 60 leagues long, and which the first Spa 
niards called La Senora, and in which governed 
a cacique, or regular chief, over the infinite In 
dians with whom these countries were peopled. 
The same Indians voluntarily solicited instruc 
tion in the Catholic faith in 1638 ; and on their 
having been committed to the charge of the Je 
suits, the father Bartolome Castano went out on 
the mission and baptised many. His labours 
were imitated by several others ; and they suc 
ceeded in founding 25 settlements of the Indians, 
called the Pimas Baxos, Opatas, Tobas, Tequia- 
mas, Hequis, Pimas Altos, Ceris, Tepocas, and 
Guaimas ; all of whom, excepting the latter na 
tion, dwell in the finest valleys. Such valleys, 
however, are very few, and are, properly speak 
ing, ramifications of the mother sierra ; nor can 
they be approached without that sierra being first 
passed. 

This province is watered by many rivers and 
streams, which make it most abundantly irri 
gated, and very fertile for crops of maize, French 
beans, and wheat ; as also for vines yielding ex 
cellent grapes, although in no quantity, either 
from want of attention in the Indians or from 
their ignorance in the cultivation of them. The 
territory also yields many other fruits, as well of 
America as of Europe : also pulse and garden- 
herbs. It has many silver-mines, the working of 
which is not worth speaking of, owing to the 
great expense of labour. 

As a defence to the settlements of this pro 
vince against the invasions of the Apaches In 
dians, there have been established, at different 
periods, five garrisons, furnished with a sufficient 
supply of troops, and of the names of Visani, 
San Felipe de Jesus Guevavi, Horcasitas, Coro 
de Guachi, Pitiqui, Rio Chico, and Buenavista. 

In 1744, the father Jacobo Sedelmair, a Jesuit, 
reconnoitred this province to find a pass by the 

VOL. IV. 



n. to reduce the province of Moqui, fan inde 
pendent nation of Indians since 1680] ; and in 
1765, the inhabitants of Sonora, enraged at the 
hostilities they had experienced from the infidel 
Indians, sent to the viceroy, then the Marquis de 
Croix, and besought him that he would furnish 
them with troops and arms for their defence. 
Although the royal coffers were at that time in 
a very low state, a sum was raised by means of 
the commerce of the province, and by the sub 
scriptions of individuals, equal to 200,000 dol 
lars, and an expedition was entrusted to the 
charge of Don Joseph de Galves, who was, at 
that time, in that kingdom. A six years war 
was the event, before that, in 1771, he could re 
duce those barbarous tribes. 

In pursuing them, he traversed with his army 
over parts hitherto unattempted by Spaniards, 
and in some of the sierras through which he 
passed, discovered rich mines of gold and silver: 
and in the spot called La Cienequilla, which is a 
llanura of upwards of 14 leagues long, were 
found only two foot from the surface of the 
earth lumps of gold of such magnitude, as that 
one alone should weigh nine marks ; and thus 
were many thousands of marks of gold collected, 
without even the trouble of washing the earth 
from oft it. Indeed, such were the riches of this 
mine, that some intelligent persons have asserted 
that it might have produced a million of dollars. 
This affair soon caused no less than 2000 per 
sons immediately to settle here. The form of 
the government of the province was changed, 
and a commandant-general appointed, who was 
Don Theodore de Croix, knight of Croix, and of 
the Teutonic order, and now colonel and director 
of the regiment of the Royal Walloon Guards ; 
and, in honour of this expedition, the aforesaid 
Don Joseph de Galvez took the title of La So 
nora ; though some years after, and on another 
occasion, he changed it for that of Castilla. 

[Humboldt thus describes that tract of country 
which he denominates the Intendancy of Sonora. 
This intendancy, which is still more thinly peopled 
than that of Durango, extends along the Gulf of 
California, called also the Sea of Cortez, for 
more than 280 leagues from the great bay of 
Bayona, or the Rio del Rosario, to the mouth 
of the Rio Colorado, formerly called Rio de Bal- 
zas, on the banks of which the missionary monks 
Pedro Nadral and Marcos de Niza made astro 
nomical observations in the 16th century. The 
breadth of the intendancy is by no means uni 
form. From the tropic of Cancer to the 27th 
degree the breadth scarcely exceeds 50 leagues;] 
3 L 



442 



SO NO R A. 



[but further n. towards the Rio Gila, it increases 
so considerably, that on the parallel of Arispe 
it is more than 128 leagues. 

The intendancy of Sonora comprehends an ex 
tent of hilly country of greater surface than the 
half of France ; but its absolute population is not 
equal to the fourth of the most peopled depart 
ment of that empire. The intendant who resides 
in the town of Arispe has the charge, as well as 
the intendant of San Luis Potosi, of the adminis 
tration of several provinces, which have pre 
served the particular names which they had be 
fore the union. The intendancy of Sonora, con 
sequently, comprehends the three provinces of 
Cinaloa or Sinaloa, Ostimury, and Sonora Pro 
per. The first extends from the Rio del Rpsario 
to the Rio del Fuerte ; the second from the Rio 
del Fuerte to the Rio del Mayo ; and the pro 
vince of Sonora, called also in old maps by the 
name of New Navarre, includes all the northern 
extremity of this intendancy. The small district 
of Cinaloa is now looked on as part of the pro 
vince of Cinaloa. The intendancy of Sonora is 
bounded on the w. by the sea ; on the s. by the 
intendancy of Guadalaxara ; and on the e. by a 
very uncultivated part of New Biscay. Its n. 
limits are very uncertain. The villages De la 
Pimeria alta are separated from the banks of the 
Rio Gila by a region inhabited by independent 
Indians, of which neither the soldiers stationed 
in the presidios, nor the monks posted in the 
neighbouring missions, have been hitherto able 
to make the conquest. 

From the port of Guitivis, at the mouth of 
the Rio Mayo, called also Santa Cruz de Mayo, 
the courier embarks for California, charged with 
the dispatches of the government and the public 
correspondence. This courier goes on horseback 
from Guatemala to the city of Mexico, and 
from thence by Guadalaxara and the Rosario to 
Guitivis. After crossing in a lancha the sea of 
Cortez, he disembarks at the village of Loreto 
in Old California. From this village letters are 
sent from mission to mission to Monterey and 
the port of San Francisco, situate in New Cali 
fornia under lat. 37 48 w. They thus traverse 
a route of posts of more than 920 leagues, that 
is to say, a distance equal to that from Lisbon 
to Cherson. The river of Yaqui, or Sonora, has 
a course of considerable length ; it takes its rise 
in the w. declivity of the Sierra Madre, of which 
the crest, by no means very elevated, passes be 
tween Arispe and the Presidio de Fronteras. The 
small port of Guaymas is situate near its mouth. 

The most w. part of the intendancy of Sonora 



bears the name of Pimeria, on account of a nu 
merous tribe of Pimas Indians who inhabit it. 
These Indians, for the most part, live under the 
domination of the missionary monks, and follow 
the catholic ritual. The Pimeria Alta is dis 
tinguished from the Pimeria Baxa ; the latter 
contains the Presidio de Buenavista ; the former 
extends from the military post (presidio) of Ter- 
nate to the Rio Gila. This hilly country of the 
Pimeria Alta is the Choco of N . America. All 
the ravins, and even plains, contain gold scat 
tered up and down the alluvious land. Pepitas 
of pure gold, of the weight of from two to three 
kilogrammes, (from 51b. toSlb. troy) have been 
found there. But these lavaderos are by no means 
diligently sought after, on account of the fre 
quent incursions of the independent Indians, and 
especially on account of the high price of pro 
visions, which must be brought from a great dis 
tance in this uncultivated country. Further n. 
on the right bank of the Rio de la Ascension, 
live a very warlike race of Indians, the Seris, 
to whom several Mexican savans attribute an 
Asiatic origin, on account of the analogy be 
tween their name and that of the Seri, placed by 
ancient geographers at the foot of the mountains 
of Ottorocoras to the e. of Scythia extra Imaum. 

There has been hitherto no permanent com 
munication between Sonora, New Mexico, and 
New California, although the court of Madrid 
has frequently given orders for the formation of 
presidios and missions between the Rio Gila and 
the Rio Colorado. The extravagant military 
expedition of Don Joseph Galvez did not serve 
to establish in a permanent manner the n. limits of 
the intendancy of Sonora. Two courageous and 
enterprising monks, fathers Garces and Font, were 
able, however, to go by land through the coun 
tries inhabited by independent Indians from the 
missions of La Pimeria Alta to Monterey, and 
even to the port of San Francisco, without cross 
ing the peninsula of Old California. This bold 
enterprise, on which the college of the Propa 
ganda at Queretaro published an interesting no 
tice, has also furnished new information relative 
to the ruins of La Casa Grande, considered by 
the Mexican historians (Clavigero, i. p. 159) as 
the abode of the Aztecs on their arrival at the 
Rio Gila towards the end of the twelfth century. 

Father Francisco Garces, accompanied by Fa 
ther Font, (see Chronica Serafica de el Colegio 
de Propaganda fede de Queretaro, por Fray 
Domingo Arricivitor, Mexico, 1792, torn. ii. p. 
396, 426 , and 462,) who was entrusted with the 
observations of latitude, set out from the Pre-] 



S O N O R A 



443 



[sidio d Horcasitas on the 20th April, 1773. After 
a journey of 11 days they arrived at a vast and 
beautiful plain, one league s distance from the 
s. bank of the Rio Gila. They there discovered 
the ruins of an ancient Aztec city, in the midst 
of which is the edifice called La Casa Grande. 
These ruins occupy a space of ground of more 
than a square league. The Casa Grande is 
exactly laid down according to the four cardinal 
points, having from n. to s. 136 metres (or 445 
feet) in length, and from e. to w. 84 metres (or 
276 feet) in breadth. It is constructed of clay 
(tapia). The pises , or cases in which the clay is 
rammed down in the construction of a clay wall, 
are of an unequal size, but symmetrically placed. 
The walls are 12 decimeters (or three feet 11 
inches) in thickness. This edifice had three 
stories and a terrace. The stair was on the out 
side, and probably of wood. The same kind of 
construction is still to be found in all the villages 
of the independent Indians of the Moqui w. from 
New Mexico. In the Casa Grande were five 
apartments, of which each is 27. 18 feet in length, 
10.82 feet in breadth, and 11.48 feet in height. 
A wall, interrupted by large towers, surrounds 
the principal edifice, and appears to have served 
to defend it. Father Garces discovered the ves 
tiges of an artificial canal, which brought the 
water of the Rio Gila to the town. The whole 
surrounding plain is covered with broken earthen 
pitchers and pots, prettily painted in white, red, 
and blue. We also find amidst these fragments 
of Mexican stone-ware pieces of obsidian (itztli), 
a very curious phenomenon, because it proves 
that the Aztecs passed through some unknown 
n. country which contains this volcanic substance, 
and that it was not the abundance of obsidian in 
New Spain which suggested the idea of razors 
and arms of Itztli. We must not, however, con 
found the ruins of this city of the Gila, the centre 
of an ancient civilization of the Americans, with 
the Casas Grandes of New Biscay, situate between 
the presidio of Yanos and that of San Buenaven 
tura. The latter are pointed out by the indige 
nous, on the very vague supposition that the 
Aztic nation, in their migration from Aztlan to 
Tula and the valley of Tenochtitlan, made three 
stations ; the first near the lake Teguyo (to the 
s. of the fabulous city of Quivira, the Mexican 
Dorado !) the second at the Rio Gila, and the 
third in the environs of Yanos. 

The Indians who live in the plains adjoining 
the Casas Grandes of the Rio Gila, and who have 
never had the smallest communication with the 
inhabitants of Sonora, deserve by no means the 



appellation of Indios bra-cos. Their social civi 
lization forms a singular contrast with the state 
of the savages who wander along the banks of 
the Missoury, and other parts of Canada. Fathers 
Garces and Font found the Indians to the s. of 
the Rio Gila clothed and assembled together, to 
the number of two or three thousand, in villages 
which they call Uturicut and Sutaquisan, where 
they peaceably cultivate the soil. They saw 
fields sown with maize, cotton, and gourds. 
The missionaries, in order to bring about the 
conversion of these Indians, showed them a pic 
ture painted on a large piece of cotton cloth, in 
which a sinner was represented burning in the 
flames of hell. The picture terrified them, and 
they entreated Father Garces not to unrol it any 
more, nor speak to them of what would happen 
after death. These Indians are of a gentle and 
sincere character. Father Font explained to them 
by an interpreter the security which prevailed in 
the Christian missions, where an Indian alcalde 
administered justice. The chief of Uturicut re 
plied : " This order of things may be necessary 
for you. We do not steal, and we very seldom 
disagree ; what use have we then for an alcalde 
among us ?" The civilization to be found among 
the Indians when we approach the n. w. coast of 
America, from the 33 to the 54 of latitude, is a 
very striking phenomenon, which cannot but 
throw some light on the history of the first mi 
grations of the Mexican nations. 

There are reckoned in the province of Sonora 
one city, Arispe ; two towns, viz. Sonora and 
Hostemuri ; 46 villages, or settlements, 15 pa 
rishes, 43 missions, 20 farms, or haciendas, and 
25 cottages, or ranchos. 

The province of Cinaloa contains five towns 
(Culiacan, Cinaloa, El Rosario, El Fuerte, and 
Los Alamos), 92 villages, 30 parishes, 14 hacien 
das, and 450 ranchos. 

In 1793 the number of tributary Indians in 
the province of Sonora amounted only to 251, 
while in the province of Cinaloa they amounted 
to 1851. This last province was more anciently 
peopled than the former. 

The most remarkable places of the intendancy 
of Sonora are : Arispe, Sonora, Hostimuri, Cu 
liacan, Cinaloa, El Rosario, Villa del Fuerte, Los 
Alamos. 

The population of this intendancy amounted, 
in 1803, to 121,400 : the extent of surface, in 
square leagues, is 19,143: making the number 
of inhabitants to the square league 6.] 

Sox OR A. The capital of the above province 
and intendancy, with the dedicatory title of San 
3 L 2 



444 



SON 



SON 



Juan Baptista. It is a real of mines of silver 
and of gold ; and from these it derives its chief 
emolument. [Its present population is about 
6400 souls.] its curacy is collegiate, and in lat. 
29 40 . The other settlements are the follow 
ing, including those of the missions : 



Nacozari, 

Tepache, 

Motepore, 

Vavispe, 

Soledad, 

Guisuani, 

Populo, 

Toape, 

Concepcion, 

Tepetates, 

Timen, 

Caborca, 

Aribeti, 

Bazaraca, 

Guevavi, 

Anabas, 

Comurispas, 

Aigame, 

Pitiquin, 

San Francisco, 

Los Alamos, 

Batuco, 

San Cosme, 

Macameri, 

Cucurpe, 

San Hipolito, 

Nazacori, 

San Ignacio, 

Laoripa, 

Guazava, 

Matape, 

Mobas, 

San Estanislao, 

Ures, 



Babicora, 

Bayaconi, 

Aconchi, 

Guecapa, 

Banamichi, 

Apode, 

Dolores, 

Bacanutchi, 

SantaMaria Soanca. 

Santa Magdalena. 

Belen, 

Bacade, 

Oposura, 

Batuco, 

Teopari, 

San Francisco de 

Borja, 
Cinoquipa, 
Arispe, 
Chinapa, 
Bacoati, 
Basochuca, 
San Pedro, 
Los Angeles, 
Merisichi, 
Remedies, 
Cananca, 
Cocospera, 
Tubutama, 
Onapa, 
Guachi, 
Cuquasarachi, 
Tecoripa, 
S. Xavier del Bac. 



SONSONATE, [or TRINIDAD,] a province 
and alcaldia mayor of the kingdom of Guatemala 
in N. America : bounded s. by the S. Sea ; n. by 
the sierra; e. and the other rhumbs by the pro 
vince and alcaldia mayor of San Salvador, which 
surrounds it; and w. by that of Escuintla or 
Guazacapan. Its extent is 25 leagues long, and 
15 wide at the broadest part. 

It is of a very hot climate, produces some 
cacao, which, in former times, was in greater 
abundance, through the large estates which it 
had of this production, but which have been, for 
the most part, abandoned ; the natives having 
rather addicted themselves to the cultivation of 
indigo, which they procure from a plant called 



there guiquilite, this being the chief article of 
commerce. It produces also much sugar, which 
they make in the engines ; rice and starch, made 
ofi/uca root, in such abundance, as by these two 
last articles to supply the whole kingdom of 
Guatemala; also in qjonjoli, (sessamum) from 
which they extract a certain portion of oil. Its 
territory produces no wheat, owing to the heat 
of the climate ; and what is necessary is there 
fore provided from the alcaldias may ores of Xalapa 
and Totonicapan. It has large breeds of swine, 
which it sends in droves to the capital ; of neat 
cattle ; domestic fowl, fruit, and vegetables, ne 
cessary for its own consumption, and of very 
superior quality. In this province are many 
muleteers, who, in requas, or droves of 25 to 50 
mules, which they call atajos, carry on the traffic 
of conveying the aforesaid effects to the port of 
its name, and to the capital. It is watered by 
various rivers, which run to empty themselves 
into the S. Sea; with the exception of that which 
they call Del Agua Caliente (of warm water), 
which is very large, and enters the N. Sea. 

In its jurisdiction is comprehended the cele 
brated coast of Balsamo, whereon is found the 
richest balsam known, and consequently highly 
esteemed in all parts. The population, which 
amounts to about 40,000 souls, is entirely of 
Indians, Mulattoes, Negroes, and other casts ; 
although there are not wanting some Spanish 
families. Along the whole coast of the S. Sea 
the waters are so violent, as to deserve any name 
rather than that of Pacific ; and as the only com 
mercial port here, called Acajutla, is nothing 
more than a very large bay, in which vessels lie 
exposed to the inclemency of the weather, and 
at a distance from land ; it follows that the lading 
and unlading of merchandise are attended with 
great inconveniences, and not unfrequently with 
considerable loss. Notwithstanding this, how 
ever, vessels do not fail to arrive here from the 
kingdoms of Nueva Espaiia, Tierra Firme, and 
Peru ; from the convenience of this spot being 
only four leagues distant from the capital, and of 
throwing the effects immediately into the interior 
provinces. 

The capital is of the same name, with the de 
dicatory title of Santissima Trinidad ; being a 
town founded on the shore of the river of its 
name, and four miles from the port of Acajutla; 
which has also the same title, in the S. Sea, and 
is a large bay, much frequented by vessels from 
the kingdoms of Peru, Tierra Firme, and Nueva 
Espaiia, conveying the greatest part of the traffic 
carried on with Guatemala. 



SOP 

It has, besides the parish church, three con 
vents of religious ; which are of San Francisco, 
S. Domingo, and La Merced; a convent for fe 
male orphans, founded by Don Fr. Juan de Za- 
pata and Sandoval, of the order of San Agus- 
tin, bishop of Vera Paz. Its population, which 
is tolerably large, is composed of three wards ; 
bearing the names of Sonsonate, Mexicanos, and 
San Antonio ; and in these dwell about 100 In 
dians and 1900 other souls, of which 400 may be 
Spaniards. 

This town, although of the greatest impor 
tance from the reasons above mentioned, has no 
fortification or defence whatever. In its vicinity 
runs the grand Sierra Apaneca for many leagues 
from e. to w. and in it are three volcanoes. Its 
temperature is hot. As the port aforesaid is close 
to the capital of the kingdom Guatemala, there 
are in the vicinities of this town manv muleteers, 
masters of large droves, who employ themselves 
in carrying merchandise ; and as this is the prin 
cipal branch of commerce, the number who thus 
gain their livelihood is very great. [This town 
is distant from Guatemala*! 62 miles. Lat. 13 
46 n. long. 89 45 .] 

S. Pedro Caluco, Talrnasuc, 

S. Andres Guaimango, Comacagua, 

Santiago Naulingo, Theotepeque, 

S. Miguel Jujuta, Xicalapa, 

Asuncion de Avecha- Chiltiupa, 

pan, Asuncion de Izalco, 

, Ataco, San Juan Navizalco, 

Tacuba, Sta.CatalinaMazapua, 

S.SilvestreGuaimaco, San Pedro Pauztlan, 

Zapotan, Sto. Domingo Guiza- 

Quixnagua, pan, 

Mixata, San Andres Apaneca, 

Cacaluta, Joayola, 

S. Antonio Atheos, Salcotitan. 

SOPACHUI,. a settlement of the province 
and corregimiento of Tomina in Peru. 

SOPETRAN, a settlement of the province 
and government of Antioquia in the Nuevo Reyno 
de Granada, close to its capital. In it is vene 
rated a miraculous image of Nuestra Senora of 
its name, presented by the oidor of Santa Fe, 
Don Francisco Campuzano, and held in parti 
cular devotion by all the surrounding people. 

SOPINGA, a settlement of the province and 
government of Popayan in the Nuevo Reyno de 
Granada. 

SOPO, a settlement of the corregimiento ofZi- 
paquira in the Nuevo Reyno de Granada. It is of 
a cold temperature, and abounding in vegetable 



S O R 



445 



productions corresponding to its climate. It 
contains more than 200 housekeepers and 100 
Indians ; and is six leagues n. of Santa Fe. 

SOQUICANCHA, a settlement of the pro 
vince and corregimiento of Guarochiri in Peru ; 
annexed to the curacy of San Cosine and San 
Damian. 

SORA, a settlement of the province of Tunja 
in the Nuevo Reyno de Granada. It is of a 
moderately cold temperature, and abounding in 
productions of such a climate, especially in wheat 
of very fine quality, maize, papas, &amp;c. It con 
tains 100 housekeepers, and 150 Indians ; and is 
two hours journey from the road of Tunja to 
the w. going to the town of Leiba. 

SORACA, a settlement of the same province 
and kingdom as the former ; of a very cold tem 
perature, and surrounded by swamps, which 
make it sickly, particularly during the evening. 
It produces sufficient wheat, maize, barley, papas. 
&amp;c. and much cattle, of the wools of which its 
natives fabricate woven stuffs. Its population 
was once large ; but now reduced to 25 house 
keepers and 150 Indians ; though these, the greater 
part of them, may be said to have gone over to 
Tunja, which is half a league to the e. 

SORACA, a very abundant river in the same 
province and kingdom as the former settlement. 

SORAMINA, a river of the province and go 
vernment of Guayana, or Nueva Andalucia, in 
the territory possessed by the Dutch. 

SORAS, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Lucanas in Peru. 

SORASOR A, a settlement and asiento of gold 
mines ofthe province and corregimiento of Oruro 
in Peru, four leagues from its capital. 

SORAYA, a settlement of the province and 
corresimiento of Aimaraez in the same kingdom 

O ^ J 

as the former. 

[SOREL, a small town ; situate at the en 
trance of the river Sorel, which runs into Lake 
Champlain. It has a respectable appearance 
from the water : it is somewhat smaller than 
Three Rivers, and is inhabited by several Eng 
lish and French families. The streets are prettily 
laid out, but the houses are yet very thinly scat 
tered. Sorel, indeed, seems rather on the de 
cline, both in wealth and population : and the 
few stores that are kept there, are mostly depen 
dent upon the merchants of Montreal and Que 
bec. Its trade is confined to the supplying the 
inhabitants of the town and neighbourhood with 
English manufactured goods, AVest India pro 
duce, &amp;c. The little importance that was for- 



446 



S O R 



merly attached to Sorel, arose from the ship 
building carried on there for some years ; but of 
late that has entirely ceased. 

The country people in the vicinity are mostly 
employed as voyageurs in the n. w. fur trade, 
and the cultivation of their small farms is left to 
their wives and children. When they return 
home, they seldom bring more than enough to 
support them during the winter. The soil is 
thus neglected, and the town is badly supplied 
with provisions. Three horrid murders were 
committed here about nine or ten years ago. A 
store, kept by an old man, was observed, one 
morning, not opened as usual : the neighbours 
knocked at the door, but not getting admittance, 
they broke it open, and discovered the old man, 
and his niece who lived with him, lying dead be 
hind the counter. It appeared that they must 
have been just called from supper to serve the 
villain who had murdered them, for the supper 
things were laid out on the table in an adjoining 
parlour. The till was emptied of all the money, 
and many articles strewed about the floor. 

The very next night, to the dread and astonish 
ment of this little town, another man was mur 
dered in his store in a similar manner, and his 
money stolen ; but what was most surprising, 
the murderer remained undiscovered, and even 
unsuspected ! nor was it ever positively ascer 
tained who had been guilty of such atrocious 
deeds. But when the foreman of the shipyard, 
an European, decamped a few days after, with 
the wife of a tradesman in the town, strong sus 
picions were entertained that he was the mur 
derer. He however made his escape into the 
United States, before any measures could be 
taken to apprehend him.] 

SOREL, a fort built by the French in the pro 
vince and country of the Iroquees Indians ; situ 
ate at the w. point of the mouth of the river of 
the same name. 

[SOREL, River, the outlet of Lake Champlain, 
which, after a course of about 69 miles n. empties 
into the river St. Lawrence, in lat. 46 5 , and 
long. 72 55 w. 

The country in the neighbourhood of the river 
Sorel does not yield to the others either in fer 
tility or beauty. This river has three names ; 
sometimes it is called Sorel, sometimes Chambly, 
(places thus named being situate upon it) and 
sometimes Richlieu. This river is of great value 
to Canada, because it has its source in Lake 
Champlain, from whence great quantities of va 
luable produce, particularly ship-timber and pot- 



SOT 

ashes, are annually introduced from the United 
States. Indeed, it is the only channel acknow 
ledged in law for the commerce of the States 
with Lower Canada. Hence, at a place called 
St. John s, on this river, near the lake, we have 
established a custom-house, which takes cogni 
zance of whatever passes to and from the United 
States. 

There is a fort at Chambly, and another at 
St. John s ; neither of them are very formidable: 
that at Chambly is built of stone ; that at St. 
John s of wood. We generally have some troops 
at St. John s, as it is a frontier town.] 

SORIBAN, a port of the coast of the N.Sea, 
in the province and kingdom of Tierra Firme : 
it is also called Port de Escribanos, and lies be 
tween that of N ombre de Dios and the point of 
San Bias. 

SORITOR, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Chachapoyas in Peru. 

SORO, a settlement of the province and go 
vernment of Cumana ; one of those which are 
held by the Aragonese Capuchins; in the midst 
of the Serrania. 

SOROCOTA, a llanura, called, by another 
name, De San Martin, in the Nuevo Reyno de 
Granada. It is very large, populous, fertile, 
and delightful, and of a mild and healthy climate : 
was discovered by Gonzalo Ximenez de Quesada 
in 1537. 

SOROCUCHO, a settlement of the province 
and corregimiento of Cajamarca in Peru ; an 
nexed to the curacy of Celedin. 

SOROPALCA, a settlement of the province 
and corregimiento of Porco in the same kingdom 
as the former. 

[SORREL. See SOREL.] 
SOTAQUI, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Coquimbo in the kingdom of 
Chile. In its district are four vice-parishes, and 
two small settlements of Indians, through which 
passes the river Limari ; and in the valley here 
are gathered abundant crops of grapes and seeds. 
SOTAQUIRA, a settlement of the province 
and corregimiento of Tunja in the Nuevo Reyno 
de Granada. It is of a very cold temperature, 
and abounding in wheat, barley, maize, and papas. 
It has large breeds of cattle, from the fleeces 
of which they make fringed shirts and mantles, 
and also of cotton, towels, napkins, and other 
fine articles, of great estimation throughout the 
whole kingdom. It contains 200 housekeepers, 
and ISO Indians : and is a little more than three 
leagues between n. and n. w. of its capital. 



sou 

SOTARA, a settlement of the province and 
government of Popayan, in the same kingdom as 
the former. 

SOTKING, a small island of the N. Sea; 
one of the Lucayas : w. of the island of Yuma. 

SOTO, a settlement of the province and go 
vernment of Tucuman in Peru, of the district 
and jurisdiction of the city of Cordoba, on the 
shore of the river Primero. 

SOTOLAMARINA, a settlement of the pro 
vince and government of Sierra Gorda in the Bay 
of Mexico and kingdom of Nueva Espana; 
founded by the count of that title, Don Joseph 
de Escandon, Colonel of the Militia of Quere- 
taro, in 1750. 

SOTOTA, a small settlement of the head set 
tlement of the district of Orijava and alcaldia 
mayor of Ixmiquilpan in Nueva Espana. 

[SOTOVENTO, a name applied to the Lesser 
Antilles in the W. Indies. Among these, the 
chief may be reckoned Trinidad, Margareta, Cu 
racao, and Tortugas.j 

[SOTOVENTO LOBOS, Or LEEWARD ISLAND OF 

SEA WOLVES OR SEALS, on the coast of Peru, 
is seven leagues from the Barlevento Lobos, or 
Windward Island of Sea Wolves. It is about 
miles in circuit, and 25 miles from Cape 



six 



Aguja.J 

SOTO VIS, a settlement of the province and 
government of Louisiana in N. America; where 
the French have built a fort on the shore of the 
river Akansas. 

SOTOYA, a small river of the province and 
country of Las Amazonas ; which rises in the 
territory between the nations of the Indians call 
ed Greabellados, Cenequajes, and Cungies, runs 
w. and enters the Isa or Parana. 

[SOUFFRIER Mountain. The most northerly 
of the lofty chain running through the centre of 
the island St. Vincent, and the highest of the 
whole, as computed by the most accurate survey 
that has as yet been taken. For some time pre 
vious to the 30th April, 1812, this memorable 
mountain had indicated much disquietude ; and, 
from the extraordinary frequency and violence 
of earthquakes, (which are calculated to have ex 
ceeded 200 within the preceding year) had por 
tended some great movement or eruption. The 
apprehension, however, was not so immediate as 
to restrain curiosity, or to prevent repeated vi 
sits to the crater, which of late had been more 
numerous than at any former period, even up to 
Sunday last, the 26th of April; when some gen 
tlemen ascended it, and remained there for some 
time. Nothing unusual was then remarked, or 



447 



any external difference observed, except rather a 
stronger emission of smoke from the interstices 
of the conical hill, at the bottom of the crater. 
To those who have not visited this romantic and 
wonderful spot, a slight description of it, as it 
lately stood, is previously necessary and indis 
pensable, to form any conception of it, and to 
the better understanding the account which fol 
lows ; for no one living can expect to see it again 
in the perfection and beauty in which it was on 
Sunday, the 26th instant. 

About 2000 feet from the level of the sea, (cal 
culating from conjecture) on the s. side of the 
mountain, and rather more than two-thirds of its 
height, opens a circular chasm, somewhat ex 
ceeding half a mile in diameter, and between 
four or 500 feet in depth : exactly in the centre 
of this capacious bowl rose a conical hill, about 
260 or 300 feet in height, and about 200 in dia 
meter, richly covered and variegated with shrubs, 
brushwood, and vines, above half-way up, and 
for the remainder powdered over with virgin 
sulphur to the top. From the fissures in the 
cone and interstices of the rock a thin white 
smoke was constantly emitted, occasionally ting 
ed with a slight bluish flame. The precipitous 
sides of this magnificent amphitheatre were 
fringed with various evergreens and aromatic 
shrubs, flowers, and many Alpine plants. On 
the n. and s. sides of the base of the cone were 
two pieces of water, one perfectly pure and taste 
less, the other strongly impregnated with sul 
phur and alum. This lonely and beautiful spot 
was rendered more enchanting by the singularly 
melodious notes of a bird, an inhabitant of these 
upper solitudes, and altogether unknown to the 
other parts of the island : hence principally call 
ed, or supposed to be, invisible; though it cer 
tainly has been seen, and is a species of the 
merle. 

A century had now elapsed since the last con 
vulsion of the mountain, or since any other ele 
ments had disturbed the serenity of this wilder 
ness than those which are common to the tropical 
tempest. It apparently slumbered in primeval 
solitude and tranquillity, and from the luxuriant 
vegetation and growth of the forest which co 
vered its sides from the base nearly to the sum 
mit, seemed to discountenance the fact, and 
falsify the records of the ancient volcano. Such 

A. 

was the majestic, peaceful Souftrier, on April the 
27th ; but the surrounding inhabitants trod on 
" ignem repositum cinen doloso," and their 
imaginary safety was soon to be confounded by 
the sudden danger of devastation. Just as the] 



448 



S O U F F R I E R MOUNTAIN. 



[ plantation bells rang twelve at noon, on Monday 
the 27th, an abrupt and dreadful crash from the 
mountain, with a severe concussion of the earth, 
and tremulous noise in the air, alarmed all 
around it. The resurrection of this fiery furnace 
was proclaimed in a moment by a vast column of 
thick, black, ropy smoke, like that of an im 
mense glass-house, bursting forth at once, and 
mounting to the sky ; showering down sand, with 
gritty calcined particles of earth and favilla mix 
ed, on all below. This driven before the! wind 
towards Wallibon and Morne Ronde, darkened 
the air like a cataract of rain, and covered the 
ridges, woods, and cane-pieces, with light grey- 
coloured ashes, resembling snow when slightly 
covered by dust. As the eruption increased, this 
continual shower expanded, destroying every 
appearance of vegetation. At night a very con 
siderable degree of ignition was observed on the 
lips of the crater ; but it is not asserted, that 
there was as yet any visible ascension of flame. 
The same awful scene presented itself on Tues 
day ; the fall of favilla and calcined pebbles still 
increasing, and the compact pitchy column from 
the crater rising perpendicularly to an immense 
height, with a noise, at intervals, like the mut 
tering of distant thunder. On Wednesday the 
29th, all these menacing symptoms of horror 
and combustion still gathered more thick and 
terrific for miles around the dismal and half- 
obscured mountain. The prodigious column shot 
up with quicker motion, dilating as it rose like a 
balloon. The sun appeared in total eclipse, and 
shed a meridian twilight over us, that aggra 
vated the wintry gloom of the scene, now com 
pletely powdered over with falling particles. It 
was evident that the crisis was as yet to come 
that the burning fluid was struggling for a vent, 
and labouring to throw off the superincumbent 
strata and obstructions, which suppressed the 
ignivomous torrent. At night, it was manifest, 
that it had greatly disengaged itself from its bur 
den, by the appearance of fire flashing now and 
then, flaking above the mouth of the crater. 

On Thursday, the memorable 30th of April, 
the reflection of the rising sun on this majestic 
body of curling vapour was sublime beyond ima 
gination any comparison of the Glaciers, of the 
Andes, or Cordilleras with it, can but feebly 
convey an idea of the fleecy whiteness and bril 
liancy of this awful column of intermingled and 
wreathed smoke and clouds : it afterwards as 
sumed a more sulphureous cast, like what we 
call thunder-clouds, and in the course of the day 
a ferruginous and sanguine appearance, with 



much livelier action in the ascent, a more ex~ 
tensive dilation, as if almost freed from every 
obstruction after noon, the noise was incessant, 
and resembled the approach of thunder still 
nearer and nearer, with a vibration, that affected 
the feelings and hearing : as yet there was no 
convulsive motion, or sensible earthquake. Ter 
ror and consternation now seized all beholders. 
The Caribes settled at Morne Ronde, at the foot 
of the Souffrier, abandoned their houses, with 
their live stock, and every thing they possessed, 
and fled precipitately towards town. The Ne 
groes became confused, forsook their work, look 
ed up to the mountain, and, as it shook, trem 
bled, with the dread of what they could neither 
understand or describe the birds fell to the 
ground, overpowered with showers of favilla, 
unable to keep themselves on the wing ; the cat 
tle were starving for want of food; as not a 
blade of grass or a leaf was now to be found ; 
the sea was much discoloured, but in no wise 
uncommonly agitated : and it is remarkable, that 
throughout the whole of this violent disturbance 
of the earth, it continued quite passive, and did 
not at any time sympathise with the agitation of 
the land. About four o clock p. m. the noise be 
came more alarming, and just before sunset the 
clouds reflected a bright copper colour, suffused 
with fire. Scarcely had the day closed, when 
the flame burst at length pyramidically from the 
crater, through the mass of smoke ; the rolling 
of the thunder became more awful and deafen 
ing : electric flashes quickly succeeded, attended 
with loud clapjsj and now, indeed, the hurly- 



burly began. Those only who have witnessed 
such a sight, can form any idea of the magnifi 
cence and variety of the lightning and electric 
flashes ; some forked zig-zag playing across the 
perpendicular column from the crater others 
shooting upwards from the mouth like rockets of 
the most dazzling lustre others, like shells 
with their trailing fuses, flying in different para 
bolas, with the most vivid scintillations from the 
dark sanguine column, which now seemed in 
flexible, and immovable by the wind. Shortly 
after seven p. m. the mighty caldron was seen to 
simmer, and the ebullition of lava to break out 
on the n. w. side. This, immediately after boil 
ing over the orifice, and flowing a short way, 
was opposed by the acclivity of a higher point of 
land, over which it was impelled by the immense 
tide of liquified fire that drove it on, forming 
the figure V in grand illumination. Sometimes, 
when the ebullition slackened, or was insufficient 
to urge it over the obstructing hill, it recoiled] 



S O U F F R I E R MOUNTAIN. 



449 



[back, like a refluent billow from the rock, and 
then again rushed forward, impelled by fresh 
supplies, and scaling every obstacle, carrying 
rocks and woods together, in its course down the 
slope of the mountain, until it precipitated itself 
down some vast ravine, concealed from our sight 
by the intervening ridges of Morne Ronde. Vast 
globular bodies of fire were seen projected from 
the fiery furnace, and bursting, fell back into it, 
or over it, on the surrounding bushes, which 
were instantly set in flames. About four hours 
from the lava boiling over the crater, it reached 
the sea, as we could observe from the reflection 
of the fire and the electric flashes attending it. 
About half past one, another stream of lava was 
seen descending to the e. towards Rabacca. The 
thundering noise of the mountain, and the vi 
bration of sound, that had been so formidable 
hitherto, now mingled in the sullen monotonous 
roar of the rolling lava, became so terrible, that 
dismay was almost turned into despair. At this 
time the first earthquake was felt : this was fol 
lowed by showers of cinders, that fell with the 
hissing noise of hail during two hours. At three 
o clock, a rolling on the roofs of the houses in 
dicated a fall of stones, which soon thickened, 
and at length descended in a rain of intermingled 
fire, that threatened at once the fate of Pompeii 
or Herculaneum. The crackling and corusca 
tions from the crater at this period exceeded all 
that had yet passed. The eyes were struck with 
momentary blindness, and the ears stunned with 
the glomeration of sounds. People sought shel 
ter in cellars, under rocks, or any where, for 
every where was nearly the same ; and the mi 
serable Negroes, flying from their huts, were 
knocked down or wounded ; and many killed in 
the open air. Several houses were set on fire. 
The estates situate in the immediate vicinity 
seemed doomed to destruction. Had the stones 
that fell been proportionably heavy to their size, 
not a living creature could have escaped without 
death : these having undergone a thorough fu 
sion, they were divested of their natural gravity, 
and fell almost as light as pumex, though in 
some places as large as a man s head. This 
dreadful rain of stones and fire lasted upwards 
of an hour, and was again succeeded by cinders 
from three till six o clock in the morning. 
Earthquake followed earthquake almost mo 
mentarily, or rather the whole of this part of 
the island was in a state of continued oscilla 
tion : not agitated by shocks, vertical or hori 
zontal ; but undulated, like water shaken in a 



VOL. IV. 



The break of day, if such it could be called, 
was truly terrific. Darkness was only visible at 
eight o clock, and the birth of May dawned like 
the day of judgment : a chaotic gloom enveloped 
the mountain, and an impenetrable haze hung 
over the sea, with black sluggish clouds of a 
sulphureous cast. The whole island was covered 
with favilla, cinders, scoria, and broken masses 
of volcanic matter. It was not until the after 
noon the muttering noise of the mountain sunk 
gradually into a solemn yet suspicious silence. 
Such were the particulars of this sublime and 
tremendous scene, from commencement to catas 
trophe. We shall now describe its effects, or 
the injury it has done. 

The following authentic information, on this 
head, is derived from extracts of a letter from 
the Speaker of the Assembly of St. Vincent, to 
the Colonial Agent in London, dated St. Vincent, 
May 6, 1812. 

&amp;lt; On one estate, called Wallibou, to leeward, 
and on five more to windward, or, as we speak 
here, in the Caribe country, the earth is still 
covered with what I will still term ashes, from 
six to 12 inches ; and on one estate the walls of 
the boiling-house fell in, as it is supposed, from 
the effects of an earthquake. 

Excepting the one estate to leeward, and 
those five to windward, I do not believe the in 
jury has been very great. The ashes have fallen 
abundantly on two or three others, but, it is 
hoped, not enough materially to injure the soil ; 
this, however, as well as the effect where it is 
deeper, must be ascertained by experience. We 
have no data to judge whether it be a mere caput 
mortuum, or if it contain the sources of vegeta 
tion; if the latter, labour and industry may bring 
matters about ; but if the former, I do not know 
what to say. So the rivers which turn the mills 
on these estates may resume their courses ; but 
no human wisdom can do more than conjecture 
on the subject. 

4 The estates, from the Caribe boundary, and 
from Wallibou, have not, as I understood, re 
ceived any injury ; the ashes fell indeed to the 
extent of many miles at sea, for, after the great 
and heavy part was deposited, the lighter par 
ticles seem to have been dispersed in all direc 
tions throughout the island ; it has made a light 
thin crust, about one-fourth or one-eighth of an 
inch thick, which we consider as doing more 
good than harm. 

i Only one white man, and I believe 40 or 50 
Negroes, have been lost; and some magass- 
houses, Negro houses, and other buildings took | 
SM 



450 



SOU 



[fire, from the ignited stones, which were dis 
charged to a considerable distance, and at certain 
periods in great profusion. 

* This, I believe, is a tolerably correct state 
ment of the effects produced by this dreadful 
event ; though I speak with some hesitation as to 
the damage suffered by two estates in the Caribe 
country, and one to leeward, called Richmond, 
the accounts which I have not agreeing very well. 
My opinion is, that the damage is not great, but 
persons concerned in all the properties from 
Mount Young (to windward), and from Walli- 
bou (to leeward), maybe at ease as to any loss. ] 
SOVAGE, a small river of Newfoundland; 
which runs w. in the s. head or extremity, and 
enters the sea in the bav of the Straits of Belle 
Isle. 

[SOUEYAWAMINECA, a Canadian settle 
ment, in lat. 47 17 30" n.] 

SOUPHRIERE, a mountain in the island of 
St. Domingo. See AZUFRERA. 

[SOUTH, a short river of Anne Arundel 
County, Maryland, which runs e. into Chesapeak 
Bay. Its mouth is about six miles s. of Annapo 
lis city, and is navigable in vessels of burden 10 
or miles.] 

[SOUTH AMBOY, a township of New Jer 
sey, Middlesex County, and contains 2626 inha 
bitants, including 183 slaves.] 

[SOUTH AMERICA, like Africa, is an ex 
tensive peninsula, connnected with N. America 
by the Isthmus of Darien and Panama.] 

[SOUTHAMPTON. See SOUTH HAMP 
TON.] 

[SOUTH ANNA, a branch of North Anna 
River in Virginia, which together form Pamunky 
River.] 

[SOUTHBOROUGH, a small township in 
the e. part of Worcester Count v, Massachusetts, 
incorporated in 1727 ; contains 840 inhabitants, 
and is 30 miles w. by 5. of Boston.] 

[SOUTH BRANCH HOUSE, a station of 
the Hudson s Bay Company, in N. America, si 
tuate on the e. side of Saskashawan River.] 

[SOUTH BR1MFIELD, a township of Mas 
sachusetts, Hampshire County, about 24 miles 
s. e. of Northampton, and 61 w. of Boston. It 
was incorporated in 1762, and contains 606 in 
habitants.]^ 

[SOUTH BURY, a town of Connecticut, 
Litchfield County, nine miles n. e. of Danbury, 
and 33 s. w. of Hartford.] 

[SOUTH EAST, a township of New York, 
situate in Dutchess County, bounded s. by W. 
Chester County, and w. by Frederick Town. It 
contained, by the census of 1792, 921 inhabi- 



sou 

tants ; of whom 261 were electors, and 13 
slaves.] 

[SOUTH CAROLINA, one of the United 
States of America ; bounded n. by N. Carolina ; 
e. by the Atlantic Ocean ; s. and s. w. by Savan 
nah River, and a branch of its head waters, 
called Tugulo River, which divides this state 
from Georgia. It lies between lat. 32 35 15" 
n. and between long. 78 80 84" w. from Green 
wich. It is in length about 200 miles from n. to 
s. and 260 from e. to w. and contains 20,000 
square miles. It is divided into nine districts, 
Charleston, Beaufort, and Georgetown, consti 
tute what is called the Lower Country, and con 
tained, by the census of 1792, 19 parishes, and 
28,694 white inhabitants ; sent to the legislature 
70 representatives, and 20 senators, and paid 
taxes to the amount of 2808 15*. lid. Ninety- 
Six, Washington, Pinckney, Camden, Orange- 
burg, and Cheraw districts, are comprehended 
in the Upper Country, and contained 23 coun 
ties, and 1 10,902 white inhabitants ; sent to the 
legislature 54 representatives, and 17 senators, and 
paid taxes to the amount of j8390 2*. 3d. The 
great inequality of representation is obvious ; 
attempts have been made by the upper districts 
to remedy this evil, but hitherto without effect. 
By a late arrangement, the name of county is 
given to the subdivision of those districts only, 
in which county courts are established. In the 
lower districts, the subdivisions are called pa 
rishes, and made only for the purpose of electing 
the members of the state legislature. The total 
number of inhabitants, in 1790, was 249,073, of 
whom 107,094 were slaves; by the census of 
1810, the total population amounted to 414,935 
souls. 

This state is watered by many navigable rivers, 
the principal of which are, Savannah, Edisto, 
Santee, Pedee, and their branches. The Santee 
is the largest river in the state. Those of a se 
condary size, as you pass from n. tos. are Wak- 
kamaw, Black, Cooper, Ashepoo, and Comba- 
hee rivers. In the third class are comprehended 
those rivers which extend but a short distance 
from the ocean, and serve, by branching into 
numberless creeks, as drains to carry off the rain 
water which comes down from the large inland 
swamps, or are merely arms of the sea. The 
tide in no part of the state flows above 25 miles 
from the sea. A canal has been lately made, of 
21 miles in length, connecting Cooper and San 
tee rivers, the cost of which was upwards of 
400,000 dollars ; and the company are allowed 
to raise a toll of 20 per cent, on the sum actually 
expended. A waggon road has also been opened] 



SOUTH CAROLINA. 



451 



[from the settlements in S. Carolina, over the 
mountains to Knoxville in Tennessee ; for which 
a sum of money had previously been voted. 

The only harbours of note, are those of 
Charleston, Port Royal, and Georgetown. The 
climate is different in diffent parts of the state. 
Along the sea-coast, bilious diseases, and fevers 
of various kinds, are prevalent between July and 
October. 

The probability of dying is much greater be 
tween the 20th of June and the 20th of October, 
than in the other eight months in the year. One 
cause of these diseases is, a low marshy country, 
which is overflowed for the sake of cultivating 
rice. The exhalations from these stagnated 
waters, from the rivers, and from the neighbour 
ing ocean, and the profuse perspiration of vege 
tables of all kinds, which cover the ground, fill 
the air with moisture. This moisture falls in 
frequent rains and copious dews. From actual 
observation, it has been found that the average 
annual fall of rain, for 10 years, was 42 inches, 
without regarding the moisture that fell in fogs 
and dews. The great heat of the day relaxes 
the body, and the agreeable coolness of the even 
ing invites to an exposure to these heavy dews. 
But not only does the water on the low grounds 
and rice swamps become in a degree putrid, and 
emit an unwholesome vapour, but when it is 
dried up or drawn off from the surface of the 
ground, a quantity of weeds and grass, which 
have been rotted by the water, and animals and 
fish which have been destroyed by it, are ex 
posed to the intense heat of the sun, and help to 
infect the air with a quantity of poisonous efflu 
via. Within the limits of Charleston the case is 
very different, and the danger of contracting dis 
eases arises from indolence and excess. Though 
a residence in or near the swamps is very in 
jurious to health, yet it has been satisfactorily 
ascertained, that by removing three miles from 
them, into the pine land, which occupies the 
middle ground between the rivers, an exemption 
from autumnal fevers may be obtained. The 
disagreeable effects of this climate, experience 
has proved, might in a great measure be avoided, 
by those inhabitants whose circumstances will 
admit of their removal from the neighbourhood 
of the rice swamps, to healthier situations, during 
the months of July, August, September, and Oc 
tober; and in the worst situations by temperance 
and care. Violent exercise on horseback, chiefly, 
exposure to the meridian rays of the sun, sudden 
showers of rain, and the night air, are too fre 
quently the causes of fevers and other disorders. 



Would the sportsmen deny themselves, during 
the fall months, their favourite amusements of 
hunting and fishing, or confine themselves to a 
very few hours, in the morning or evening 
would the industrious planter visit his fields only 
at the same hours or would the poorer class of 
people pay due attention to their manner of liv 
ing, and observe the precautions recommended 
to them by men of knowledge and experience, 
much sickness, and many distressing events, 
might be prevented. 

But the following authentic table of the obitu 
ary of Charleston, will best explain the nature 
of the diseases most prevalent in this climate. 

Accidents and Diseases which occasion Death; 
from the Bills of Mortality in Charleston. 



Accidents and Diseases. 


18031 


1804 


1805 


1806 


1807 


Febrile Diseases. 












Endemial causus - 


19 


148 


40 





162 


Bilious inflammatory 


75 


133 


155 


125 


205 


Nervous or putrid 


13 


22 


26 


15 


21 


Small pox - - - - 


2 


1 


13 


31 


26 


Infantile Diseases. 












Diarrhoea infantum - 


65 


122 


116 


120 


92 


Croup ----- 


6 


19 


8 


7 


15 


Convulsions - - - 


12 


51 


46 


38 


68 


Overlaid - - - - 








1 


1 


1 


Teething - - - - 


11 


32 


29 


18 


33 


Still born - - - - 


8 


14 


7 


16 


22 


Thrush - 


2 





2 


2 


3 




Hydrocephalus - - 
Whooping cough - - 


. _ 


64 


5 


2 

1 


6 


Worms ----- 


30 





18 


18 


37 


Intestinal Diseases. 












Dysentery - - - - 


15 


55 


57 


134 


656 


Cholic ----- 


1 


5 


1 


2 


5 


Hepatitis - - - - 








1 








Cramp in stomach 


6 


5 


? 


6 


7 


Pulmonic Affections. 












Consumption - - - 


92 


175 


223 


200 


207 


Debility - - . - - 


3 


17 


5 


27 


29 


Pleurisy - * - - 


10 


28 


75 


76 


65 


Colds ----- 


12 


32 


78 


38 49 


Influenza - - - - 


3 





2 


2 


58 


Asthma 


2 


8 


6 


9 


5 


Immorality. 












Intemperance - - - 





19 





8 


14 


Hanged - - - - 





2 











Murdered - - - - 


_ 


1 


4 


4 


5 






c 


i 




IA 








j 




3 


Carried over - - 


389 


959 


922 


897 


1787] 


SM 2 



\ 52 



SOUTH CAROLINA. 



[Accidents and Diseases. 


1803 


1804 


1805 


1806 


1807 


Amount brought up 
Apoplexy - - - - 
Accident - - - 
Childbed .... 
Dropsy - - - - - 
Drowned "-" * - - 


389 
2 
4 
6 
18 
13 

2 
4 
2 
2 

22 
2 

2 
3 

28 


959 
22 
11 
13 
61 

1 

1 

10 
1 
2 

29 

3 

3 
6 
12 

2 
1 
130 


922 
11 
17 
10 
55 
8 

7 
5 

1 

6 
6 
21 

1 

8 

1 

7 
3 
3 
1 
2 
3 
2 
2 
1 
106 


897 
11 
11 
7 
92 
14 
1 
3 
12 
1 
1 
2 
4 
39 
2 
1 
9 
1 
4 
5 
9 
1 
1 
1 
2 

165 


1787 
19 
20 
18 
110 
9 

3 
10 
2 
1 
4 
9 
21 
1 

10 

5 
12 
16 
4 

10 
2 

1 
119 
2191 


Imposthume - - - 

Inflammation - 
Insanity ^ " - - - 
Jaundice - - 
King s evil - - - - 

Mortification - - - 

Spasms - ^. - - 


Nervous head-ache - 

Pnlcv 


r aisy 
Homeroids 
Rheumatism - - - 
Sore throat ... 


Chnt 


Surfeit, and kine pock 
Rupture - - - - 
Syphilis .... 
Hydrophobia - - - 


Hemorrhage - - - 
Unknown - - - - 


Total deaths - 


449 


1267 


1209 


1296 



The Upper Country, situate in the medium be 
tween extreme heat and cold, is as healthful as 
any part of the United States. Except the high 
hills of Santee, the Ridge, and some few other 
hills, this country is like one extensive plain, till 
fou reach the Tryon and Hogback Mountains, 
220 miles . w. of Charleston. The elevation of 
these mountains above their base, is 3840 feet, 
and above the sea-coast, 4640. There is exhi 
bited from the top of these mountains an exten 
sive view of this state, N. Carolina, and Georgia ; 
and, as no object intervenes to obstruct the 
view, a man with telescopic eyes might discern 
vessels at sea. The mountains w. and n. w. rise 
much higher than these, and form a ridge, which 
divides the waters of Tennessee and Santee 
Rivers. 

The sea-coast is bordered with a chain of fine 
sea islands, around which the sea flows, open 
ing an excellent inland navigation, for the con 
veyance of produce to market. North of Charle 



ston harbour lie Bull s, Dewee s, and Sullivan s 
islands, which form the n. part of the harbour. 
James s Island lies on the other side of the har 
bour, opposite Charleston, containing about 50 
families. Further s. w. is John s Island, larger 
than James s ; Stono River, which forms a con 
venient and safe harbour, divides these islands. 
Contiguous to John s Island, and connected with 
it by a bridge, is Wadmelaw ; e. of which are 
the small isles of Keywaw and Simmon. Be 
tween these and Edisto Island, is N. Edisto In 
let, which also affords a good harbour for vessels 
of easy draft of water. South of Edisto Island 
is S. Edisto Inlet, through which enter, from the 
n. all the vessels bound to Beaufort, Asheepoo, 
Combahee, and Coosaw. On the s. w. side of 
St. Helena Island lies a cluster of islands, one of 
the largest of which is Port Royal. Adjacent to 
Port Royal lie St. Helena, Ladies Island, Paris 
Island, and the Hunting Islands, five or six in 
number, bordering on the ocean, so called from 
the number of deer and other wild game found 
upon them. All these islands, and some others 
of less note, belong- to St. Helena parish. 

Crossing Broad River, you come to Hilton 
Head, the most southern sea island in Carolina. 
West and s. w. of Hilton Head lie Pinckney s, 
Bull s, Dawfuskies , and some smaller islands, 
between which and Hilton Head are Calibogie 
River and Sound, which form the outlet of May 
and New Rivers. The soil on these islands is 
generally better adapted to the culture of indigo 
and cotton than the main, and less suited to rice. 
The natural growth is the live oak, which is so 
excellent for ship timber ; and the palmetto or 
cabbage tree, the utility of which, in the con 
struction of forts, was experienced during the 
late war. 

The whole state, to the distance of 80 or 100 
miles from the sea, generally speaking, is low 
and level, almost without a stone, and abounds, 
more or less, especially on and near the rivers, 
with swamps or marshes, which, when cleared 
and cultivated, yield, in favourable seasons, on 
an average, an annual income of from 20 to 40 
dollars for each acre, and often much more ; but 
this species of soil cannot be cultivated by white 
men, without endangering both health and life. 
These swamps do not cover an hundredth part of 
the State of Carolina. In this distance, by a 
gradual ascent from the sea-coast, the land rises 
about 190 feet. Here, if you proceed in a w. n. w. 
course from Charleston, commences a curiously 
uneven country. The traveller is constantly as 
cending or descending little sand-hills, which] 



SOUTH CAROLINA. 



453 



[nature seems to have disunited in a frolic. If a 
pretty high sea were suddenly arrested, and 
transformed into sand-hills, in the very form the 
waves existed at the moment of transformation, 
it would present the eye with just such a view 
as is here to be seen. Some little herbage, and 
a few small pines, grow even on this soil. The 
inhabitants are few, and have but a scanty sub 
sistence on corn and sweet potatoes, which grow 
here tolerably well. This curious country con 
tinues till you arrive at a place called the Ridge, 
140 miles from Charleston. This ridge is a re 
markable tract of high ground, as you approach 
it from the sea, but level as you advance n. w. 
from its summit. It is a fine high, healthy, belt 
of land, well watered, and of a good soil, and 
extends from the Savannah to Broad River. 
Beyond this ridge commences a country exactly 
resembling the northern states, or like Devon 
shire in England, or Languedoc in France. 
Here hills and dales, with all their verdure and 
variegated beauty, present themselves to the 
eye. Wheat fields, which are rare in the low 
country, begin to grow common. Here heaven 
has bestowed its blessings with a mc&amp;t bounteous 
hand. The air is much more temperate ; nd 
healthful than nearer the sea. The hills are co 
vered with valuable woods, the valleys watered 
with beautiful rivers, and the fertility of the soil 
is equal to every vegetable production. This, 
by way of distinction, is called the Upper Coun 
try, where are different modes, and different ar 
ticles of cultivation ; where the manners of the 
people, and even their language, have a different 
tone. The land still rises by a gradual ascent ; 
each succeeding hill overlooks that which imme 
diately precedes it, till having advanced 220 
miles in a n. w. direction from Charleston, the 
elevation of the land above the sea-coast is found 
by mensuration to be 800 feet. 

Here commences a mountainous country, which 
continues rising to the w. terminating point of 
the state. The soil may be divided into four 
kinds ; first, the pine barren, which is valuable 
only for its timber. Interspersed among the 
pine barren, are tracts of land free of timber 
and every kind of growth but that of grass. 
These tracts are called savannas, constituting a 
second kind of soil, good for grazing. The third 
kind is that of the swamps and low grounds on 
the rivers, which is a mixture of black loam and 
fat clay, producing natural canes in great plenty, 
cypress, bays, loblolly pines, &amp;c. In these 
swamps rice is cultivated, which constitutes the 
staple commodity of the state. The high lands, 



commonly known by the name of oak and hickory 
lands, constitute the fourth kind of soil. The 
natural growth is oak, hickory, walnut, pine, and 
locust. On these lands, in the low country, are 
cultivated Indian corn principally; and in the 
back country, besides these, they raise tobacco 
in large quantities, wheat, rye, barley, oats, 
hemp, flax, and cotton. From experiments which 
have been made, it is well ascertained that olives, 
silk, and madder may be as abundantly produced 
in S. Carolina, and we may add in Georgia also, 
as in the s. of France. 

There is little fruit in this state, especially in 
the lower parts of it. They have oranges, which 
are chiefly sour, and figs in plenty, a few limes 
and lemons, pomegranates, pears, and peaches; 
apples are scarce, and are imported from the N. 
States. Melons, especially the water-melon, are 
raised here in great perfection. The river 
swamps, in which rice can be cultivated with 
any tolerable degree of safety and success, do 
not extend higher up the rivers than the head of 
the tides ; ar i in estimating the value of this spe 
cies of HLe land, the height which the tide rises 
is tal"?n into consideration, those lying where 
it rices to a proper pitch for overflowing the 
swamps being the most valuable. The best in 
land swamps, which constitute a second species 
of rice land, are such as are furnished with re 
serves of water. These reserves are formed by 
means of large banks thrown up at the upper 
parts of the swamps, whence it is conveyed, when 
needed, to the fields of rice. 

Rice was first planted in S. Carolina, about the 
year 1688, when, by chance, a little of it, of a 
small unprofitable kind, was introduced into the 
state. In the year 1696, a bag of a larger and 
whiter rice, was presented by the captain of a 
brigantine from Madagascar, to the governor, 
who divided it between several gentlemen. Some 
time afterwards Mr. Du Bois, treasurer to the 
British East India Company, sent another parcel 
of rice ; which probably made the distinction 
which now prevails, between white and gold rice. 
In its early cultivation, rice was planted on high 
land ; but it being observed, that this plant not 
only required the richest kind of land, but also 
frequent flowings of water, the planters were na 
turally led from the high lands to the fresh water 
swamps. To these situations it was found per 
fectly adapted, and rice immediately became the 
great staple of the country. It was now that 
importations were made with great avidity ; and 
the proceeds of a crop instead of being spent in 
dissipated living, as they are at this day, were] 



454 



SOUTH CAROLINA. 



[economised, to increase the exertions of the en 
suing year. Hence property was rapidly accu 
mulated, and people from all parts were encou 
raged to try their fortunes in S. Carolina. 

Indigo was formerly a great source of wealth 
to this state, being introduced into it about the 
year 1745 ; and such was the success with which 
it was cultivated, that in less than two years 
200,000 Ibs. weight of indigo were exported to 
England. From that time its culture was much 
attended to throughout the lower, and in some 
situations, in the middle parts of the state ; and 
many fortunes were made by pursuing this 
branch of agriculture. Since the commence 
ment of the wars which have disturbed Europe 
for several years past, and in consequence of 
large importations from the E. Indies, its culti 
vation has ceased to be profitable, so that a very 
small quantity is now planted in S. Carolina. 
The lands which were suitable to the growth of 
this plant, are fortunately well adapted to the 
cultivation of cotton : hence, by an easy transi 
tion, and without much expense, the indigo 
planters, driven by necessity to search out other 
sources of industry, have directed their attention 
to the planting of cotton ; and the success they 
have experienced ought to stimulate the British 
government to accomplish the same thing with 
regard to hemp in Canada, where every thing is 
congenial to its success, were only a right system 
adopted. 

Cotton is noticed as an article of export in 
S. Carolina as early as the year 1754 ; but it is 
only within the last 20 years that it has become 
a staple commodity, and surpassed, in value, 
the greatest crops of rice or indigo that have ever 
been made in the state. The planter sells his 
cotton to the merchant at least for Is. and gene 
rally for ls.6d. sterling the pound. In the year 
1799, good cotton found an immediate sale in 
Charleston for 2s. 4rf. and 2s. Sd. the pound ; and 
it is said, that what is called the island or sea 
shore cotton, is at least equal, in fineness and 
strength of staple, to that of Jamaica. Since the 
embargo, the best cotton sold for Wd. and the 
inferior from 4d. to 6d. the pound ; and frequently 
no sale was to be found for it at any price. 

In S. Carolina, tobacco is cultivated under 
some disadvantages ; among which the expense 
and trouble of bringing it to market, is not the 
least to be encountered. It is grown principally 
in the upper country, remote from markets and 
navigation, where, although the land is well 
suited to its culture, yet no plantations of large 
extent have yet been established. Each farmer 



plants a small field; which, though separately 
considered, cannot produce any considerable 
quantity, yet when collected for exportation, it 
forms a mass by no means unworthy the atten 
tion of the merchant. 

Maize, or Indian corn, is much cultivated in 
S. Carolina, both for home consumption and ex 
portation. Like tobacco it is indigenous to Ame 
rica, or was obtained by the Indians from some 
other parts, long before the discovery of the con 
tinent. It consists of several varieties, of which 
the gourd and flint kind are principally planted. 
The difference between these kinds of corn is, 
that the gourd is floury, and wastes much in the 
grinding ; whereas the flint is more hard and 
nourishing, and grinds more into grist. Another 
peculiarity, which marks their difference, is, that 
the flint corn grows principally in the lower 
country, degenerating in the middle and upper 
country into gourd corn ; and the gourd corn, 
if brought from the middle and upper country, is 
said to change into a more flinty kind. 

Hemp is grown in the upper country for sale, 
particularly between Broad and Saluda Rivers, 
on what is called the Dutch Fork. Flax is also 
grown, but only for domestic use ; as are gene 
rally all kinds of small European grain. Wheat, 
however, in parts adjacent to good flour mills, is 
an exception to this ; for wherever mills are si 
tuated, a great encouragement is given to the 
growth of this valuable grain. The produce of 
wheat, in the upper country, where almost every 
one cultivates a little for domestic use, is gene 
rally about 15 bushels to the acre ; but where 
the ground is well tilled, and the wheat ploughed 
in, (as is done by a few of the best farmers) the 
produce is from 20 to 25 bushels the acre. A 
slovenly practice too much prevails, of sowing the 
wheat over the Indian corn fields after the corn 
is gathered in, without having giving it any pre 
paration whatever, except perhaps ploughing 
the seed (after it is sown) into the land ; yet 
even in this careless manner the produce is fre 
quently 12 bushels the acre. The reason which 
the farmers give for not setting those wheat crops 
in a better manner is, that in this way they make 
with ease, and with little attendance, as much 
wheat as their household concerns require ; that 
to make more would be unnecessary, as they can 
not conveniently transport so bulky an article 
any distance for sale. Canals and roads are, 
however, now constructing throughout the state, 
and will, in a few years, afford the back settlers 
every facility to dispose of their produce. Silk 
was formerly raised in S. Carolina and Georgia;] 



SOUTH CAROLINA. 



455 



[but it is now unattended to, though it appears 
that mulberry trees and silk worms are the spon 
taneous productions of the country. 

The implements of husbandry used in S.Caro 
lina, are few and simple : they consist of various 
ploughs, such as the bar-share, shovel, fluke, 
single coulter, cutter, and drill ; harrows, hoes, 
spades, waggons, carts, and sledges. Ploughs 
are chiefly used in the middle and upper country, 
where labourers are few, and the soil tenacious 
and stubborn. In the lower country they are 
but partially used, although the planters would 
probably find it their interest to adopt them more 
generally. In some cases they cultivate a cotton 
and Indian corn crop by the plough ; but they 
are oftener done with the hoe, which may be con 
sidered as the principal instrument of husbandry 
in the lower country. The spade is used chiefly 
for ditching and draining the rice lands. But the 
hoe is used for cultivating them. In some tide, 
and inland plantations, however, where the 
ground is strong, and has been kept sufficiently 
dry, ploughs are used with great advantage. 

Waggons and sledges are principally used in 
the middle and upper country, the first for trans 
porting heavy articles to a distance, and the last 
for drawing wood, rails, and small timber about 
a settlement. In the lower country, ox carts, 
capable of carrying three or four barrels of rice, 
are almost solely the mode of land-carriage for 
the rice planters. They are drawn by three or 
four yoke of oxen, and attended by two or three 
Negro drivers. 

There are upwards of 16 different grasses in 
digenous to S. Carolina ; but in general little at 
tention is paid to the forming of pasture and 
meadow lands. The cattle are sent into the 
woods to graze, and the culture of cotton, rice, 
and maize, becomes the chief object of the planter 
and farmer s attention. Some lands in the vici 
nity of Charleston are, however, converted into 
fields for mowing, as the high price of hay in 
that neighbourhood renders this branch of agri 
culture a profitable business ; but the greatest 
proportion of hay is brought from the N. States 
in the packet vessels. In general the cattle is 
fed during winter upon the leaves and blades of 
the Indian corn, rice-straw, &amp;c. Horses and 
poultry are fed with the corn, which, together 
with rice, also form the principal food of the 
Negroes. The white inhabitants are extremely 
fond of the corn bruised and boiled into a pud 
ding, which they call hominy. It is eaten with 
milk, sugar, ana butter, and is a favourite dish 
at breakfast. 



While agriculture is so much attended to, and 
the means of engaging in it so easy, it is not sur 
prising that few direct their attention to manu 
factures. Some years ago, a cotton manufactory 
was established near Statesborough, which bid 
fair to rise into consideration. It was, however, 
soon perceived that the price of labour was too 
great to permit its goods to stand any competi 
tion with those of similar qualities imported from 
Great Britain ; consequently the proprietors 
were obliged to discontinue their operations. A 
numerous population, and scarcity of lands, must 
first be experienced in a country, before its inha 
bitants will resort to manufactures, while a more 
eligible mode of subsistence exists. In the upper 
country, however, necessity has obliged the in 
habitants to provide for their respective wants 
from their own resources, in consequence of the 
difficulty and expense of conveying bulky articles 
from the sea-coast to the interior. The traveller 
there soon becomes accustomed to the humming 
music of the spinning wheel and the loom. Cot 
tons and woollens of various descriptions are 
made in sufficient quantities for domestic use ; 
and if we except the articles of salt and sugar, 
the people in the upper parts of the state may be 
considered independent of foreign support ; for 
carpenters, smiths, masons, tanners, shoemakers, 
sadlers, hatters, millwrights, and other trades- 
are conveniently situated throughout the 



men 



country ; and the materials necessary for their 
respective professions are met with in abun 
dance. 

At the distance of about 110 miles from the 
sea, the river swamps terminate, and the high 
lands extend quite to the rivers, and form banks 
in some places several hundred feet high from 
the surface of the water, and afford many exten 
sive and delightful views. These high banks are 
interwoven with layers of leaves, and different 
coloured earth, and abound with quarries of free 
stone, pebbles, flint, crystals, iron-ore in abun 
dance, silver, lead, sulphur, and coarse diamonds. 
The swamps above the head of the tide are oc 
casionally planted with corn, cotton, and indigo. 
The soil is very rich, yielding from 40 to 50 
bushels of corn an acre. It is curious to observe 
the gradations from the sea-coast to the upper 
country, with respect to the produce, the mode 
of cultivation, and the cultivators. 

On the islands upon the sea-coast, and for 40 
or 50 miles back, and on the rivers much farther, 
the cultivators are all slaves. No white man, to 
speak generally, ever thinks of settling a farm 
and improving it for himself without Negroes :1 



456 



SOUTH C A R O L 1 JN A. 



[if he has no Negroes, he hires himself as over 
seer to some rich planter who has more than he 
can or will attend to, till he can purchase for 
himself. The articles cultivated are corn, rye, 
oats, every species of pulse and potatoes, which, 
with the small rice, are food for the Negroes ; 
rice, indigo, cotton, and some hemp, for expor 
tation. The culture of cotton is capable of being 
increased equal to almost any demand. The soil 
was cultivated till lately almost wholly by ma 
nual labour. The plough, till since the peace, 
was scarcely used. Now the plough and harrow, 
and other improvements, are introduced into the 
rice swamps with great success, and will, no 
doubt, become general. In the middle settle 
ments, Negroes are not so numerous. The mas 
ter attends personally to his own business. The 
land is not properly situated for rice. It pro 
duces tolerable good indigo weed, and some to 
bacco is raised for exportation. The farmer is 
contented to raise corn, potatoes, oats, rye, poul 
try, and a little wheat. 

In the upper country there are but few Ne 
groes ; generally speaking, the farmers have 
none, and depend, like the inhabitants of the 
N. States, upon the labour of themselves and fa 
milies for subsistence ; the plough is used almost 
wholly. Indian corn in great quantities, wheat, 
rye, barley, oats, potatoes, &amp;c. are raised for 
food ; and tobacco, wheat, cotton, hemp, flax, and 
indigo, for exportation. From late experiments 
it has been found that vines may be cultivated, 
and wine made to great advantage. Snake-root, 
pink-root, and a variety of medicinal herbs grow 
spontaneously ; also ginseng on and near the 
mountains. 

This country abounds with precious ores, such 
as gold, silver, lead, black-lead, copper, and iron ; 
but it is the misfortune of those who direct their 
pursuits in search of them, that they are deficient 
in the knowledge of chemistry, and too frequently 
make use of improper menstruums in extracting 
the respective metals. There are likewise to be 
found pellucid stones of different hues, rock crys 
tal, pyrites, petrified substances, coarse corne 
lian, marble beautifully variegated, vitreous 
stone, and vitreous sand; red and yellow ochres, 
which, when roasted and ground down with lin 
seed oil, make a very excellent paint ; also pot 
ter s clay of a most delicate texture, fuller s earth, 
and a number of dye-stuffs, among which is a sin 
gular weed which yields four different colours, 
its leaves are surprisingly styptic, strongly re 
sembling the taste of alum ; likewise, an abun 
dance of chalk, crude alum, sulphur, nitre, vi 



triol, and along the banks of rivers large quanti 
ties of marie may be collected. There are also 
a variety of roots, the medicinal effects of which 
it is the barbarous policy of those who are in 
the secret to keep a profound mystery. The 
rattle-snake root, so famous amongst the Indians 
for the cure of poison, is of the number. The 
next is the venereal root, which, under a vege 
table regimen, will cure a confirmed lues. An 
other root, when reduced to an impalpable 
powder, is singularly efficacious in destroying 
worms in children. There is likewise a root, an 
ointment of which, with a poultice of the same, 
will in a short space of time discuss the most 
extraordinary tumours,particularty what is termed 
the white-swelling ; this root is very scarce. 
There is another root, a decoction of which, in 
new milk, will cure the bloody dysentery ; the 
patient must avoid cold, and much judgment is 
requisite in the portion to be administered. There 
is also a plant, the leaves of which, being bruised 
and applied to the part affected, relieves rheu 
matic pains ; it occasions a considerable agitation 
of the parts, attended with most violent and acute 
pains, but never fails to procure immediate ease. 
There is also a plant, the leaves of which have a 
most fetid smell ; these leaves being boiled, and 
any person afflicted with cutaneous complaints, 
once bathing therein, will be radically cured. 
There is a root which acts as an excellent purge, 
and is well calculated for the labouring part of 
mankind, as it is only necessary to chew it in its 
crude state, and it requies no manner of aid to 
facilitate its operation. An equally efficacious 
and simple purge is obtained from a weed, the 
stalk of which is red, is about three feet high, and 
the flower white ; the leaves run from the bot 
tom of the stalk in opposite and corresponding 
lines ; the seed is about the size of a wheat 
grain, globular in the centre, and oblate at both 
ends ; it is full of oil, and tastes like a walnut 
kernel : 20 grains of this, chewed and swallowed, 
is, in point of mildness and efficacy, equal to any 
rhubarb ; and the pleasantness of its taste, as a 
deception to weak stomachs, appears to have 
been a design of Providence : in its operation it 
resembles castor-oil. A very sovereign remedy 
is extracted from the bark of a tree, which may 
be used to great advantage in the diseases in 
cident to this climate. Every climate, some be 
lieve, has its peculiar disease, and every disease 
its peculiar antidote under the same climate. In 
addition to the above is another species of bark, 
of a sweet and nauseous taste : the tree grows 
contiguous to a very powerful chalybeate spring ;] 



SOUTH CAROLINA. 



457 



[the bark, when sufficiently masticated, operates 
as a very potential purge and emetic, and in the 
hands of a skilful chemist may be rendered very 
serviceable. In this country is a tree which 
bears a large pod, inclosing a kind of mucilage, 
the juice of which is very sharp ; the bark smells 
like tanned leather, and when prepared like hemp, 
makes the very best of cordage ; also another 
tree, which bears an ear like a corn-cob, covered 
with berries containing a large proportion of 
oil. There is likewise a very singular tree, which 
affords a most superb shade ; it produces a round 
ball, which, in the heat of summer, opens and 
enlarges a number of male insects, which be 
come very troublesome wherever they lodge : this 
happens generally some distance from their pa 
rent tree. 

The hand of nature never formed a country 
with more natural advantages, or blessed it with 
a more serene or healthfuf climate. It abounds 
with game of all kinds, is a very fine fruit coun 
try ? and is peculiarly adapted to the growth of 
Vines, the olive, silk, and coffee trees, and the 
production of cotton. It is a perfect garden of 
medical herbs, and its medicinal springs are 
not inferior to any in Europe. 

The iron-works, known by the name of the 
./Era Etna Iron-work, are situated in York 
County, within two miles of the Catawba River. 
Within the compass of two miles from the fur 
nace, there is an inexhaustible quantity of ore, 
which works easy and well in the furnace. The 
metal is good for hammers, gudgeons, or any 
kind of machinery and hollow ware, and will 
make good bar-iron. Some trial has been made 
of it in steel, and it promises well. Nothing is 
necessary for preparing the ore for use but burn 
ing. The ore consists of large rocks above the 
surface ; the depth not yet known. In the cavi 
ties between, lie an ochre and seed ore. It is 
said there will be no occasion to sink shafts or 
drive levels for 50 years to come. The ^Era 
furnace was built in 1787 ; the ./Etna in 1788. 
The nearest landing at present (1795) is Cam- 
den, 70 miles from the furnace. The proprietors 
of the works, and seven others, have obtained a 
charter to open the Catawba to the N. Carolina 
Line, and a charter from N. Carolina to open 
the river 80 miles higher in that state, and boats 
came within 40 miles of the works in the course 
of the summer of 1795, as there were boats al 
ready built for the purpose which were to carry 30 
tons, and in the course of the following summer 
they were brought within two miles of the works. 
The works are within two miles of the river, and 

VOL. IV. 



the creek can be made navigable to the works. 
Mr. William Hill, one of the principal proprie 
tors of these works, has contrived a method, by 
means of a fall of water, of blowing all the fires 
both of the forges and furnaces, so as to render 
unnecessary the use of wheels, cylinders, or any 
other kind of bellows. The machinery is simple 
and cheap, and not liable to the accident of freez 
ing. In the middle, and especially in the upper 
country, the people are obliged to manufacture 
their own cotton and woollen cloths, and most of 
their husbandry tools ; but in the lower country, 
the inhabitants, for these articles, depend almost 
entirely on their merchants. 

Late accounts from the interior parts of this 
state inform, that cotton, hemp, and flax, are 
plenty ; that they have a considerable stock of 
good sheep ; that great exertions are made, and 
much done in the household way; that they have 
long been in the habit of doing something in fa 
mily manufactures, but within a few years past 
great improvements have been made. The wo 
men do the weaving, and leave the men to at 
tend to agriculture. This state furnishes all the 
materials, and of the best kind, for ship building. 
The live oak, and the pitch and yellow pines, are 
of a superior quality. Ships might be built here 
with more ease, and to much greater advantage, 
than in the middle and e. states. A want of sea 
men, is one reason why this business is not more 
generally attended to. So much attention is now 
paid to the manufacture of indigo, in this state, 
that it bids fair to rival that of the French. It 
is to be regretted, that it is still the practice of 
the merchants concerned in the Carolina trade, 
to sell at foreign markets the Carolina indigo of 
the first quality, as French. The society for the 
information and assistance of persons emigrat 
ing from other countries, in a printed paper, 
which bears their signature, say, that " A mo- 
nied capital may be profitably employed, 1st. In 
erecting mills, for making paper, for sawing lum 
ber, and especially for manufacturing wheat flour. 
There are hundreds of valuable mill seats unim 
proved, and the woods abound with pine trees. 
A bushel of wheat may be purchased in S. Caro 
lina for half a dollar, which will make as good 
flour as that which in the vicinity of proper mills 
sells for double that price. Such is the cheap 
ness and fertility of the soil, that half a dollar a 
bushel for wheat would afford a great profit to 
the cultivators thereof. 2. In tanning and ma 
nufacturing leather. Cattle are raised with so 
much ease, in a country where the winters are 
both mild and short, that hides are remarkably] 
SN 



458 



SOUTH CAROLINA. 



[cheap. The profits of tanners and shoemakers 
must be considerable, when it is a well known 
fact, that the hides of full grown cattle, and a 
single pair of shoes sell for nearly the same price. 

3. In making bricks These now sell for nine 
dollars a thousand, and the call for them is so 
great, that the bricklayers are not fully supplied. 

4. In making pot-ash The ashes fhat might be 
collected in Charleston, and from the woods burnt 
in clearing new lands in the country, would fur 
nish the means of carrying on the manufacture of 
pot-ash to great advantage." 

Gentlemen of fortune, before the late war, sent 
their sons to Europe for education. During the 
war and since, they have generally sent them to 
the Middle and N. States. Those who have been 
at this expense in educating their sons, have been 
but comparitively few in number ; so that the 
literature of the state is at a low ebb. Since the 
peace, however, it has begun to flourish. There 
are several respectable academies in Charleston, 
one at Beaufort, on Port Royal Island, and seve 
ral others in different parts of the state. Three 
colleges have lately been incorporated by law, 
one at Charleston, one at Winnsborough, in the 
district of Camden, the other at Cambridge, in 
the district of Ninety Six. The public and pri 
vate donations for the support of these three col 
leges, were originally intended to have been ap 
propriated jointly, for the erecting and support 
ing of one respectable college. The division of 
these donations has frustrated this design. Part 
of the old barracks in Charleston has been hand 
somely fitted up, and converted into a college, 
and there are a number of students ; but it does 
not yet merit a more dignified name than that of 
a respectable academy. The Mount Sion Col 
lege at Winnsborough, is supported by a respect 
able society of gentlemen, who have long been 
incorporated. This institution flourishes and 
bids fair for usefulness. The college at Cam 
bridge is no more than a grammar school. That 
the literature of this state might be put upon a 
respectable footing, nothing is wanting but a 
spirit of enterprise among its wealthy inhabitants. 
The legislature, in their session in January 1795, 
appointed a committee to enquire into the prac 
ticability of, and to report a plan for, the esta 
blishment of schools in the different parts of the 
state. 

Since the revolution, by which all denomina 
tions were put on an equal footing, there have 
been no disputes between different religious sects. 
They all agree to differ. The upper parts of this 
jitate are settled chiefly by Presbyterians, Bap 



tists, and Methodists. From the most probable 
calculations, it is supposed that the religious de 
nominations of this state, as to numbers, may be 
ranked as follows : Presbyterians, including the 
Congregational and Independent Churches, Epis 
copalians, Baptists, Methodists, &amp;c. 

The little attention that has been paid to ma 
nufactures, occasions a vast consumption of fo 
reign imported articles ; but the quality and va 
lue of their exports generally leave a balance 
in favour of the state, except when there have 
been large importations of Negroes. The amount 
of exports from the port of Charleston, in the 
year ending November, 1787, was then estimated, 
from authentic documents, at ^.505,279. 19s. 5d. 
sterling money. The number of vessels cleared 
from the custom-house, the same year, was 947, 
measuring* 62,118 tons ; 735 of these, measuring 
41,531 tons, were American; the others be 
longed to Great Britain, Spain, France^ the 
United Netherlands, and Ireland. The princi 
pal articles exported from this state, are rice, 
indigo, tobacco, skins of various kinds, beef, 
pork, cotton, pitch, tar, rosin, turpentine, myr 
tle-wax, lumber, naval stores, cork, leather, 
pink-root, snake-root, ginseng, &amp;c. In the most 
successful seasons, there have been as many as 
140,000 barrels of rice, and 1,300,000 pounds of 
indigo exported in a year. From the 15th of 
December, 1791, to September, 1792, 108,567 
tierces of rice, averaging 550 Ib. nett weight 
each, were exported from Charleston. In the 
year ending September 30, 1791, the amount of 
exports from this state was 2,693,267 dollars, 97 
cents, and the year ending September, 1795, to 
5,998,492 dollars, 49 cents. Upon the whole, it 
is certain, that previously to the revolutionary 
war the exports of S. Carolina amounted, upon 
an average, to ^500,000 sterling, and consisted 
principally of rice, indigo, tobacco, deer-skins, 
pitch, tar, turpentine, salt provisions, Indian 
corn, and lumber. During the war, agriculture 
and commerce were both materially injured. 
The usual supplies of clothing from the mother- 
country being stopped, manufactories were esta 
blished, and the Negroes were for the most part 
clothed with mixed cloths of cotton and wool, 
spun and woven for the occasion. Many negroes 
were taken from agricultural pursuits, as well to 
assist at these manufactures, as to carry on the 
erection of fortifications, and other public works ; 
in consequence of which, the articles for exporta 
tion naturally decreased, or, when collected, were 
consumed at home, alternately, by friends and 
foes.] 



SOUTH CAROLINA. 



459 



[At the conclusion of the war it appeared, that 
the agriculture and commerce of S. Carolina had 
retrograded nearly 47 years backwards, the ex 
ports of 1783 being scarcely equal to those of 
1736. The internal consumption, however, must 
have been greater, but the loss to the state was 
the same. Since that period her agriculture and 
commerce have rapidly augmented, though in 
some degree counteracted by the partial prohi 
bition of the importation of Negroes for several 
years past, and which was fully carried into exe 
cution on the 1st of January, 1808. From year 
to year, new prospects have presented them 
selves ; new objects of agriculture have arisen ; 
and the loss ot one staple has been supplied by 
another of superior value: cotton is now the most 
valuable export of S. Carolina. 

Since the French revolution Charleston has 



been the medium of the greatest part of that 
trade, which has been carried on between the 
French W. India islands and the mother country, 
under the neutral flag of the United States. In 
this manner quantities of cocoa, coffee, sugar, 
rum, indigo, and other articles, the produce of 
the French, Spanish, and Dutch possessions in 
the W. Indies and S. America, are included in 
the exports of S. Carolina, from the year 1793, 
which, in time of peace, are directly exported 
from the colonies to the mother-country. Within 
these few years much of this neutral traffic has 
been gradually abolished, by the restrictive de 
crees and orders of council of the two great 
belligerent powers, in return for which the Ame 
ricans have retaliated by a general embargo. It 
may not be amiss here to insert 



A STATEMENT exhibiting the Quantities of ft ice, Indigo, Tobacco, and Cotton, exported 
from S. CAROLINA to GREAT BRITAIN and other foreign Parts, from 1760 to 
1801, also the total Value of Exports at different Periods. 



Years. 


Barrels of 
Rice. 


Ibs. weight of 
Indigo. 


Hogsheads of 
Tobaco. 


Ibs. weight of 
Cotton. 


Total Value of the Exports 
for each Year. 












.Sterl. s. d. 


1760 


100,000 


399,366 


14 





256,767 


1761 


62,288 


249,000 








300,000 


1762 





.. 








508,108 6 10 


1768 














387,114 12 1 


1769 














278,907 14 


1770 














420,311 14 8 


1771 














756,000 1 1 


1772 


140,000 


1,107,660 








456,513 8 4 


1782 


22,224 


827 casks 


643 








1783 


61,974 


2,051 do. 


2,680 








1789 


100,000 














1792 


106,419 


839,666 Ibs. 


5,290 


68,520 


656,545 5 6 


1795 


85,670 


1,217 casks 


4,288 


1,109,653 


1,346,444 2 


1799 


70,426 


6,892 Ibs. 


9,646 


2,801,996 


1,964,027 7 6 


1800 


75,788 


3,400 do. 


7,927 


6,425,863 


2,374,839 9 


1801 


64,769 


8,502 do. 


5,996 


8,301,907 


3,218,410 2 6 



Charleston is by far the most considerable city 
on the sea-coast, for an extent of 600 miles. 
From it are annually exported about the value 
of two millions and a half of dollars, in native 
commodities; and it supplies, with imported 
goods, a great part of the inhabitants of N. Ca 
rolina and Georgia, as well as those of S. Ca 
rolina. The harbour thereof is open all the 



winter, and its contiguity to the W. India islands 
gives the merchants superior advantages for car 
rying on a peculiarly lucrative commerce. A 
waggon^road of 15 miles only is all that is 
wanted, to open a communication with the inha 
bitants of Tennessee. Knoxville, the capital of 
that state, is 100 miles nearer to Charleston than 
to any other considerable sea-port town on the] 
3x2 



460 



SOU 



[Atlantic Ocean. The reformation in France oc 
casioned a civil war between the Protestant and 
Catholic parties in that kingdom. During these 
domestic troubles, Jasper de Coligni, a principal 
commander of the Protestant army, fitted out 
two ships, and sent them with a colony to Ame 
rica, under the command of Jean Ribaud, for the 
purpose of securing a retreat from persecution. 
Ribaud landed at what is now called Albemarle 
River, in N. Carolina. This colony, after en 
during incredible hardships, were extirpated by 
the Spaniards. No further attempts were made 
to plant a colony in this quarter, till the reign of 
Charles II. of England. 

The militia of S. Carolina is divided into two 
divisions, each commanded by a major-general. 
These divisions comprehend nine brigades, 39 
regiments of infantry, eight regiments and a 
squadron of cavalry, and one regiment and a 
battalion of artillery, besides artillery companies 
which are attached to some of the regiments of 
infantry. The brigades are commanded by as 
many brigadier-generals ; and the regiments are 
commanded by lieutenant-colonels. The gover 
nor is commander in chief of all the militia of 
the state, both by sea and land. 

Every able-bodied white male citizen, between 
the age of 18 and 45, is enrolled in the militia, 
and free people of colour are enrolled as 
pioneers. One third of the militia may be 
marched out of the state by order of the execu 
tive of the United States, on particular emer 
gencies, and under certain conditions ; and treated 
in every respect the same as the regular troops, 
except that in cases of court-martial, the court 
is to be selected from the militia of the state. 
Officers rise by seniority ; and no election exists 
except in the first appointment of subalterns. 
The number of effective militia in S. Carolina 
is about 40,000, of whom 2000 are cavalry. 

In Charleston, the inhabitants have formed 
themselves into volunteer corps, armed and 
clothed at their own expense. One half consists 
of cavalry and artillery. The uniform of the 
latter is a long blue coat with red facings, and 
large cocked hat and red feather ; it has a heavy 
appearance, and is but ill adapted to such a corps, 
whose chief perfection is in celerity of move 
ment. See UNITED STATES.] 

[SOUTHERN STATES; the States of Mary 
land, Virginia, Kentucky, N. Carolina, Tennes 
see, S. Carolina, and Georgia : bounded n. by 
Pennsylvania, are thus denominated. This dis 
trict of the Union contained, by the census of 
1792, upwards of 1,900,000 inhabitants, of whom 



SOU 

648,439 were slaves, which is thirteen fourteenths 
of the whole number of slaves in the United 
States. The influence of slavery has produced 
a very distinguishing feature in the general cha 
racter of the inhabitants, which, though now dis 
cernible to their disadvantage, has been softened 
and meliorated by the benign effects of the revo 
lution, and the progress of liberty and humanity. 
The following may be considered as the principal 
productions of this division : tobacco, rice, in 
digo, wheat, corn, cotton, tar, pitch, turpentine, 
and lumber. In this district is fixed the perma 
nent seat of the general government, viz. the city 
of Washington. See UNITED STATES.] 

[SOUTHFIELD, a township of New York, 
Richmond County, bounded n. by the n. side of 
the road leading from Van-Duerson s Ferry to 
Richmond Town and the Fish-Kill ; e. by Hud 
son s River. It contains 855 inhabitants.] 

[SOUTH GEORGIA, a cluster of barren islands 
in the S. Atlantic Ocean to the e. of Cape Horn, 
the s. point of S. America ; in lat. about 54 20 5. 
and long. 39 18 X w. One of these is said to be 
between 50 and 60 leagues in length.] 

[SOUTH HADLEY, a township of Massachu 
setts, Hampshire County, on the e. bank of Con 
necticut River, 14 miles n. of Springfield, six 
s. e. of Northampton, and 63 w. of Boston. It 
was incorporated in 1753, and. contains 759 inha 
bitants. The locks and canals in S. Hadley, on 
the e. side of Connecticut River, made for the 
purpose of navigating round the falls in the ri 
ver, were begun in 1793, and completed in 1795. 
The falls are about three miles in length ; and 
since the completion of these locks and canals, 
there has been a considerable increase of trans 
portation up and down the river. Some mills 
are already erected on these canals, and a great 
variety of water-works may, and doubtless will 
soon be erected here, as nature and art have 
made it one of the most advantageous places for 
these purposes in the United States. Canals 
are also opening by the same company, at Miller s 
Falls in Montgomery, about 25 miles above these, 
and on the same side of the river.] 

[SOUTH HAMPTON, a county of Virginia, be 
tween James s River and the State of N. Caro 
lina. It contains 12,864 inhabitants, including 
5993 slaves. The court-house is 36 miles from 
Norfolk, and 25 from Grenville.] 

[SOUTH HAMPTON, a township of New Hamp 
shire, Rockingham County, on the s. line of the 
State, which separates it from Massachusetts ; 25 
miles s. w. of Portsmouth, and six n. w. of New- 
bury Port. It was taken from Hampton, and 



ffr 

sou 

incorporated in 1742 ; and contains 448 inhabi 
tants.] 

[SouTH HAMPTON, a township of Massachu 
setts, Hampshire County, and separated from E. 
Hampton by Pawtucket River. It was incorpo 
rated in 1753, and contains 829 inhabitants ; 
about nine miles s. w. of Northampton.] 

[Souxii HAMPTON, a township of New York, 
Suffolk County, Long- Island. It includes Bridge- 
hampton, formerly called Saggabonek, and Me- 
coxe ; and, by means of Sagg Harbour, carries 
on a small trade. It contains 3408 inhabitants, 
of whom 421 are electors, and 146 slaves. It is 
12 miles from Sagg Harbour, 18 from Suffolk 
court-house, and 95 e. of New York.] 

[SOUTH HAMPTON, two townships of Pennsyl 
vania, the one in Buck s County, the other in 
that of Franklin.] 

[SOUTH HAMPTON, a township in the e. part 
of Nova Scotia, and in Halifax County. It was 
formerly called Tatmagouche, and is 35 miles 
from Onslow.] 

[SOUTH HEMPSTEAD, a township of New York, 
Queen s County, Long Island, had its name al 
tered in 1796, by the legislature, into Hemp- 
stead. The inhabitants, 3826 in number, have 
the privilege of oystering, fishing, and clam 
ming, in the creeks, bays, and harbours of N. 
Hempstead, and they in return have the same 
right in S. Hempstead. Of the inhabitants 575 
are electors, and 326 slaves.] 

[SOUTH HERO, or GRAND ISLAND, in Lake 
Champlain. See HERO.] 

[SOUTHHOLD, or SOUTHOLD, a township 
of N ew York, Suffolk County, Long Island. It 
includes Fisher s Island, Plumb Island, Robin s 
Island, Gull Islands, and all that part of the 
manor of St. George on the n. side of Peaconock, 
extending w. to the e. line of Brook Haven. It 
contains a number of parishes, and houses for 
public worship, and 321 9 inhabitants; of whom 
329 are electors, and 182 slaves. It was settled 
in 1640, by the Rev. John Young and his ad 
herents, originally from England, but last from 
Salem in Massachusetts.] 

[SOUTH HUNTINGTON, a township in West 
moreland County, Pennsylvania.] 

[SOUTHINGTON, the s. w. township of 
Hartford County, Connecticut, 20 miles s. w. of 
Hartford, and 22 w. of New Haven.] 

[SOUTH KINGSTON, a township of Rhode 
Island, Washington County, on the w. side of 
Narraganset Bay. It contains 4131 inhabitants, 
including 135 slaves.] 

[SOUTH KEY, a small island, one of the Ba- 



S P A 



461 



n. long. 



New Jersey. See 



hamas, in the W. Indies. Lat. 22 31 
74 6 w. ] 

[SOUTH MOUNTAIN, in 
NEW JERSEY.] 

[SOUTH MOUNTAIN, a part of the Alleghany 
Mountains in Pennsylvania. Near this moun 
tain, about 14 miles from the town of Carlisle, a 
valuable copper-mine was discovered in Septem 
ber, 1795.] 

[SOUTH SEA, now more usually distinguished 
by the name of Pacific Ocean, was so named by 
the Spaniards, after they had passed over the 
mountains of the Isthmus of Darien or Panama, 
from n. to s. It might properly be named the 
W. Ocean, with regard to America in general ; 
but from the isthmus it appeared to them in a 
s. direction. In the beautiful islands in this 
ocean, the cold of winter is never known ; the 
trees hardly ever lose their leaves through the 
constant succession of vegetation, and the trees 
bear fruit through the greatest part of the year. 
The heat is always alleviated by alternate breezes, 
whilst the inhabitants sit under the shadow of 
groves, odoriferous, and loaded with abundance. 
The sky is serene, the nights beautiful, and the 
sea, ever offering its inexhaustible stores of food, 
and an easy and pleasing conveyance.] 

[SOUTH THULE, or SOUTHERN THULE, in 
the S. Atlantic Ocean, is the most s. land which 
has at any time been discovered by navigators. 
Lat. 59 34 s. long. 27 45 aj.] 

[SOUTHWICK, a township of Massachu 
setts, in the s. w. part of Hampshire County, 87 
miles s. w. by w. of Boston, and 12 s. w. of 
Springfield. It was incorporated in 1770, and 
contains 841 inhabitants.] 

[SOUTH WEST Point, in Tennessee, is formed 
by the confluence of Clinch with Tennessee ri 
vers, where a blockhouse is erected.] 

[SOUTH WASHINGTON, a town of N. Caro 
lina, on the n. e. branch of Cape Fear River, 
which is navigable thus far for boats. It is 25 
miles from Cross Roads near Duplin court-house, 
and 32 from Wilmington.] 

[SOUTOUX, an Indian village in Louisiana, 
on the so. side of Mississippi river, opposite to 
the Nine Mile Rapids, 22 miles below Wiespin- 
can River, and 28 above Riviere a la Roche. 
Lat. 40 32 w.l 

[SOW AND PIGS, a number of large rocks lying 
off the s. w. end of Catahunk Island, one of the 
Elizabeth Islands, on the coast of Massachusetts.] 

[SPAIN, NEW. See MEXICO.] 

[SPANIARDS BAY, on the e. coast of Cape 
Breton Island, is round the point of the s. en- 



462 



SPA 



trance into Port Dauphin, to the s. of which is 
Cape Charbon. Its mouth is narrow, but it is 
wider within till it branches into two arms, both 
of which are navigable three leagues, and afford 
secure harbouring^. Lat. 47 n. long. 60 w.~\ 

[SPANISH AMERICA contains immense 
provinces, most of which are very fertile. 1. In 
N. America, Louisiana, California, Old Mexico, 
or NuevaEspaiia, New Mexico, orNuevo Mexico, 
both the Floridas. 2. In the W. Indies, the island 
of Cuba, Porto Rico, Trinidad, Margareta, Tor- 
tuga, &amp;c. 3. In S. America, Tierra Firme, Peru, 
Chile, Granada, Paraguay, and Patagonia. These 
extensive countries are described under their 
proper heads. All the exports of Spain, most 
articles of which no other European country can 
supply, were estimated some years back at 
80,000,000 livres, or ,.3,333,333 sterling. The 
most important trade of Spain is that which it 
carries on with its American provinces. The chief 
imports from these extensive countries consist of 
gold, silver, precious stones, pearls, cotton, cocoa, 
cochineal, red- wood, skins, rice, medicinal herbs 
and barks, as sassafras, Peruv ian bark, &amp;c. Vay- 
nilla, Vicuna wool, sugar, and tobacco. In 1784, 
the total amount of the value of Spanish goods 
exported to America was 195,000,000 rcales de 
vellon ; foreign commodities, 238,000,000 r. d. v. 
The imports from America were valued at 
900,000,000 r. d. v. in gold, silver, and precious 
stones ; and upwards of 300,000,000 in goods. 
In the Gazeta de Madrid, 1787, (Feb. 20,) it was 
stated, that the exports to America (the Indies) 
from the following 12 harbours, Cadiz, Corunna, 
Malaga, Seville, St. Lucar, Santander, Canaries, 
Alicante, Barcelona, Tortosa, Gipon, St. Sebas 
tian, amounted, in 1785, to 767,249,787 r. d. v. ; 
the duties paid on these exports amounted to 
28,543,702 r. d. v. The imports, both in goods 
and money, from America and the W. India 
islands, amounted, in the same year, to 
1,266,071,067 r. d. v. and the duties to 65,472,195 
r. d. v. The profits of the merchants from the 
whole American trade was valued at 5,000,000 
dollars. See ESPANNA NUEVA and MEXICO ; 
also General Table, at beginning of Vol. I.] 

[SPANISH Creek, is at the head of St. Mary s 
River in Florida.] 

[SPANISH Main, that part of the coast of 
America, which extends from the Mosquito shore, 
along the n. coast of Darien, Carthagena, and 
Venezuela, to the Leeward Isles.] 

[SPANISH River, a river and settlement in 
Cape Breton Island, and the present seat of go 
vernment.] 



S P E 

SPANISH-TOWN, the capital, formerly, of 
the island of Jamaica, where the governor used 
to reside, and the juntas used to be celebrated : 
founded by Admiral Christoval Colon, who gave 
it the name of Santiago de la Vega ; and which 
enjoys the duchy enjoyed by the crown of Spain. 

Although it does less commerce than the city 
of Kingston, it is more handsome ; audits inha 
bitants are people of great wealth, so that the 
number of carriages kept here is very consi- 

] U1 

derabfe. 

SPANISH-TOWN, an island in the N. Sea. See 
article VIRGEN GORDA. 

[SPARHAWK S Point, on the n. shore of 
Piscataqua River, abreast of which ships can an 
chor in nine fathoms.] 

[SPARTA, a post-town of New Jersey, Sus 
sex County, 67 miles n. n. w. from Philadelphia.] 

[SPARTANBURGH, a county of Pinckney 
district, formerly in that of Ninety-Six, S. Ca 
rolina, containing 8800 inhabitants, of whom 
7907 are whites, and 866 slaves. It sends two 
representatives, and one senator, to the state 
legislature. The court-house is 19 miles from 
Pinckney, and 33 from Greenville.] 

SPEAR, Cape, on the e. coast of Newfound 
land ; on the side of the Bay of Taureaux. 

SPEIGHT-TOWN, a city of the island of 
Barbadoes, formerly much frequented by mer 
chants of Bristol ; and from thence called Little 
Bristol. It is very handsome ; contains 350 well 
built houses, and is divided into four regular 
and spacious streets, the larger of which is called 
of the Indians ; and this, as well as the other 
three, run strait down to the sea shore. The 
people of that part of the island called Escosia, 
or Scotland, embark from thence their produc 
tions for Europe, so that they have found it ne 
cessary to build there some store-houses : and 
the concourse of people that assemble there is a 
great benefit to the town ; although the more 
considerable part of this traffic is now carried 
on at Bridge-Town. 

It has a church dedicated to St. Peter, which 
gives its name to the territory, and is where the 
assemblies are held. This city is defended by 
two castles, besides a third which is in the Bay 
of Heathcote, at some distance to the s. One of 
the above forts is in the centre of the city, and 
contains 14 cannons; the other, in which are 32 
cannons, is at the n. extremity ; and more than 
these, it has several batteries, which have been 
built on the shore since the breaking out of the 
late war in 1778. [In long. 58 55 w. lat. 13* 
W n.] 



S P 11 

[SPENCER, a flourishing township in Wor 
cester County, Massachusetts, taken from Lei 
cester, and incorporated in 1753, and contains 
1322 inhabitants, and lies 12 miles w. of Wor 
cester, on the post-road to Springfield, and 48 w. 
of Boston.] 

[SPESUTIE, a small island at the head of 
Chesapeak Bay.] 

[SPIRITU SANTO, a town on the s. side of 
the island of Cuba, opposite to the n. w. part of 
the cluster of isles and rocks called Jardin de la 
Reyna, and about 45 miles n. w. of La Tri 
nidad.] 

[SPIRITU SANTO, or TAMPAY BAY, called 
also Hillsborough Bay, lies on the w. coast of 
the peninsula of E. Florida. Some account of 
it may be found under the title Espiritu Santo, 
but this is the more proper name. It has a num 
ber of shoals and keys at its mouth, and is nine 
leagues n. n. w. one-quarter a?, of Charlotte Har 
bour, and 56 s. e. by s. three-quarters e. of the 
Bay of Apalache. Lat. 27 45 n. long 82 
38 / a;.] 

[SPIRITU SANTO, a town of Brazil in S. Ame 
rica. It is situate on the sea coast, in a very 
fertile country, and has a castle and harbour. 
Lat. 13 41 s. long. 38 41 w.~] 

[SPIRITU SANTO, a lake towards the extre 
mity of the peninsula of E. Florida ; s. from the 
chain of lakes which communicate with St. John s 
River.] 

f SPIRITU SANTO. See ESPIRITU SANTO, also 
SANTO ESPIRITU.] 

[SPLIT ROCK, a rocky point which projects 
into Lake Champlain, on the w. side, about 56 
miles n. of Skeensborough, bears this name. The 
lake is narrow, and no where exceeding two 
miles from Skeensborough to this rock, but here 
it suddenly widens to five or six miles, and the 
waters become pure and clear.] 

SPOTSILVANIA, a county of Virginia in 
N. America. [See SPOTSYLVANIA.] 

[SPOTSWOOD, a small town of New Jersey, 
Middlesex County, near the w. side of South 
River, which empties into the Rariton in a s. e. 
direction. The situation is good for extensive 
manufactories, and there is already a paper-mill 
here. It is on the Amboy stage-road, nine miles 
s. e. of Brunswick, and 10 w. by s. of Middleton 
Point.] 

[SPOTSYLVANIA, a county of Virginia, 
bounded n. by Stafford, and e. by Caroline Coun 
ty. It contained, by the census of 1792, 11,252 
inhabitants, of whom 5933 were slaves.] 

SPRING-COLD, a small island of the N. 



S P R 



463 



Sea, near the coast of the province of New Jer 
sey, between Cape May and Five Mile Island. 

[SPRING-COLD Cove. See COLD-SPRING 
COVE.] 

[SPRINGFIELD, a township of Vermont, 
Windsor County, on the w. side of Connecticut 
River, opposite to Charleston in New Hamp 
shire. It has Weathersfield n. and Rockingham 
on the s. and contains 1097 inhabitants.] 

[SPRINGFIELD, a post-town of Massachusetts, 
Hampshire county, on the e. side of Connecticut 
River ; 14 miles s. by e. of Northampton, 74 
w. s. w. of Boston, 23 n. of Hartford, and 178 
n. e. of Philadelphia. The township of Spring 
field was incorporated in 1635 or 1645. It con 
tains 1574 inhabitants, a Congregational church, 
a court-house, and a number 1 of dwelling-houses, 
many of which are both commodious and elegant. 
The town lies chiefly on one long spacious street, 
which runs parallel with the river. A stream 
from the hills, at the e. of the town, falls into 
this street, and forms two branches, which take 
their course in opposite directions, one of them 
running n. and the other s. along the e. side of 
the street, and afford the inhabitants, from one 
end to the other, an easy supply of water for do 
mestic uses. Here a considerable inland trade 
is carried on ; and there is also a paper-mill. 
The original superintendant and some of the 
principal workmen in the armoury here, were 
manufacturers in Bridgewater, which is famous 
for its iron works.] 

[SPRINGFIELD, a township of New York, 
Otsego County, 11 miles n. of Otsego, and be 
tween it and the lake of that name. It is 50 miles 
w. of Albany, has a good soil, and increases in 
population.] 

[SPRINGFIELD, a township of New Jersey, 
Burlington County, of a good soil, and famed for 
excellent cheese ; some farmers make 10,001bs. 
in a season. The inhabitants are principally 
Quakers, who have three meeting-houses. The 
chief place of the township, where business is 
transacted, is a village called Job s-Town, 10 
miles from Burlington, and 18 from Trenton. In 
this township is a hill three miles in length, call 
ed Mount Pisgah, which furnishes stone for build 
ing. Here is also a grammar school.] 

[SPRINGFIELD, a township in Essex County, 
New Jersey, on Railway River, which furnishes 
fine mill-seats : six or eight miles n. w. of Eliza 
beth Town. Turf for firing is found here.] 

[SPRINGFIELD, the name of four townships of 
Pennsylvania, viz. in Buck s, Payette, Delaware, 
and Montgomery counties.] 



461 



S T A 



[SPRUCE Creek, urges its winding course 
through the marshes, from the mouth of Piscata- 
qua River, five or six miles up into Kitterj, in 
York County, district of Maine.] 

SPRUIGHT, a small river of the province of 
Guayana, in the part possessed by the Dutch. It 
runs into the sea near the river Poumaron. 

[SPURWJNG, a river of the district of 
Maine, which runs through Scarborough, to the 
w. of Cape Elizabeth, and is navigable a few 
miles for vessels of 100 tons.] 

SPYKES, a city of the island of Barbadoes. 

[SQUAM, a lake, part of which is in the 
township of Holderness, in Grafton County, New 
Hampshire ; but the one half of it is in Strafford 
County. It is about five miles long, and four broad.] 

[SQUAM, a short river of New Hampshire, the 
outlet of the above lake, which runs a s. w. 
course, and joins the Pemigewasset at the town 
of New Chester, and 10 miles above the mouth 
of the Winnipiseogee branch.] 

[SQUAM Beach, on the sea-coast of New Jer 
sey, between Barnegat Inlet and Cranbury New 
Inlet.] 

[SQUAM Harbour, on the n. e. side of Cape 
Ann, Massachusetts. When a vessel at anchor 
off Newbury Port Bar, parts a cable and loses 
an anchor with the wind at n. e. or e. n. e. if she 
can carry double-reefed sails, she may run s. s. e. 
five leagues, which course, if made good, will 
carry her a little to the e. of Squam Bay. Squam 
(Pigeon Hill) lies in lat. 42 48 n. and long. 
70 39 . ,] 

[SQUARE HANDKERCHIEF, (MouciioiR 
QUARRE) an island of some extent in the W. 
Indies, which lies between lat. 21 5 and 21 24 
n. and between long. 70 19 and 70 49 w.~\ 

[SQUEAUGHETA Creek, in New York, 
a n. head water of Alleghany River. Its mouth 
is 19 miles n. w. of the Ichua Town.] 

[STAATESBURGH, in New York State, 
lies on the e. side of Hudson s River, between 
Rhynbeck and Poughkeepsie ; about 28 miles s. 
of Hudson, and 7 In. of New York City.] 

[STAEBROECK, a town of Dutch Guayana in 
S. America, on the e. side of Demarara River, a 
mile and a half above the post which commands 
its entrance. It is the seat of government, and 
the depository of the records. The station for 
the shipping extends from the fort to about two 
miles above the town. They anchor in a line 
from two to four abreast. 

The long-existing differences between the co 
lonies of Demerary and Berbice have been very 
lately finally adjusted, by commissioners ap- 



S T A 

pointed for that purpose. The governments and 
courts of justice of both settlements have been 
consolidated, in consequence of the instructions, 
carried out by Governor Carmichael ; and all 
legal proceedings are in future to be carried on in 
the English language. TheCourt of Policy passed 
an act, on the 29th April, for changing the name 
of this town from Staebroeck to George Town.] 

[STAFFORD, a county of Virginia, bounded 
n. by Prince William County, and e. by the Pa- 
towmac. It contains 9588 inhabitants, including 
4036 slaves.] 

[STAFFORD, a township of Connecticut, in 
Tolland County, near the s. line of Massachu 
setts, 10 or 12 miles n e. of Tolland. In this 
town is a furnace for casting hollow ware, and a 
medicinal spring, which is the resort of valetudi 
narians.] 

[STAFFORD, New, a township of New Jersey, 
in Monmouth County, and adjoining Dover on 
the s. w. It consists chiefly of pine barren land, 
and contains 883 inhabitants.] 

[STAGE Island, in the district of Maine, lies 
s. of Parker s and Arrowsike Islands, on the n. 
side of Small Point, consisting of eight acres, 
not capable of much improvement ; and is only 
remarkable for being the first land inhabited in 
New England by a civilized people. It is not 
now inhabited.] 

[STAMFORD, a township of Vermont, in 
Bennington County ; it borders on Bennington 
to the ^. e. and contains 272 inhabitants, and has 
good intervale land.] 

[STAMFORD, a post-town of Connecticut, Fair- 
field County, on a small stream called Mill River, 
which empties into Long Island Sound. It con 
tains a Congregational and Episcopal church, and 
about 45 compact dwelling-houses. It is 10 miles 
s. w. of Norwalk, 24 s. w. of New Haven, 30 
n. e. of New York, and 99 n. e. of Philadelphia. 
The township was formerly called Rippowams, 
and was settled in 1641.] 

[STAMFORD, a township of New York, in Ul 
ster County, taken from Woodstock, and incor 
porated in 1792. Of its inhabitants, 127 are 
electors.] 

[STAN DISH, a township of the district of 
Maine, on the w. line of Cumberland County, 
between Presumscut and Saco Rivers. It was 
incorporated in 1785, and contains 716 inhabi 
tants. Seventeen miles n. w. of Portland, and 86 
n. of Boston.] 

[STANFORD, a township of New York, 
Duchess County, taken from Washington, and 
incorporated in 1793.] 



S T A 



8 T E 



465 



[STANFORD, the capital of Lincoln County, 
Kentucky ; situate on a fertile plain, about 10 
miles s. s. e. of Danville, 28 s. by w. of Lexing 
ton, and 33 s. s. e. of Frankfort. It contains a 
stone court-house, a gaol, and about 40 houses.] 

[STANWIX, Old Fort, in the State of New 
York, is situate in the township of Rome, at the 
head of the navigable waters of Mohawk River. 
Its foundation was laid in 1759, by General 
Broadstreet, and built upon by the troops of the 
United States, during the late war. The British 
made an unsuccessful attempt to take it in 1777.] 

[STARKS, a plantation in Lincoln County, 
Maine, situate on the w. side of Kennebeck Ri 
ver, near Norridgewalk.] 

[STARKSBOROUGH, a township in Addi- 
son County, Vermont, 12 miles e. of Ferrisburg. 
It contains 40 inhabitants.] 

[STATEN Island, lies six miles s. w. of the 
city of New York, and constitutes Richmond 
County. The island is about 15 miles in length, 
and at a medium six or seven in breadth, and 
contains 3835 inhabitants. On the s. side is a 
considerable tract of level good land : but the 
island in general is rough, and the hills high. 
Richmond is the only town of any note, and that 
is an inconsiderable place. The inhabitants are 
chiefly descendants of the Dutch and French; 
and are noted for their hospitality to strangers, 
and love of their native spot.] 

STATEN-LAND, an island near Cape Horn, 
formed by the e. part of the Straits of Maire. It 
is about 40 miles in length, and 12 in width ; it 
is entirely barren and desert. The captain, Ja 
cob Le Maire, who discovered it, together with 
the straits, gave it this name, in compliment to 
the states of the Republic of Holland, his native 
country. It is included between lat. 54 45 and 
54 56 s. and between long. 63 40 and 64 
48 a&amp;gt;. 

STATES Island. See STATEN ISLAND.] 
STATES, UNITED. See UNITED STATES.] 
STATESBURG, a post-town of S. Carolina, 
the capital of Clermont County, situate on 
the e. side of Beech Creek, which unites with 
Shanks Creek, and empties into the Wateree, a 
few miles below the town. It contains 10 or 12 
houses, a court-house and gaol. It is 26 miles 
s. bye. of Camden, and 76 w. byte, of Charleston.] 

[STAUNTON, a post-town of Virginia, and 
the capital of Augusta County. It is situate on 
the s. e. side of Middle River, a water of Patow- 
mack, a little to the n. of Maddison s Cave. It 
contains about 160 houses, mostly built of stone, 
a court-house, and gaol. It is 68 miles from the 

VOL. IV. 



an 



Sweet Springs, 78 miles s. w. by s. of Winches 
ter, and 89 w. n. w. of Richmond.] 

[STAUNTON, a large river of Virginia, 
which rises on the w. side of the Blue Ridge, and 
breaks through that mountain in lat. about 37 
10 n. and uniting with Dan River, forms the 
Roanoke, above the Occoneachy Islands, about 
98 miles from its source. It is also called Smith s 
River.] 

[STAUSEE, Fort, just above the Falls of Ni 
agara, and eight miles above Queen s Town.] 

[STEADMAN S Creek, in the State of New 
York. The main fork of this creek empties into 
Niagara River, above Fort Schlosser.] 

[STEEP ROCKS, a curious ledge of perpen 
dicular shelly rocks, which form the w. bank of 
Hudson s River, with some interruptions, for 12or 
13 miles from the Tappan Sea, to within 11 miles 
of New- York City. Some of these ledges are 
from 150 feet to 200 feet high. As you pass down 
the river from the Tappan Sea, by these rocks, 
the prospect on every side is enchanting. On 
the n. of the Tappan Sea, a fine broad bay opens 
to view, skirted with high hills ; on the s. the 
river lies under the eye as far as it distinguishes, 
objects; on the ay. are the Steep Rocks, before 
described ; and on the e. a fine cultivate coun- 

tr J-] 

[STEPHENS, a cape s. w. of Cape Denbigh, 
on the n. w. coast of N. America, and is at the 
s. e. part of Norton Sound. Stuart s Island is 
opposite to it. Lat. 63 40 n. long. 162 19 w. 
Between this and Shoal Ness is shoal water.] 

[STEPHENS, a short river of Vermont, which 
empties into Connecticut River, from the n. w. in 
the town of Barnet.] 

[STEPHENS, St. a parish of Charleston district, 
S. Carolina ; containing 2733 inhabitants, of 
whom 226 are whites.] 

[STEPHENTOWN, a township of good land 
in New York, in Rensselaer County, between 
Lebanon and Scoodack. It is about 14 miles 



square, and lies 20 miles e. of Albany. Of its 
inhabitants 624 are elector?. The timber on the 
low land is pine, hemlock, beech, birch, ash, ma 
ple. On the hills, pine, hemlock, black and 
white oak, walnut, and poplar.] 

[STERLING, a plantation in Lincoln County, 
district of Maine ; n. w. of Hallowell, and at no 
great distance. It contains 166 inhabitants.] 

[STERLING, in Worcester County, Massachu 
setts, was formerly a parish of Lancaster, called 
Chockset, incorporated in 1781 ; situate 12 miles 
n. e. of Worcester, and 38 w. of Boston, and con 
tains 1428 inhabitants. Near the neck of land 
So 



* 



466 



S T I 



which divides Waushacum Ponds, on the s. side, 
was formerly an Indian fort, of which the ves 
tiges are nearly disappeared. On this spot was 
the palace and royal seat of Sholan, sachem of 
the Nashaways, proprietor of Nashawogg.] 

[STEUBEN, a small fort in the N. W. Ter 
ritory, situate at the Rapids of the Ohio, a short 
distance above Clarksville.] 

[STEUBEN, a new county of New York, taken 
from that of Ontario ; being that part of Ontario 
County, bounded by the Pennsylvania line on the 
s. by the north bounds of the six range of town 
ships on the n. by the pre-emption line on the e. 
and by the Indian line on the wJ] 

[STEUBEN, a township of New York, in Her- 
kemer County ; taken from Whitestown, and in 
corporated in 1792. In 1796 the towns of Floyd 
and Rome were taken off of this township. Of its 
inhabitants 417 are electors. The centre of the 
town is about 12 miles n. e. of Fort Schuyler, and 
27 n. w. of the mouth of Canada Creek.] 

[STEVENS, a short navigable river of the 
district of Maine. It rises within a mile of Merry 
Meeting Bay, with which it is connected by a ca 
nal lately opened. See GEORGETOWN.] 

[STEVENSBURG, a post-town of Virginia, 
situate on the road from Philadelphia to Staun- 
ton. It contains about 60 houses ; the inhabi 
tants are mostly of Dutch extraction. It is 10 
miles n. by e. of Strasburg, 71 n. e. by n. of 
Staunton, 40 s. w. by s. of Williamsport, and 160 
v. w. of Philadelphia.] 

[STEVENTOWN, W. Chester County, New 
York ; is bounded w. by York Town, and n. by 
Dutchess County. It contains 1297 inhabitants, 
of whom 178 are electors.] 

[STEY Point, on the Labrador coast, and N. 
Atlantic Ocean. Lat. 58 n. long. 61 40 a&amp;gt;.] 

[STILL WATER, a township of New York, 
Albany County, bounded e. by Cambridge, and 
s. by Schachtekoke and Anthony s Kill. It con 
tains 3071 inhabitants ; of whom 459 are elec 
tors, and 61 slaves. The village of Still water, 
in this township, is situate on the w. bank of 
Hudson s River ; 12 miles from Cohoez Bridge, 
nine from Saratoga, 17 n. of Albany, and 11 from 
Ballstown Springs. A canal is begun at this 
place, to lead the water of the Hudson to the 
mouth of the Mohawk, 10 miles below.] 

[STINKING Islands, on the e. coast of 
Newfoundland Island. Lat. 49 28 n. long. 52 
5(X jJ 

[STISSIK Mountain, lies between the State 
of Connecticut and Hudson s River, and near it 
the Mahikander Indians formerly resided.] 



S T O 

[STOCKBRIDGE, a township in Windsor 
County, Vermont, on White River, and contains 
1 00 inhabitants.] 

[STOCKBRIDGE, a post- town of Massachusetts, 
Berkshire County, 31 miles w. by n. of Spring 
field, 101 w. of Boston, and 23 e. by s. of Kin- 
derhook in New York. The township is the 
chief of the county ; was incorporated in 1739, 
and contains 1336 inhabitants.] 

[STOCKBRIDGE, New, a tract of land six miles 
square, lying in the s. e. part of the Oneida Re 
servation, in the State of New York, inhabited 
by the Indians, 300 in number, who, some years 
since, removed from Stockbridge, Massachusetts, 
and from this circumstance are called the Stock- 
bridge Indians. This tract was given to these 
Indians by the Oneidas, as an inducement to 
them to settle in their neighbourhood ; and is 
seven miles s. e. of Kahnonwolohale, the princi 
pal village of the Oneidas. These Indians are 
under the pastoral care of a missionary, the Rev. 
Mr. Sarjeant, whose pious labours have been 
attended with considerable success. They are 
generally industrious, especially the women, and 
employ themselves in agriculture, and breeding 
of cattle and swine. Their farms are generally 
inclosed with pretty good fences, and under to 
lerable cultivation. In the fall of 1796, almost 
every family sowed wheat ; and there was a sin 
gle instance this year, of one of the Indian wo 
men, named Esther, who wove 16 yards of 
woollen cloth ; who is here mentioned as an ex 
ample of industry, and as having led the way to 
improvements of this kind. There is little doubt 
but her example has been followed by others. 
Their dividend of moneys, from the United 
States, amounting to about 300 dollars, has 
hitherto been expended in erecting a saw-mill, 
and supporting an English school.] 

[STOCK Creek, a branch of Peleson River. 
See WASHINGTON COUNTY, Virginia.] 

[STOCKPORT, a village in Northampton 
County, Pennsylvania, on the w. side of the Po- 
paxtunk branch of Delaware River. From this 
place is a portage of about 18 miles to Harmony, 
on the e. branch of the river Susquehannah.] 

[STODDARD, a township of New Hamp 
shire, Cheshire County, about 15 or 18 miles e. 
of Walpole, on Connecticut River. It was in 
corporated in 1774, and contains 701 inhabi 
tants.] 

[STODHART Bay, near the n. w. point of 
the island of Jamaica, is to the e. of Sandy Bay, 
and between it and Lucea Harbour.] 

[STOKES, a county of Salisbury district, N. 



S T O 

Carolina; bounded e. by Rockingham, and w. by 
Surrey, and contains 8528 inhabitants, including 
787 slaves. Iron ore is found here in consider 
able quantities, and works have been erected on 
Iron Creek, which manufacture considerable 
quantities. Chief town, Germantown.J 

[STOKES, the chief town of Montgomery 
County, N. Carolina, near Yadkin River. It 
contains a court-house, gaol, and about 20 
houses.] 

STONE ARABIA, a village and fine tract of 
country so called, in Montgomery County, New 
York, on the n. side of Mohawk Kiver, between 
50 and 60 miles w. of Albany. This settlement 
was begun by the Germans in 1709. The land 
from the river rises on a beautiful and gradual 
ascent for four miles, and the principal settle 
ment is on a wide spreading hill, at that distance 
from the river. The soil is excellent, and the 
people industrious and thriving. It suffered 
much from the Indians in the late war, particu- 
larlv in 1780.J 

[STONEHAM, a township of Massachusetts, 
in Middlesex County, which was incorporated in 
1725, and contains 381 inhabitants. It is about 
10 miles n. of Boston.! 

[STONE Indians, inhabit s. of Fire Fort, on 
Assenebayne River, N. America.] 

[STONE Mountain, between the States of Ten 
nessee and Virginia. The Virginia line inter 
sects it in lat. 36 30 n. from thence to the place 
where Watauga River breaks through it. See 
TENNESSEE.] 

[STONE Island, on the e. coast of Newfound 
land, is near Cape Broyle, and is one of the three 
islands which lie off Caplin Bay.] 

QSTONES, is a boatable water of Tennessee, 
which runs w. w. into Cumberland River, six 
miles n. e. of Nashville.] 

[STONES Fort Gut, on the s. w. side of the 
island of St. Christopher s ; e. of Old Road Bay, 
and between that and Bloody Point. There is a 
fort on a point of land on the w. side.] 

[STONEY Hill, in Baltimore County, Mary 
land, is five or six miles n. w. of Whetstone Fort, 
at the mouth of Baltimore Harbour, and two 
miles s. e. of Hooks-Town.] 

[STONEY Point, in Orange County, New 
York, a small peninsula, projecting in a consi 
derable bluff from the w. bank of Hudson s River 
into Haverstraw Bay ; about 36 miles n. of New 
York city, just at the s. entrance of the high 
lands. In the capture of this fortress the brave 
General Wayne distinguished himself.] 

[STONEY Mountains, in the n. w. part of N. 



S T O 



467 



America, extend from the s. to the n. and in a 
n. w. direction, from lat. 48 to 68 n. The n. 
part of this range is called the Mountains of 
Bright Stones.jj 

[STONEY River, called by the French Bayouk 
Pierre, empties into the Mississippi four miles 
from Petit Goufre, and 10 from Louisa Chitto. 
From the mouth of what is called the fork of this 
river, is computed to be 21 miles. In this dis 
tance there are several quarries of stone, and the 
land has a clayey soil, with gravel on the surface 
of the ground. On the w. side of this river the 
land, in general, is low and rich ; that on the s. 
side is much higher, but broken into hills and 
vales ; but here the low lands are not often over 
flowed : both sides are shaded with a variety of 
useful timber.] 

[STONINGTON, a post-town arid port in 
New London County, Connecticut ; 10 miles e. 
by s. of New London city. The harbour sets up 
from the Sound, opposite to Fisher s Island. The 
town is separated from Rhode Island by the e. 
line of the state ; and was settled in 1658. Here 
are six places of public worship ; and the number 
of inhabitants, in 1790, was 5648.] 

[STONO Inlet, on the coast of S. Carolina, 
is to the s. of the channel of Charleston, at the 
n. e. corner of John s Island, which is bounded 
by Stono River on the w. It is six miles from 
the s. channel of Charleston, and from this inlet 
to that of N. Edisto, the course is s. w. by w. 
half w. distant 11 miles.] 

[STORM Cape, in the Straits of Northum 
berland, is the n. limit of the mouth of Bay Verte, 
and forms the s. e. corner of the province of New 
BrunswickJ 

[STOUENUCK, a township in Cumberland 
County, New Jersey.] 

[STOUGHTON, called by the Indians, Pake- 
mitt, or Pontipog, or Punkapaog, (that is, taken 
from a spring that ariseth out of red earth) a 
township in Norfolk County, Massachusetts, in 
corporated in 1726. It is bounded e. by Brain- 
tree, w. by Sharon, and is 15 miles s. of Boston. 
It contains 16,000 acres of land, and 1994 inha 
bitants. Iron ore is found here, of an excellent 
quality ; and there is a rolling and slitting mill, 
which manufacture considerable quantities of 
steel and iron. Great quantities of charcoal, 
baskets and brooms, are sent from thence to Bos 
ton. Early in the war a large quantity of gun 
powder, of an excellent quality, was made in 
this town for the American army, from salt 
petre, the produce of the towns in its vicinity.] 

[STOW, a township of Massachusetts, Middle* 
3o2 



468 



S T R 



sex County, incorporated in 1683 ; and contains 
801 inhabitants, and is 23 miles w. n. w. of Bos 
ton.] 

[Sxow, a township of Vermont, Chittenden 
County, about 25 or 30 miles e. of Burlington.] 

[STOWE Creek, one of the seven townships 
into which Cumberland County in New Jersey 
is divided.] 

[STRABANE, two townships of Pennsylva 
nia ; the one in York County, the other in that 
of Washington.] 

[STR AFFORD, a township in Orange County, 
Vermont, w. of Thetford, adjoining, having 845 
inhabitants.] 

[STRAFFORD, a county of New Hampshire, 
bounded n. and n. w. by Grafton, s. e. by Rock- 
ingham, and e. by the district of Maine. It con 
tains 25 townships, almost wholly agricultural, 
and has no sea-port. The branches of the Pisca- 
taqua and Merrimack, and other streams, water 
this county; besides the lakes Winnipiseogee 
and Ossipee. It contains 23,601 inhabitants, of 
whom 22 are slaves. Chief towns, Dover and 
Durham.] 

[STRAITS OF BEERING, or BHERING, 
separate the n. w. part of N. America from the 
n. e. coast of Asia. Beering s Island lies in lat. 
55 n. and long. 164 35 e.] 

[STRASBURG, a post-town of Virginia, She- 
nandoah County, on the n. w. branch of the n. 
fork of SItenandoah River, and contains a hand 
some German Lutheran church, and about 60 or 
70 houses. It is 64 miles n. e. by n. of Staunton, 
and 17 s. s. w. of Winchester.] 

[STRASBURG, a town of Lancaster County, 
Pennsylvania ; situate on an eminence, and in 
the centre of a fertile and well cultivated coun 
try, and contains about 60 houses, several of 
which are built of brick. It is about nine miles 
w. from Strasburg Gap, where the road leads 
through the mountains ; seven miles e. of Lan 
caster, and 49 w. of Philadelphia.] 

[STRASBURG, a settlement in Kentucky, near 
the Bullit Lick.] 

[STRATFORD, a township in Grafton Coun 
ty, New Hampshire ; situate on the e. bank of 
Connecticut River, between Cockburn township 
n. and Northumberland on the mouth of the 
Upper Amonoosuck on the s. It was incorpo 
rated in 1773, and contains 146 inhabitants. It 
is 56 miles above Hanover.] 

[STRATFORD, a pleasant post-town of Con 
necticut, in Fairfield County, on the w. side of 
Stratford River, which contains two places for 
public worship, and several neat and commo- 



S T Y 

dious houses. It is 12 miles s. w. of New Haven, 
16 n. e. of Norwalk, and 124 n. e. of Philadel 
phia. The township of Stratford, the Cupheag 
of the Indians, was settled in 1638, principally 
from Massachusetts.] 

[STRATFORD River. See HOUSATONIC.] 

[STRATHAM, or STREATHAM, a township 
of New Hampshire, situate in Rockingham 
County. Incorporated in 1693, and contains 
882 inhabitants. It lies on the road from Ports 
mouth to Exeter ; 1 1 miles w. of the former, and 
four e. of the latter.] 

[STRATTON, a township of Vermont, Wind- 
ham County, about 15 miles n. e. of Bennington, 
having 95 inhabitants.] 

[STRAWBERRY Gap, a pass in the moun 
tains on the road from Philadelphia to Lancas 
ter ; 42 miles w. of the former, and 16 s. e. of the 
latter.] 

[STRAWBERRY River, falls into Lake Onta 
rio ; and is thus named from the great quantity 
of large fruit of that name growing on its 
banks.] 

[STROUDS, a stage on the new road from 
Lexington in Kentucky, to Virginia. It is 17 
miles n. e. of Lexington, and nine from Hoi- 
den.] 

[STROUDWATER. See CASCO BAY.] 

[STUART S Island, on the n. w. coast of N. 
America, is about six or seven leagues in circuit; 
about 45 miles from Cape Denbigh on the conti 
nent. Lat. 63 4 1 7 .] 

STUART TOWN, in Grafton County, New 
Hampshire, is situate on the e. bank of Connec 
ticut River, between Colebrook on the s. and a 
tract of 2000 acres on the n. belonging to Dart 
mouth college.] 

[STUMSTOWN, a small town of Pennsyl 
vania, Dauphin County, on a branch of Little 
Swatara. It contains about 20 houses, and a 
German Lutheran and Calvanist church united. 
It is 24 miles e. n. e. of Harrisburg, and 66 n. w. 
by w. of Philadelphia.] 

[STURBRIDGE, a township in the s. w. cor 
ner of Worcester County, Massachusetts, contain 
ing 28,929 acres, divided from Woodstock and 
Union on the s. in Connecticut by the state line, 
and on the n. by Brookfield. It was incorporated 
in 1738, and contains 1704 inhabitants. The 
butter and cheese made here have obtained high 
credit in the markets. It is 54 miles 5. w. by w. of 
Boston, and 21 s. w. of Worcester.] 

[STURGEON Creek. See KITTERY.] 

[STYX, a small branch of Patowmac River., 
where it is called Cohongoronto. It rises in the 



S U A 

Laurel Thickets, in the Alleghany Mountains ; 
runs n. and empties opposite to Laurel Creek.] 

SUACHA, a settlement of the corregimiento 
of Boza in the Nuevo Reyno de Granada; a 
place chosen by the religious of S. Francisco as 
a leading step to the conversions they made 
amongst those Gentiles. It is of an extremely 
cold temperature, but abounding in vegetable 
productions, and contains more than 100 house 
keepers, and as many Indians, and is three 
leagues s. of Santa Fe. 

SUAITA, a settlement of the corregimiento 
and jurisdiction of Velez, in the same kingdom 
as the former. It is of an hot, but healthy tem 
perature, and produces in abundance sugar-cane, 
of which much sugar is made in the mills ; honey 
and conserves, plantains, yucas, and cotton ; 
contains 500 housekeepers, and is eight leagues 
n. of its capital. 

SUANCA, SANTA MARIA DE, a settlement 
of the missions which were established and held 
by the Jesuits in the province and government of 
Sonora. 

SUAPURE, a river of the province and go 
vernment of Guayana, or Nueva Andalucia. It 
rises in the sierra Maiguatida, runs w. collecting 
the waters of many other rivers, and enters the 
Orinoco opposite the rapid stream of the Maru- 
marota. 

SUARES. See SARABITA. 

SUASA, a small river of the province and 
country of Las Amazonas ; which runs through 
the territory of the Chunamas Indians to the e. 
and enters the Maranon just before this runs into 
the Iza or Parana. 

SUATA, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Tunja in the Nuevo Reyno de 
Granada ; situate on the side of a small moun 
tain. It is of an hot temperature, but with mo 
deration ; pleasant and delightful, and abounding 
in the vegetable productions of all climates, and 
particularly in sugar-canes, dates, pomegranates, 
and other fruits. The natives make great quan 
tities of sugar and delicious conserves ; and in 
these productions it maintains a great trade, 
having a large public market every Sunday. Its 
population is composed of more than 1000 house 
keepers : 24 leagues n. of Tunja in the high road 
leading to Merida, Pamplona, and the province 
of Caracas. 

SUAY, CONCEPCION DE, a settlement of the 
province of Guayana and government of Cu- 
mana : one of those composed of the missions 
held there by the Catalanian Capuchin fathers ; 
and the first which was founded by them in 1724 : 



S U (J 



469 



it is two leagues inland from the garrison of Santo 
Tome de la Guayana. 

SUAZA, a river of the province and govern 
ment of Neiva in the Nuevo Reyno de Granada. 
It runs w. and enters the Grande de la Magda- 
lena opposite the city of La Plata. 

SUBA, a settlement of the province and cor 
regimiento of Boza in the Nuevo Reyno de Gra 
nada. It is of a cold temperature, abounding in 
wheat, maize, barley, and papas ; and is three 
leagues n. of Santa Fe. 

SUBCUNCA, a settlement of the province 
and corregimiento of Aimaraez in Peru ; annexed 
to the curacy of the settlement of Ancobamba. 

SUBERCIAS, a barbarous nation of Indians, 
discovered a few years since in Peru : descended 
from the Chiquitos, and of whom little is known 
to the present time. 

SUBIA, an ancient province of the Nuevo 
Reyno de Granada ; celebrated for the magni 
ficent palace of the zipas, or kings of Bogota ; 
and although there was here a great fortress well 
furnished with artillery to suppress the incursions 
of the infidel Punches Indians, who lived on the 
borders of it, yet nothing now remains of these 
people or the fort but the mere memory. 

[SUCCESS, a bay, also called Good Success, 
on Terra del Fuego, or the w. shore of Strait lr 
Maire. Lat. 54 49 s. long. 65 14 w. Cape 
Success, on the point of this bay, lies in lat.55 v. 
and long. 65 19 w.~\ 

[SUCCESS, a township of New Hampshire, in 
Grafton County, n. e. of the White Mountains 
on the e. line of the state, incorporated in 1773.] 

SUCHIAPA, a settlement of the province and 
alcaldia mayor of Villalta in Nueva Espana. It 
contains 41 families of Indians, and is 34 leagues 
from its capital. 

SUCHITEPEQUE, a province and alcaldia 
mayor of the kingdom of Guatemala : bounded 
n. by the province of Solola and Atitan ; w. by 
thai of Soconusco ; and *. by the Pacific Sea, on 
the shore of which its jurisdiction extends. It 
was discovered and conquered by Captain Pedro 
de Alvarado, by the order and through the com 
mission of Hernan Cortes, after that he had 
made himself master of Mexico. It is through 
out of a very hot temperature, and subject to 
continual rains, with tempests of thunder and 
lightning. Its principal productions are cacao., 
achote, vanilla, and other drugs, in which it car 
ries on a great land-trade with Nueva Espana, 
and with the kingdoms of Tierra Firme and 
Peru through the ports of the Sea : nor is it 
without some cultivation of indigo and cochineal, 



470 



sue 



though these productions are by no means in 
such profusion as the rest; and, in fine, this 
alcaldia is in greater request and esteem than any 
other. 

This province is watered by different rivers, 
all of which flow down from the sierra of the 
n. part, and run to empty themselves into the 
sea : the principal of these are, the river of its 
name, called also Nahualate, the Chipilapa, the 
Acome, and the Escuita, which serves as a boun 
dary to the province, dividing it from the district 
of this name : in all these rivers is found abun 
dance of fish of excellent sorts, the preference 
being given to that called by the Indians terne- 
pechin, and which is, indeed, of singular esti 
mation. 

The capital of this province is the settlement 
of the same name with the dedicatory title of 
San Antonio ; [72 miles . w. of the city Guati- 
mala, in lat. 14 47 n. and long. 92 W a&amp;gt;.] It 
is of a very hot climate ; situate on the shore of 
the river of its denomination, contains 1480 In 
dians of the Sutuhil nation, dedicated to the cul 
tivation of cochineal and indigo, and annexed to 
its curacy is the settlement of San Juan Nigua- 
lapa, in which dwell 80 other inhabitants. The 
other settlements are : 

San Juan Nugualapa, Santa Barbara, 

San Martin Sapotitlan, Sta. Catalina Retalu- 

San Felipe, let, 

San Antonio Retaru- Santiago Zambo, 

lent, San Gaspar Cuyute- 

San Sebastian, nango, 

S. Bartolome Masate- San Andres, 

nango, Santa Catalina Z iquis- 

San Gabriel, nala, 

San Lorenzo, La Asuncion, 

San Francisco Sapo- San Andres, 

titan, Santa Lucia Maqual- 

San Francisco Ichan- pan, 

guegue, San Pablo Xocopilas, 

Zamaya, Santo Tomas, 

Sto. Domingo Retalu- San Miguel, 

lent, San Francisco de la 

S. Bernardino Sinaco, Cestilla. 
[SUCK Creek empties into Tennessee River 
from the s. s. e. at the Suck, or Whirl, where 
the river is contracted to the breadth of 70 yards. 
It is a few miles n. from the Georgia n. line. See 
TENNESSEE and SHALLOW FORD.] 

[SUCKLING Cape, on the n. w. part of N. 
America ; off which, and to the n. e. end of 
Kaye s Island, is a muddy bottom with from 43 
to 27 fathoms water. The s. w. point of Kaye s 
Island is in lat. 59 56 n. and long. 143 32 o&amp;gt;.] 



S U D 

SUCUBUTI, a river of the province and go 
vernment of Darien and kingdom of Tierra 
Firme. It has its origin in the mountains of 
this province in the e. part, and follows its course 
to the w. until it enters the grand river of Chu- 
cunaqui. 

SUCUMBIOS, a settlement of the province 
and government of Pastos in the kingdom of 
Quito, on the shore of the river San Miguel. 

SUCUNCA, SANTA MARIA DE, a settlement 
of the province and government of Sonora in 
Nueva Esparia ; on the shore of a river in the 
territory of the Sobaipuris Indians, near the 
town and garrison of San Felipe de Guevavi. 

[SUD, DE, a river of N. America, which rises 
in the mountains, and falls into the St. Lawrence 
at St. Thomas, after watering a beautiful and 
rich plain, which runs up into the country for 
many miles. This river is one of those which 
literally falls into the river St. Lawrence. This 
fall is not to be compared to some of the others ; 
but still, when the river is full, it has a fine 
effect, as the precipice is about 20 feet. It af 
fords excellent situations for mills, of which the 
lord of the manor has availed himself. 

The banks of this river are thought to be pre 
ferable for farming land than those of the river 
De Loup, although it is near 200 miles further 
up the t. Lawrence, and consequently further 
to the s. and although there certainly is an ex 
tensive tract of very valuable land in that quar 
ter, and situate too between Quebec and Mon 
treal.] 

SUDBURY, a city of the county of Middle 
sex. 

[SUDBURY, a county of New Brunswick, on 
the w. side of St. John s River, towards its 
mouth.] 

[SUDBURY, a township of Vermont, in Rut 
land County, having Orwell on the w. It con 
tains 258 inhabitants.] 

[SUDBURY, EAST, a township of Massachu 
setts, Middlesex County, on the post-road 18 
miles w. of Boston. It was incorporated in 1780, 
and contains 801 inhabitants.] 

[SUDBURY, West, or SUDBURY, a township ZP. 
of E. Sudbury, and 23 miles w. of Boston. It 
was incorporated in 1639, and contains 1290 in 
habitants.] 

[SUDBURY, CANADA, in York County, dis 
trict of Maine, is situated on the s. side of An- 
droscoggin River, and s. of Andover. In 1796, 
it was erected into a township called Bethel, and 
has two parishes.] 

SUDCHA, a settlement of the province and 



S U F 

corregimiento of Guailas in Peru ; annexed to 
the curacy of the settlement of Aija. 

[SUE, LA, a powerful nation of Indians inha 
biting w. of Lake Superior and the Mississippi. 
Warriors 10,000.] 

[SUER, FORT LE, in Louisiana, is on the w. 
bank of the Mississippi, and e. of Fort L Huillier, 
on St. Peter s River.] 

SUERTE, a river of the province and go 
vernment of Veraguia in the kingdom of Tierra 
Firme. It enters the N. Sea between the port 
of Portete and the river of Los Anzuelos. 

SUESCA, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Ubate in the Nuevo Reyno de 
Granada ; situate in a llanura^ and being of a 
cold temperature and abounding in the vegetable 
productions and fruits of this climate. It was a 
curacy of the religious of St. Domingo, the cu 
rate having been the Fr. Juan de Ladrada, after 
wards bishop of Cartagena. It was, in the time 
of the gentilism of the Indians, a large and rich 
city, called Suezusa, signifying, in the idiom of 
the country, colour of guacamaya, from the va 
riety of green tints found in the llanura. This 
city was free after the manner of the Republic 
of Geneva, and afforded an asylum to all those 
who fled to it. It was conquered by Gonzalo 
Ziminez de Quesada in 1537 ; who afterwards 
retired to it, and wrote a compendious history of 
the conquest of that kingdom, with the title of 
Ratos de Suesca. It is now reduced to a small 
village, containing about 100 inhabitants and as 
many Indians : 29 miles n. n. e. of Fe. 

SUETI, a river of the province and govern 
ment of Choco in the Nuevo Reyno de Granada. 
It rises in the interior of the mountains, runs w. 
and enters the mouth of the great river Atrato, 
serving as limits and division between this pro 
vince and that of Darien. 

SUETI, another river, in the province and go 
vernment of Darien ; which runs to the same 
rhumb as the former, and enters the grand river 
Chucanaqui. 

SUEUR, a fort of the province and govern 
ment of Louisiana in N. America; built by the 
French on the shore of the river Mississippi, and 
at the entrance of the river Bois. 

[SUFFIELD, a pleasant post-town of Mas 
sachusetts, Hartford County, having a handsome 
church and some respectable dwelling-houses. 
It is on the w. bank of Connecticut River, on 
the great post-road from Boston to New- York, 
nine miles s. of Springfield, 15 n. of Hartford. 
This township was purchased of two Indian sa 
chems for 30, and, in 1670, was granted to 



S U G 



471 



Major John Pyncheon by the assembly of Massa 
chusetts.] 

[SUFFOLK, a county of Massachusetts, so 
named from that in England, in which Governor 
Winthrop lived, before he emigrated to America. 
It contained, in 1790, 23 townships, 6335 houses, 
13,038 families, 44,875 inhabitants. In 1793 the 
county was divided ; and now the new county, 
Norfolk, comprehends all the towns except Bos 
ton, Chelsea, Hull, and Hingham. Suffolk was 
constituted a county, May 10, 1643. See MASSA 
CHUSETTS and BOSTON.] 

[SUFFOLK, a county of New York, Long 
Island, is about 100 miles long and 10 broad, 
and comprehends all that part of the state 
bounded e. and s. by the Atlantic Ocean, n. by 
the Sound, and w. by Lloyd s Neck, or Queen s 
Village, Cold Spring Harbour, and the e. bounds 
of the township of Oyster Bay ; the line conti 
nued s. to the Atlantic Ocean, including the Isle 
of Wight, now called Gardner s Island, Shelter 
Island, Plumb Islands, Robin s Island, and the 
Gull Islands. Fisher s Island also belongs to it. 
It contains 16,440 inhabitants, of whom 1098 are 
slaves. There are nine townships, and 2609 of 
the inhabitants are electors. Suffolk County 
court-house is 13 miles from Southampton, 27 
from Sagg Harbour, and 57 from New York 
City.] 

[SUFFOLK, a post-town of Virginia, in Nan- 
semond County, on the e. of the river Nanse- 
mond. It contains a court-house, gaol, and 
about 40 houses. The river is thus far navigable 
for vessels of 250 tons. It is 16 miles w. by s. 
of Portsmouth, 56 e. s. e. of Petersburgh, and 
66 s. e. of Richmond.] 

[SUFFRAGE, a township of New York, 
situate in Otsego County, on the n. side of Sus- 
quehannah River ; taken from Unadilla, and in 
corporated in 1796. 

SUGACHI, a river of the province and go 
vernment of Mainas in the kingdom of Quito. 
It rises in the serrania which divides this province 
from that of Quixos and Macas, runs inclining 
to s. s. e. and enters the Pastaza. 

SUGAMUXI. See SOGAMOSO. 

[SUGAR Creek, or CAESAR S Creek, a con 
siderable branch of Little Miami River.] 

[SUGAR Hill, a ragged eminence, the top of 
which overlooks and commands the whole works 
of Ticonderoga, where the waters of Lake George 
empty into Lake Champlain, and opposite to 
Fort Independence, in the State of Vermont. 
General Burgoyne made a lodgment on this hill, 
which the Americans esteemed inaccessible : and 



472 



S U L 



thus forced General St. Clair to abandon the fort 
in June, 1777.1 

[SUGAR River, in Cheshire County, New 
Hampshire, rises in Sunapee Lake, and, after a 
short course w. empties into Connecticut River 
at Clermont, and opposite to Ashcutney moun 
tain in Vermont. There is a strong expectation 
of uniting- this river, by a short canal, with Con- 
tocook, which falls into Merrimack River at 
Boscawen .1 

[SUGAR, a river of Veragua, which empties 
into the Bay of Honduras.] 

[SUGAR-LOAF Bay, on the n. e. side of Juan 
Fernandez Island.] 

SUGUACHI, a large and abundant river, 
which runs through unknown territories to the 
s. e. to where the river Pastaza divides itself into 
two arms, forming a large island ; and it enters 
this river by the w. side, in lat. 3 35 . 

SUILA, a small settlement of the province 
and government of Darien and kingdom of Tierra 
Firme. It is of gentile Indians, and is situate on 
the shore of the Gulf of Darien. 

SUIPACHA, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Chichas and Tarija in Peru ; si 
tuate on the top of a mountain, on the skirt of 
which runs a river : 20 leagues from Cotagaita. 

SUIPIRA, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Piura in Peru ; annexed to the 
curacy of the settlement of its capital. 

SUIST, a river of the island of Jamaica, 
which rises in the centre of the same, towards 
the e. head, runs n. and enters the sea between 
the river Grande and Orange Bay. 

SULA, a settlement of the head settlement of 
the district and alcaldia mayor of Barca in the 
kingdom of Nueva Galicia in N. America. 

SULETI, a river of the province and govern 
ment of Choco in the Nuevo Reyno de Granada. 
It rises in the mountains, and enters the sea by 
the w. part, at the mouth of the river Atrato, near 
the limits which divide this province from that of 
Darien. 

SULIA, a large and abundant river of the 
province and government of Pamplona in the 
Nuevo Reyno de Granada. It rises in the vi 
cinity of this province, runs constantly n. and 
collecting the waters of many other rivers, unites 
itself with the Catacumbo ; and again separating 
itself after a little space, forms three mouths, 
whereby to enter the lake of M aracaibo ; first, 
of itself forming a great lake, called El Barar- 
dero, above the city of Grita. Its mouth is in 
lat. 8 35 n. 

SULIA, a settlement of the same province and 



SUM 

government as the former river; situate n. 
and at a small distance from the city of Pam 
plona, in the road leading to Santa Fe. It was 
founded some years since by order of the king 
by Don Sebastian Guillen. 

[SULIVAN, a township of Cheshire County, 
New Hampshire, containing 220 inhabitants.] 

[SuLi VAN, a post-town of the district of Maine, 
Hancock County, and on Frenchman s Bay, 12 
miles w. ;. of Goldsborough, 23 e. of Penobscot. 
The township contains 504 inhabitants. See 
WAUKEAGUE.] 

[SULIVAN, a county of Tennessee, in Wash 
ington district. In 1795 it contained, according 
to the state census, 8457 inhabitants, of whom 
777 were slaves.] 

[Su LI VAN S Island, one of the three islands 
which form the n. part of Charleston Harbour, in 
S. Carolina. It is about seven miles s. e. of 
Charleston.] 

SULLANA, an ancient province of Peru, in 
the territory and jurisdiction of the Gran Chimu. 
It was conquered and united to the empire by 
Huayna-Capac, 13th monarch. It extends its 
whole length along the coast of the Pacific Sea, 
and now forms part of the province of Santa. 

[SULPHUR Creek, LITTLE, one of the s. 
upper branches of Green River in Kentucky ; 
and lies s. w. of another branch called Bryant s 
Lick Creek. Near this is a sulphur spring.] 

[SULPHUR Islands. See MARGARET S ISLES.] 

[SULPHUR Mountain, a noted mountain in 
the island of Guadaloupe, famous for exhalations 
of sulphur and eruptions of ashes. On the e. 
side are two mouths of an enormous sulphur-pit; 
one of these mouths is 100 feet in diameter ; the 
depth is unknown.] 

SUMA, a small river of the province and go 
vernment of Guayana, or Nueva Andalucia. It 
rises in the country of the ferocious Caribes In 
dians, and enters the Caroni above the mouth, 
where this is entered by the abundant stream of 
the Arvi. 

[SUMANYSTOWN, a village of Pennsyl 
vania in Montgomery County, situate on the e. 
side of Great Swamp Creek, which empties into 
the Schuylkill above Norriton. It is 28 miles 
n. w. by n. of Philadelphia.] 

SUMAPAMPA, a settlement of the province 
and government of Tucuman in Peru ; on the 
shore of the river Dulce or Del Estero, and to 
the s. of the city of this name. 

SUMAPAZ, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Pasca in the Nuevo Reyno de 
Granada, See ALTAGRACIA. 






SUN 

SUMAPAZ, a large and abundant river which 
irrigates the provinces of Sutagaos and Tocaima 
in the Nuevo Reyno de Granada. It rises in 
the sierra of Los Pardaos, runs n. and, after 
wards inclining its course to w. unites itself with 
thePasca; and these together form the Fusa- 
gasuga to enter the Grande de la Magdalena. 

SUMARA, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Abancai in Peru, annexed to the 
curacy of the settlement of Chincaipucquio. 

S UMASINTLA, a river of the province and 
alcaldia mayor of Tabasco in Nueva Espana. It 
runs n. and enters the sea in the lake of Ter- 
minos. 

SUMAURA, a settlement of the province and 
captainship of Para in Brazil ; situate at the 
mouth of the river Acari, opposite the island of 
its name. 

SUMAURA. This island is in the river of Las 
Amazonas, and formed by a large arm of that 
river. It belongs" to the same province as the 
former settlement. 

SUMBIRCA, a settlement of the province 
and corregimiento of Canta in Peru, annexed to 
the curacy of the settlement of Guamantanga. 

SUMIDOURO, a river of the captainship of 
Mato Groso in Brazil ; its source being only a 
short distance from the river Sypotuba. A fur 
ther description of this river will be found under 
the head TAPAJOS. 

[SUMNER, a county of Tennessee, in Mero 
District. According to the state census of 1795, 
it contained 6370 inhabitants, of whom 1076 
were slaves.} 

SUMPIT, a small river of Georgia. 
[SUNAPEE, a lake and mountain in Cheshire 
County, New Hampshire. The lake is about 
eight or nine miles long, and three broad, and 
sends its waters through Sugar River w. 14 miles 
to Connecticut River. The mountain stands at 
the s. end of the lake.] 

SUNBURN, a city of New Jersey. 
[SUNBURY, a county of the British province 
of New Brunswick. It is situated on the River 
St. John, at the head of the Bay of Fundy ; and 
contains eight townships, viz. Conway, Gage 
Town, Burton, Sunbury, St. Anne s, Wilmot, 
Newton, and Maugerville. The three last of 
these were settled from Massachusetts, Connecti 
cut, &amp;c. The lands are generally pretty level, 
and tolerably fertile, abounding with variety of 
timber.] 

[SUNBURY, the chief town of Northumberland 
county, Pennsylvania ; situated near where Fort 
Augusta was erected, on the e. side of Susque- 

VOL. IV. 



SUN 



473 



hannah River, just below the junction of the ft. 
and w. branches of that river, in lat. about 40 52 n. 
It is regularly laid out, and contains a court-house, 
brick gaol, a Presbyterian and German Lutheran 
church, and about 100 dwelling-houses. Here 
the river is about half a mile broad, and at the 
ferry opposite Northumberland, about a mile 
higher, is three-fourths of a mile. It is about 53 
miles above Reading, and 96 n. w. of Phila 
delphia.] 

[SUNBURY, a port of entry and post-town of 
Georgia, beautifully situated in Liberty County, 
at the head of St. Catharine s Sound, on the main, 
between Medway and Newport Rivers, about 11 
miles s . of Great Ogeechee River. The town and 
harbour are defended from the fury of the sea by 
the w. and s. points of St. Helena and St. Catharine s 
Islands ; between is the bar and entrance into the 
sound : the harbour is capacious and safe, and 
has water enough for ships of great burden. It 
is a very pleasant healthy town, and is the resort 
of the planters from the adjacent country during 
the sickly months. It was burnt during the late 
war, but has sinee been rebuilt. An academy 
was established here in 1788, which has been un 
der an able instructor, and proved a very useful 
institution. It is 27 miles s. w. of Savannah.] 

SUNCHULI, a mountain of the province 
and corregimiento of Larecaja in Peru, and of the 
district of the city of La Paz. It has been cele 
brated for a great gold mine, discovered in 1709, 
which was worked to great profit, producing 
much wealth until the year 1756, when it was 
inundated by a spring which suddenly burst in 
upon it ; all attempts to get the water under 
having since been in vain. 

[SUNCOOK, a small plantation in York 
County, district of Maine, which, with Bromfield, 
contains 250 inhabitants.] 

[SUNDERLAND, a township of Vermont, 
Bennington County, 16 miles w. e. of Benning- 
ton, and contains 414 inhabitants. A lead mine 
has been lately discovered in this township.] 

[SUNDERLAND, a township of Massachusetts, 
situate in Hampshire County, on the e. side of 
Connecticut River, about 10 miles n. of Hadley 
and 69 w. of Boston. There is here a handsome 
Congregational church, and 73 houses, lying 
chiefly on one street. It was incorporated in 
1718, and contains 462 inhabitants.] 

SUNGOTO, a small river of the province 
and government of Mainas in the kingdom of 
Quito. It rises from the lake Nachego, runs e. 
and enters the Cahuapana. 

SUNICANCHA, a settlement of the province 
3p 



and corregimiento of Guarochiri in Peru ; an 
nexed to the curacy of S. Cosme and S. Damian. 

SUNNA, a settlement of the province and 
government of Quixos and Macas in the king 
dom of Quito. 

SUPACAY-GUAZU, a river of the province 
and captainship of Rio Grande in Brazil. It runs 
n. n. w. and enters the Parana. 

SUPACAY-MERIN, a river of the same pro 
vince and kingdom as the former. It runs to the 
same rhumb, and enters also the Parana. 

SUPAIGUA, a settlement of the province and 
government of Tucuman, in the district of the 
city of Jujui, on the shore of the river La- 
quiaca. 

SUPAMA, a settlement of the province and 
government of Guayana or Nueva Andalucia ; 
one of the missions which are held there by the 
Capuchin fathers : on the shore of the river 
Yuruario. 

SUPAY-YACU, a river of the province of 
Quixos and Macas in the kingdom of Quito. It 
is in the e. part, runs s. e. and enters the river 
Coca by the w. part, and to the w. of the river of 
Sardinas. In lat. 22 1" s. 

SUPAY-URCU, signifying DEVIL S MOUNT, 
a mountain of the province and corregimiento of 
Cuenca in the kingdom of Quito ; between the 
valleys of Chuquipata and Paute, celebrated for 
imaginary riches said to be concealed in it, and 
of which the following story is related. " A 
countryman who found himself, in his native 
place, oppressed with misery, invoked, in a state 
of desperation, the Devil to come to his assist 
ance, and, cursing the hour of his birth, was re 
volving upon putting himself to death. The 
common enemy, profiting himself of the mo 
ment, appeared in a human shape before the 
distressed man, and, having asked him the cause 
of his sorrow, and having ascertained that it 
arose from poverty, affected to be struck with 
compassion, and told the poor creature he could 
show him a place whence he might extract as 
much gold as he pleased. The countryman ac 
cepted the offer with joy, and believing that the 
journey would be short, put up only a small 
quantity of provision to take with him, about 
four small loaves, and then went complacently to 
sleep, expecting the time when his conductor 
should call him ; but what was his astonishment, 
to find himself, upon waking, in a country en 
tirely unknown to him ; and in fact by the moun 
tain of Supay-urcu. His mind was rendered 
somewhat tranquil on his perceiving at a small 
distance an old house, and, making up to it, he 



SUP 

found it to belong to another countryman, who 
received him with great courtesy. Whilst they 
were sitting at supper, the host, who had by 
chance taken in his hand one of the loaves be 
longing to the guest, and knowing that it was 
such bread as was made in Spain, but seeing it 
was altogether quite new, asked, in surprise, his 
guest, how it was that he had made so long a 
voyage in so short a time? The guest then re 
lated all that had happened, and they both con 
sented that he must have been carried thither by 
the devil, and that in the neighbouring mountain 
must be the riches which were promised him he 
should find." This story is current in the king 
dom of Quito ; and the father Manuel Rodrigues 
relates it. However great may be the fiction, it 
is universally believed that the said mountain 
abounds in exquisite riches; and this although 
no attempts have been made to extract them. 
Indeed, the natural aspect of the mountain, and 
bits of metal found on its skirt, bear strong indi 
cations of its containing mines. But these indi 
cations are peculiar to other mountains, and we 
have only related the story of the countryman 
to account for the name which this mountain 
bears. In lat. 2 28 s. 

SUPE, a settlement of the province and cor 
regimiento of Chancay in Peru, on the sea-shore, 
close to the settlement of La Barranca. 

SUPERA, a settlement of the province and 
government of Antioquia, in the Nuevo Reyno 
de Granada. 

SUPERAGUA, or SUP ARAB A, as others call 
it, a small island near the coast of Brazil, in the 
province and captainship of Rey, and at the en 
trance of the Bay of Sagasu. 

SUPERIOR, a large lake of Canada in N. 
America ; or, more properly, a small fresh water 
sea. [From the most w. point of this lake, in a 
straight line to the Falls of St. Maria, it is 344 
geographical miles in length. Its breadth is 
very various, being from 10 to about 100 miles 
from n. to s.] It is full of islands, and the whole 
of its s. coast is straight and sandy ; but the n. 
coast is more convenient for sailing, as it con 
sists of rocks which form little bays or inlets, in 
which vessels may lie secure in times of tempests. 
But these never occur without a warning of two 
days. The first day, the waters of the lake be 
come somewhat disquieted, a murmuring noise 
being heard over every part, and, the following 
day, the whole lake is covered with a thick mud, 
being still navigable if the wind be favourable ; 
but on the third day, when it is least expected, 
the waters become suddenly agitated like those 



SUPERIOR. 



475 



of the ocean ; and then it is that vessels on the 
n, side of the lake make into the shore for the 
aforesaid inlets, whilst those on the e. side take 
the precaution, on the second day, to ride out 
from the shore. 

The country surrounding is but little known, 
and is frequented only by the Indians who go 
thither to hunt. These Indians hold the lake as 
a kind of deity, offering to it sacrifices, by way of 
gratitude for the great quantities of fish which 
they extract from it, and in token of the respect 
which they bear to it from its vast extent. They 
assert that Michabou, God of the Waters, formed 
it for the hunting of castors. 

In the channel by which it empties itself into 
Lake Huron, is a cascade formed by great rocks, 
which, according to the tradition of those barba 
rians, are the remains of some causeways which 
were built by their god, to restrain the waters of 
the rivers and those of the Lake Almipegon, 
which formed this lake. The French mission 
aries of the Jesuits, called this cascade the Falls 
of St. Marie, from a church which they had 
there. In some parts of the coasts, and in vari 
ous islands of the lake, are found large bits of cop 
per, which form an object of great superstition 
to the savages ; and they look upon this metal as 
being sent them by the deities residing beneath 
the lake ; collecting even the smallest pieces with 
the greatest care, and keeping them without ever 
making any use of them. They say that there 
was formerly standing out of the water a rock 
of this material ; but as it does not now exist, it 
is thought by them to have been removed by 
their deities to some other spot ; whereas, in all 
probability, the waves of the lake have by time 
covered it over with sand. Certain it is that a 
great quantity of the above metal has been 
found in various parts ; and, in the aforesaid 
church, the missionaries used to make of it their 
crosses and incensories. 

[Lake Superior, formerly termed the Upper 
Lake, from its n. situation, may justly be termed 
the Caspian Sea of America, and is supposed to 
be the largest body of fresh water on the globe. 
According to the French charts it is 1500 miles 
in circumference. A great part of the coast is 
bounded by rocks and uneven ground. It is 
situated between lat. 46 and 49 n. and between 
long. 84 and 92 15" w. The water is very 
clear, and transparent. If the sun shines bright, 
it is impossible through this medium to look 
at the rocks at the bottom, above a minute 
or two. Although the water, at the surface, is 
much warmed by the heat of the sun, yet, when 



drawn up at about a fathom depth, it is very cold. 
Storms are more dreadful here than on the 
ocean. 

There are many islands in this lake ; two of 
them have each land enough, if proper for culti 
vation, to form a considerable province ; especi 
ally Isle Royal, which is not less than 36 miles 
long, and in many places 12 broad. The natives 
suppose these islands to be the residence of the 
Great Spirit. 

Many rivers empty their waters into this mighty 
reservoir ; of these one is called Nipegon, another 
Michipicooton ; which are described under their 
respective heads. 

Not far from the Nipegon is a small river, 
that, just before it enters the lake, has a perpen 
dicular fall from the top of a mountain, of more 
than 100 feet. It is very narrow, and appears 
at a distance like a white garter suspended in 
the air. On the s. side of it is a remarkable 
point or cape of about 60 miles in length, called 
Point Chegomegan or Kuwenaw. About 100 
miles w. of this cape, a considerable river falls 
into the lake, the head of which is composed of a 
great assemblage of small streams. This river 
is remarkable for the abundance of virgin copper 
that is found on and near its banks. Many small 
islands, particularly on the e. shores, abound with 
copper-ore lying in beds, with the appearance of 
copperas ; thus warranting the assertions made 
by Albedo on this subject respecting the opi 
nions of the Indians. This metal might be easily 
made a very advantageous article of commerce. 
This lake abounds with fish, particularly trout 
and sturgeon ; the former weigh from 12 to 50 
pounds, and are caught almost any season of the 
year in great plenty. Storms affect this lake as 
much as they do the Atlantic Ocean ; the waves 
run as high, and the navigation is equally dan 
gerous. 

The entrance into this lake from the Straits of 
St. Marie affords one of the most pleasing pro 
spects in the world. On the left may be seen 
many beautiful little islands that extend a con 
siderable way before you ; and on the right, an 
agreeable succession of small points of land that 
project a little way into the water, and contri 
bute, with the islands, to render this delightful 
bason calm, and secure from those tempestuous 
winds by which the adjoining lake is frequently 
troubled. 

This lake discharges its waters from the s. e. 

corner through the above-mentioned Straits of 

St. Marie, which are about 40 miles long, into 

Lake Huron. Although about 40 rivers empty] 

3 P 2 



476 



SUPERIOR. 



[into Lake Superior, many of which are large, 
yet it does not appear that one-tenth part of 
the waters which it receives, is discharged by 
the above-mentioned strait : great part of the wa 
ters, it is thought, find to themselves subterrane 
ous vents, whilst more evaporate; and Provi 
dence, doubtless, makes use of this inland sea to 
furnish the interior parts of the country with that 
supply of vapours, without which, like the inte 
rior parts of Africa, they must have been a mere 
desert. A number of tribes live around Lake 
Superior, but little is known respecting them. 

The following extract from the journal of a 
late traveller will be acceptable to the curious. 

" Mr. M , about the year 1790, departed 

from Montreal with a company of about 100 men, 
under his direction, for the purpose of making a 
tour through the Indian country, to collect furs, 
and to make such remarks on its soil, waters, 
lakes, mountains, manners and customs of its 
inhabitants as might come within his knowledge 
and observation. He pursued his route from 
Montreal, entered the Indian country, and coasted 
about 300 leagues along the banks of Lake Supe 
rior, from thence to the Lake of the Woods, of 
which he took an actual survey, and found it to 
be 36 leagues in length ; from thence to the Lake 
Ounipique, of which he gave also a description. 
The tribes of the Indians which he passed 
through, were called the Maskego Tribe, Shepe- 
weyau, Cithinistinee, Great Belly Indians, Beaver 
Indians, Blood Indians, the Black Feet Tribe, 
the Snake Indians, Ossnobians, Shivey toon Tribe, 
Mandon Tribe, Paunees, and several others, who 
in general were very pacific and friendly towards 
him, and are great admirers of the best hunting 
horses, in which the country abounds. The 
horses prepared by them for hunters, have large 
holes cut above their natural nostrils, for which 
they give as a reason, that those prepared in this 
manner will keep their breath longer than the 
others which are not thus prepared : from ex 
perience, knowledge is gained, and the long 
practice of this custom, consequent on these 
trials, must have convinced them of the truth and 
utility of the experiment ; otherwise we can 
hardly suppose they would torture their best 
horses in this manner, if some advantage was not 
derived from the measure. 

In pursuing his route, he found no difficulty in 
obtaining a guide to accompany him from one 
nation to the other, until he came to the Shining 
Mountains, or Mountains of Bright Stones, where, 
in attempting to pass, he was frustrated by the 
hostile appearance of the Indians who inhabit 



that part of the country. The consequence oi 
which was, he was disappointed in his intention, 
and obliged to turn his back upon them. Having 
collected a number of Indians, he went forward 
again, with an intention to force his way over 
those mountains, if necessary and practicable, 
and to make his way to Cook s River, on the 
n. w. coast of America, supposed by him to be 
about 300 leagues from the mountains ; but the 
inhabitants of the mountains again met him with 
their bows and arrows, and so superior were they 
in numbers to his little force, that he was obliged 
to flee before them. Finding himself thus totally 
disappointed in the information he was in hopes 
to obtain, he was obliged to turn his back upon 
that part of the country for which his heart had 
long panted. Cold weather coming on, he built 
huts for himself and party in the Ossnobian 
country, and near to the source of a large river, 
called the Ossnobian River, where they tarried 
during the continuance of the cold season, and 
until some time in the warmer months. Pre 
vious to his departure from Montreal, he had 
supplied himself with several kinds of seeds, and 
before his huts he laid out a small garden, which 
the natives observing, called them slaves, for 
digging up the ground, nothing of that kind 
beinjr done by them, they living wholly on ani 
mal food ; bread is unknown to them : to some 
he gave remnants of hard bread, which they 
chewed and spit out again, calling it rotten 
wood. When his onions, &amp;c. were somewhat 
advanced in their growth, he was often surprised 
to find them pulled up ; determining therefore 
to know from what cause it proceeded, he di 
rected his men to keep watch, who found that 
the Indian children, induced by motives of curio 
sity, came with sticks, thrust them through the 
poles of his fence, to ascertain and satisfy them 
selves, what the things of the white men were, 
and in what manner they grew, &amp;c. The na 
tives of this country have no fixed or permanent 
place of abode, but live wholly in tents made of 
buffalo and other hides, and with which they tra 
vel from one place to another, like the Arabs ; 
and so soon as the feed for their horses is ex 
pended, they remove their tents to another fer 
tile spot, and so on continually, scarcely ever re 
turning to the same spots again." 

By the treaty of 1783, it was agreed that a 
water communication should be had into the 
Mississippi, by a line drawn due w. from the 
Lake of the Woods ; but this was afterwards 
found to be impossible, since it is now ascer 
tained that there are no waters flowing into] 



SUR 

[Lake Superior from the w. but only a height of 
land. If the spirit of the treaty had been to be 
acted on, a line drawn through the river St. 
Lewis, which rises within a few miles of the 
Mississippi, and runs e. into the lake, would 
have formed the obvious boundary.] 

SUPIA, a settlement of the province and go 
vernment of Popayan in the Nuevo Reyno de 
Granada. 

SUPIA S, a barbarous nation of Indians of the 
same province and kingdom as the former settle 
ment, from whom that settlement took its name. 
These Indians were discovered by Captain Juan 
Vadillo in 1537 ; and they used to dwell in the 
woods close to the city of Anserma. They were 
distinguished into Supias Altos and Baxos : but 
they all formed but one nation. At first they 
were very numerous ; but they are now reduced 
to a few, living scattered through the woods. 

SUPIAYES, or SUPAYES, a barbarous nation 
of Indians of Equinoctial France. They live in 
the territory bordering on Cayenne, that is to 
say, 20 leagues s. of the same ; between the ri 
vers Apurvaca and Camovi. These Indians are 
bounded w. by the nation of the Acuranis, and 
n. w. by that of the Nourages. They are docile, 
of a pacific genius, and friendly to the French. 

SUPLICIO, S. a settlement of the French in 
Canada, on the shore of the river St. Lawrence, 
near the mouth of the Maquinonge. 

SUPONGA, a small river of the province and 
colony of Surinam, in the part called Dutch 
Guayana. It rises in the sierra of Rinocote, 
runs s. inclining somewhat to w. and enters the 
Caroni. 

SUQUISTACA, a settlement of the province 
and corregimiento of Pilaya and Paspaya in 
Peru; annexed to the curacy of the settlement 
of Cinti. 

SUR, PUNTA DEL, the s. point or extremity 
of the island of the Caico Grande or Del Norte. 

SURA, an ancient province of Peru, to the n. 
ofCuzco. It was conquered and united to the 
empire by Capac Yupanqui, the fifth monarch. 
It is mountainous, uncultivated, and full of 
woods, rivers, and lakes, and, for this reason, 
desert. 

SUR ABA, a small settlement of barbarian 
Indians, of the province and government of Da- 
rien : situate in the mountains which face the 
gulf of this name, on the n, side. 

SURAMACA, a river of Guayana or country 
of Las Amazonas, in the part possessed by the 
Dutch. It runs into the sea near the settlement 
of Cupename. 



sun 



477 



SURARE, a settlement of the province and 
government of Merida, and of the district of the 
jurisdiction of Pamplona, in the Nuevo Reyno 
de Granada. 

SURATA, a river of the province and govern 
ment of Santa Marta in the Nuevo Reyno de 
Granada. It rises n. of the city of San Juan 
Giron, on the opposite side of the river Lobrija, 
and runs into the last river. 

SURCO, a settlement of the province and cor- 
regimiento of Cercado in Peru. 

SURCO, another settlement, in the province 
and corregimiento of Guarochiri in the same 
kingdom ; annexed to the curacy of S. Juan de 
Matucana. 

SURCOBAMBA, a settlement of the province 
and rorregimiento of Guanta in Peru, on the 
shore of the river Angoyaco, in the island of 
Tayacaxa. 

SUREAU, a small river of the province and 
government of Louisiana in N.America, which 
runs s. w. and enters the Missouri. 

SURIMANA, a settlement of the province 
and corregimiento of Tinta or Canes and Canches 
in Peru : annexed to the curacy of the settle 
ment of Pampamarca. 

SURIMENA, a settlement of the jurisdiction 
of the city of Santiago de las Atalayas, in the 
government of Los I7lanos de Neiba and Nuevo 
Reyno de Granada, on the shore of the river 
Meta. It has this name from its vicinity to the 
swamp thus called. It formerly had the name of 
Guanapalo ; as having been first founded near 
this river, although afterwards translated to the 
spot where it now stands. It is of a very hot 
temperature, but abounding in the vegetable 
productions of this climate, and in some very 
shady trees, yielding a fruit in shape of a quince, 
with this difference, that this fruit is a strong 
caustic, and is consequently used for opening 
issues, and, applied to the skin but an instant, it 
makes a wound. All the pulp of this fruit is 
convertible into a very sweet water, affording to 
the natives a refreshing drink. This settlement 
is well peopled with Indians, who are very labo 
rious. Sixty-eight miles s. w. from its capital. 

SURINAM, a colony and province in Dutch 
Guayana in S. America, on the w. shore of the 
river of its name, and 15 miles from the mouth 
of the same. The French established themselves 
in this country in 1640, but, finding it unhealthy, 
immediately abandoned it ; and the English, in 
1661, sent hither a colony. Its territory passed 
into the hands of the Dutch in 1674, having been 
ceded to them in exchange for New York. It 



478 



SURINAM. 



was at that time full of woods, impenetrable both 
to the sun and air, and was consequently in 
fested by hurtful vapours and exhalations ; but 
notwithstanding all this the inhabitants of Zea 
land determined to establish themselves here, 
under the protection of the States, and, seeing 
that the country was capable of producing great 
quantities of sugar, they cut down the trees in 
numbers sufficient to lay open the land and to 
make the territory more healthy. The States of 
Zealand, to whom the country belonged, sold it 
to the Dutch W. India Company ; but this com 
pany not having in its power to remit the neces 
sary succours and provisions, was under the ne 
cessity of selling a third part of the possessions 
to the magistracy of Amsterdam, another part to 
Mr. Van Aarsans, and another to Mr. Somel- 
dyck. Thus it gained the name of the Society of 
Surinam, as being under three proprietors, al 
though the sovereignty was vested in the States 
General. As soon as this division was made, 
various families established themselves here, 
and formed many sugar-cane plantations, which 
produced immense profit ; and, the air being now 
rendered salutary, great numbers of people were 
attracted hither ; so that in 1682 the colony was 
said to possess no less than 600 families. 

This encreasing prosperity secured it the pro 
tection and favour of the States, and induced 
them, in 1683, to grant it a patent, which con 
sists of 32 articles, not merely in favour of the 
W. India Company, but for the security of all 
such as should choose to settle in it. Amongst 
other advantages enjoyed by the company, was 
that of the right of imposing a duty or three 
Dutch guilders upon every 100 tons of goods that 
were brought from, or carried to, the port of 
Surinam; as also the right of demanding 50 Ibs. 
sugar yearly of each of the inhabitants of the co 
lony, as well whites as Negroes ; and 2| per 
cent, on the value of the merchandises which 
were sent to Holland or sold here. Moreover 
it had the exclusive right of trading in Negroes, 
although it was under the obligation of selling 
them in an open market, and in pairs, to all per 
sons whoever would buy. All the natives of the 
United Provinces have the liberty of establishing 
themselves here or of trading to this place, upon 
paying the aforesaid centage on their cargoes, and 
under the restriction from touching at the Afri 
can coast, or any other part to the infringement 
of the company s exclusive charter. They may 
also trade directly with the ports of the United 
States. The company was under the obligation 
of providing the establishments with ammunition 



and artillery ; also of paying the troops, taking 
care of whatsoever related to the security of the 
colony, and of sending ministers, who Mere paid 
by the colony. 

The great number of Dutch and French who 
have come to establish themselves here, have 
caused it to be in a very flourishing state, in 
somuch as that it now extends upwards of 30 
leagues above the mouth of the river Surinam. 
It is probable, however, that it will extend no 
farther, as the river is here rendered impassable 
through a number of cascades : add to this, that 
there is here a sort of natural bulwark formed of 
vast rocks, serving at once as a frontier to the 
colony and a defence against the savage Indians 
who dwell amongst the mountains. 

The plantations, we are assured, exceed in 
number 500, and yield immense profit. All these 
are situate on the shores of the rivers Comewine 
and Cotica, this last being an arm of the Suri 
nam, and both abounding in excellent fish, and 
having in the wood on their borders an immense 
variety of birds. 

The climate from the end of November to the 
beginning of July is very mild ; as well because 
that the clouds impede the rays of the sun, as 
that the n. e. wind almost continually prevails, 
and not without great abundance of rain. The 
principal commerce of this colony consists in the 
productions of the country ; which are sugar, 
tobacco, and dyeing wood. The Dutch also have 
here planted coffee, of which such quantities are 
produced as to admit of much being exported to 
Holland, where it is as much esteemed as the 
coffee of the east. 

The land is cultivated by Negro slaves, who 
are provided to the planters by the company. 
No beasts of burden ever lead a life so wretched 
as do these poor creatures : they are doomed to 
incessant drudgery, suffering the most rigorous 
treatment for the least breach of the orders of 
their imperious masters. These allow them only 
five or six hours on a Sunday to cultivate their 
own gardens, the only means they have whereby 
to maintain themselves, excepting indeed a little 
salt meat, which is sometimes left for them on a 
table, without any thing else whatever. This 
barbarous treatment oftentimes drives them to 
desperation, when they endeavour to gain their 
liberty at every risk. But when they are in 
danger of being caught, they either put them 
selves to death, or, when taken, will bear the 
most excruciating torments with the greatest 
firmness. 

For the government of this colony there is at 



SURINAM. 



479 



Amsterdam a college composed of 10 directors ; 
of the which five are elected from the magistrates 
of the city, four from the W. India Company, and 
another is the Lord of Someldyck. Although 
this tribunal is opposed to the company, it gives 
to the regency of Surinam all its influence for 
the preservation of the colony, and the aforesaid 
directors nominate the governor; although he 
must be approved of by the States General, and 
be bound by oath as well to these as to the di 
rectors. 1* his governor, who has under him a 
commandant, exercises, in the name of the States 
General and of the company, a supreme autho 
rity in the colony, as well in civil as in mili 
tary concerns ; but is obliged, in cases of great 
weight, to convene the political council, of which, 
as well as of the tribunal of justice, he is presi 
dent, although in either he has not more than 
one vote, and the question being decided by the 
plurality. This political council has, besides the 
president, the commandant, who is first coun 
sellor, and nine other counsellors, independently 
of the fiscal and secretary. The tribunal of jus 
tice consists of the governor, five counsellors, a 
secretary, and a judge. The governor has the 
filling of all the places and employments as well 
civil as military, but not without having first re 
ceived the order from the college of directors. 
He, however, makes all the regulations which he 
considers convenient to the security of the colony 
against the insults and invasions of an enemy, 
and, with the commandant and the captains, forms 
the council of war; moreover, weighing all mili 
tary subjects with the political council, and pro 
posing whatsoever he thinks necessary. Besides 
the above, is a subaltern council of war, com 
posed of the commandant and all the officers, 
captains, lieutenants, and corporals, for the taking 
cognizance and punishment of all the faults com 
mitted by the troops. The chamber of orphans 
is governed by four commissaries, with a secre 
tary. 

The troops paid for the defence of the colony 
consist of four companies of infantry, who have 
a captain, a lieutenant, a corporal, and two ser- 
jeants. The governor is colonel of the four 
companies, and also captain of the first ; and in 
the staff there is a major-general, a surgeon, 
and a provost. The whole colony is divided into 
eight parts, which are, High Pamaribo, Low Pa- 
maribo, Thorarika, High Comewine, Low Come- 
wine, Cotica, Perica, and Para ; each of which 
forms a company of militia, having a captain, 
lieutenant, and corporal. Here are only three 
Calyinist churches, each governed by a curate, 



two ancients, and a lecturer, who is at the same 
time a schoolmaster : all these churches are well 
endowed. 

The country has many peculiarities in natural 
history ; and a collection of these articles were 
made by Mary Sibila Merian, a native of Frank 
fort, who made a voyage to Surinam with no 
other object in view than that of acquainting 
herself with the various phenomena which here 
present themselves : amongst the rest we must 
notice a species of frog, which is accustomed to 
live near an aquatic plant of a pale red colour, 
and excellent for salad ; the female of which 
conceives and carries its young, before they are 
born, upon its back, where the uterus, which is 
very large, is situate ; and from whence the 
young frogs are delivered at the time of partu 
rition, one after another, by the breaking of the 
skin. One of these frogs were brought over to 
Europe in this singular state in some spirits of 
wine, when some of the little ones appeared with 
their head only out of the uterus, and others half 
their bodies. These animals are very good 
eating, and the Negroes use much diligence in 
searching for them. Their fore-paws are like those 
of a frog, and their feet like those of the duck. 
In the fields is found a large rat, which carries 
its young upon its back ; the young ones flying 
to its mother in case of danger, and fastening 
themselves upon its neck by way of safety. Here 
is also a plant called dormilona (sleepy plant), 
well worthy of mention, and taking its name 
from the singular disposition of its leaves during 
the night ; for, upon the setting of the sun, these 
fold themselves, by pairs, one over the other, 
so as to form but one stem, and in this state re 
main the whole of the night. The aforesaid ob- 
servatrix took the trouble of cultivating these 
trees, and discovered their virtues for curing 
of wounds. There is in this colony a settlement 
of Jews; and the interior of the country towards 
the w. and n. w. is inhabited by Caribee Indians ; 
of whom there are some tribes who are allied 
to the Dutch, and who trade with them. 

The French, commanded by the admiral Du- 
case, endeavoured to take possession of this co 
lony in 1688, but were foiled in the attempt. 
The capital is Paramaribo. [See DUTCH AME 
RICA.] 

SURINAM, a large river of the province of 
Dutch Guayana, and from which the former co 
lony and country take their name. That colony 
is situate on its w. shore, 15 miles from the mouth. 
It flows down from the mountains of Para, and, 
after watering the country of the barbarian Ins- 



480 



S U R 



dians, and following a long winding course, en 
ters the sea ; it is about 224 miles from its source 
in a direct line to its mouth, just before it enters 
the sea, precipitates itself down a cascade, and 
forms the fall of Surinam, being navigable to 
this place. It has at its entrance some sand 
banks, which, at high tide, are covered with 
three feet water; but, beyond these, the river 
grows deeper, and is navigable for more than 
30 leagues inland ; having, the whole of this 
distance, its shores well cultivated, and upon its 
w. shore the fort of Zealand to defend the en 
trance, which is in the Atlantic Sea, in lat. 6 6 / n. 

SURINAMA, a small river in the province 
and government of Guayana; which rises in the 
serrania of Imataca, runs n. and enters the 
Ao.uire. 

SURIRISSA, a river of the province and go 
vernment of Jaen in the kingdom of Quito, to 
wards the s. part. It runs from s. w. to n. e. and 
enters by the s. part into the Zamora in lat. 43 / $. 

SURlTE, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Abancay in Peru. 

[SURRY, a county of N. Carolina, in Salis 
bury district ; bounded e. by Stokes, and w. by 
Wilkes. It contains 7191 inhabitants, including 
698 slaves. The Moravian settlements of Wa 
chovia are in this county. Near the river Yad- 
kin is a forge, which manufactures bar-iron. The 
Ararat or Pilot Mountain, about 16 miles n. w. 
of Salem, draws the attention of every curious 
traveller in this part of the state. It is discerni 
ble at the distance of 60 or 70 miles, overlooking 
the country below. It was anciently called the 
Pilot by the Indians, as it served them for a 
beacon to conduct their routes in the n. and s. 
wars. On approaching it, a grand display of 
Nature s workmanship, in rude dress, is exhi 
bited. From its broad base the mountain rises 
in easy ascent, like a pyramid, near a mile high, 
to where it is not more than the area of an acre 
broad ; when, on a sudden, a vast stupendous 
rock, having the appearance of a large castle, 
with its battlements, erects its perpendicular 
height to upwards of 300 feet, and terminates in 
a flat, which is generally as level as a floor. To 
ascend this precipice there is only one way, 
which, through cavities and fissures of the rock, 
is with some difficulty and danger effected. 
When on the summit the eye is entertained with 
a vast delightful prospect of the Apalachian 
mountains on the n. and a wide-extended level 
country below on the s. ; while the streams of 
the Yadkin and Dan, on the right and left hand, 
are discovered at several distant places, winding 



s u s 

their way through the fertile low grounds to 
wards the ocean. J 

[SuRRY, a county of Virginia, bounded n. by 
James River, which separates it from Charles 
City County, e. by Isle of Wight, and w. by 
Prince George s County. It contains 6227 in 
habitants, of whom 3097 are slaves.] 

[SuRRY, a township of New Hampshire, in 
Cheshire County, containing 448 inhabitants. It 
lies e. of Walpole, adjoining, and was incorpo 
rated in 1769.J 

SURUBIA, or SURUBIN, a settlement of the 
Portuguese in the part of Guayana possessed by 
them : situate on the shore of the river of Las 
Amazonas, and at the mouth bearing its name. 

SURUBIA. This river rises in the country of 
the Coparipucus Indians, runs s. and enters that 
of Las Amazonas, between the strait of Pauxis 
and the river of Curupatuba. 

SURUMI, a settlement of the province and 
correginiiento of Chayanta or Charcas in Peru ; 
annexed to the curacy of the settlement of San 
Marcos de Miraflores. It has a sanctuary of 
Nuestra Senora, to which singular devotion is 
paid, and to which a great multitude of people 
throng from the neighbouring parts. 

SUSA, a settlement of the province and cor- 
regimiento of Ubate in the Nuevo Reyno de 
Granada : situate in a pleasant and delightful 
valley in the road which leads from Santa Fe to 
Chuquinquira, between the settlements of Fu- 
quene and Simijaca. It is of a moderately cold 
temperature, fertile, and abounding in all kinds 
of vegetable productions and seeds, both of a 
cold and hot climate. It contains more than 
100 housekeepers, and has in its vicinity a mine 
of rock crystal, of so exquisite a quality as to 
appear like the most sparkling diamonds. It 
was, in the times of the Indians, a large, popu 
lous, and rich city ; and was conquered and pil 
laged by the zipa or king of Bogota, Nemequene. 
Fourteen leagues n. w. of Santa Fe. 

S. SUSANA, a river of the province and go 
vernment of Luisiana in N.America; between 
the rivers of Trinidad and Fores. 

S. SUSANA, a mountain situate near the coast 
of the Strait of Magellan ; between the point of 
Nuestra Senora de Gracia and the Bay of San 
Gregorio. 

[SUSQUEHANNAH River, rises in Lake 
Ustayantho in the State of New York, and runs 
a very serpentine course ; it crosses the boundary 
line between the States of Pennsylvania and New 
York. It receives the Tyoga river in lat.4157 ;i. 
Afterwards it proceeds s. e. to Pittsburg, and then 



S U S 



S U T 



481 



[s. w. till, at Sunbury, in lat. 40 C 
w. branch of Susquehannah, which is navigable 
90 miles from its mouth. By its course from 
Sunbury the river is passable with boats to Har- 
risburg and Middleton on the Swatara. About 
15 miles above Harrisburg, it receives the Juni- 
atta from the n. w. proceeding from the Alleg- 
hany mountains, and flowing through a broken 
country. Hence it takes its course about s. e. 
until it falls into the head of Chesapeak Bay, just 
below Havre de Grace. It is about a mile wide 
at its mouth, and navigable only 20 miles, the na 
vigation being obstructed beyond that by the 
Rapids. 

The inland navigation between .Schuylkill and 
Susquehannah, will bring by water to Philadel 
phia the trade of a most fertile country, of about 
1000 miles square, or 600,000 acres of land. If 
this can be accomplished, an inland navigation 
may be easily made to the Ohio and to Lake 
Erie, which would at once open a communica 
tion with above 2000 miles extent of western 
country, viz. with all the great lakes, together 
with the countries which lie on the waters of Mis 
sissippi, Missouri, and all their branches. 

The water communication between Schuylkill 
and Susquehannah, which is the soul of all this, 
will be about GO miles, as the navigation must 
go, although the distance on a line is only 40 
miles. This tract is cut by two creeks, the 
Quitapahilla and the Tulpehoken. These two 
creeks lead within four miles of each other; the 
level of their head waters is nearly the same, and 
the space between them makes the height of land, 
or, as it is commonly called, the crown land be 
tween the two rivers, which is nearly on a plain, 
and the bottom of the canal, through which the 
navigation must pass, will no where rise more 
than 30 feet above the level of the head waters 
of the two creeks above mentioned, nor so much 
as 200 feet above the level of the waters of Sus 
quehannah or Schuylkill. 

The company, instituted the 29th of Septem 
ber, 1791, has a capital of 1000 shares, at 400 
dollars each, payable at such time as the company 
shall direct. Coal of an excellent quality is found 
on several parts of this river, particularly at 
Wyoming.] 

[SUSSEX, the n. ze. county of New Jersey. 
It is mountainous and healthy, and has several 
iron mines ; and works have been erected for the 
manufacture of bar and pig iron. It produces 
excellent crops of wheat ; and in no part of the 
state are greater herds of cattle. The produce 

VOL. iv. 



is floated down the Delaware in boats and rafts. 
Here are five Presbyterian churches, two for 
Anabaptists, one for German Lutherans, and one 
for Quakers. It contains 12 townships : the 
chief of which are Newton, Greenwich, Hardy - 
ston, Knowltown, and Oxford. The population 
is 19,500, including 439 slaves. It is bounded 
n. e. by the State of New York, n. w. by Dela 
ware River, which separates it from Northamp 
ton County in Pennsylvania, and s. e. and s. bv 
Morris and Hunterdon Counties. Paulin s Kill 
is here navigable for small craft 15 miles. The 
Musconetcony, which divides the county from 
Hunterdon, is capable of beneficial improve 
ments, as is the Pequest or Pequaset, between 
the above-mentioned rivers. The court-house 
in this county is 13 miles s. w. of Hamburg, 38 
n. e. of Easton in Pennsylvania, 25 s. w. of Go- 
shen in New York, and 77 n. by e. of Philadel 
phia. The village at this place is called New 
ton.] 

[SUSSEX, a county of Virginia, bounded n. e. 
by Surry, and s. w. by Dinwiddie. It contains 
10,554 inhabitants, including 5387 slaves.] 

[SUSSEX, a maritime county of Delaware State, 
bounded zo. and s. by the State of Maryland, n. e. 
by Delaware Bay, e. by the Atlantic Ocean, and 
w. by Kent County. It contains 20,488 inhabi 
tants, including 4025 slaves. Cape Henlopen is 
the n. e. part of the county. Chief town, George 
town.] 

SUSTICATAN, a settlement of the head set 
tlement of the district and alcaldia mayor of 
Xerez in the Nueva Espaiia ; and annexed to 
the curacy of its capital, from whence it lies three 
leagues to s. z/s. 

SUSUPUATO, a settlement of the head set 
tlement of the district of Tuzantla and alcaldia 
mayor of Maravatio in Nueva Espaiia. It is 
much reduced, and contains only 11 Indian fa 
milies. 

S UT AS, a nation of Indians of the NuevoRcyno 
de Granada, w r ho were conquered by the Ade- 
lantado Gonzalo Ximenez de Quesada. A short 
time afterwards, however, they rose in a body 
against the oppression they experienced from 
their new masters, and entrenched themselves in 
a fastness, composed of strong rocks, and so for 
tified by nature, as to have only one narrow en 
trance, where four men might defend themselves 
against a multitude. In this retreat no less than 
100,000 Indians had lodged themselves, with 
their families, provisions, and other necessaries, 
for many days; and, no sooner had Gonzalo 

3 Q 



482 



S U T 



S U T 



Ximenez de Quesada received intelligence of 
the fact, and also that other nations, in imitation 
of the Sutas, were already in a state of mutiny, 
together with the Tausas, than he resolved upon 
reducing them to obedience, and chastising 
them, before that the rebellion might become 
universal throughout the kingdom ; and to this 
end he appointed to the commission the Captain 
Juan de Cespedes, with two companies of in 
fantry, trusting to the renowned valour and abi 
lity of this officer. Nor did the event discredit 
the election ; for, in spite of the very obstinate 
attempts made by the Indians to secure their 
liberty, he hit upon a plan, which was, however, 
attended with infinite danger. The first in this 
attack were Juan Gomez Portillo and Pedro 
Galeano, who made shocking havoc with the 
naked bodies of the Indians, and gave time for 
their companions to join the combat ; so that 
the poor Indians, rather than meet the cruel fate 
which awaited them, preferred to dash them 
selves headlong from the precipice; and this 
even in preference to surrendering themselves 
prisoners. The tragical issue, however, of this 
contest, struck a terror into the breasts of all the 
other Indians ; and, from this moment, the king 
dom regained its tranquillity. 

SUTAGAOS, a barbarous nation of Indians of 
the Nuevo Reyno de Granada, who dwell be 
tween the rivers Pazca and Sumapaz. They are 
of a moderate stature ; and their accent is so 
mellifluous, as well to denote their native timi 
dity and pusillanimity. Their principal occupa 
tion was, in the time of their gentilism, to sally 
forth in parties into the highways, not with an 
intention of putting the passengers to death, but 
merely of taking from them their booty. More 
over, they imagined that their idols were much 
better pleased with offerings which were the ef 
fects of such robberies. To these deities, which 
were of clay or wood, they uniformly repaired 
to make their offerings, before they dared to revisit 
their homes, after any of their excursions, though 
they would bring home with them part of their 
spoil, reserving it as something sacred. But it 
should have been remarked, that these savages 
never offered any thing of their own to their deities, 
inasmuch as they imagined that nothing was ac 
ceptable to them but what was stolen. Their arms 
were envenomed arrows ; and very much were 
these to be dreaded, from the virulent poison 
with which they were tipped, made of certain 
herbs found in abundance in their territory. So 
addicted were they to sorcery, that they tell us, 



some of those who have been converted, that 
they had such a special connexion with the 
devil, that, if they wished to bring any one to 
his end, they had nothing more to do than to 
make a streak with the poison in the way the 
object of their hatred might pass, and that he 
would certainly fall a sacrifice to the spell, whilst 
others might pass totally uninjured. 

They were in strict alliance with the Pijaos, 
their neighbours, in opposition to the Spaniards ; 
and ruled over the Sumapaez, Doas, and Cun- 
dayes, more through the dread excited by their 
poisonous herbs than any military valour. There 
was a town belonging to them, of their own 
name, which was taken, pillaged, and destroyed, 
by Gonzalo Ximenez de Quesada in 1538. 
These Indians are now very few, and live dis 
persed. 

SUTAMARCHAN, a settlement of the corregi- 
miento of Sachicha and jurisdiction of the city of 
Leiba in the Nuevo Reyno de Granada ; situate 
in a delightful plain, and being of a cold, though 
agreeable temperature. Its territory is very fer 
tile and cheerful, and abounds in vegetable pro 
ductions. There was formerly in this settlement 
the image of Chiquinquira ; and it was then 

freat and populous, and was called Marchan, 
aving, subsequently, changed its name to that 
of Suta, being united to this latter settlement. 
It is now reduced to a very small population, is 
annexed to the curacy of Leiba, and is one 
league distance from the same, and eight from 
Chiquinquira, in the road leading to this place. 

SUTATAUSA, a settlement of the corregimi- 
ento of Ubate in the Nuevo Reyno de Granada. 
It is of a cold temperature, abounding in wheat, 
barley, maize, and papas,- contains 200 house 
keepers, and 100 Indians, and is very near the 
settlement of Ubate, and 12 leagues from Santa 
Fe. 

SUTATEUSA, a settlement of the corregi- 
miento of Teusa and province of Tunja, in the 
Nuevo Reyno de Granada. It is of an hot tem 
perature, fertile, and abounding in sugar-canes, 
plantains, potatoes, indigo, and garbanzos. It is 
very healthy, and contains 100 housekeepers, and 
50 Indians. 

SUTIAPA, a district and alcalcKa mayor of 
the province and government of Nicaragua, and 
kingdom of Guatemala in N.America; bounded 
n. by the alcaldia of Zacapa, s. by that of Guaza- 
capan, e. by the corregimiento of the capital, and 
w. by the sierra Apaneca, which divides it from 
the alcaldia of Sonsonate. It produces the same 



S U Y 

fruits, and is of equal temperature as the former 
settlement. It is of limited extent, and in it are 



SWA 



483 



the following settlements 
San Christoval de Tu- 

tiapa, 
Comoapa, 
Yupitepeque, 
Atescatempa, 
San Pedro Conguaco, 
Santo Tomas Jalpa- 

taqua, 

San Francisco Pasaco. 
San Estevan Azulco, 



San Juan Baptista Mo- 

yuta, 

Los Esclavos, 
Jumay, 

Matquescuinta, 
Quaxinicuilapa, 
Asuncion de Mita, 
Santa Catalina, 
Santa Maria Xalapa, 
Pifiula, 

Santo Domingo. 
[SUTTON, a township of New Hampshire, 
Hillsborough County, containing 520 inhabi 
tants. It was first called Perrystown, and was 
incorporated in 1784.] 

[SUTTON, a township in Worcester County, 
Massachusetts; 38 miles w. s. w. of Boston, and 
10 miles s. by e. of Worcester. It was incorpo 
rated in 1718, and contains 2642 inhabitants. 
Here are 10 grist-mills, six saw-mills, three full 
ing-mills, a paper-mill, an oil-mill, and seven 
trip-hammers. There are five scythe and ax- 
makers, one hoe-maker, several who work at 
nail-making, and six works for making pot-ash. 
Here are found ginseng and the cohush-root. 
The cavern, commonly called Purgatory, in the 
s. e. part of the town, is a natural curiosity. Bo 
dies of ice are found here in June, although the 
descent is to the s.~] 

[SUTTON, a settlement of the same name in 
the island of Barbadoes, of the district and parish 
of St. Thomas. 

SUYA, a settlement of the province and go 
vernment of Guayaquil, and kingdom of Quito ; 
situate at the mouth of the river of its name, on 
the coast of the Gulf of Guayaquil. 

SUYALTEPEQUE, a settlement of the pro 
vince and alcaldia mayor of Xalapa in Nueva 
Espana ; situate in a lofty plain, where there is 
SL signal-house, commanding all the settlements 
of this jurisdiction. It is of a moist and so ex 
cessively hot a temperature that corruption takes 
place in the shortest space of time ; so that they 
never kill here more animals than what they have 
an immediate necessity for. Its population is 
composed of 300 families of Indians, who speak 
the Mazateco idiom. It is extremely fertile and 
woody, and abounds in an infinite variety of ex 
quisite fruits. Its principal commerce is in its 
crops ofbaymHoy so much esteemed for impart 
ing a delicious aromatic flavour to chocolate. 
Here are, likewise, gathered some crops of cot 



ton and cacao, and there are cinnamon-trees, 
which, were they cultivated, would be very fine ; 
nor is there wanting the pepper of Tabasco. 
Here grow some small trees, the wood of which 
is white ; but which, when steeped in water, be 
comes red, and from which are made brushes for 
cleaning the teeth, in great estimation. All the 
stone found in this settlement is of a rough 
grinding nature, and of this there is, in the n. 
part, a large rock of more than 100 feet long 
and 60 wide. This settlement is very subject to 
earthquakes, and is seven leagues from Xalapa. 

SUZCUBA, a valley of the province and cor- 
regimiento of Pataz or Caxamarquilla in Peru. 
It is of a triangular figure, and has two sides 
bordered by the rivers Perenne and Apurimac, 
these rivers uniting in the part called Junta de 
Mantara ; and a third side girt by the cordillera 
of the Andes ; the same passing from one river 
to the other. 

[SWALLOW Island, in the Pacific Ocean, in 
lat. 10 20 s. long. 166 10 w. ; discovered by 
Roggewein, in 1722.] 

[SWAMSCOT, or GREAT River, to distin 
guish it from another much less, also called Exe 
ter Rivet, rises in Chester, in New Hampshire, 
and after running through Sandown, Poplin, 
Brentwood, and a considerable part of Exeter, 
affording many excellent mill-seats, tumbles over 
a fall 20 or 30 rods in length, and meets the tide 
from Piscataqua Harbour in the centre of the 
township of Exeter. The smaller river rises in 
Brentwood, and joins Great River about a third 
of a mile above Exeter. Here are caught plenty 
of alewives, and some oysters. Swamscot is the 
Indian name of Exeter. J 

[SWAN Island, in the district of Maine, di 
vides the waters of Kennebeck River, three miles 
from the chops of Merry Meeting Bay. It is 
seven miles long, and has a navigable channel on 
both sides, but that to the e. is mostly used. It 
was the seat of the sachem Kenebis. The river 
itself probably took its name from the race of 
Sagamores of the name of Kenebis.] 

SWAN S Point, on the coast of the province 
and colony of Maryland, and Bay of Chesapeak 
in the United States of America. 

[SWANNANO, the e. head-water of French 
Broad River, in Tennesse. Also the name of a 
settlement within about 60 miles of the Chero 
kee nation.] 

[SWANNSBOROUGH, the chief town of 
Onslow County, Wilmington district, N. Caro 
lina.] 

SWANSCUT, a small river of the province 
3cj2 



484 



S Y D 



and colony of N. Carolina, which runs e. and en 
ters the sea close to the river Kikotau. 

[SWANSEY, a township in Cheshire County, 
New Hampshire, adjoining Chesterfield on the e. 
97 miles w. of Portsmouth. It was incorporated 
in 1753, and contains 1157 inhabitants.] 

[SWANSEY, a township in Bristol County, 
Massachsetts ; containing 1784 inhabitants. It 
was incorporated in 1667, and lies 51 miles s. of 
Boston.] 

[SWANTON, a township of Vermont, Frank 
lin County, on the e. bank of Lake Champlain, 
on the 5. side of Mischiscoui River. This town 
ship has a cedar swamp in the n.w. part of it, 
towards Hog Island. The Mischiscoui is navi 
gable for the largest boats seven miles, to the 
falls in this town.] 

[SWANTOWN, in Kent County, Maryland, 
is about three miles s.e. of Georgetown.] 

[SWEDESBOROUGH, a small post-town of 
New Jersey, Gloucester County, on Racoon 
Creek ; three miles from its mouth, on Delaware 
River, 11 s. by w. of Woodbury, 17 n. by e. of 
Salem, and 20 s. of Philadelphia.] 

[SWEDISH AMERICA. The Swedes had 
anciently settlements on Delaware River, and the 
Swedish church in Philadelphia is the oldest in 
that city. The only American settlement they 
have now, is the small island of Bartholomew, 
or Barthelemi, in the W. Indies, which is about 
30 miles in length, and the same in breadth. It 
was obtained from France in 1785, and gave rise 
to the Swedish W. India Company.] 

[SWEET Springs, in Virginia, 17 miles s. e. 
of Greenbriar, and 69 w. of Staunton. In the 
settlement around these springs, a post-office is 
kept.] 

[SWETARA, or SWATARA, a river of Penn 
sylvania, which falls into the Susquehannah from 
the n.e, about seven miles s.e. of Harrisburg.] 
. [SYDNAY, in Lincoln County, district of 
Maine, is 37 miles from Pownalborough. 

SYDNEY, or CAPE BRETON, a large and 
very considerable island of the Gulf of St. Law 
rence in N. America, originally possessed by the 
French, but taken from them in 1745 by the 
English admiral Peter Warren, and a colonel 
Peperell. In 1758 it was afterwards restored to 
the French, and again taken by Admiral Bos- 
cawen and Colonel Amherst, [when the garri 
son, consisting of 5600 men, were made prison 
ers ; and 11 men of war in the harbour, were 
either taken, sunk, burnt, or destroyed. It 
was ceded to Great Britain by the peace of 
1763.] 



S Y D 

The Strait of Fronsac, which separates this 
island from Nova Scotia, is only a league wide. 
It is about 60 miles from Newfoundland, and with 
it forms the entrance of the Gulf of St. Lawrence. 
This island properly belongs to Nova Scotia or 
Acadia, and is the only part which, in the peace, 
was ceded to the English, its present possessors. 

It is 96 miles long, and 60 wide, full of moun 
tains and lakes, and its coasts abound in creeks 
and ports close to each other. The soil is very 
fertile, and abounds in every part in timber. In 
its mountains are veins of coal, and on its shores 
an unexampled quantity of fish. It also pro 
duces much flax, and cattle, and birds of every 
species. All its ports are open to the e. and are 
found all along the coast to the s. from Port 
Delfin to Port Tolosa, near to which is the en 
trance of the Strait of Fronsac. 

[The Harbour of St. Peter s at the w. end of 
the island, is a very commodious place for carry 
ing on the fishery. This island was considered 
as annexed to Nova Scotia in respect to matters 
of government till 1784, when it was erected into 
a separate government by the name of Sydney. 

There is a great proportion of arable land on 
this island ; and it abounds in timber and hard 
wood, such as pine, beach, birch, maple, spruce, 
and fir. 

Here are about 1000 inhabitants, who have a 
lieutenant-governor resident among them, ap 
pointed by the king. Isle Madame, which is an 
appendage to this government, is settled for the 
most part with French Acadians, about 50 fami 
lies, whose chief employment is the fishery at 
Ashmot, the principal harbour in this little island. 
The principal towns are Louisburg, the capital, 
and Sydney. Louisburg has the best harbour 
in the island. The present seat of government 
is at Spanish River, on the n. side of the island. 

This island may be considered as the key to 
Canada, and the very valuable fishery in its 
neighbourhood depends for its protection on the 
possession of this island ; as no nation can carry 
it on without some convenient harbour of strength 
to supply and protect it, and Louisburg is the 
principal one for these purposes. 

The peltry trade was ever a very inconsider 
able object. It consisted only in the skins of a 
few lynxes, elks, musk-rats, wild cats, bears, ot 
ters, and foxes, both of a red, silver, and grey 
colour. Some of these were procured from a 
colony of Micmac Indians, who had settled on 
the island with the French, and never could raise 
more than 60 men able to bear arms. The rest 
came from St. John s, on the neighbouring con-] 



TAB 

[tinent. Greater advantages are now derived 
from the coal mines which are situate near the 
entrance of the harbour, the working of which, 
and the fishery, are the chief employment of the 
inhabitants. They lie in a horizontal direction; 
and being- no more than six or eight feet below 
the surface, may be worked without digging deep, 
or draining off the waters. Notwithstanding the 
prodigious demand for this coal from New Eng 
land, from the year 1745 to 1749, these mines 
would probably have been forsaken, had not the 
ships which were sent out to the French islands 
wanted ballast. In one of these mines, a fire 
has been kindled, which, it is said, could never 
yet be extinguished. These mines yield a re 
venue of 12,000 yearly to the crown. 

In 1743, while this island belonged to the 
French, they caught 1,149,000 quintals of dry 
fish, and 3,500,000 quintals of mud fish ; the value 
of both which, including 3116| tons of train oil, 
drawn from the blubber, amounted to 926,577 
10s. sterling, according to the prime cost of the 
fish at Newfoundland. The whole value of this 



TAB 



485 



trade, annually, at that period, amounted to 
1,000,000 sterling. No less than 564 ships, be 
sides shallops, and 27 ,000 seamen, were employed 
in this trade. At present the inhabitants of this 
island take about 30,000 quintals of fish annu 
ally, which are shipped for Spain and the Straits, 
principally by merchants from Jersey (in Eng 
land), who yearly resort here, and keep stores of 
supplies for the fishermen. 

Though some fishermen had long resorted to 
this island every summer, the French, who took 
possession of it in August 1713, were properly 
the first settled inhabitants. They changed its 
name into that of Isle Royale, and fixed upon 
Fort Dauphin for their principal settlement. In 
1720, the fortifications of Louisburg were begun. 
The other settlements were at Port Toulouse, 
Neruka, &amp;c.] 

[SYMSBURY. See SIMSBURY.] 
[SYPOMBA, an island on the coast of Bra 
zil, in S. America, about seven leagues n. e. of 
St. John s Island, and n. w. from a range of 
islands which form the great Bay of Para.] 



T 



[lAAWIRRY, one of the two small islands 
within the reef of the island of Otaheite, in the 
S. Pacific Ocean. These islands have anchorage 
within the reef that surrounds them.] 

TABAA, a principal and head settlement of 
the district of the alcaldia mayor of Villalta in 
Nueva Espana. It is of an hot temperature, 
contains 219 families of Indians, dedicated to 
the cultivation of cochineal, and is three leagues 
w. of the capital. 

[TABACO. See TABOGA.] 

TABACONES, a settlement of the province 
and government of Jaen de Bracamoros in the 
kingdom of Quito, situate on the side of a very 
lofty mountain. 

TABACUNDO, a settlement of the province 
and corrtgimienlo of Otavalo in the kingdom of 
Quito. 

TABAGE, a large settlement of Salivas In 
dians, with the dedicatory title of Nuestra Se- 
nora ; founded in 1682 by the Jesuits, near the 
mouth of the river Sinaruco, in the llanuras of 
the Orinoco and Nuevo Reyno de Granada. 
The Caribees entirely burnt and destroyed it two 
years afterwards. 



TABAGO, an island in the N. Sea, one of the 
smaller Antilles or Caribees ; situate n. e. of the 
island of Trinidad ; is 25 miles long and about 
six wide. It was possessed by the Dutch, who 
established a colony in it in 1632, by the name 
of New Walcheren. The French, under Mar 
shal Estrees, dislodged them in 1677 ; but sur 
rendered it up at the treaty of Nimega. It was 
afterwards abandoned, and the English began to 
cultivate it, though these were obliged at last to 
quit it, from the repeated invasions they expe 
rienced from the Caribee Indians of Tierra Firme, 
who dwell at the mouth of the Orinoco ; and 
from this time, notwithstanding its fine climate, 
has it remained uncultivated and desert. [Its 
nearest distance from Trinidad is about 16| 
miles, and 116 s. s. w. of Barbadoes, in lat. 11 
14 n. and long. 60 42 w.~] 

TABAGUILLO, a small isle of the N. Sea, 
close to the island of Tabago. 

TABAJE, RAUDAL DE, a narrow part of the 
river Orinoco, where its navigation is dangerous 
and difficult ; it being necessary for vessels to 
pass here by being towed. Twelve leagues from, 
the river Meta. 



4W&amp;gt; 



TAB 



TAB 



and reduced to obedience to the kings of 



TABAJE, a river of the province and alcaldia 
mat/or of Culiacan in Nueva Espana. 

TABALOSOS, a settlement of the province 
and corregimiento of Lamas in Peru. 

TABANCARAS, an antient province of Peru, 
in the n. part ; bounded by the river Maranon 
and the province of Jaen in the kingdom of 
Quito. It is but little known, as being impe 
netrable through its woods, lakes, rivers, and 
" swamps. 

[TABAPY, a settlement of Mulattoes, of the 
prov ince and government of Paraguay, situate 
on a plain, about 45 miles s, e. from Assumption, 
in lat. 25 54 56" s. and long. 57 21 18" a&amp;gt;.] 

TABASCO, a province and government of 
Yucatan and Campeche : bounded n. by the Gulf 
of Mexico, e. by Yucatan, s. by the province of 
Chiapa, of the kingdom of Guatemala, from 
whence it is separated by a great cordillera, or 
serrania of mountains ; and w. by that of Oaxaca 
in Nueva Espana. It is 180 miles long, and 
about 60 wide ; and its name is derived from its 
cazique or lord, who was governing at the time 
that the Spaniards entered it, commanded by 
Hernan Cortes, who was engaged in the con 
quest of Nueva Espana. In 1525, it was con 
quered 
Spain, by Captain Vallecillo. 

It is of an hot and moist temperature, and the 
territory is low and plain, but very full of 
woods ; in which there are abundance of cedars, 
brazil, and many other sorts of woods. The 
country is unhealthy from the abundance of rain, 
and the prevalence of strong winds, which last 
for nine months together ; but it is very fertile in 
fruits of the country, such as mameyes, zapotcs, 
aquacates, quaybas, and many others of a delicate 
taste, as also in European productions. 

It produces much maize, of which there are 
three or four crops annually ; rice and cocos, 
which are sent for sale to Vera Cruz ; pulse, 
garden and many medicinal herbs, tobacco, and, 
above all, cacao, this being the most abundant 
production of any, and that which is the greatest 
source of commerce ; it being also in this that 
the natives used to pay their tribute to the Em 
perors of Mexico. It is not less abundant in 
pepper, which is much esteemed, and of which 
great quantities are carried to all parts, although 
of inferior quality to the pepper of the east. 
The breed of cattle, of all species, has increased 
greatly in this country ; and in the woods there 
are leopards, dantas, small boars, rabbits, deer, 
monkeys, squirrels, tapeyes; quintes, similar to 
stags, but smaller ; and very many birds, such 
as pheasants, parrots, quails, hens, pigeons, 



doves, and an infinite number of others, large 
and small. Although the cotton-tree be here in 
abundance, the fruit is made no use of, since it 
is eaten by the monkeys before it ripens, as also 
by the squirrels, and other small animals, with 
which the country is overrun. But all these 
plagues are less obnoxious than the musquitoes, 
of different kinds, which will scarce suffer men 
to exist : for no one can sleep except covered 
by a canopy, the heat caused by which is intense. 

This province is watered by different rivers, 
which fertilize it ; but the most considerable is 
that of its name. The capital is the settlement 
of the same name also, called De Nuestra Sefiora 
de la Victoria. 

[TABASCO, an island, or rather a neck of 
land, in the s. w. part of the Gulf of Mexico, 
and at the bottom of the Gulf of Campeachy ; 
on it is built the town of Tabasco, in lat. 
18 34 n. and long. 93 36 w. It is the ca 
pital of a rich province of its name, and is si 
tuate at the mouth of the river Grijalva, 76 
miles e. of Santa Ana, and 197 e. s. e. of Vera 
Cruz. It is not large, but is well built, and is 
considerably enriched by a constant resort of 
merchants and tradesmen at Christmas. The 
river Grijalva divides itself near the sea into two 
branches, of which the western falls into the 
river Tabasco, which rises in the mountains of 
Chiapa, and the other continues its course till 
within four leagues of the sea, where it subdi 
vides and separates the island from the continent. 
Near it are plains, which abound with cattle and 
other animals, particularly the mountain cow, 
so called from its resembling that creature, and 
feeding on a sort of moss found on the trees near 
great rivers.] 

TABASCO, a river which enters the sea in the 
Gulf of Mexico, and was discovered by captain 
Juan de Grijalva, to the n. of that of San Pedro 
and San Pablo. 

TABATINGA, BARRA DE, a sand-bank near 
the coast of the province and captains kip ofTodos 
Santos in Brazil ; between the town of S. Anto 
nio and the river Longoribo. 

TABAVELA, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Quito in the district of Las Cinco 
Leguas. 

TABAY, a settlement of the government and 
jurisdiction of Maracaibo in the Nuevo Reyno 
de Granada. It is of a mild and healthy tempe 
rature, fertile, and abounding in wheat, rice, 
maize, and other vegetable productions of its 
climate. It has many mills, engines, and estates 
of neat cattle ; and is very close to the city of 
Merida, in the road which leads to Barinas. 



TAB 

TABEGUA, a principal and head settlement 
of the district of the alcaldia mayor of Nueva Es- 
paiia. It is of a moderately hot temperature, 
contains 76 families of Indians, and is somewhat 
less than five leagues distant from its capital. 

TABICAS, a barbarous nation of Indians of 
the kingdom of Peru ; who dwell to the e. n. e. 
of the nation of the Chiquitos, and to the e. of 
Apure. These infidels are ferocious and trea 
cherous, have no fixed abode, and their country 
is unknown. 

TABIO, a settlement of the corregimtento of 
Zipaquira in theNuevo Reyno de Granada. It 
is of a cold temperature, but moderately so, 
healthy, and abounding in all the productions 
peculiar to its climate. It has two fountains near 
to each other ; the one of warm, the other of 
cold, water ; where the zipas or kings of Bo 
gota used to have some delightful baths, at 
the time of the arrival of the Spaniards. The 
Indians here should amount to 150, and the 
Spanish families to 250. Five leagues n. w. of 
Santa Fe. 

TABLACHUCA, a river of the province and 
corregimienlo of Conchucos in Peru, which enters 
the Santa. 

TABLADA, a settlement of the province and 
government of Santa Marta in the Nuevo Reyno 
de Granada; on the shore of the river Magda- 
lena, on an island formed by an arm of this 
river. 

TABLAS, a settlement of the jurisdiction and 
alcaldia mayor of Nata, in the province and go 
vernment of Panama and kingdom of Tierra 
Firme ; near the coast of the S. Sea. 

TABLAS, another settlement, in the Nuevo 
Reyno de Leon in N. America; annexed to the 
curacy of the town of Cadreita ; to which it is 
very near by the e. part. 

TABLAS, another, of the province and corre- 
gimiento of Quillota in the kingdom of Chile ; 
near the coast. 

TABLAS, another, of the province of Quixos 
and Macas in the kingdom of Quito ; w. of the 
paramo of Sangay. 

TABOGA, a small island of the S. Sea ; 12 
miles s. of the city of Panama. It is one league 
and a half wide : and is covered with trees and 
woods ; and in the n. part has a delightful descent 
to the sea ; where the land is of a blackish co 
lour and very low, though dry in the higher parts. 
In the former part, towards the sea, it has the 
appearance of a large garden, hemmed in by 
trees and shady woods. Its principal productions 
are plantains, pines, and melons, which are re 
puted as the best that are known. On the shore 



T A B 



487 



are very many groves of cocos, and in the 
woods are the marneyes-trees. The s. part is 
uncultivated ; and from the declivity of the 
mountain rushes down a stream of delicious wa 
ter, which, running through a small wood of 
fruit-trees, runs into the sea by the n. part. 

This island belonged to Hernando de Luque, 
dean of the church of Panama ; a man who had 
identified the whole of his fortunes in the trium 
virate held in this city, and of which Francisco 
Pizarro and Diego de Almagro were members, 
to undertake the discovery and conquest of Peru. 
It has been celebrated for its pearl-fisheries. 

It had a town near the sea in the n. part, which 
was destroyed by the pirates in the last (16th) 
century : when they infested those seas ; and it 
was a mile s distance from a road, in which ves 
sels might lie securely, anchoring in 16 to 18 
feet water. Nothing now but its church re 
mains, and some small cottages on the estates 
belonging to the inhabitants of Panama : [in lat. 
8 48 n. and long. 79 24 a&amp;gt;.] 

TABOGUILLA, a small isle of the N. Sea, 
near the former ; and on which coast pearls used 
to be found : now it only produces some plan 
tains, maize, and fruits. 

TABOLEVO, a river of the kingdom of 
Chile ; which runs e. and, turning its course to 
n. n. e. enters the Biobio. 

[TABOO YAMANOO, a small island in the 
S. Pacific Ocean, subject to Huaheine, one of the 
Society Islands.] 

TABOQUINQUET, a small river of the pro 
vince of Nova Scotia in the United States. 

TABOUY, a settlement of Indians of the 
province of Guayana, in the part possessed by 
the French. 

TABUCO, a small settlement of the pro 
vince and alcaldia mayor of Guauchinango in 
Nueva Espana. It has a moderate port, at the 
entrance of which is the bar of its name, per 
mitting a pass only to middling-sized vessels ; 
such as those coming from Caaipeche, laden with 
salt to sell on the coast, and others from Vera 
Cruz with fruits, not only as the water is very 
shallow, but as a large sand-bank has formed 
itself here. The port is, however, capable of 
containing more than 60 large ships. The set 
tlement has 122 families of Indians, who main 
tain themselves by the trading in chile, common 
wax, sugar, pita, and neat cattle. It is annexed 
to the curacy of Tamapachi. 

TABUIL, a settlement of the province and 
government of Tucuman in Peru, and of the 
district of its capital; e. of the city of San Fer 
nando de Catamarca, 



483 



T A C 



T A C 



TABUYA, a settlement of the province and 
government of Popayan in the Nuevo Reyno de 
Granada. 

TABUYAS, a barbarous and ancient nation 
of Indians, of the province of Anserma in the 
Nuevo Reyno de Granada, to the e. n. e. They 
were ferocious and cannibals, but are now en 
tirely extinct. 

TACABAMBA, a secernent of the province 
and corregimiento of Caxamarca in Peru, an 
nexed to the curacy of the settlement of Chota. 

TACALAISO, a settlement of the province 
and corregimiento of Chichas and Tarija in Peru; 
of the district of the second. 

TACALAZALUMA, a settlement of the pro 
vince and government of Cartagena, in the Nuevo 
Reyno de Granada ; on the shore of a lake 
formed by the arms of the river Cauca to the e. 
of the town of San Benito Abad. 

TACALOA, a settlement of the same pro 
vince and kingdom as the former, in the district 
of the town of Mompox ; on the shore of the 
river Cauca, nearly where this disembogues itself 
into the grand river Magdalena. It was formed 
by the union of the other settlements in 1776 by 
the governor D. Francisco Pimienta. 

TACAMBARO, a settlement of the akakUa 
mayor of Valladolid in the province and bishopric 
of Mechoacan, at the foot of a sierra so lofty, as 
to make a journey of eight leagues to reach the 
highest part : its skirt is five leagues long on 
the s. side ; and reaches from the kingdom of 
Guatemala as far as the province of Sinaloa. It 
is of a mild temperature, with an inclination to 
hot; and the territory is agreeable from its 
cheerfulness, being covered with shady groves 
and fruit-trees of various sorts, and also abound 
ing in medicinal herbs. On the e. part runs from 
n. to s. a crystalline river, which rises in the top 
of the sierra, gives a fall of more than 40 yards, 
and then oozing out from its bed near the settle 
ment, provides a water sufficient to turn a mill, 
and to irrigate the surrounding country. 

The population is composed of 159 families of 
Spaniards, 50 of Mulattoes, and 170 of Indians. 
It has a convent of the religious of St. Augustin, 
and in its district are various estates, in which 
are gathered abundant crops of wheat, maize, 
and other seeds, and where there are some en 
gines or mills for making certain portions of su- 

&amp;lt;rar, of which productions its commerce is com- 

j 
posed. 

Half a league from the town is a large lake, 
which belongs to the House of the Counts of 
Ofiate ; from whence are extracted vast quanti 
ties of fish; and at three-quarters of a league s 



distance is a mountain, close to an estate of the 
same house, in which there is a deep pool of 
crystalline water, sweet and limpid, which nei 
ther decreases in time of drought, nor swells in 
the freshes, but is always of one height. Thirty- 
two leagues 5. e . of Valladolid. This settlement 
is also called Ocambare. 

[TACAMES, a bay on the coast of Esmeral- 
das or Tacames in Grenada, in about lat. 54 n. 
and three leagues to the n. e. of Point Galera. 
It is the same as that described by Albedo as 
Atacames, by which name it is also properly 
called.] 

TACAMOCHO, a settlement of the province 
and government of Cartagena, in the Nueto 
Reyno de Granada, on the shore of the river 
Grande de la Magdalena, near the mouth where 
this is entered by the Cauca: founded in 1776, by 
the governor D.rrancisco Pimienta, by the union 
of other settlements. 

TACAQUIRA, a settlement of the province 
and corregimiento of Pilaya and Paspaya in 

Peru; annexed to the curacy of the settlement of 

r&amp;lt;- j 
Linta. 

TACARIGUA, a large lake of the province 
and government of Venezuela, in the Nuevo 
Reyno de Granada. It is also called De Va 
lencia : is 23 miles long from e. to w. and seven 
wide from n. to s. ; and is so deep as to be at a 
very small distance from its shore unfathomable. 
It is formed by the waters of 14 rivers which 
unite here, after flowing down from the snowy 
sierra. Its shores are pleasant and beautiful to 
behold, covered with an immense variety of 
trees, and thronged with different fowl. It has 
some islands ; and, amongst the rest, two, which 
are, each of them, 1| leagues in circumference; 
abounding in baquiras, paugics, guacharacas^ and 
geese. 

In this lake grow, upon the surface of the 
water, very large leaves ; which, entwining with 
each other by their roots, and harbouring other 
leaves which fall from the surrounding trees, as 
well as pieces of earth and timber brought down 
by the violence of the rivers, form a body of 
two or three yards thick, and upwards of 30 or 
40 yards long, and of such consistency as to have 
growing upon them large trees ; and these catch 
ing the wind, and giving an impetus to the mass 
thus formed ; the whole is, to all intents, a per 
fect floating island, which, however, is often 
doomed to crumble to pieces by continual agi 
tation. 

[New islands appear in this lake from time to 
time, from the diminution of water (las apare- 
cidas). The lake of Tacarigua, or Nueva Va- 



TAG 

lencia, is 474 metres (1554 feet) elevated above 
&amp;lt; he level of the sea. See Humboldt s Tableaux 
tie la Nature, torn. i. p. 72. It is 54 miles s. s. e. 
from Tucuyo, 53 s. by w. from Caracas, and 14 
s. from the sea.] 

T AC ARIGU A, another, a small lake of the same 
province and kingdom, on the shore of the sea, 
with which it communicates, between the rivers 
Unare and Tuy. 

[This lake, observes Depons, is sometimes im 
properly confounded with that of Valencia, to 
which the Indians have given the same name. 
It lies 1| leagues from the mouth of the river 
Tuy. Its form, he observes, is circular, and is a 
bay, excepting sometimes, when a moveable bar 
of sand cuts off its communication with the sea, 
and converts it into a lake. It runs inland 
nearly seven leagues, the sea being to n. e. It 
abounds in every sort offish.] 

TACARIGUA, a settlement of the island and 
government of Trinidad, in the n. part, and 
nearly at the e. extremity ; opposite the island of 
Tabago. 

TAG AT A, a settlement of the province and 
government of Venezuela, and Nuevo Reyno de 
Granada, in the district of the city of Caracas, on 
the s. of this city, and on the shore of the Tuy. 

TACATU, a river of the province and govern 
ment of Guayana in N.America. It rises from 
the lake Parime on the w. and, united with the 
river Maho, forms that which they call the 
Blanco ; which, afterwards, enters by the n. part 
into the Maranon, and not into the Negro, as is 
shown in the chart of the course of the Maranon 
by D. Carlos de la Condamine. See YAGUA- 
RIPE. 

TACAZURUMA, a mountain of the province 
and government of Venezuela, in the Nuevo 
Reyno de Granada, to the s. of the lake Taca- 

"TACAZQUARO, a settlement of the head 
settlement of the district, and alcaldia mayor of 
Tinguindin in Nueva Espana. It contains 84 
families of Indians, is of a mild temperature, 
and in its vicinity is a lake of seven leagues 
long, abounding in fish ; the catching and sell 
ing of which form the whole occupation of the 
natives. Three leagues w. of its head settle 
ment. 

TACHES, a small island of the N. Sea, near 
the coast of N. Carolina, and near the islands of 
Kikotan and Matchapungo. 

[TACHIFI Point, on the coast of New 
Mexico, is 18 miles from the town of Pomaro.] 

TACHINA, a river of the province and cap- 

VOL. IV. 



T A C 



489 



tainship of San Vicente in Brazil, which runs a;. 
and enters the source of the Uruguay. 

TACHIRA, SAN ANTONIO DE, a settlement 
of the jurisdiction of the town of San Christoval, 
in the Nuevo Reyno de Granada. It is of an 
hot temperature, being plagued with many mus- 
quitoes, snakes, and venomous insects. It pro 
duces much cacao and tobacco, which are carried 
for sale to Maracaibo, Santa Fe, and the other 
provinces of the kingdom. The climate is very 
healthy, and the soil fertile, as well in sugar- 
canes, of which sugar is made, as in maize, and 
other productions of a warm climate, yielding all 
in abundance. [Thirty-two miles n. with a slight 
inclination to the e. of Pamplona, close to the 
high road leading to Grita and Merida.] 

TACHIRA, a river of the province and govern 
ment of Maracaibo, in the same kingdom as the 
former settlement. It rises in the mountains of 
the Guajiros Indians, and runs into the great 
lake of Maracaibo, at its interior part and nearly 
opposite the entrance. 

TACHOBACO, a river of the province of 
New England. 

TACMARA, an ancient nation of Indians of 
Chinchaysuyu in Peru : conquered and united to 
the empire by Yahuar-Huacac, seventh emperor, 
he being hereditary prince. 

TACNA, a settlement of the province and cor~ 
regimiento of Arica in Peru. It is of a mild cli 
mate, and delightfully situate, and where many 
noble families, who have passed from Arica, have 
settled. It has a very handsome parish-church, 
to the curacy of which are annexed five other 
settlements. 

TACOARA, a river of the province and coun 
try of Las Amazonas, in the territory lying be 
tween the two large rivers of Cuchivara and Ma 
deira. It runs e. and enters the latter. 

TACOBAMBA, a settlement of the province 
and corregimiento of Porco in Peru. 

[TACONNET Fall. See FORT HALIFAX.] 

TACOTAXPA, or TLACOTALPAN, a settle 
ment of the jurisdiction and government of Vera 
Cruz in Nueva Espana. It contains 337 fami 
lies of Indians, who exercise themselves in mak 
ing earthenware, and in the fisheries of the river 
of its name. By this river the settlement has 
suffered much by inundations, and from hence it 
arises that the natives care little about cultivat 
ing the soil. It formerly carried on a great 
trade by the wood which was cut in the sierras of 
Candaria and Campanario. This trade, as hav 
ing been carried on at 100 leagues distance, was 
abandoned ; and, although it might be done 
3 R 



4150 



T A C 



nearer, it is not so, since the masters of the 
estates will not allow it. [Forty-seven miles 
s. e. of its capital, in lat. 18 37 . long. 95 
29 a&amp;gt;] 

TACOTAN, a settlement of the head settle 
ment of the district and akaJdia mayor of Cuquio 
in Nueva Espana, on the shore of the river 
Verde. Four leagues s. of its capital. 

TACOUTCHti-TESSEE River, the Indian 
name for the Columbia, rises w. of the Rocky 
Mountains, and runs into the ocean s. of Nootka 
Sound. 

TACUANA, a settlement of the province and 
captainship of Para in Brazil, on the shore of the 
river Xinffii, and by the first of its falls. 

TACLIATO, a settlement of the province and 
government of Venezuela in the Nucvo Reyno 
de Granada; in the peninsula of Paraguana, on 
the s. coast, and opposite that of Tierra Firme. 

TACUAZALCO, a settlement of the province 
and ahaldia mayor of Sonsonate in the kingdom 
of Guatemala; 

TACUBA, a jurisdiction and alcahlia mayor of 
the kingdom of Nueva Espana ; bounded w. n, w. 
by the jurisdiction of Mexico. It is very fertile, 
and abounding in wheat, maize, and other seeds 
and herbs, which are cultivated in very many 
gardens and estates for the supply of Mexico ; as 
also in fuel, coal, and different sorts of woods, 
which are cut on the mountains. It was anciently 
the inheritance of the blood royal of Moctezuma ; 
and it is preserved to the present day in the same 
line, enjoying the tribute, which was paid by 
Hernan Cortes, in the name of the Emperor 
Charles V. to Isabella, daughter of Moctezuma, 
as a dowery, upon her being married to Alonso 
de Grado, her first husband. The tribute of this 
jurisdiction is divided between the Count of La 
Enxarada, the Duke de Linares, as descendant 
of the house, Don Diego Cano Moctezuma, Don 
Joseph Audelo, and the descendants of Dona 
Geronima Moctezuma and her brothers, she 
being a religious of the convent of San Gero 
nimo, and Dona Maria de la Rosa, through the 
declaration of the council of the Indies in her 
favour in a late suit ; and the tributary settle 
ments are Tacuba, Huizquilucan, and San Barto 
lome Naucalpan. 

TACUBA, the capital, is the town of the same 
name ; at six miles distance w. n. w. from 
Mexico, and having, leading to it, a beautiful 
causeway of cut stone; the same having been oc 
cupied by Hernan Cortes, and being that by 
which he entered the capital. It contains 724 
families of Indians, and in the square is a good 



TAG 

convent of the religious of San Francisco, one of 
whom officiated as curate until that the cure de 
volved upon the regular clergy. [In lat. 19* 
28 . long. 99 10 30" a&amp;gt;.] 

The other settlements of this jurisdiction are 
the following, amongst which are 10 which are 
head settlements of the district. 

S. Estevan de Popotla, Escapuzalco, 

S. Antonio Huixquilu- S. Lorenzo Tultitlan, 

can, S. Geronimo, 

S. Bartolome Naucal- Tepetlacalco, 

pan, Santa Maria de Coa- 

Tenaypca, tepee, 

Tlalneplanta, S. Pablo de las Salinas. 

TACUBAYA, a settlement of the head settle 
ment of the district of the alcaldiu mayor of Co- 
yoacan in Nueva Espana. , It is of a tine, plea 
sant, and delightful temperature, and covered 
with country houses, orchards, and gardens. It 
has many olive-grounds, and presses for making 
oil ; a convent of the religious of S. Domingo, 
situate in the square, and another of Barefooted 
Franciscans, with the title of San Joseph. Its 
population consists of 342 families of Indians, 
and is four miles s. w. of Mexico. 

TACUCHAMETA, a settlement of the mis 
sions which were held by the religious of S. Fran 
cisco, in the province of Canliacan and kingdom 
of Nueva Vizcaya ; between the rivers Elota and 
Tabala. It produces maize, French beans, and 
an abundance of wax and honey. 

TACUCU, a small river of the province and 
government of Guayana or Nueva Andalucia. 
It enters the Caroni by the w. side, nearly oppo 
site the settlement of La Divina Pastora. 

TACUNGA, a province and corregimiento of 
the kingdom of Quito, to the s. ; bounded e. by 
the valley of Vicioso, n. by the corregimiento of 
Quito, n. w. by the province and government of 
Esmeraldas, by the province of Guayaquil; s. w. 
by that of Chimbo, and s. by that of Ambato. 
Its length is 21 leagues from e. to w. and its 
wii th 14 from n. to s. It is of a very cold tem 
perature, but abounding in cattle which have ex 
cellent pastures. 

It produces wheat, barley, and rye, and wools 
of many kinds, of which some beautiful articles 
are manufactured. In the settlement of Pugilli 
are made various vessels of a red clay, which are 
carried for sale to Quito and to the other pro 
vinces, where they are much esteemed. 

This province is fertilized by many rivers, the 
principal of which are, that of Alaques and that 
of San Felipe. It has several medicinal baths, 
and abounds throughout in nitre, so that it makes 



T A C 

as good powder as any in Europe. It is well 
peopled with Indians, and it was, in the times of 
the gentilism, called by them Llatan-cunga. 

It was conquered by Sebastian de Belalcazar 
in 1533, after very little resistance on the part of 
the natives, although he was much assisted in his 
enterprise by an irruption of the volcano Coto- 
paxi, which greatly dismayed them. It enjoys 
different temperatures, according to the various 
settlements ; those on the mountains being warm, 
those of the llanos moderately so, and those 
close to the mountain deserts very cold. The 
genius of this people and of its neighbourhood is 
greater than that of those of the other provinces. 
In the llanura, in which the capital stands, and 
which abounds in huge crags of rock and stone, 
which have, at various times, been thrown up by 
the volcano, are to be seen the walls of one of 
the palaces which belonged to the Incas ; the 
entrance to which is by a passage of five or six 
toises long, and serving as an entrance to the 
hall. Around the hall are three great saloons, 
which form the three grand fronts, and in each 
of these are various divisions ; and at the back of 
that saloon which is opposite to the entrance are 
compartments, which, to all appearance, were 
made for keeping animals in. The materials of 
which this palace is built, consist chiefly of a 
hard black stone, which has the semblance of 
flint. Moreover, these stones are so beautifully 
knit together that the joining is scarcely visible. 
In the exterior part of the building the said 
stones are all worked convex, and at the entrance 
of the gates they are of a plain superficies ; for, 
although naturally of an unequal size and of irre 
gular figure, this objection is overruled by the 
nicety and labour with which they have been knit 
together. The height of the walls is 2| toises, 
and their thickness from three to four feet. The 
gates also are five yards high, so as to admit the 
palanquins of the Incas. At 50 toises from this 
edifice to the n. is a small mountain, singular as 
being the only one in the llano. It is from 60 
to 70 yards high, of a round figure, like a sugar- 
loaf, and so equal in all its parts as to have the 
appearance of having been made by hand : as we 
are assured was really the case. It was just by 
the chief gates, and served as a watch tower, 
commanding a full view of the plain. This 
mountain was called Panecillo del Callo, by the 
Spaniards, the same name having been given to, 
and retained by the aforesaid palace to the pre 
sent day. 

TACUBA, the capital, is of the same name, 



491 



with the dedicatory title of San Vicente Martin ; 
situate in an extensive llanura to the s. of Quito, 
near the cordillera of the Andes, from which 
stands out a very lofty mountain, and at a dis 
tance from the skirt of which is the town, which 
is girt in on the ay. by the river of San Felipe, of 
a tolerably large stream. This river, although 
it be fordable at times, must, at its swellings, be 
passed by the bridge. 

The town is large and well arranged, the 
streets are wide, the houses all of pumice-stone 
(which is so light as to swim upon the water, and 
which unites well with mortar), arched and hand 
some, although low, to guard against mischief 
from earthquakes. It has, besides the parish- 
church, a convent of the religious of San Fran 
cisco ; another of S. Domingo, another of S. 
Agustin, another of La Merced; and it had a 
college which belonged to the Jesuits, and a 
monastery of Barefooted Carmelites, which was 
transferred to Quito, and now exists with the 
name of Carmen Baxo. 

This town was destroyed in 1698 by an earth 
quake, when nothing but the aforesaid college 
and one house out of 600 remained ; the greater 
part of the inhabitants also perishing. An equal 
catastrophe was likewise repeated in the years 
1743 and 1757, from its being no further than 
six leagues distance from the volcano of Coto- 
paxi, and in consequence of which its tempera 
ture is very cold. The natives are great me 
chanics and artisans. They make cloth, baizes, 
and other manufactures called tucuyos, by which 
they carry on a good trade ; and they also carry 
bacon and hams for sale to Quito, Riobamba, 
and Guayaquil ; the same being highly esteemed 
for the manner in which they are prepared, 
namely, so as never to become rancid. All the 
neighbouring fields are sowed with fine clover 
and clumps of willows, the verdure of which af 
fords a delightful prospect. 

The inhabitants of this town are reputed at 
12,000 souls of all sexes and ages ; the greater 
part being of Spaniards and Muslces, and amongst 
the former some families of high distinction ; as, 
for instance, that of the Marquis of Macnza, who 
has here a magnificent house, and a rich estate, 
with some manufactories, called La Cienga : [it 
is 44 miles s. of Quito and 49 miles n. n. e. of Rio 
Bamba. In s. latitude 55 14|", and zc. longitude 
78 23 .] 

The other settlements are, 

Zicchos mayor, Yungas,or Colorados, 

Zicchos menor, Isilimbi, 

SR 2 



492 



T A D 



T A G 



Chisa-Halo, or Toa- Saquisili. 

caso, Pugili, 

Pillaro, Tanichuchi, 

San Felipe, Cuzubamba, 

Mula-halo, Tisalco, 

Alaques, Augamarca, 

Molleambato, Pila-halo. 

TACUPETO, a settlement and real of silver 
mines, of the province of Ostimuri ; which for 
merly was rich but now entirely reduced. Eigh 
teen leagues n. e. of the real of Rio Chico. 

TACURACHI, a settlement of the province 
and corregimiento of Arica in Peru ; annexed to 
the curacy of the settlement of Tarata. 

TACURAGUA, a small river of the province 
and government of Guayna or Nueva Andalucia ; 
which rises in the mountain of Tiramuto, runs n. 
and enters the Orinoco to the e. of the Ciudad 
real. 

TACURAY, a small river of the province and 
government of Mainas in the kingdom of Quito, 
which runs n. n. e. and enters the Guayaga. 

TACUTA, a settlement of the missions, which 
were under the charge of the Jesuits in the pro 
vince of Taraumara and kingdom of Nueva Viz- 
caya in N. America. Fifty leagues w. s. w. one 
quarter w. of the town and real of mines of Chi- 
guagua. 

TACUTO, a river of the province and govern 
ment of Guayana in S. America. It rises in the 
limits of the dominions of the crown of Portugal 
in Brasil, forms a great lake, which preserves the 
same name, and empties itself in the river of Las 
Amazonas. M. La Condamine calls it Tacutu. 

TADAN, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Cuenca in the kingdom of Quito ; 
annexed to the curacy of the settlement of Gua- 
lasco. 

TADAY, a settlement of the same province 
and corregimiento as the former ; situate in the 
?. part, and, having in its district the estates of 
Ramadan, Guariponga, and Yazuay. It is an 
nexed to the curacy of the settlement of Pen- 
delec. 

TADEO, S. a settlement of the missions which 
are held by the religious of S. Francisco, of the 
college of Santa Rosa de Ocupa, in the province 
and corregimiento of Caxamarquilla and kingdom 
of Peru. 

TADOUSSAC, a small settlement of Canada, 
on the n. w. shore of the river St. Lawrence, and 
at the mouth of the Sagueny. It carries on a 
good trade with the Indians, who come to it and 
give furs in exchange for linen, iron utensils, and 



trinkets. It has a fort, which was built for its 
defence, upon an inaccessible rock. It is 123 
miles below Quebec. [In lat. 48 2 n. and long. 
69 16 w. See SAGUENY River.] 

[TAENSA, a settlement in W. Florida, on 
the e. channel of the great Mobile River, oil a 
high bluff, and on the scite of an ancient Indian 
town, which is apparent from many artificial 
mounds of earth and other ruins. It is about 25 
miles above Fort Conde, or city of Mobile, at 
the head of the bay. Here is a delightful and 
extensive prospect of some flourishing planta 
tions. The inhabitants are mostly of French ex 
traction, and are chiefly tenants. The mijrica 
inodora, or wax-tree, grows here to the height of 
nine or 10 feet, and produces excellent wax for 
candles.] 

TAENSAS, a settlement of Indians of the 
province and government of Louisiana ; on the 
shore of the river Mississippi, opposite the ruins 
of the fort of Rosalia. 

TAGANGA, a settlement of the province and 
government of Santa Marta and Nuevo Reyno 
de Granada ; situate just before you arrive at the 
point of Abuja, in a bay of its name. It is of a 
hot climate, is governed by a cazique^ and was, 
formerly, very populous. 

TAGAPIPE, a castle which has been built 
upon a point of land in the Bay of Todos Santos 
in Brazil : contributing greatly to the defence of 
the citv of S. Salvador. 

TACARIBA, a port of the coast of the king 
dom of Brazil. 

TAGARIS, a barbarous nation of Indians, in 
habiting the woods of the river Cunuris ; bound 
ed n. by the nation of the Guacare, and s. by 
that of the Apotos. It is now reduced to a very 
small number, and is but little known. 

[TAGO, SANT, or TIAGO Point, on the w. 
coast of New Mexico, is between Salagua and 
the White Rock.] 

TAGUACAY, a river of the province and 
government of Paraguay ; which runs 5. and en 
ters the Parana, between the Aguapay and Juan- 
guazu. 

TAGUATAGUA, a settlement of the pro 
vince and corregimiento of Colchagua in the king 
dom of Chile ; on the shore of the river Rapel. 

TAGUATAGUA, a lake of this province and 
kingdom ; celebrated for its abundance of fish 
and water-fowl, and particularly for its trout,which 
are delicious. P ourteen leagues from the city 
of Santiago, on the shore of the river Tinguiri- 
rica. 



T A I 

TAGUIIS, a principal and head settlement 
of the district of the alcaldia mayor of Villalta in 
Nueva Espana. It is of a hot temperature, and 
contains 30 familes of Indians. 

[TAHOORA, or TAHOOROWA, one of the 
smallest of the Sandwich Islands, three leagues 
from the s. w. part of Mowee. Lat. 20 38 n. 
Ion*?. 156 33 to.] 

TAHUENHUATO, SAN PEDRO DE, a set 
tlement of the head settlement of the district and 
alcaldia mayor of La Piedad in Nueva Espana. 
It contains 16 families of Indians, Spaniards, and 
MustceS) and 110 of Indians. It is surrounded by 
nine ranches, at a small distance from each other, 
in which dwell 215 families of Spaniards, Mus- 
tees, and Mulattoes, who trade in the grain 
which they cultivate. Ten leagues w. of its 
capital. 

TAIGUEN, a river of the kingdom of Chile, 
which runs n. n. w. and then s. s. w. forming a 
curve, and enters the Quinu. 

TAIJAS, a settlement of the province and 
government of Tejas in N. America; on the 
shore of the river of La Trinidad. 

TAILOR, a settlement of the island of Bar- 
badoes, in the district of the parish of San Juan. 
T AIM AT I, a river of the province and govern 
ment of Darien and kingdom of Tierra Firme. It 
rises in the mountains of the s. coast, and disem 
bogues itself into the sea at the Gulf of San Mi 
guel, opposite the Point of Garachine. 

TAIMATI, another river in this province and 
kingdom. It rises in the mountains of the n. 
coast, runs s. w. and enters the Chucunaqui. 

TAIMATI, another, in the province and govern 
ment of Choco and Nuevo Reyno de Granada. 
It rises in the n. part, near the mountain of 
Aguila, and enters the sea in the Gulf of Tucu- 
mari, or Darien. 

TAIME, a settlement of the missions which 
were held by the Jesuits in the Llanos of Casa- 
nare and Meta, of the Nuevo Reyno de Granada, 
and being now under the charge of the religious 
of St. Domingo. 

TAIMES, a principal and head settlement of 
the district of the alcaldia mayor of Tlapujagua 
in Nueva Espana. It contains 720 families of 
Indians, including those of the wards of its vici 
nity, and a chapel of ease. Very near to it are 
some rocks, having two mouths, out of which 
issue two streams, the one of cold, the other of 
hot water : the same becoming mingled, are of a 
moderate warmth, and noted for the cure of 
many infirmities. Sixteen leagues w. n. &amp;\ of its 
capital. 



T A L 



493 



TAIRICHI, a settlement of the missions which 
were held by the Jesuits, in the province of Ta- 
raumara and kingdom of Nueva Vizcaya. 
Twenty-eight leagues s. w. of the town and real 
of mines of San Felipe de Chiguagua. 

TAJACOA, a settlement of the province and 
captainship of Rey in Brazil: on the shore and at 
the source of the river Tabagi. 

TAJAI, a river of the province and captainship 
of Rey in Brazil; which runs s. s. e. and enters 
the Tajaymeri just before this runs into the sea. 

TAJAI, a large bay on the coast of the same 
province and kingdom as the former river, be 
tween two other bays ; called of Combervi and 
of Tapicu. 

TAJAI-MERI, a river of the same province 
and kingdom as the former ; which runs e. and 
enters the sea in the bay of its name. 

TAJARA, a settlement of the province and 
corregitniento of Omasuyos in Peru ; annexed to 
the curacy of the settlement of Achacache. 

TAJIPLRU, an abundant arm of the river 
Maranon, in the province and country of Las 
Amazonas and territory of the Portuguese. It 
becomes divided just before it enters the sea, 
and forming an half circle, to make another 
mouth, forms the large island of Marayo, or 
Joanes. 

TAL, a river of the province and alcaldia mayor 
of Tecoantepec in Nueva Espana. It runs e. and 
enters the sea opposite the settlement of its 
capital. 

TALA, a jurisdiction and alcaldia mayor of 
the kingdom of Nueva Galicia and bishopric of 
Mechoacan in N. America : bounded s. e. by the 
capital of Guadalaxara, from which it is 10 
leagues distant. It is of limited extent, but 
abounding in grain, fruit, and pulse, and is of a 
mild temperature. It has only four settlements,, 
since, although it is well peopled for the size of 
its district, with Spaniards, Mustees, Mulattoes, 
and Mexican Indians, the greater part of the in 
habitants dwell in the country estates, which are 
very luxuriant, and called Quesillos, San Nico 
las, and Cabezon. Besides these estates are se 
veral others upon the banks of a river which 
passes through the jurisdiction, and makes its 
way towards the town of La Purificacion. The 
capital is the settlement of the same name, [22 
miles s. s. w. of Guadalaxara,] and the others 
are Theutichan, Aguilusio, and Ameca. 

TALA, another settlement, of the province and 
government of Tucuman in Peru, and of the ju 
risdiction of the city of Salta ; on the shore of 
the river of Pasage^ 



YT 






494 



T A L 



TALA, a river of the same province and go 
vernment as the former settlement, which runs 
$. s. e. and enters the Salado. 

TALACUN, a settlement of the head settle 
ment of the district of Tamazunchale and alcaldia 
mayor of Valles in Nueva Espana ; on the shore 
of a river which rises from the large river called 
Verde. It is of a hot and dry temperature, pro 
duces maize in abundance, this being the article 
of its commerce. It contains 25 families of Spani 
ards and Mustees, and 10 of Pames Indians ; and 
is 20 leagues w. of its head settlement. 

[TALAHASOCHTE, a considerable town of 
the Seminole Indians in Florida, situate on the 
elevated e. banks of the little river St. John, 
near the Bay of Apalache, in the Gulf of Mexico, 
about 75 miles from the Alachua savanna. Here 
are near 30 habitations, constructed of frame 
work, and covered with the bark of the cypress 
tree, after the mode of the Cuscowilla, and a 
spacious and neat council-house. 

These Indians have large handsome canoes, 
which they form out of the trunks of cypress 
trees ; some capacious enough to hold 20 or 30 
warriors. In these they descend the river on 
trading and hunting expeditions on the sea-coast, 
islands, and keys, quite to the Point of Florida; 
and sometimes across the gulf, and go to the 
Bahama Islands, and even to Cuba, and bring 
returns of spirituous liquors, coffee, sugar, and 
tobacco.] 

TALAGA, a settlement of the province and 
government of Popayan in the Nuevo Reyno de 
Granada. 

TALAHIGUA, a settlement of the province 
and government of Cartagena in the Nuevo 
Reyno de Granada and of the district of Mom- 
pox : on the shore of the river Magdalena, at 
the point formed at the entrance of the Cauca. 

TALALPA, a settlement of the head settle 
ment of the district of Amaqueca and alcaldia 
mai/or of Zayula in Nueva Espana. It contains 
80 families of Indians, who, in the estates of its 
district, cultivate, in abundance, wheat, maize, 
and French beans, with which they trade; as 
also by cutting wood, with which their moun 
tains are covered. Six leagues w. of its head 
settlement. 

TALAMANCAS, Rio DE LOS, a river on the 
coast of the province and government of Costa 
rica and kingdom of Guatemala. It runs into 
the N. Sea, between the rivers Bocaces and San 
Antonio. 

TALANJAS, a settlement of the head settle 
ment of Aquismos and alcaldia mayor of Valles 



T A L 

Nueva Espana. It is of a hot and moist tempe 
rature, produces maize, French beans, and sugar- 
canes, of which it makes loaf-sugar, its article 
of trade; contains 160 families of Guastecos In 
dians, and is four leagues e. of its head settle 
ment, and 14 from the capital. 

[TALAPOOSEE, or TALLAPOOSEE, the 
great w. e. branch of the Alabama, or Mobile 
River, in Florida. It rises in the high lands 
near the Cherokees, and runs through the high 
country of the Oakfuskee tribes, in a w. direc 
tion, and is full of rocks, falls, and shoals, until 
it reaches the Tuckabatches, where it becomes 
deep and quiet ; from thence the course is very 
serpentine to Little Tallasie, where it unites 
with the Coosa, or Coosa Hatcha. At Coolsome, 
near Otasse, a Muscogulge town, this river is 
300 yards broad, and about 15 or 20 feet deep. 
The water is clear and salubrious. In most 
maps, the lower part of this river is called Oak- 
fuskiej 

TALASSEE, or TALLASSE, a county, con 
sisting of a tract of land bounded by E. Florida 
on the s. from which the head water of St. Mary s 
River partly separates it; n. by Alatamaha 
River, e. by Glynn and Camden counties, and 
w. by a line which extends from the w. part of 
Ekanfanoka Swamp, in a n. e. direction, till it 
strikes the Alatamaha River, at the mouth of the 
Oakmulgee. It is said that the State of Georgia 
had extinguished the Indian claim to this tract of 
land, but it has been given up to the Indians as 
the price of peace ; for which that State makes a 
claim for 50,000, with interest, since the treaty, 
upon the United States.] 

[TALASSEE, a town of the Upper Creeks, in the 
Georgia w. territory, on the s. side of Talapoose 
River, distant about three days journey from 
Apalachicola on Chata Uche River. It is also 
called Big Talassee.] 

TALA VERA, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Andahuailas in Peru. 

TALAVERA, another settlement, with the ad 
dition of Puna, in the province and corregimiento 
of Porco in the same kingdom, and in the arch 
bishopric of Charcas, which is the capital and re 
sidence of the corregidor. 

TALAVERA, a city of the province and govern 
ment of Tucuman. See ESTECO. 

[T ALBERT S Island, on the coast of Georgia, 
the n. point of which is in lat. about 30 44 n. 
where St. Mary s River empties into the ocean 
between this island and Amelia Island on the n.] 

[TALBOT, an island on the coast of E. Flo 
rida. The sands at the entrance of Nassau lie 



T A L 

three miles off" the 5. e. point of Amelia Island, 
and from the n. e. point of Talbot Island. ~\ 

[TALBOT, a county of Maryland, on the e. 
shore of Chesapeak Bay, bounded e. by Choptank 
River, which divides it rom Caroline County, and 
s. by the same river, which separate? it from Dor 
chester. It contains 13,084 inhabitants, of which 
4777 are slaves. The soil is rich and fertile.] 

TALCA, a town and capital of the province 
and corregimiento of Manle in the kingdom of 
Chile : founded in 1742 by the Count de Super- 
unda, who was then president. It has, besides 
the parish church, two chapels of ease in its dis 
trict, and in the town two convents, the one of 
the Recoletans of S. Francisco, the other of La 
Merced ; also a college, which belonged to the 
Jesuits. It is situate on the shore of the river 
Maule, and in its vicinity, to the e. on this river, 
is a fortress, which was built by the Spaniards, 
to restrain the incursions of the Infidel Indians. 

[To the n, e. of this place there is a small hill, 
consisting almost entirely of amethysts, and in 
its vicinity is also another hill, which furnishes a 
species of cement-sand, known by the name of 
talca-sand. It is 193 miles n, n. e. of Concep 
tion, and 105 s. of Santiago, in lat. 35 13 s. 
and long. 71 1 a).] 

TALCAGUANO, a port of the coast of the 
kingdom of Chile, within the bay of La Concep 
tion. It is much frequented by small vessels, as 
well for its good bottom, as for its being com 
pletely sheltered from the n. winds : and, al 
though the disembarkation be, during the preva 
lence of those winds, somewhat difficult, through 
the breakers, it is attended with no danger. Two 
leagues from the city of La Concepcion ; and on 
its shore are some houses. 

TALCAPULI, a settlement of the province 
and corregimiento of Caxamarquilla in Peru. 

TALEA, a principal and head settlement of 
the district and alcaldia mayor of Villalta in 
Nueva Espana. It is of a hot temperature, con 
tains 1 12 families of Indians, and is six leagues 
from its capital. 

TALE-HOUMA, a river of the province and 
government of Louisiana in N. America; which 
runs s. and enters the Soulahue. 

TALINA, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Chichas and Tarija in Peru, be 
longing to the district of the former. 

TALISCOYAN, a settlement of the jurisdic 
tion and government of Vera Cruz in Nueva 
Espana. It is of a hot and dry temperature, and 
its trade consists in robalos (a sort of trout) which 
are caught by the inhabitants in the river Taco- 



T A M 



49/&amp;gt; 



talpa, and which they gather in its district, and 
is of great estimation. Twenty-four miles s. from 
Vera Cruz, and 178 e. by*, from Mexico. 

TALISTAC, a settlement of the head spttle- 
ment of the district and alcaldia mayor of Tasco 
in Nueva Espana, annexed to the curacy of its 
capital, from whence it is five leagues to the n.w. 
containing 88 Indian families. 

TALISTAC, another, with the dedicatory title 
of San Miguel, in the alcaldia mayor of Ante- 
quera, of the same kingdom. It is of a hot and 
dry temperature, contains 4SO families of In 
dians, employed in the cultivation of cochineal, 
and in the manufacture of cotton stuffs, of which 
its commerce consists ; and is two leagues e. of 
the capital. 

TALISTIPAN, a settlement of the head set 
tlement of the district of Haltenango and alcaldia 
mayor of Colotlan in Nueva Espana: three 
leagues s. of its head settlement. 

TALKA, a small island of the straits of Ma 
gellan to the e. near the island of Talkamme : 
names which Mr. La Martiniere pretends were 
given by the natives ; but which are not to be 
found in any maps. 

[TALLOW Point, a mark for anchoring in 
the harbour of Port Royal, on the s. coast of the 
island of Jamaica.] 

TALMACAHLTIDA, a fortress of the king 
dom of Chile; situate on the further side of the 
river Biobio, and on the frontier of the Arau- 
canos Indians, who burnt and destroyed it. 

TALNALIC, a settlement of the head settle 
ment of the district and alcaldia mayor of Zo- 
chicoatlan in Nueva Espana. It is of a hot and 
moist temperature, two leagues n. of its capital, 
and containing 50 families of Indians. 

[TALOO Harbour, on the n. side of the 
island of Eimeo, in the S. Pacific Ocean. Lat. 
17 30 s. long. 150 a?.] 

TALPA, a settlement of the head settlement 
of the district and alcaldia mayor of Ostotipac in 
Nueva Espana. 

TALPICON, a settlement of the province 
and corregimiento of Santa in Peru ; at the foot 
of the cordilltra. 

TALPUJAGUA, a settlement of the alcaldia 
mayor of Valladolid, in the province and bi 
shopric of Mechoacan and kingdom of Nueva 
Espana. 

TAMA, a small river of the province and 
captainship of Para in Brazil ; which runs n. n. w. 
and enters the mouth of the arm of the river of 
Las Amazonas, which forms the island of Ma- 
rayo. 



490 



T A M 



T A M 



TAM AHU, a settlement of the province and 
akaldia mayor of Vera Paz in the kingdom of 
Guatemala. 

TAMALAMEQUE, a town of the province 
and government of Santa Marta in the Nuevo 
Reyno de Granada ; called formerly S. Barto- 
lome de las Palmas : founded in 1554 by Captain 
Lorenzo Martin on the shore of the grand river 
Magdalena, and in the same spot where the set 
tlement of Barbudo had been founded in 1539 
by Gonzalo Ximenez de Quesada ; this name 
applying to the beards worn by the caciques, a 
very rare custom amongst the Indians. After 
this a Spanish colony established themselves here 
under Captain Luis de Manjarres, and lastly it 
was brought to a state of perfection, and made 
a regular town by Bartolome Davila in 1561. 
It is of an extremely hot temperature, but the 
territory is lofty and abounding in good pastures. 
At the present day it has fallen into such decay, 
as to be nothing more than a miserable settle 
ment : [158 miles s. from Santa Marta, and 68 s. 
from Tenerife ; in lat. 8 40 n. long. 74 14 a&amp;gt;.] 

TAMALINTO, a settlement of the head set 
tlement of the district of Tantina and alcaldia 
mayor of Tampico in Nueva Espana. It is of 
an hot temperature, and contains 62 families of 
Indians ; and is one league n. of its head settle 
ment. 

TAMANA, a settlement of the province and 
government of Antioquea in the Nuevo Reyno 
de Granada; on the shore of the river Ingara, 
where this unites with the Talama. 

TAMANAES, a barbarous nation of Indians 
of the Nuevo Reyrio de Granada, who live in 
the woods of the grand river Magdalena, on the 
e. part. They are very warlike, cunning, and 
treacherous. 

TAMAPACHE, a settlement of the head set 
tlement of the district of Tamazunchale and al 
caldia mayor of Valles in Nueva Espana; situate 
in the roughest part of the sierra. It contains 
120 families of Pames and Guastecos Indians, 
who live as barbarians ; is of a cold and moist 
temperature, produces some seeds, and is 16 
leagues from its head settlement. 

[TAMAR, Cape, is thew. w. point of a large 
bay and harbour on the n. shore of the Straits of 
Magellan, within the cape. The s. e. point of the 
bay is named Providence. Lat. 52 5 V s. long. 
74 10 w.l 

TAMARA, a settlement of the province and 
government of San Juan de los Llanos in the 
Nuevo Reyno de Granada. It is of a fresh, de 
lightful, and healthy temperature, and the com 



mon residence of the governors ; very fertile 
and abounding in vegetable productions, parti 
cularly cotton, in which its greatest commerce 
consists, as it makes veiy fine woven stuffs, 
which are esteemed in all parts as the best in the 
kingdom ; as also flags and quilts of white and 
blue thread, excellently wrought ; very fine 
towels, called here de mania, and used by people 
of distinction. Its natives consist of more than 
400 Indians, who are either employed in the cot 
ton manufactories, or in the cultivation of cot 
ton, tobacco, and sugar-canes, of which they 
make sugar. Here are abundance of palms, 
which yield very exquisite dates. It is at the 
foot of the mountains of Bogota, at the entrance 
of the llanos, [seven miles w. of the town of Pore, 
and about 126 n. e. of Santa Fe.] 

TAMARA, another settlement, in the province 
and corregimiento of Yauyos in Peru ; annexed 
to the curacy of the settlement of Omas. 

TAMARACA, a province and captainship of 
the kingdom of Brazil : bounded n. by the pro 
vince of Paraiba, and s. by that of Olinda ; e. 
by the sea ; and w. by the country of the Tapuyes 
Indians. It is only seven leagues in extent along 
the coast, but 30 to 40 in the interior of the 
country. It takes its name from an island, which 
it has opposite to it near the continent ; and it 
forms the principal part of this government. It 
is very fertile, and abounds in Brazil-wood, cot 
ton, sugar, cedars, cocos, and many kinds of 
w r ood, of the which it maintains a lucrative com 
merce ; this being facilitated by a very good 
port which is in the island, and which is entered 
by a narrow channel. 

This port is commanded by a fortress which is 
upon an eminence, and it was taken by the 
Dutch, who built another fortress at its entrance 
with the name of Orange ; the same being inac 
cessible for the swamps with which it was sur 
rounded ; whilst vessels seeking to enter the 
port were exposed to the whole fire from this 
fort. 

The other mouth of the channel, called Cate- 
vamah, has scarcely 10 feet of water, and is fit 
only for flat-bottomed vessels. The island is 
about three leagues long, one wide, and seven or 
eight in circumference. 

This captainship and government was founded 
by Pedro Lopez de Sousa, who having obtained 
from the king, Juan III. a grant of 50 leagues of 
territory as a reward for his services; took seven 
leagues only of the coast, and the rest from the 
interior to the s. This property passed by the 
female line to the house of the Marquises of 



T A M 



T A M 



497 



Cascaes. It was at first possessed by the infidel 
Pitb uares Indians, but who were conquered and 
subjected. The French took possession of this 

Erovince, and kept it till 1635. It is watered 
y a river of the same name, and on the shores 
of which are 22 sugar-engines : and it pays an 
nually to government 30,000 Portuguese aucats. 
Its population consists of the city of Goayana 
and the settlements of Tejucupapo, Tacoara, 
Capibaribi, and Nuestra Senora del Destierro, 
besides the capital, which is situate in the island, 
and bears the same name, with the dedicatory 
title of Nuestra Seuora de la Concepcion. 

The capital is on the top of a mountain, has 
a magnificent parish church, and two regular 
garrison companies for its defence. The whole 
of the territory in its vicinity is covered with 
cultivated estates, sugar engines, and beautiful 
country houses, forming a region most pleasant 
and delightful, and one at the same time abound 
ing in all the necessaries and conveniences of 
life. The population should amount to 200 
housekeepers, [and that of the whole province 
may amount to about 2000. The capital is 14 
miles n. from Olinda, and 64 s. of Paraiba, in 
lat. 7 59 50" s. and long. 35 6 w.~] 

TAMARO, a small river of the province and 
government of Maracaibo in the Nuevo Reyno 
de Granada : it rises near the sea-coast, runs s. 
and empties itself in the great lake of Maracaibo. 

TAMAROAS, or TAMAROS, a large island 
of the province and government of Florida in 
N. America. On the continent is a nation of 
Indians of the same name. 

TAMAULIPA, SAN CARLOS DE, a town of 
the province and government of Sierra Gorda, 
on the coast of the Bay of Mexico and kingdom 
of Nueva Espana : founded in 1763, by order 
of the Viceroy, the Marquis of Cruillas. It has 
not prospered as was expected, its population 
being still very scanty, and most of its houses 
being nothing but straw huts. 

TAMAYO, a river of the province and go 
vernment of Venezuela in the Nuevo Reyno de 
Granada : it rises on the side of the Lake of Ma 
racaibo, runs nearly due e. and enters theTucuyo. 

TAMAZULA, a settlement of the head set 
tlement and alcaldia mayor of Zapotlan in Nueva 
Espana ; situate e. n. e. of the head settlement 
of Tuspan. 

TAMAZULA, another settlement, of the mis 
sions which were held by the Jesuits in the pro 
vince of Topia and kingdom of Nueva Vizcaya; 
in the middle of the sierra of that name, and on 
the shore of the river Piastla. 

VOL. IV. 



TAMAZULA, another, with the dedicatory title 
of San Juan, in thealca/dia mayor of Nochist- 
lan, and of the kingdom of Nuova Espana. It 
contains 78 families of Indians, and is two leagues 
e. of its capital. 

TAMAZULAPA, a settlement of the head 
settlement of the district of Aytla and alcaldia, 
mayor of Villalta in Nueva Espana: it contains 
150 families of Indians, and is 12 leagues from 
its capital. 

TAMAZULAPA, another settlement, the head 
settlement of the district of the alcaldia mayor of 
Tepozcolula in the same kingdom. It contains 
a convent of the religious of St. Domingo, and 
270 families of Indians employed in agriculture 
and breeding goats, of which there are immense 
numbers, the pastures being particularly favour 
able to that species of cattle : three leagues n. e. 
of its capital. 

TAMAZUNCHALE, a principal and head 
settlement of the district of the alcaldia mayor of 
Nueva Espana ; situate near the river of Desa- 
guadero, in which are caught quantities of fish. 
It produces maize, French-beans, and sugar- 
canes, in abundance. It contains a very good 
parish-church, 358 families of Indians, and 36 of 
Spaniards : 30 leagues from its capital. 

TAMBAPALLA, a valley of the province and 
corregimiento of Arica; near the sea-coast. 

TAMBILLO, a settlement of the district of 
Guadalabquen, of the kingdom of Chile ; on the 
shore of a small river of the same name, which 
runs s. and enters the Valdivia. 

TAMBILLO, another settlement, in the pro 
vince and government of Esmeraldas and king 
dom of Quito. 

TAMBILLO, another, of the province and cor- 
regimienlo of Castro Virreyna in Peru ; annexed 
to the curacy of the settlement of Huaitara. 

TAMBILLO, another, of the province and cor 
regimiento of Huanta in the same kingdom. 

TAMBO, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Coquimbo in the kingdom of 
Chile ; near the source of the river Choapa. 

TAMBO, another settlement in the province 
and corregimiento of Moquehua in the same 
kingdom. 

TAMBO, another, of the province and govern 
ment of Atacames in the kingdom of Quito ; on 
the shore of a small river which enters the Gual- 
labamba. 

TAMBO, another, of the province and govern 
ment of Popayan in the Nuevo Reyno de Gra 
nada ; called also Alto del Rey : w. 01 its capital, 
and situate at the source of a river. 
3s 



498 



T A M 



TAMBO, another, of the province and corre- 
gimiento of Castro Virreyna in Peru; annexed 
to the curacy of Huaitara. 

TAMBO, another, of the province and corre- 
gimiento of Calca and Lares in the same king 
dom as the former ; [45 miles n. n. w. of Cuzco ; 
situate on the n. shore of the river Quillabamba, 
or Urubamba, or Vilcabamba ;] in the vicinity of 
which is a mountain on which is to be seen a 
fortress which belonged to the Incas, built of 
large wrought stone so beautifully fitted together, 
as that the junction is scarcely perceptible ; a 
circumstance the more wonderful, when we con 
sider the height to which these stones were car 
ried. None of these stones are of a regular 
figure. This fortress has its bulwarks, gate, and 
small squares, arranged with singular disposition 
and art. It is entered by long, wide flights of 
steps, with several landing-places : at a small 
distance from this fortress are two strong towers, 
which served, to all appearance, as advanced 
posts. Near it also is a place where there are 
some stones with holes in them, and by passing 
a chain through which it is said that the Indians 
thought they could bind the sun ; so that the 
place took the name of Intehuatana, signifying, 
in their language, a place where the sun is 
bound. Here is also another stone with a hole 
in it, in which it was customary to put the head 
of the delinquent, and to chop it off by letting 
another edged stone fall on it after the manner 
of a guillotine. Close by here is a narrow pass 
formed by two mountains, and in it is to be seen a 
stone statue of an Indian with a stone in his hand. 
TAMBO, another, of the province and corregi- 
miento of Canete in the same kingdom ; on the 
coast near the Quebrada ordeep ravine of Tobana. 
TAMBO, another, of the province and corregi 
miento of Arequipa in the same kingdom. 

TAMBO, a river of the same province and king 
dom as the former port ; it rises in the province 
of Moquehua, near the settlement of its name, 
and runs w. forming a bow, till it enters the S. 
Sea in the Bay of Quilca. 

TAMBO, another river, of the kingdom of Bra 
zil, in the territory and country of the Guayazas 
Indians : it is formed of various streams, which 
unite, run n. n. w. and enter the Tocantines. 

TAMBO, a settlement, with the additional title 
of Pintado, and called also Chachaguy, in the 
province and government of Pastes and kingdom 
of Quito. 

TAMBO, another, with the addition of Que- 
mado, in the province and corregimiento of Lu- 
canas and kingdom of Peru ; annexed to the cu 
racy of the settlement of Saiza. 



T A M 

TAMBO, another, of the missions which were 
held by the Jesuits in the province of Gaira and 
government of Paraguay ; situate between two 
rivers, and at the source of one which enters the 
Parana, near the settlement of Copacavana. 

TAMBOBAMBA, a settlement of the pro 
vince and corregimiento of Cochabamba in Peru. 

TAMBOR, an isle of the N. Sea, near the coast 
of Portovelo in the kingdom of Tierra Firme, 
on the side of the Port of Garrote. It has a 
very lofty mountain, on which is a watch-house 
to give intelligence to the governor of Portovelo 
of the vessels on the coast. 

TAMBOR, or TAMBO, CUESTA DEL, a settle 
ment of the province and government of Popayan 
in the Nuevo Reyno de Granada ; situate in the 
road which leads to Quito, on the confines of the 
province of Pastos: 13 miles w of Popayan City. 

TAMBOS, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Huanta in Peru. 

TAME, a large settlement of Indians of the 
Mosca nation, in the Nuevo Reyno de Granada, 
and of the province and government of San Juan 
de los Llanos ; on the skirt of a mountain near 
the river Cazanare, and on the shore of the ri 
ver of its name. It is of a cold temperature, 
but healthy and populous; containing 700 In 
dians, who are much given to labour and agri 
culture, gathering much maize and t/uca, and 
making, besides the cazave^ another eatable, 
which they call cucuma, and even of yuca a 
bread equal to wheaten bread. It is 120 miles 
n. e. of Tunja, and 58 s. of Pamplona. 

TAME, a river of the province and govern 
ment of Guayana, which enters the Meta, ac 
cording to Bellin, the engineer to the king of 
France, in his map of the course of the Orinoco. 

TAMES, a barbarous nation of Indians of 
the Nuevo Reyno de Granada, in the province 
and corregimiento of Tunja. , These savages are 
descended from the Laches ; and their territory 
is bounded by the province of Los Spuyes. 

TAMES, a settlement of the province and go 
vernment of Venezuela in the Nuevo Reyno de 
Granada; on the coast opposite the port of 
Maya, and to the w. of Caraccas. 

TAMES, another settlement. See CACAQUAN. 

TAMIAHUA, or TAMIAGUA, a settlement 
and port of the alcaldia mayor of Guauchinango 
in Nueva Espana ; situate on a narrow isthmus 
or neck of land on the w. coast of the Gulf of 
Mexico; of a hot and moist temperature; on 
which account, as well as by being surrounded 
by swamps on the n. w. and s. sides, it is very 
unhealthy. Its population consists of 40 Spanish 
families, and 400 Mulattoes and Negroes, who 



T A M 



T A M 



499 



are indemnified from paying tribute, on account 
of their guarding- the port and the coast; also of 
460 Guastecos and Mexicanos Indians, who trade 
in wax, sugar, grain, dates, pita, and much fish, 
of which there is a great abundance in a river 
or arm of the sea, which runs n. touching in its 
course upon the houses of the said settlement. 
It is divided into six wards, and very near to it, 
towards the mouth of the river, is the famous 
bar of Tanguyo, the intermediate coast being, 
all the way, nothing but formidable rocks, ren 
dering the anchorage to vessels impossible : [it 
is 146 miles n. n. w. of Vera Cruz, and 68 s. s. e. 
of Tampico,inlat. SPie w. and long. 9729 / ty.] 

TAMIAHUA. The aforesaid river has the same 
name, and runs into the sea between the river 
Tampico and the Punta Delgada. 

TAMIGI, a river of the province of New 
England in the United States of America. It 
rises from a lake n. of the country of Massachu 
setts, and, running in a straight line to the s. 
enters the sea close to the city of New London, 
and to the e. of the river Connecticut. It is 
abundant, notwithstanding many arms which are 
thrown out from it ; the principal of which are 
called Glass River, Russel s Delight, and Indian 
River. 

TAMINANGO, a settlement of the province 
and government of Popayan in the Nuevo Reyno 
de Granada ; situate between the rivers Angas- 
mayo and Juanambu. 

TAMIPICAS, a barbarous nation of Indians 
but little known ; it being understood of them, 
however, that they dwell to the w. of the nation 
of the Xamaros, in the country of the Amazonas. 

TAMISQUI, a settlement of the province 
and government of Tucuman in Peru, situate on 
the shore of the river Dulce. 

TAMITAS, a settlement of the head settle 
ment of the district of Tamagunchale and alcaldia 
mayor of Valles in Nueva Espana. It has a 
convent of the religious of San Francisco, con 
tains 50 families of Guastecos Indians, and is 
situate on an arm of the sierra, 10 leagues n. e. 
of its head settlement. 

[TAMMANY S, ST. a village on the n. side 
of the Roanoke River in Virginia, 17 miles w. 
from Goldson s court-house, 13 from Mecklen 
burg, 34 e. from Halifax court-house in N. Ca 
rolina, and 398 from Philadelphia.] 

[TAMMANY, FORT ST. or ST. MARY S, at the 
mouth of St. Mary s River, on the s. line of 
Georgia. See ST. MARY S.] 

[TAMMATA-PAPPA, a low island of the N. 
PacificOcearijSaidtobeneartheSandwichlslands.] 



TAMOIN, a settlement of the same juris 
diction and alcaldia mayor as the former; founded 
on the shore of a river of a spacious plain. It 
is of an extremely hot temperature, abounding 
in fruit-trees, maize, and other pulse, on which 
the natives subsist. They also make of reeds, 
mats, baskets, and other utensils, and in these 
do they pay their tribute and other contributions. 
Here is a convent of religious of San Francisco, 
and 109 families of Guasteeos Indians, so valorous, 
as that, without the assistance of other troops, 
they have always defended themselves against 
the barbarous Chichimecas, who are on their 
frontiers, and continually menacing war. There 
were formerly in this settlement more than 100 
families of Spaniards and Mustees ; who were, 
however, obliged to fly from the persecutions 
they experienced from the above Indians, be 
taking themselves to some neighbouring parts. 
In the vicinity of the settlement there are, close 
to the sierra, two springs of water ; the one ex 
tremely cold, and the other hot and sulphureous; 
and these mixed are a famous remedy against the 
venereal and other diseases, being used in the 
manner of ablution. It is seven leagues e. of its 
capital. 

[TAMOU Island, one of the small islets 
which form part of the reef on the e. side of 
Ulietea Island, one of the Society Islands.] 

TAMOYES, a barbarous nation of Indians, 
of the province and government of Paraguay ; 
who dwell near the source of the river Moari, 
on the confines of the province and captainship 
of San Vicente in Brazil. These Indians are 
descendants of the Xaqueses, but with whom 
they are at continual war. They are of a brutal, 
ferocious, and treacherous nature, and of very 
lofty stature. They go naked, both men and 
women : the former are addicted to sodomy, and 
the second are common to all. War has almost 
extirpated this abominable race, and the few of 
them who remain lead a wandering life through 
their native wilds and woods. 

[TAMPA. See SPIRITU SANTO.] 

TAMPAGAN,a settlement of the jurisdiction 
and alcaldia mayor of Valles in Nueva Espana ; 
situate at the foot of a sierra of inaccessible 
height. It produces plenty of maize ; cotton, of 
which the inhabitants make their clothes ; and 
sugar-cane, of which they make dust and loaf 
sugar. It is annexed to the curacy of the set 
tlement of Tampamolon, contains 55 families of 
Indians, and is 25 leagues from its capital. 

TAMPAMOLON, a principal and head set 
tlement of the district of the alcaldia mayor of 
3s 2 



500 



T A M 



Valles in Nueva Espana. It is of a hot and dry 
temperature, abounding in grain, pulse, and 
sugar-cane, of which they make loaf sugar, the 
principal branch of trade, and on which the set 
tlement almost solely depends. It has a very 
good parish church, and a convent of the re 
ligious of San Francisco, and 40 families of 
Mexicanos and Guastecos Indians, who alter 
nately exercise the offices of the republic, not, 
however, losing the custom of living dispersed, 
and being followed in this example by the Spa 
niards, Negroes, and Mulattoes, who dwell here, 
and amount to 60 more families : 19 leagues s. 
of its capital. 

TAMPASQUIN, a settlement of the head 
settlement of the district of Tamazunchale and 
of the same alcaldia mayor as the former ; situate 
in a glen formed by various mountains. It is of 
a mild temperature, and inhabited by 57 families 
of Guastecos Indians, the religious functions of 
the place being discharged by a priest of the 
order of San Francisco, who also attends many 
other families living dispersed in the district. 
Fourteen leagues from the capital. 

TAMPA YA, a mountain, celebrated for its 
rich silver mine, in the ancient province of Pa- 
cages, and now in the province of La Paz. 

TAMPIAGUITI, a settlement of the pro 
vince and corregimiento of Caxamarquilla in 
Peru. 

TAMPICO, a province and alcaldia mayor of 
the kingdom of Nueva Espana, and one of the 
smallest and least lucrative. It is of warm and 
moist temperature, produces some cochineal ; 
sugar-cane, of which loaf sugar is made; maize, 
honey, wild wax, and large cattle, of which they 
make dried meat. But its principal commerce 
was formerly in salt, and fish which they used 
to catch in a river of this name, and which, when 
salted, they would send for sale to other juris 
dictions, or export in the vessels coming from 
Campeche: this commerce has, however, entirely 
fallen to decay, owing to the excessive price at 
which the salt was latterly procured. They 
grow here a portion of cotton, of which they 
make certain woven stuffs; and in exchange of 
the above articles, as well as by the sale of some 
bulls, does the whole of the province supply 
itself with such necessaries as it may require. 
It is particularly infested with venomous in 
sects, especially towards the territory of Otzu- 
luama. 

It is traversed by the abundant river of its 
name, and the settlements of its district, besides 
the capital, are the following : 



TAN 

Tantoyuca, 

Santa Catalina, 

San Juan Otontepec, 

Tamalinto, 

San Nicolas, 

Chicomi, 

San Pedro Coyutla, 



Poblacion Nueva, 
Sta. Maria Otzu- 

lama, 
Tanjuco, 
Temporal, 
Santiago Tanquiu- 

che. 



[TAMPICO, the capital of the above province, 
is of the same name ; situate near the sea on a 
neck of land formed by the lake of its name, 
and the Lake of Tamiagua, about 214 miles n. a&amp;gt;. 
of Vera Cruz.] 

TAMPLICO, an abundant river of this pro 
vince, which passes through it into the N. Sea, 
having at the mouth a watch-house to explore 
the coast, and to give advice to the alcalde mayor 
of vessels as they appear. On the w. part of 
this river is a small settlement or ward of In 
dians, of the nation of the Olives ; who are 
obliged to ferry across the river any one that 
may apply, they being, for this service, free 
from tribute. 

TAMPOAN, a settlement of Guastecos In 
dians in the head settlement of the district of 
Tamazunchale and alcaldia mayor of Valles in 
Nueva Espafia. It consists of about 20 families, 
inhabiting a level and beautiful territory, wa 
tered by the large river Tanchanchin, which is 
formed from the river San Marcos, and another 
which flows down from the mountain of Tamul, 
and then forms a beautiful fall in a part of the 
sierra Gorda. The Indians of this settlement 
take care of the canoes for passing the river, 
and, by this service, are freed from the tribute. 
Five leagues o! its head settlement. 

[TAMWORTH, a township in the n. part of 
Strafford County, New Hampshire. It was in 
corporated in 1766, and contains 266 inhabi 
tants.] 

TANA, a settlement of the province and cor- 
regimiento of Castro Virreyna in Peru ; annexed 
to the curacy of the settlement of Vinac in the 
province of Yauyos. 

TANABO, a small part of the island of Cuba, 
on the n. n. e. coast, and the e. head, between 
the port Altabonita and that of Sebayas. 

TANACO, SANTA CRUZ DE, a settlement of 
the head settlement of the district of Arantzan 
and alcaldia mayor of Valladolid, in the province 
and bishopric of Mechoacan. It contains 38 
families of Indians, employed in the cultivation 
of grain, cutting wood, fabricating earthenware, 
and making saddle-trees. 

TANACO, SAN MIGUEL DE, another settle 
ment in the head settlement of the district and 



TAN 

alcaldia mayor of Zacatlan in Nueva Espana : 
six leagues from its capital. 

TANACOCHA, a settlement of the province 
and corregimiento of Guailas in Peru, annexed 
to the curacy of the settlement of Cotaparazo. 

TANAPATEPEC, a settlement of the head 
settlement of the district and alcaldia mayor of 
Tehuantepec in Nueva Espana. It is of an hot 
temperature, contains a convent of the order of 
St. Domingo, and 160 families of Indians (in 
cluding those of the wards of its district), who 
trade in seeds and in breeds of large cattle. 
Fourteen leagues e. of its capital. 

TANASEE, a settlement of Indians of the 
province and colony of N. Carolina, where the 
English have a fort, on the shore of the river of 
this name. 

TANASEE. This river runs n. w. and enters 
the Cherokees. [The more proper name is TE- 
NESSEE, which see.] 

[TANBANTY Bay, on the coast of Brazil, 
has a good road, sheltered by the sands that lie 
off within three miles of the shore. It is one of 
those places between Point Negro and Point 
Luena.J 

TANCANHUICHI, a settlement of the head 
settlement of the district of Tampamolon and 
alcaldia mayor of Valles in Nueva Espana ; in a 
rough territory, and surrounded by mountains, 
ravines, and glens. It is the residence of the 
curate, contains 1700 families of Mexicanos and 
Guastecos Indians, and some of Spaniards, Mus- 
tees, and Mulattoes, all well instructed in their 
religion through the care of D. Juan Santos de 
Mendoza, who was once curate there, and who 
was perfectly well acquainted with their lan 
guages. Fourteen leagues s. e. of the capital. 

TANCHANACO, a small settlement of the 
head settlement of the district of Tamazunchale 
and alcaldia mayor of Valles in Nueva Espana. 
It is of a hot and dry temperature ; annexed to 
the curacy of the settlement of Aquismon. It 
contains 25 families of Indians, and is situate at 
the foot of the sierra Madre, five leagues from 
its head settlement. At a small distance, in the 
loftiest part of the sierra, is a rancheria of Pames 
Indians, who amount to 80 souls, none of whom 
have been reduced to the faith. 

TANCHE, a principal and head settlement 
of the district of the alcaldia mayor of Villalta 
in Nueva Espana. It contains 75 families of 
Indians, and is seven leagues w. by s. of its ca 
pital. 

TANCONA, a creek of the coast of the S. 



TAN 



Sea, in the district of the province and corregi 
miento of Arica in Peru. 

TANCUR, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Caxatambo in Peru ; annexed 
to the curacy of the settlement of Churin. 

TANDIL, a mountain of the province and 
government of Buenos Ayres in Peru ; near the 
shore of the river of its name. 

TANDIL. This river runs n. n. w. then turns 
e. and enters the sea on the coast of the Pata- 
gones. 

[TANELA, or TONELA, a tract of shore on 
the w. coast of Mexico, on the N. Pacific Ocean, 
commencing near the Sugar Loaf Hill, about six 
miles within the land, bearing n. e. and s. w. with 
the burning mountain of Lacatecolula, about 18 
miles up the river Limpa.] 

TANEPLANTA, a river of the province of 
Mexico and kingdom of Nueva Espana. It rises 
in the mountains, runs e. and, uniting itself with 
the river of Los Remedios, changes its name to 
Guadalupe, until it enters the Lake of Mexico 
by the bridge of the same name. 

[TANEYTOWN, a small post-town of Mary 
land, in Frederick County, between Piney Run 
and Pine Creek, on which are a number of mills 
and some iron-works. It lies 18 miles n. by e. 
of Frederickstown, and 96 a), s. w. of Phila 
delphia.] 

TANGA, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Pastes in the kingdom of Quito; 
situate in the road which leads down from the 
province of Popayan. 

TANGANZIQUARO, a settlement of the 
alcaldia mayor of Zamora in Nueva Espana; 
situate in a plain between two crystalline rivers, 
which rise from two fountains close to the set 
tlement, and there irrigate the land, making it 
to bear wheat, maize, and lentils, the branches 
of its commerce. It is of a cold temperature, 
as being situate in the sierra, and is surrounded 
by gardens, which produce many fruits and gar 
den herbs. The population is composed of 98 
families of Spaniards, and 74 of Indians. Six 
leagues n. of its capital. 

TANGO, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Santiago in the kingdom of 
Chile ; founded in a beautiful and extensive val 
ley, from whence it has its name. 

TA.VGO, a small river of the same province 
and government of Popayan. It rises at the foot 
of the paramo of Guanacas, and after a short 
course enters the Caqueta. 

[T ANGOLA, an island in the N. Pacific 



502 



TAN 



Ocean, and on the w. coast of Nuevo Mexico; af 
fording good anchorage and plenty of wood and 
water. It is about 60 miles w. of Guatimala. 
It is also named Tangolatango.J 

TANGOR, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Tarma in Peru ; annexed to the 
curacy of the settlement of Caina. 

TANGOTANGO, a settlement of the pro 
vince and alcaldia mayor of Tecoantepec in 
Nueva Espana; situate on the coast of the S. 
Sea, between the rivers Aguatulco and Cayola. 

TANGUA, a settlement of the province and 
government of Popayan in the Nuevo Rcyno de 
Granada. 

TANGUALO, a settlement of the province 
and corregimiento of Tacunga in the kingdom of 
Quito. 

[TANGUEY,or TONGUEY, a bay on the coast 
of Chile in the S. Pacific Ocean, is 35 miles from 
Limari, and in lat. 30 16 35" s.~] 

TANGUIER, a port of the 5. coast in the 
province of Nova Scotia, of the United States ; 
between Rage Cape and the Shoals of Mal- 
voilin. 

TANICUCHI, a large settlement of the pro 
vince and corregimiento of Tacunga in the king 
dom of Quito ; situate on the w. shore of the 
river of its name, and which flows down from the 
paramo of Elenesia. It is w. of Mulahalo, and 
n. of Saquisili, in lat. 47 30" s. 

TANJUCO, a small settlement or ward of the 
head settlement of the district of Otzulama, and 
alcaldia mayor of Tampico in Nueva Espana. It 
is of an hot temperature, and abounding in ve 
nomous insects and animals ; contains only 12 
families of Indians, and is on the frontier of the 
barbarous Chichimecos. In it reside two sol 
diers, payed by the king, to command and direct 
the Indians who are enlisted as militia, to re 
strain the incursions of the aforesaid infidels, and 
to give the necessary intelligence to the compa 
nies residing at the Port of Tampico. At a small 
distance from its head settlement. 

[TANKAWAYS, or TANKS, Indians of N. 
America, who have no land, nor claim the ex 
clusive right to any, nor have any particular 
place of abode, but are always moving, alter 
nately occupying the country watered by the 
Trinity, Braces, and Colerado, towards Santa 
Fe. In their dress they resemble the Cancers 
and Hietans, but all in one horde or tribe. Their 
number of men is estimated at about 200 ; are 

food hunters, kill buffalo and deer with the bow, 
ave the best breed of horses, are alternately 



TAN 

friends and enemies of the Spaniards. They 
plant nothing, but live upon wild fruits and 
flesh ; are strong-, athletic people, and excellent 
horsemen. They supply traders with deer-kins, 
tallow, rugs, and tongues.] 

TANLAGUA, a very lofty mountain or pa 
ramo, ever covered with snow, of the kingdom of 
Quito, and n. of this capital. At its skirt runs a 
tolerably large river, which has the virtue of pe 
trifying every thing by its waters, and near to it 
are some very rich estates ; one of which is of 
the same name, and another called Conrogal. 

TANOS, a settlement of the missions which 
are held by the religious of San Francisco in the 
province of Moqui, and of the kingdom of Nuevo 
Mexico. 

TANPISCO, a river of the province and go 
vernment of Costarica in the kingdom of Guate 
mala. It runs s. and enters the Pacific Sea to 
the e. of the town of Nicoya. 

TANQUAYALAB, a settlement of the juris 
diction and alcaldia mayor of Valles in Nueva 
Espana ; situate in a lofty plain. It is of a dry 
and hot temperature and scarce of water ; pro 
duces much maize, calabashes, French beans, 
fruits, and sugar-canes, of which they make loaf- 
sugar, in which consists their commerce ; also 
they make bags of pita and of palm, of great 
beauty. In its district are various ranches, 
formed by some Indians and Mulattoes, and in 
which are some large breeds of neat cattle and 
horses. It has a convent of the religious of San 
Francisco, contains 143 families of Indians, and 
70 of free Negroes and Mulattoes. Eleven 
leagues s. of its capital. 

TANQUI, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Caiiete in Peru ; annexed to the 
curacy of the settlement of Chilca. 

TANQUIAN, a settlement of the jurisdiction 
and alcaldia mayor of Valles in Nueva Espana ; 
situate on the side of the river called Del Desa- 
guadero. It is annexed to the curacy of the 
settlement of Tampamolon, of an hot and dry 
temperature ; produces some seeds and fruits, by 
which the natives maintain themselves, although 
not less by the breed of large cattle, and is very 
small, containing only 17 families of Indians, 
who will not permit any Spaniards to settle 
amongst them, nor even any other class of 
people. Twenty leagues e. of its capital. 

TANQUYUCHE, SANTIAGO DE, a settle 
ment of the head settlement of the district of 
Otzulama and alcaldia mayor of Tampico in 
Nueva Espana. It contains 60 families of In- 



TAN 



TAP 



503 



dians ; and is five leagues from its head settle 
ment. 

[TANS A, a branch of the river Mobile. 
Three leagues below the Alabama Branch.] 

TANTAMAYO, a settlement of the province 
and corrcgimiento of Huamalies in Peru ; an 
nexed to the curacy of the settlement of Chavin 
de Pariarca. 

TANTIMA, S. JUAN DE, a principal and 
head settlement of the district of the akaldia 
mayor of Tampico in Nueva Espana. It is of a 
hot temperature, situate amongst some rough 
serranias ; contains 583 families of Indians, who 
occupy themselves in the cultivation of sugar- 
canes, of which they make honey and loaf-sugar ; 
and in the above number are included the In 
dians of the four small wards of its district. 
Fifteen leagues e. of its head settlement. 

TANTOYUCA, a settlement and capital of 
the same alcaldia mayor as the former. It is of 
a hot and dry temperature, its population being 
composed of 306 families of Mexicanos and Guas- 
tecos Indians, and 150 of Spaniards; whose com 
merce consisted in salt, which was brought in 
vessels from Campeche to the port of Tampico, 
and which they immediately exchanged with the 
other jurisdictions for other necessaries. This 
traffic has, however, fallen away completely, 
from the great increase in the price of salt ; and 
thus the settlement as well as the district has 
fallen greatly into decay, the inhabitants having, 
for their livelihood, put into work some sugar- 
engines, cultivating the sugar-cane and some 
grains. It has a good convent of Augustins, and 
to these the curacy belonged before the arrival 
of the clergy. Sixty leagues n. e. by n. of 
Mexico. 

TANZITARO Y PIZANDARO, an alcaldia 
mayor of the province and bishopric of Mecho- 
acan. It is 35 leagues long from e. to w. and 32 
wide from n. to s. The temperature is generally 
cold, although there are some mild and hot parts. 
It abounds very much in waters, which although 
they render the territory fertile, are the cause of 
great sickness. It produces many kinds of grain, 
especially rice, with which it supplies the other 
jurisdictions ; and also honey, fruit, and some 
cattle. 

TANZITARO Y PIZANDARO, the capital, is si 
tuate on the highest part of the sierra of Mecho- 
acan ; on which account it is extremely cold, 
snow constantly falling here when it rains in other 
parts ; and this snow lasts on the ground till the 
return of summer. It enjoys a very pure and 
salutary air, and has abundance of the most de 



licious waters, which gush from the heights of 
the sierra. Its inhabitants are 58 families of 
Spaniards, 105 of Indians, and 15 of Mulattoes 
and Mustees. It has a convent of Franciscans., 
and is 187 miles w. of Mexico. 

The other settlements of its jurisdiction are, 

Acaguato, X&amp;gt; Ipa, 

Apazingan, Pinzandaro, 

Paraquaro, Santa Ana Tetlama, 

San Juan de los Pla- Santiago Thomatlan, 
tanos, Alina, 

Sta. Ana Amatlan, Tepalcatepec. 

TANZOZOB, a settlement of the head settle 
ment of the district of Tamazunchale, and alcal 
dia mayor of Valles in Nueva Espana ; situate 
in the craggy part of the sierra, where the soil 
produces nothing. It is situate in the limits di 
viding this alcaldia from that of Cadreita ; and is 
20 leagues from its head settlement. 

[TAOO, the most s. of the Friendly Islands, 
in the S. Pacific Ocean, is about 10 leagues in 
circuit, and so elevated as to be seen at the dis 
tance of 12 leagues.] 

[TAGS, a town of the province of Nuevo 
Mexico ; which Humboldt states to be placed in 
the old maps 62 leagues too far n. under lat. 40. 
Population 8900.] 

[TAGS Village, is situate on the e. side of the 
grand river Del Norte, about 67 miles n. of 
Santa Fe, capital of Nuevo Mexico. It is be 
lieved at New Mexico that the river which rises 
to the n. e. of this village, and receives the river 
Mora, is the same which in Louisiana is called 
the Red River. This last, joining the Oxen and 
Black River, falls into the Mississippi below Fort 
Adams, 
long. 10436 a&amp;gt;.] 

[TAOUKA, an island in the S. Pacific Ocean, 
one of the Society Islands. Lat. 14 29 s. Long. 
144 59 a;.] 

TAPACARI, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Cochabamba in Peru. 

TAPACRIC, a large and ancient settlement 
of Peru, the capital of a province of the same 
name, which extended itself from the lake Titi- 
caca to the source of the river Chopare, for more 
than 40 leagues. It had its peculiar princes, the 
last of whom was named Cari, and who delivered 
himself up with all his vassals to Capac-Yupan- 
qui, fifth monarch of the Incas. It is now a mi 
serable village ; situate near the source of the 
river Condorillo. [In lat. 18 10 s.] 

TAPACROYA, a settlement of the province 
and captainship of Rey in Brazil ; situate on the 
s. coast of the Bay of Tapicu. 



This village is in lat. 37 19 n. and 



504 



TAP 



TAPACURES, a barbarous nation of Indians 
but little known, of the province and govern 
ment of Moxos in the kingdom of Quito. They 
dwell on the e. side of the river Sara, and on the 
n. of the nation of the Chiquitos and of Santa 
Cruz de la Sierra. 

TAPACURES, a very lofty mountain of the 
province of Charcas in the kingdom of Peru. 

TAPACURO, a small river of the province 
and captainship of Pernambuco in Brazil. It rises 
near the coast, runs e. and enters the sea close 
to Cape San Agustin. 

TAPADO, a small river of the province and 
captainship of Tamaraca in Brazil, which rises 
near the coast, runs e. and enters the sea between 
the river Doce and the town of Olinda. 

TAPAHANOCK, a settlement of the province 
and colony of Virginia in N. America, and of 
King and Queen s County, on the shore of the 
river Rapahanock, near where this enters the 
sea. 

TAPAIRIHUA, a settlement of the province 
and corregimiento of Aimaraez in Peru ; annexed 
to the curacy of the settlement of Acobamba. 

TAPAJOCOS. SeeTopAYos. 

TAPALAGA, a settlement of the province and 
alcaldia mayor of Los Zoques in the kingdom of 
Guatemala. 

TAPANACA, a settlement of the province and 
government of Darien and kingdom of Tierra 
Firme, near the coast of the N. Sea, and on the 
shore of the river Tarena. 

TAPANATEPEC, a settlement of the pro 
vince and alcaldia mayor of Chiapa in the king 
dom of Guatemala ; situate at the foot of the 
mountains of Quelenes, and in the interior of a 
bay of the S. Sea, according to the description 
given by the Fr. Thomas Gage. It is one of the 
most pleasant and delightful settlements in that 
country, abounding in flesh, fowl, fruits, and 
fish, and the latter from being near to a river and 
to the sea ; nor is it without excellent pastures, 
wherein are large breeds of cattle ; nor without 
groves of oranges, lemons, citrons, figs, and other 
fruits. 

TAPANZAQUECO, a settlement of the al 
caldia mayor of Villalta in Nueva Espana. It 
is of a cold temperature, contains 52 families of 
Indians, and is 12 leagues w. by s. of its capital. 

TAPAO Y, a settlement of the head settlement 
of the district of Amatlan and alcaldia mayor of 
Guauchinango in Nueva Espana. 

TAPAQUIRE, a settlement of the province 
and government of Spanish Guayana or Nueva 
Andalucia; [situate about 12 miles s. of the river 



TAP 

Orinoco, and about 41 s. w. of St. Tome, and e. 
of the city of real Corona.] 

TAPAQUIRE, a small river of the province and 
government of Guayana or Nueva Andalucia, 
Avhich runs n. and enters the Orinoco ; on which 
the former settlement is situate. 

TAPARI, BARRA DE, a sand-bank near the 
coast of the province and captainship of Ma- 
ranan in Brazil, on the side of the large shoal of 
Coroa. 

TAP A RICA, a large island of the Bay of 
Todos Santos or Bahia in Brazil ; the largest, 
most populous, and fertile of all those in that 
bay. As it has the continent on the e. side, this 
island defends the entrance of the bay, the dis 
tance between the island and the main-land that 
is between this island and Point St. Antonio, 
being 7| miles. Upon the point or extremity is 
the fort of San Antonio, and a settlement called 
La Ciudad Vieja, in lat. 13 s. 

TAPAY, a settlement of the province and cor- 
regimiento of Collahuas in Peru; annexed to the 
curacy of the settlement of Madrigal. 

TAPAYA, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Chancay, in the same kingdom 
as the former ; annexed to the curacy of the set 
tlement of Sayan. 

[TAPAYOS, or TAPAJOS. See TAPOYAES.] 

TAPAYULA, SAN FRANCISCO DE, a settle 
ment of the head settlement of the district of Za- 
potitlan, and alcaldia mayor of Zacatlan in Nueva 
Espana. Two leagues from its head settlement. 

TAPE. See GUAIRA. 

TAPE. Some mountains of the province and 
government of Paraguay, between the river Te- 
boropi, and the Rio Grande of the captainship of 
Rey in Brazil. 

TAPERADAS BOCAS, a settlement of the 
province and captainship of Para in Brazil, on 
the shore of the river of Las Amazonas, and in 
the arm formed by the island of Marayo. 

TAPES, a settlement of the province and cap 
tainship of Rey in Brazil, on the shore of the 
river Tebiquari. 

TAPIA, a settlement of the province and go 
vernment of Cartagena, in the Nuevo Rey no de 
Granada, on the shore of one of the arms of the 
river Cauca. 

TAPIA, another settlement, in the province 
and government of Tncuman and kingdom of 
Peru, in the district and jurisdiction of the capi 
tal, on the shore of the river Choromoros. 

TAPIA, another, of the province and govern 
ment of Guayana or Nueva Andalucia ; situate 
on the shore of the river Arvi. 



TAP 



505 



TAPIA, a river of the same province and king 
dom as the former settlement. It runs s. s. e. 
and enters the Choromoros. 

TAPIA, another, of the kingdom of Chile, 
which runs n. n. w. and enters the Valdivia. 

TAPICU, Bay of, on the coast of the province 
and captainship of Rey in Brazil ; between the 
Bay of Tajay and the island of Bepitanga. 

TAPICU, a river of the province and captain 
ship of Maranon in Brazil. It runs n. between 
the rivers Mejari and Masseita, and enters the 
sea in the Bay of Marauan. 

TAPICURO, a settlement of the province and 
captainship of Todos Santos in Brazil ; situate 
on the shore of the river of its name, near its 
mouth. 

TAPICURO. This river rises near the coast, 
runs nearly due e. and enters the sea between 
the Ponica and Cape Color. 

TAPICURU, a river of the same kingdom as 
the former. It rises in the mountains of the in 
terior, runs n. forming a curve, and enters the 
sea in the captainship of Maranan, opposite the 
island of San Luis. 

TAPILULA, a settlement of the alcaldia mayor 
of Los Zoques in the kingdom of Guatemala. 

TAPION, a settlement of the island of St. Do 
mingo in the French part ; situate between the 
Petit Goave and Trou de Juan Roger. 

TAPIROZA, ESTRECHO DE, a strait or chan 
nel formed in the middle of the Bay of Maranan, 
by the island San Luis w ith the continent, and 
defended by the castle and fort of Santa Maria. 

TAPISI, a large and abundant river of the 
kingdom of Peru, which rises from the moun 
tains of Cocamas, or Conomamas, to the s. runs 
n. for more than 25 leagues, and then forms 
a lake which is known by the same name. It 
afterwards pursues from a . to a n. w. course, 
and enters the Ucayale in lat. 5 13 / s. 

TAPITAY, a settlement of the province of 
Gaira and government of Paraguay in Peru ; si 
tuate on the shore of the river Parana, and on 
the skirt of the sierra of Maracayu. 

TAPO, a rapid river, called also Tarma, in 
Peru, as being on the confines of this province, 
on the e. part. It is only passable in the part 
called El Balzadero de Chancha-Mayu in balsas, 
or rafts, made of reeds. 

TAPOANA, a river of the province and cap 
tainship of Rio Janeiro in Brazil. It runs e. and 
enters the sea between the settlement of Paraiba 
o^the s. and the Irutiba. 

TAPOCALMA, a settlement of the province 
and corregimiento of Itata in the kingdom of 

VOL. IV. 



Chile ; situate on the coast and at the point of 
its name : between the river Bichuquen and the 
shoals of Rapel. 

TAPOCAYA, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Tomina in Peru. 

TAPORICA, a small island of the N. Sea, 
near the coast of Brazil, in the province and cap 
tainship of Todos Santos, and in the entrance of 
the bay. 

TAPORO, a settlement of the government of 
Maracaibo and province of Venezuela, in the 
Nuevo Reyno de Granada, on the e. coast of the 
lake of that name, and in the interior of the pro 
vince. 

TAPOUCHAS, a settlement of Indians of the 
province and colony of S. Carolina, on the shore 
of a river. 

TAPOYAES, TAPAYOS, TAPOIS, or TAPA- 
Jos, a river of the captainship of Matto Grosco. 
It rises in the country of the Itenes or Ytenese 
Indians, runs s. s. w. and enters the river Itenes, 
about 30 miles n. w. of Fort de Principe de Beira. 

[This magnificent river, which derives its 
copious sources, flowing through numerous large 
branches, from the abovementioned captainship, 
runs n. between the Madeira and the Chingu 
for 300 leagues, flowing into the Amazonas, in 
lat. 2 27 s. and long. 54 36 w. which is nearly 
the geographical position of the town of Santa- 
rem ; situate about 20 miles e. of its mouth, and 
350 w. from the city of Para. In some of the 
plains in which this river rises, are those called 
rarexis, that is from an Indian nation which inha 
bits them. These plains occupy a vast space, not 
level, but formed by undulating heaps of sand and 
light earth, resembling large waves. The spectator 
who is in the midst of them ever sees before him 
a distant and extended mount ; he advances to 
wards itxby a gentle and long declivity, tra 
verses the plain, and advances by an ascent 
equally gentle, until he gains imperceptibly the 
heights he saw ; another eminence then presents 
itself, and he proceeds with the same recurring 
circumstances. The soil of these wide plains is 
sandy, and so light that loaded beasts in passing- 
sink into it so much as to impede their progress. 
The pasturage is poor, consisting of a grass com 
posed of wiry stalks a foot high, and small rough 
lancet-shaped leaves ; the animals in grazing 
pluck them up with the roots covered with sand ; 
on this account the passage by land is difhcult 
and tedious ; though, on finding any of the 
streams, which abound in these plains, there i 
grass and other mild herbage, which afford them 
tolerable pasturage.] 

3 T 



505 



T A P O Y A E S. 



[The plains of Parexis form, to a large extent 
and breadth, the summit of those high mountains 
of the same name, and are situate on some of the 
most elevated land in all Brazil. In these plains 
and mountains are the origins of many very 
large rivers, which flow down from them on all 
sides ; the Paraguay, as well in its own nume 
rous heads, the principal of which are, the Jauru, 
the Sypotuba, and the Cuiaba ; and the Madeira, 
which is the largest river that flows into the 
Amazonas on the s. has some of its sources in 
these mountains, though its most remote sources 
are in the mountains to the n. of Potosi in 
Peru. 

The Tapajos, flowing in a direction contrary 
to that of the above-named river (the Paraguay) 
rises in these mountains. Its easternmost branch 
is the river Arinos, which entwines its sources 
with those of the Cuiaba at a short distance from 
those of the Paraguay. The river Arinos has 
a w. branch, called Kio Negro, from which, to 
the point where it is navigable, there is a pas 
sage of eight leagues over-land tD the river 
Cuiaba, below its upper and greatest falls ; and, 
in like manner, from the Arinos itself the pas 
sage to the same part of the river Cuiaba is 12 
leagues. 

The Arinos is auriferous at its springs, and in 
1747 the mines of Santa Isabel were discovered 
in it, but immediately abandoned, as not answer 
ing the expectations created in those fortunate 
times by the great quantities of gold drawn from 
the mines of Cuiaba and Matto Grosso. The 
lands were infested by dangerous tribes of war 
like Indians. 

The river Sumidouro empties itself on the s. 
side into the Arinos, and its source being a short 
distance from that of the Sypotuba, a large w. 
branch of the Paraguay, there is an easy com 
munication from one river to the other. The 
famous discoverer, Joao de Souza Echevedo, in 
1746 made this passage : he descended the river 
Cuiaba, and sailing up the Sypotuba to its very 
sources, he there passed his canoes over-land into 
the Sumidouro, which he navigated, following 
the current, notwithstanding that the river runs 
for some distance under ground, and thence de 
rives its appellation. After this, he passed into 
the Arinos, and thence into the Tapajos, where 
he surmounted the falls, though more difficult 
than those of the Madeira, and discovered many 
symptoms of gold in the river of Tres Barras, a 
w. arm of the Tapajos, 100 leagues below the 
springs of the Arinos. West of the Sumidouro, 
and in the plains of Parexis, the river Xacuru- 



tina has its origin to the n. of the river Jauru : 
it is famous for a lake, situate in one of its 
branches, where every year is produced a great 
quantity of salt, which .is a constant cause of war 
among the Indians. Some navigators make the 
Xacurutina an arm of the Arinos, and others of 
the Sumidouro. In these plains of Parexis, ter 
minating to the w. in the high mountains so de 
nominated, which, extending 200 leagues in a 
n. n. w. direction, front the Guapore at a distance 
of 15 or 20 leagues, springs the river Juruena, 
between the heads of the Jauru and the Gua 
pore, a league w. of the former and two e. of the 
latter. This river, the largest and westernmost 
branch of the Tapajos, rises in lat. 14 42 s. 
20 leagues n. n. e. of 5 Villa Bella, and, running 
n. 120 leagues, flows into the Arinos, and with 
it forms the bed of the Tapajos. 

The Juruena receives on both sides many small 
rivers, those from the w. affording many practi 
cable communications by short passages over 
land with the Guapore and its confluent streams. 
The uppermost of these, which is nearest to Villa 
Bella, is the Securiu, navigable even there, and 
almost to its -source. This is a league n. of the 
principal source of the river Sarare, which, a 
quarter of a league from its head, is three yards 
deep and five broad. Thus sailing up the Ju 
ruena into the Securiu, and making from its 
source the short land-passage of a league to the 
Sarare, the navigator may reach Villa Bella in 
less than eight days, without any other obstacle 
than that of the fall formed by the Sarare, three 
leagues below its source, where it precipitates 
itself from the Parexis mountains on the ay. slope: 
this difficulty may be surmounted in detail, or by 
at once passing the four leagues, for the Sarare 
from its fall becomes immediately navigable to 
the capital of Matto Grosso. A league n. of the 
source of the Sarare is the first head of the river 
Galera, the second confluent of the Guapore be 
low Villa Bella ; and a league e. of the same 
head rises the Ema, a w. branch of the Securiu, 
affording equal facility of communication. The 
Galera has three other sources n. of the first in 
the plains of the Parexis, all ample streams ; the 
last and most n. called Sahara, is distant little 
more than a league from the source of the river 
Juina, a large w. branch of the Juruena. Thus, 
by the Juina and the Securiu, with a crossing of 
five or six leagues, so as to pass the falls of the 
Galera on the w. scarp of the mountain, the Ju 
ruena may be connected with the Guapore. * 

Lastly, the Juruena may be navigated to its 
upper fall, which is within two leagues of its own] 



TAP 

[source. The fall is formed by two small leaps, 
the river being, even in this part, 30 yards broad 
and of great depth ; from hence downwards it 
flows with great rapidity, yet its falls are not 
greater, and are more passable, than those of the 
Arinos. With the same circumstances, and by- 
similar short land-passages, a communication is 
practicable from the Juruena with the rivers 
Guapore and Jauru, which are to the e. of it, al 
though these two rivers precipitate themselves 
from the s. side of the Parexis mountains, where 
they rise, and immediately form numerous and 
extensive falls. 

From the geographical position of the Tapa- 
jos, it is evident that this river facilitates naviga 
tion and commerce from the maritime city of 
Para to the mines of Matto Grosso and Cuiaba, 
by means of its large branches, the Juruena and 
Arinos. If the short passages over-land should 
be found troublesome to drag canoes, the goods 
may be forwarded immediately on mules. This 
navigation to Matto Grosso is at least 200 leagues 
shorter than that performed through the Madeira 
and Guapore ; it is consequently less tedious 
and expensive, and equally advantageous to the 
mines of Cuiaba. The navigation of the river 
Tapajos might lead also to new discoveries in 
the vast unexplored parts of this river, up to its 
entrance into the plains of the Parexis, and their 
products might add to those of the extensive re 
gions on the Amazonas. Besides this, the river 
is known to be auriferous for a great part of its 
course : it is known also, that, passing from the 
Juruena into its w. arm, the river Camarare, and 
the heads of the river Jamary or Das Candeas, 
which, running in broad streams down the e. side 
of the Parexis Mountains, enters the Madeira, 
there are mines which have inspired great hopes, 
though but lately seen, after a fruitless search of 
20 years. Mawe s Travels.^ 

[TAPOYAES Indians. See TAPUYES.] 

[TAPPAHANNOCK, a post-town and port 
of entry of Virginia in Essex County, between 
Dangerfield on the n. and Hoskin s Creek on the 
s. and on the s. w. bank of Rappahannock River, 
45 miles from Richmond, 46 from Williamsburg, 
and 37 from Fredericksburg. It is also called 
Hobbes Hole ; which see. It is laid out regu 
larly, on a rich plain, and contains about 100 
houses, an episcopal church, a court-house, and 
gaol; but is rather unhealthy. The exports for 
one year, ending September 30, 1794, amounted 
to the value of 160,673 dollars/] 

[TAPPAN, a town of New York, in the s.e. 
part of Orange County, about four miles from 



TAP 



507 



the n. bank of Hudson s River, and at the s. end 
of the Tappan Sea. Here is a reformed Protes 
tant Dutch church. Major Andre, adjutant- 
general of the British army, suffered here as a 
spy, October 2, 1780 ; having been taken on his 
way to New York, after concerting a plan with 
Major-general Arnold for delivering up West 
Point to the British.] 

[TAPPAN Sea, or Bay, a dilatation of Hud 
son s River, in the State of New York, opposite 
the town of Tappan, and 32 miles n. of New 
York City ; immediately s. of and adjoining Ha- 
verstraw Bay. It is 10 miles long and four wide, 
and has on the n. side fine quarries of a reddish 
free-stone, used for buildings and grave-stones ; 
which are a source of great wealth to the pro 
prietors. See STEEP ROCKS.] 

TAPU, a settlement of the province and cor- 
regimiento of Tarma in Peru ; annexed to the 
curacy of the settlement of Acobamba. 

TAPU, another settlement, in this province and 
kingdom. 

TAPUAS, a village of the Portuguese, in the 
province and captainship of Maranan and king 
dom of Brazil ; situate on the w. coast of the 
Bay of Maranan. 

TAPUCA, a small river of the province and 
captainship of Rey in Brazil, which runs e. and 
enters the sea in the Bay of Tapicii. 

TAPLJONGA, a river of the province and go 
vernment of Buenos Ayres, which runs n. n. w. 
and enters the Ayun or Yurneri. 

TAPUREGE REN, a settlement of the pro 
vince of Barcelona and government of Cumanaj 
situate n. of the Orinoco. 

TAPUREGEREN, a river of the same province 
and government, which rises s. of the table of 
Guanipa, runs to that rhumb, and enters the 
Orinoco. 

TAPURU, a small river of the province and 
government of Cumana, which rises in the ser- 
rania of Imataca, runs s. and enters the Cuyuni 
by the n. side. 

TAPUYAS, a village of the Portuguese, in 
the province and captainship of Puerto-Seguro in 
Brazil, on the shore of the river Verde. 

TAPUYES, a barbarous nation of Indians, 
and one of the most numerous in Brazil, spread 
over a great extent of territory towards the 
w. It is divided into many tribes, cantons or go 
vernments, each having its particular king. They 
are larger and more robust than any of the Bra 
zilians, and, in some respects, also the most bar- 
barons. They are of an obscure colour, have 
their hair long and black, flowing over their 



508 



T A Q 



shoulders, and shave their faces and all the other 
parts of their bodies, not even excepting the eye 
brows. Their kings, for distinction, have their 
hair dressed in the shape of a crown, and their 
finger nails very long. Both sexes go naked, 
with the exception of a small sash round the 
waist. The men are accustomed to adorn them 
selves with feathers fastened to their foreheads 
with wild wax, being particularly choice in their 
selection. They weave mantles of cotton after 
the manner of nets, which are so strongly united 
with feathers as to keep out the strongest rain. 
They bore their ears, nostrils, and under lip, 
paint the body of a dark colour, sticking upon 
their skins great quantities of feathers with honey. 
Their sandals are of the bark of a fruit which 
they call aguay. When the father or mother of 
any one dies, he testifies his sorrow by cutting 
off his hair. They have a great relish for human 
flesh, and, in case of a still-born, the mother im 
mediately devours her infant. Their principal 
arms are bows and arrows, and with these they 
are so dexterous as to kill birds flying. Some of 
them do not use these weapons, but throw jave 
lins with a certainty almost incredible ; whilst 
others only carry a sort of club of very strong 
wood, and pointed at one end, which they ma 
nage with extreme address. 

Their martial instrument is a kind of trumpet 
made of some human bone, or of the horn of 
some animal. These Indians, besides being the 
most robust, are the best soldiers in Brazil. 
They are continually wandering about from place 
to place, and, for the most part, inhabit the 
woods. They neither sow or cultivate any thing, 
maintaining themselves by the natural produc 
tions of the soil and by the animals they kill. 

With respect to religion, they are without 
even that of the other Indians of Brazil, and are 
given up to a brutish and unbridled libertinism, 
and are, in consequence, more than any other 
Indians, enemies to the Europeans. 

The Dutch had extended their conquests 
through the territory of these Indians, but, 
since they were driven out from thence by the 
Portuguese, the Indians have disclaimed all in 
tercourse whatever with Europeans. Notwith 
standing this, some have been reduced to the 
Catholic faith. Their i,diom is the most com 
mon in Brazil, but is split into different dialects. 

TAQUANHUNA, or TICUCES, a river of the 
kingdom of Brazil, which runs n. n. e. making- 
various curves, and enters the Tocantines close 
to the settlement of Arrayal de Porate. 

[TAQUARAS, a parish of the province and 



TAR 

government of Paraguay ; situate on a small 
branch of the Paraguay, in lat. 26 50 43" s 
and long. 57 49 17" a?.] 

TAQUARI, a large river of the province and 
government of Paraguay, to the n. of the ruins 
of the city of Xerez. It runs w. and enters the 
Paraguay by the w. part, opposite the Lake of 
Marmore. It is divided into several arms, some 
of which afterwards unite, forming the island 
called Morro de los Caballos. On its shores 
live some Xarayes Indians. [It enters the Pa 
raguay in lat. 20 16 *.] 

TAQUARI, another river, in the territory of 
Cuyaba and kingdom of Brazil. It runs nearly 
to the same rhumb as the former, and afterwards 
changes its name to that of Camapoar. 

TAQUASO, a large river of the province and 
government of Darien and kingdom of Tierra 
Firme : called also De Santa Maria. Its course 
is from n. e. to s. w. for a great distance, when it 
turns to w. and enters the sea in the Gulf of San 
Miguel. On its s. shore stood formerly the city 
of Santa Maria, the first settlement of the Spa 
niards in Tierra Firme, but which they after 
wards abandoned, so that it now remains nothing 
but a miserable village. This river carries alono- 
in its sands much very fine gold, and all the ter 
ritory on its shores is particularly fertile and well 
cultivated by the Indians ; but the climate is hot 
and unhealthy. This river is navigable in ca 
noes for seven leagues from its mouth, this being 
in lat. 8 20 n. 

TAQUILE, or TAQUNA, S. RAFAEL DE, an 
island of the great lake of Chucuito, or Titicaca, 
in the district of the province of Paucancolla in 
Peru. In the higher grounds of this island are 
some plains, on which are to be seen the ruins of 
some large old towns ; and what is extraordi 
nary the houses of the same appear to have been 
built uniformly, and of stone, over stone-arches, 
with stone domes and observatories, and altoge 
ther with great regularity. This island, which 
is three leagues in circumference, is full of gar 
dens and orchards, which produce many green 
shrubs, flowers, and fruits. 

TAQUILPON, a settlement of the province 
and corregimiento of Santa in Peru ; annexed to 
the curacy of the settlement of Macate, in the 
province of Huaylas. 

TAQUIR, a small island near the coast of 
Brazil, in the province and captainship of Rey, 
close to the island of Canamea. 

[TAR, or PAMLICO River, a considerable river 
of N. Carolina, which pursues a s. e. course, and 
passing by Tarburg, Greenville, and Washin^- 



TAR 

ton, enters Pamlico Sound in lat. 35 22 n. It 
is navigable for vessels drawing- nine feet water 
to the town of Washington, 40 miles from its 
mouth by navigation, and for scows or flats carry 
ing- 30 or 40 hiids. 50 miles further to the town 
of Tarboroug-h. According- to the report of a 
committee, appointed by the legislature of N. 
Carolina, to inquire into the practicability of im 
proving- the inland navigation of the State, it is 
supposed that this river, and Fishy Creek, a 
branch of it, may be made navigable 40 miles 
above Tarborough.] 

TARABENI, a river of the kingdom of Peru, 
which rises in the province of Pomabamba, and 
runs, making various curves, to enter the abun 
dant stream of the Beni. 

TARABUCO, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Tomina in Peru. 

TARACINI, or ARATY, a river of the pro 
vince and government of Guayana, in the part 
possessed by the French. 

TARACO, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Asangaro in Peru. 

TARAGUA, a small port in the island of 
Cuba, on the n. n. e. coast, and at the e. head ; 
between the Port of Taxa and the islet of Mona. 

[TARAHUMARY, a province of Nueva Es- 
paiia, 1200 miles distant from the capital.] 

TARAISSAN, an island of the river of Las 
Amazonas ; described by Mr. Bellin, alone, en 
gineer to the king of France, in his chart and de 
scription of the Guayana. 

TARAITA, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Pomabamba in Peru. 

TARAMA,ariver of the province and govern 
ment of S. Juan de los Llanos, in the Nuevo 
Reyno de Granada. It rises between the rivers 
Guaripo and Andava, runs e. and enters the Ori 
noco opposite the rapid stream of the Atures. 

TARAPACA,a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Arica in Peru. 

TARAPAYA, a large, fertile, and delightful 
llanura of the jurisdiction of Potosi and province 
of Charcas in Peru. It is thinly peopled, and 
12 leagues from Potosi. 

TARAPAYA, a port of the S. Sea, in the Bay 
of Pisagua, having at its entrance the small 
island of Goave, the which defends it from the s. 
winds. In lat. 20 37 s. 

TARASIAMA, a small river of the province 
and government of Guayana or Nueva Andalucia. 
It rises in the country of the ferocious Caribes 
Indians, and enters the Caroni by the w. side. 

TARASQUILLO, a settlement of the head 
settlement of the district and akaldia mayor of 



TAR 



509 



Lerma in Nueva Espana. It contains 90 fami 
lies of Otomies.and Mexican Indians, and is two 
leagues e. of its head settlement. 

TAR AT A, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento ofCochabamba in Peru ; its curacy 
belonging to the province of Mizque. 

TARATA, another settlement, in the province 
and corregimiento of Arica in the same kingdom. 

TARATA, another, of the province of Cocha- 
bamba ; distinct from that above mentioned, and 
belonging to the bishopric of Santa Cruz de la 
Sierra. 

TARAUMARA, a province and akaldia mayor 
of N. America, of which little is known ; bounded 
w. by the province of Sonora, e. by Nuevo 
Mexico, the river Grande del Norte serving as 
limits, and its terminaries to the n. not being 
known ; and s. w. by the province of Cinaloa. 

It is watered by the two large rivers Del Norte 
and of Yaquis, which also serve as its limits. It 
takes its name from the nation of Indians thus 
called, which was bounded by the nation of the 
Tepeguanes, and discovered by Juan de Fonte, of 
the order of the Jesuits, and a native of Tar- 
raza in Cataluna, in 1614. 

These Indians used to live in very large caves, 
had for clothes mantles of pita, which they wove 
with great nicety. In the burying of their dead 
they differed from other nations ; inasmuch as 
they had a regular cemetery for this purpose at 
a distance from their abodes, although, like 
many others, they deposited with the defunct all 
his valuables, together with plenty of food for 
his supposed journey. They also immediately 
burnt the house in which he used to live. This 
people were naturally mild and pacific, and were 
easily reduced to the Catholic faith by the afore 
said Jesuit, although they, some years after, re 
turned to their idolatry. 

The country of this province is mountainous 
and rugged, but abounding in silver-mines, the 
metal of which was prepared in the real of Santa 
Eulalia. The above is almost the only produc 
tion, save some of a vegetable nature in certain 
estates, whereby the settlements belonging to the 
missions of the religious of S. Francisco are main 
tained, and which, independently of the capital, 
which is the town of San Felipe de Chiguaga, 
are as follows : 



Real de S. Pedro, 
Nombre de Dios, 
Cosiquirachi, 
Santa Ana, 
S. Geronimo, 
Chiibizca, 



Santa Isabel, 

Guadalupe, 

Babonoya, 

S. Andres, 

S. Bernardino, 

Sainapuchi, 



510 



TAR 



Concepcion, 

Santa Cruz, 

Hoya, 

Cuevas, 

S. Lorenzo, 

Coyachi, 

Napavechi, 

S. Borja, 

Tosiguerachi, 

Alamos, 

Guachuncla, 

S. Augustin, 

S. Joseph, 

Purbachi, 

Tairichi, 

Temeachi, 

Namiquipa, 

Las Cruces, 



Pasagochi, 

Pechera, 

Yepomera, 

Temosochi, 

Matachiqui, 

Theoloachi, 

Coachic, 

Pitrachiqui, 

Sisohuichi, 

Santo Tomas, 

Moalcachi, 

Aiciachia, 

Tomichi, 

Tacuta, 

Socorro, 

Isleta, 

Senecu, 

S. Lorenzo. 



TAR AY, a settlement of the province and cor- 
regimiento of Calca and Lares in Peru. 

TARAZA, a settlement of the province and 
government of Antioquia in the Nuevo Reyno 
de Granada ; situate on the shore of the river 
Cauca, opposite the town of Caceres. 

[TARBOROUGH, a post-town of N. Caro 
lina ; situate on the w. side of Tar River, about 
57 miles from its mouth, 74 n. e. of Fayetteville, 
94 s. of Halifax, and 83 s. of Petersburg in Vir 
ginia. It contains about 50 houses, a court 
house, and gaol. Large quantities of tobacco, 
of the Petersburg quality, pork, beef, and Indian 
corn are collected here for exportation.] 

TAREIRAS, a settlement of the Portuguese 
in Brasil; situate in the territory of the Guaya- 
zas Indians, on the shore and at the source of 
the Tocantines, near the real of the river of Las 
Almas. 

TARENA, an abundant river of the province 
and government of Darien, and kingdom of Ti- 
erra Firme. It rises in the mountains of the 
centre, runs e. collecting the waters of many 
others, and enters the N. Sea by four mouths, 
forming three large islands in the Gulf of Darien 
or entrance of the river Atrato. 

TARENA, CHARCON DE, a large lake in the 
same province and kingdom, formed by the ri 
vers Tigla and Gerarquia. It enters into one 
of the channels of the river of its name, and is a 
small distance from the sea. 

TAREQUATO, a settlement of the head set 
tlement of the district, and alcaldia mayor of Pe- 
riban in Nueva Espana. It contains a convent 
of San Francisco and 215 families of Indians, and 
is eight leagues e. of its head settlement. 

TAREYOU, a river of the province and cap- 



TAR 

lainship of Pernambuco in Brazil. It enters by 
the w. side into the Grande de San Francisco. 

TARGEA, a settlement and real of silver- 
mines of the alcaldia mayor of San Luis de Po- 
tosi, in Nueva Espana, and of the bishopric of 
Mechoacan. It contains 130 families of Indians, 
and some of Spaniards, Mustees, and Mulattoes, 
employed in the working of its mines, there being 
a good foundry in the estates. Thirty leagues 
from the capital. 

TARIBA, a settlement of the province and go 
vernment of Venezuela, in the Nuevo Reyno de 
Granada, celebrated for the sanctuary of Nuestra 
Seiiora, which is venerated in its church, the con 
course of people who assemble here from the 
neighbouring provinces being very great. 

TARIJA, a district and jurisdiction of the pro 
vince of Chichas in Peru, and of the archbishop 
ric of Charcas. It is small, but its territory is 
very fertile in wheat, maize, wine, oil, and other 
fruits. It contains excellent pastures, in which 
are maintained much cattle ; nor does it want 
mines of gold and silver, although these are not 
worked, for want of hands. It is watered, by dif 
ferent rivers, which abound in fish, which are 
caught and salted down by the Indians, and car 
ried for sale to Potosi. The river, which they 
call Tipuanis, and which laves the e. side of the 
jurisdiction, carries in its sands much gold, which 
the Indians employ themselves in picking out 
for the payment of their tribute. 

TARIJA, the capital, is the town of the same 
name, with the dedicatory of San Bernardo. It 
was built under the command of the viceroy Don 
Francisco de Toledo, to restrain the hostilities 
committed by the Indians, and for the purpose 
of defending the high road to Tucuman, in 1591. 
It has a convent of the religious of St. Domingo, 
and another of San Francisco ; which belonged 
to the Observers until 1755, when it came under 
the charge of apostolic missionaries of the same 
order; other two of San Agustin and San Juan 
de Dios, and a college which belonged to the 
Jesuits. 

In the aforesaid convent of San Francisco is 
venerated a cross, which was found in a cave at 
the beginning of the conquest, and which, some 
pretend, was made by one of the apostles, who 
preached the gospel in that country, although no 
traces of Christianity were found amongst the 
Indians at the arrival of the Spaniards. Towards 
the part bordering on the territory of the Infi 
dels, a fort has been built to restrain their incur 
sions. It is situate on the s. shore of the river 
San Juan, and is now in ruins. 



T A R 

TARIJA VIEJA, a settlement of this province 
and corregimiento. 

TARIJA, a river, also of the same province, 
which runs s. and enters the Bermejo. 

TARIMANGACHO, a settlement of the head 
settlement of the district and alcaldia mayor of 
Maravatio in Nueva Espana. It contains 40 fa 
milies of Indians, and is a little more than four 
leagues w. of its capital. 

TARIMBARO, SAN MIGUEL DE, a prin 
cipal and head settlement of the district and 
alcaldia mayor of Valladolid, in the province and 
bishopric of Mechoacan; situate amidst some 
uncultivated hilly plains. It is of a mild tem 
perature, contains 25 families of Spaniards, six 
of Mulattoes, and 184 of Indians, who trade in 
grain which they gather in abundance from 14 
luxuriant estates in its district. It has a con 
vent of the religious of San Francisco. 

TARIMBO, a settlement of the province and 
tdcaldia mayor of Valladolid, and bishopric of 
Mechoacan. 

TARMA, a province and corregimiento of 
Peru ; bounded n. by the provinces of Huama- 
lies and Guamico, e. by the mountains of the in 
fidel Indians, s. by the province of Xauja, s. w. 
by that of Guarochiri, w. by that of Canta, and 
n.w. by that of Caxatambo, and also w. by an 
angle of the province of Chancay, formed by the 
territory of Chacras. Its temperature is, gene 
rally, cold, and thus nearly all its articles of sub 
sistence are provided from the other provinces. 
But it produces some maize, and plenty of papas, 
and has abundance of cattle, of the wool of which 
they make much cloth of the country, this being- 



TAR 



511 



its principal branch of trade. 
It has man mi 



mines, which are worked to con 
siderable profit, and particularly so the cele 
brated mine of Lauricocha, which has upwards 
of 60 engines wherewith to work it. But this 
system of labour was much destroyed through 
the insurrection of the Cunchos Indians, which 
happened in this province in 1742 / when they 
destroyed some settlements ; such as that of 
Huancabamba, which stood upon the mountain. 
Since that period it has ceased to yield the fruits 
which it did formerly, namely, woods, cocoa, 
fruit, and pulse ; and this, notwithstanding that 
the whole province had been restored to perfect 
tranquillity by the field-marshal D. Joseph de 
Llamas, marquis of Mena Hermosa, who was 
then general at Callao, and chieftain of the ar 
mies of Peru ; he having been sent upon the 
said expedition by the viceroy, the Count de 
Supenmda. He built for the security of this 



province many forts, to guard it from the Indians 
of the mountains. 

This province is watered by various rivers, 
one of the principal of which is that of Pari, 
which rises in it from a lake called Chinchayco- 
cha, which is nine leagues long and three wide. 
This river runs s. and has been thought by many 
to be the origin of the Maranon, and indeed it 
takes this name as running through the whole 
province of Xauja, and arriving at that of Gua- 
nuco, it collects in its course many other rivers, 
which swell it to an immense size. Another 
principal river is that which runs through the 
settlement of Rancas, annexed to the curacy of 
the settlement of Pasco, which has its rise from 
the streams of the waterfalls flowing down from 
the cordillera, and unites itself with another. 
Towards the n. near the lake called Lauricocha, 
issues another small river, which passes through 
the province of Guamalies, running to the n. 
and which, according to Mr. Samuel Fritx, a 
wise German missionary, is the true origin of 
the Maranon. 

This corregimiento had &amp;lt;irepartimiento of 200,000 
dollars, and its corregidor paid an alcabala of 
400 annually, from whence an estimate of its 
high state of population may be inferred; a 
truth borne out by the number of the following 
settlements, of the which that of its name is 
the capital, the same being a large and rich town 
owing to the valuable silver mines in its district, 
and to its lucrative trade in woollen cloths which 
it manufactures. [This city is situate on the n. 
shore of the river Chanchamayo, a branch of 
the Para, and in its vicinity are some very high 
mountains ; it is 103 miles e. n. e. of Lima, and 
92 s. of Huanuco or Guanuco, in lat. 11 35 s. 
and long. 75 17 w.~\ The other settlements 



Oroya, 

Acobamba, 

Palcamayo, 

Picoy, 

Tapu, 

Sto. Domingo de 

Menahermosa, 
Reyes, 
Cacas, 
Racas, 
Huasahuasi, 
Ondores, 
Anticona, 
Carhuamayo, 
Ulumayo, 
Paucartambo, 



Quiparaira, 

Ninacaca, 

Huachon, 

Pasco, 

Vico, 

Rancas, 

Llanamate, 

Llanacachi, 

Caxamarquilla. 

Huariaca, 

Ticllacuyan, 

Yacan, 

Chinchan, 

Chacos, 

Matehuaca* 

Marcan, 



TAR 



T A S 



Parianchacra. Andapirca, 

Cochacalla, Vilcabamba, 

Augasmarca, Llanacocha, 

Mosca, Huailaihirca, 

Rondos. Roco, 

Jarria, Llanahuanco, 

Juzi, Tapu, 

Caina. Mito, 

Tangor. Llacan, 

Coquin, Pillao, 

Llamos, Chaupimarca. 

Cauri, Michivilca, 

Paucar, Llacos, 

Chacayan, Margos. 

Chango, 

TAROMAS, a settlement of the province and 
country of Las Amazonas in the Portuguese 
part ; situate on the shore of the river Negro, 
very near the mouth by which this enters the 
Maranon, and where a fort has been built. 

[TARPAULIN Cove, on the coast of Mas 
sachusetts, lies about three leagues n. n. w. of 
Holmes s Hole, in Martha s Vineyard. It is 
high water here at full and change two minutes 
after 10 o clock ; five fathoms water.] 

TARQUINO, a settlement of the island of 
Cuba, on the s. coast, with a good port. 

TAYQUINO, a river which rises in the sierras 
also thus called. It runs s. and enters the sea 
close to the settlement of Turino. 

TARRAGONA, a city of the province and 
government of Cumana, in the Nuevo Reyno de 
Granada ; founded by Juan de Urpin in 1638, 
on the shore of the river Uchire, in the same place 
where there formerly stood a town, which was 
destroyed by some Indians a few years before ; 
and to this end he carried with him some inha 
bitants of Nueva Barcelona to this spot, wishing 
also to hinder the Dutch from establishing 
themselves in the salines of Unare. The new 
colonists, being convinced of the fertility and 
beauty of the valley of Cupira, began to sow 
cacao, and, in a short time, there came to esta 
blish themselves here many Spaniards from San 
Sebastian de los Reyes, and from other settle 
ments ; so that the city was increasing in popu 
lation when the Tomuzas Indians returned, for 
the second time, to the attack ; but were utterly 
routed through the valour of the inhabitants, 
who hung up nine of them whom they had taken 
prisoners : the same lot also awaited the assailants, 
together with the loss of a general, when the 
city was threatened by the Dutch. It has a very 
good church, dependent upon the bishopric of 
Puerto Rico; the bishop of which, Don Juan 



Lopez Agurto de la Mata, placed in it the most 
holy sacrament. 

TARRIA, a small settlement of the province 
ofAnserma in the Nuevo Reyno de Granada ; 
celebrated for its rich gold mines, but which are 
not worked for want of hands. 

[TARRYTOWN, a considerable village in 
Phillips s Manor, New York, on the e. side of 
Hudson s River, 30 miles n. of New York City. 
Under a large tree, which is shown to travellers 
as they pass the river, is the spot where the un 
fortunate Major Andre was taken, who was af 
terwards executed at Tappan.] 

[TARSTOWN. See LEWISBUJIG, Pennsyl 
vania.] 

TARTANE, a part of the island Martinique; 
one of the Antilles, nearly entirely separate from 
the rest of the island, being united only by a 
neck of land. It is in the s. e. part, and has in 
it the points or capes of Caravele and of Chaux. 

[TARTE S Rapids, La, on the river Ohio, lie 
40 miles above the mouth of the Great Kanha- 
way. See OHIO.] 

TARUTA, a small isle of the N. Sea; near 
the coast of the province and government of 
Venezuela, in the Nuevo Rey no de Granada ; 
between the point Seca and cape San Roman. 

TASACHE, a settlement of Indians of the 
province of N. Carolina, where the English have 
a fort and establishment, situate at the source of 
the river Euphasee. 

TASAYAL. See REMEDIOS. 

TASCHUCANGO, a small river of the pro 
vince and government of Mainas in the kingdom 
of Quito ; which runs nearly due n. and enters 
the Maranon. 

TASCO, a province and alcaldia mayor of 
Nueva Espana. It abounds in silver mines, in 
which consists its chief commerce. Its situation 
is in a very rough and craggy spot, so that it 
produces scarcely any vegetable productions. Its 
population consists of 13 settlements, the prin 
cipal of which are, 

Azozalco, Tenango, 

Acamistlahuac, Cozcatlan, 

Tasco el Viejo, Coatliin, 

Tlamahuazapa, Pilcaya, 

Talistac, Noxtepec. 

TASCO, the capital, is the real of mines of its 
name ; enjoys a mild temperature, and is inha 
bited by a number of people employed in work 
ing the mines, which is a labour of very long 
standing, although they do not produce now so 
much as they used ; since, as the deeper they 
are dug, the more troublesome is the water, and 



TAT 



T A V 



.513 



to extract this is a work of great cost and infinite 
trouble. The regular population amounts to 
200 families of Spaniards, Mustees, and Mulat- 
toes, and 120 of Indians, including- those of some 
wards of its vicinity. It has a very good parish 
church. [This was constructed and endowed 
towards the middle of the 18th century by Jo 
seph de Laborde, a Frenchman, who gained im 
mense wealth in a short time by the Mexican 
mines. The building- of this church alone cost 
this individual more than two millions of francs, 
or ^.83,340 sterling-. Towards the end of his 
career, being- reduced to great poverty, he ob 
tained from the archbishop of Mexico permission 
to sell for his benefit, to the metropolitan church 
of the capital, the magnificent custodia set with 
diamonds, which, in better times, he had offered 
through devotion to the tabernacle of the parish 
church of Tasco. The elevation of this city is 
783 metres, or 2567 feet. It is 60 miles s. by w. 
of Mexico, on the n. shore of the river Zaca- 
tula ; in lat. 18 33 n. and long. 99 31 w.] 

TASCO, another settlement, in the same alcal- 
dia mayor, and of which it was formerly the ca 
pital. It is now a head settlement of the dis 
trict, and contains 30 families of Indians, and is 
annexed to the curacy of the capital of this ju 
risdiction, being distant from the same three 
leagues to s. s. e. 

TASCO, another, of the province and corregimi- 
ento of Tunja in the Nuevo Reyno de Granada. 
It is of a cold temperature, and produces wheat, 
maize, barley, beans, and papas. The climate 
is healthy, and the situation agreeable. It con 
tains 100 housekeepers and 80 Indians, and is 
12 leagues n. e. of its capital. 

TASIZA, a small river of the province and 
colony of S. Carolina ; which runs s. e. and en 
ters the Neus. 

TASUAYA, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Larecaxa in Peru, annexed to 
the curacy of the settlement of Sorata, its ca 
pital. 

TATABE, an uncultivated and unknown pro 
vince to the s. of Darien, in the kingdom of 
Tierra Firme ; extending from s. to n. as far as 
the port of Pinas, for more than 84 leagues. In 
its woods and mountains dwell many ferocious 
Indians, called the Quaquas, and many other 
fugitives of the provinces of Choco and Raposo. 
It has many gold-mines, which have often in 
duced the Spaniards to settle here ; although 
their attempts have been rendered invalid 
through the barbarity and ferocity of the natives. 
It is of an extremely hot, though variable tem- 

VOT,. IV. 



perature : on the e. it is washed by the river 
Atrato, by which the Indians have a trade with 
the English of Caledonia, receiving in exchange 
for gold cacao and campeche wood, knives, mus 
kets, powder, and other articles. 

TATACA, a settlement of Indians of the 
missions which were held by the Jesuits in the 
province of Tepeguana and kingdom of Nueva 
Vizcava ; on the shore of the river Horida, near 
the settlement and real of the mines of Parral. 

TATAMAGOUCHE, a settlement of Indians 
of Nova Scotia or Acadia ; on the e. coast and 
in the Strait of Canseau. 

TATASI, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Chichas and Tarija in Peru ; of 
the district of the former. 

TATIPERA. See MEARI. 

TATIQUE, a settlement of the province and 
alcaldta mayor of Vera Paz in the kingdom of 
Guatemala. 

[TATMAGOUCHE, or TATAMAGOUCHE, a 
place in Nova Scotia, on a short bay which sets 
up s. from the Straits of Northumberland ; about 
25 miles from Onslow, and 21 from the island 
of St. John s. See SOUTHAMPTON. It has a 
very good road for vessels, and is known also 
under the name Tatamaganabou.] 

[TATNAM Cape, the e. point of Haye s Ri 
ver, in Hudson s Bay. Lat. 57 35 n. long. 90 
30 k] 

[TATOO-E-TEE. an island in the S. Pacific 
Ocean, one of the Ingraham Isles, called by 
Captain Ingraham, Franklin, and by Captain Ro 
berts, Blake. It lies seven or eight leagues w. 
by n. of Nooheeva.] 

TAVANDA, a river of the province and cor 
regimiento of Ibarra in the kingdom of Quito. 
It rises in the paramo of Cayamburu, runs s. s. w. 
passes through the town of Ibarra, the capital, 
and then, following its course to e. enters the 
Mira. 

TAUCA, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Conchucos in Peru. 

TAUCA, a small river of the province and 
government of Guayana in Nueva Andalucia. 
It enters the Caura near its mouth. 

TAUCAS, a barbarous nation of Indians of 
Peru, who dwell e. of the Chiquitos, some tribes 
of whom extend as far as the shores of the Pa 
raguay. It is very numerous, and was discovered 
in 1692 by the Jesuits, the missionaries of the 
Chiquitos. 

TAVELA, a small river of the province and 
alcaldia mayor of Culiacan in Nueva Espana. It 
runs into the sea at the entrance of the Gulf of 
3u 



514 



T A U 



California, between the rivers of Culiacan, and 
Elota. 

TAULASSE, OLD, a settlement of Indians of 
the province and colony of S. Carolina, on the 
shore of the river Albany, or Albania. 

TAULCON, a settlement of the head settle 
ment of the district and alcaldia mayor of Tuchi- 
pila in Nueva Esparla. It contains a convent of 
the religious of San Francisco, and is nine 
leagues w. s. w. of its capital. 

TAULI, a settlement of the province and cor- 
regimienlo of Cachapoyas in Peru ; annexed to 
the curacy of the settlement of Olteros. 

TAUMACO, an island of the country of Es- 
piritu Santo in the s. part of America ; thus 
called as having been discovered by Fernando de 
Quiros in 1606, near 1250 leagues from Mexico. 
Here the commander entered into a treaty with 
the lord of the island ; who was corpulent, of a 
pale colour, with black eyes, the nose somewhat 
flat, the beard and hair white, and countenance 
serious. Here Quiros took in water, and asked 
the chief if there were any other islands near 
to them ; upon which upwards of 60 were named 
by the chief, who also spoke of a great country 
called Manicola. These islands are situate from 
the s. a quarter to s. w. to n. e. The chief also 
indicated by signs, that it was a ten week s 
voyage to the said country ; that there were 
there people of all colours, friends and enemies; 
and that some were Caribes, which he gave to 
be understood by seizing the ilesh of his arm 
between his teeth. 

The other informations obtained by Quiros 
in the liay accorded with these ; but he was, in 
addition, told, that he would meet with cows, 
buffaloes, birds, and a great quantity of pearls. 
On his departure he took with him four of these 
Indians, three of whom were drowned in swim 
ming back to the shore, and the third arrived at 
Mexico, where, having learned Spanish, he com 
pletely verified all that Quiros had learned. This 
Indian was a native of the island Chichayano, 
which is larger than that of Taumaco, being 300 
miles distant from the same. He said that his 
country was very level, and more abounding in 
fruits ; that the natives wore their hair much 
longer, and that some of them had it red, and 
were very fair ; whilst others were of a Mulatto 
colour, and some with curly hair like a Negro ; 
that they used to find various sorts of pearl 
oysters, especially where the water was shallow, 
and that there were many other islands which he 
named, such as Guatopo, 150 miles from Tau 
maco ; Tucopia, 100, where was the country of 



Manicola ; and that in Taumaco there was a 
pilot, who had been in many others. 

He also mentioned an island called Pauro, 
from whence were brought many curiosities, 
and amongst the rest arrows with coloured 
points. Quiros took notice, in the days of Philip 
and James, of many black stones of great weight; 
some of which he carried to Mexico, and which 
proved to be silver. Again, the Indian, Pedro, 
asserted, that in Taumaco there was abundance 
of these stones, and spoke much of the great 
population of all the above islands, as well as of 
other countries to the s. e. and w. Indeed, all 
that he said coincided with the conjectures of 
the most intelligent persons, and with the expe 
rience of several latter discoverers; although there 
are not wanting some to doubt of the truth of 
these relations ; as, for instance, the Ex-jesuit 
Coleti, who, however, does not give any proof 
against what has been written by, and appears in 
the diary of, Fernando de Quiros. 

[TAUNTON, a river which empties into 
Narraganset Bay, at Tiverton, opposite the n. 
end of Rhode Island : it is formed by several 
streams which rise in Plymouth County, Massa 
chusetts. Its course is about 50 miles from n, e. 
to s. w. and it is navigable for small vessels to 
Taunton.] 

[TAUNTON, a post-town of Massachusetts, and 
the capital of Bristol County ; situate on the 
w. side of Taunton River, and contains 40 or 
50 houses, compactly built, a church, court-house, 
gaol, and an academy, which was incorporated 
in 1792. It is 30 miles s. of Boston, 17 e. of Pro 
vidence, and 17 n. of Bedford. The township of 
Taunton was taken from Raynham, and incor 
porated in 1639, and contains 3804 inhabitants. 
A slitting-mill was erected here in 1776, and for 
a considerable time the only one in Massachu 
setts, and was then the best ever built in America. 
The annual production of three mills now in this 
township is not less than 800 tons of iron ; about 
50 tons are cut, and 300 hammered into nails, 
and the remainder is wrought into spades and 
shovels; of which last article 200 dozen are 
rolled annually. Mr. Samuel Leonard rolled 
the first shovel ever done in America. This in 
vention reduces the price one-half. Wire-draw 
ing, and rolling sheet-iron for the tin-manufac 
ture, are executed here. There is also a manu 
factory of a species of ochre, found here, into a 
pigment of dark yellow colour.] 

[TAUNTON Bay, in the district of Maine, is six 
miles from Frenchman s Bay.] 

TAUPA, a settlement of the province and 



T A W 



T A Y 



515 



corregimiento of Chachapoyas in Peru ; annexed 
to the curacy of the settlement of Chiliquin. 

TAVOSI, a settlement of Indians of the pro 
vince and colony of S. Carolina ; on the shore 
of the river Abama. 

TAUREAUX, Bay of, on the e. coast of New 
foundland, within the great bay of Plaisance. 

TAURICAMPA, a settlement of the province 
and corregimiento of Yauyos in Peru. 

TAURICATO, SANTA ANA DE, a settlement 
of the alcaldia mayor of Cinagua in Nueva 
Espana. It contains 45 families of Indians, ap 
plied to the cultivation of grain and the breeding 
of large cattle. Eighteen leagues from the ca 
pital. 

TAURISMA, an ancient province of Peru, to 
the w. of Cuzco ; now united with the modern 
provinces. It was conquered by Maita-Capac, 
fourth emperor of the Incas. 

TAURISMA, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Yauyos in the same kingdom. 

TAUS, a barbarous nation of Indians of Peru; 
n. w. of the country of the Chiquitos. It was 
from this, and from the nation of the Tabicas, 
that the Jesuits formed the great settlement 
called San Rafael ; the which was transferred, 
in 1701, to the shore of the river Guabis : in lat. 
1745 s. 

TAUSA, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Bogota in the Nuevo Reyno de 
Granada. It is of a cold temperature, produces 
the fruits peculiar to the same, has some small 
salines, but from which it derives little emolu 
ment. Its population consists of 50 Indians and 
some Spaniards. Twelve leagues n. w. of Santa 
Fe. 

TAUTARANCHE, a settlement of the pro 
vince and corregimiento of Guarochiri in Peru ; 
annexed to the curacy of the settlement of San 
Lorenzo de Quinti. 

[TA VERNIER Key, a small isle, one of the 
Tortugas, two miles from the s. w. end of Key 
Largo, and five n. e. of Old Matacombe. To the 
n. of this last island is a very good road.] 

[TAWAKENOES, or THREE CRANES, In 
dians of N. America, called by both names in 
differently : they live on the w. side of the Braces, 
but are often, for some months at a time, lower 
down than their usual place of residence, in the 
great prairie at the Tortuga, or Turtle, so called 
from its being a hill in the prairie, which, at a 
distance, appears in the form of a turtle, upon 
which there are some remarkable springs of wa 
ter. Their usual residence is about 200 miles to 



the w. of Nacogdoches, towards Santa Fe. They 
estimated at 200 men; are good hunters; 



are 



have guns, but hunt principally with the bow 
are supplied with goods from Nacogdoches, and 
pay for them in rugs, tongues, tallow, and skins. 
They speak the same language as the Panis, or 
Towiaches, and pretend to have descended from 
the same ancestors.] 

[TAWANDEE Creek, in Northumberland 
County, Pennsylvania, runs n. e. into the e.. 
branch of Susquehannah, 12 miles s. e. of Tioga 
Point.] 

[TAWAS, an Indian tribe in the N. W. Ter 
ritory, 18 miles up the Miami of the Lake. An 
other tribe of this name inhabit higher up the 
same river, at a place called the Rapids.] 

[TAWIXTWI, THE ENGLISH, or PIQUE- 
TOWN, in the N. W. Territory, is situate on the 
n. w. bank of the Great Miami, 35 miles be ow 
the five-mile portage, to the Miami of the Lake, 
and 68 s. w. by s. of Miami Fort. It was taken 
in 1752 by the French.] 

TAXA, a small port of the island of Cuba, 
on the n.n.e. coast, between the port of Taragua 
and the town of Baracoa. 

TAXIMAROA, a principal and head settle 
ment of the district of the alcaldia mayor of Ma- 
ravatio, in the province and bishopric of Mecho- 
acan. Its population is composed of 460 families 
of Spaniards, 110 of Mustees and Mulattoes, 
and 66 of Indians. It has a convent of the re 
ligious of San Francisco, and in the w. part a 
large, fertile, and pleasant valley, in which are 
grown large crops of wheat, maize, and French- 
bcans : also in the surrounding mountains are 
mines of sulphur, used for the manufacture of 
gunpowder. Five leagues s. of its capital. 

TAXMA, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Cicasica in Peru ; annexed to 
the curacy of the settlement of Chulumani. 

TAY, a small river of the province and co 
lony of Virginia, in Albemarle County ; which 
runs s. and enters the river James. 

TAYA, a settlement of the province and cor 
regimiento of Collahuas in Peru. 

TAYABAMBA, a settlement of the province 
and corregimiento of Caxamarquilla in Peru, an 
nexed to the curacy of the settlement of Challas. 

TAYACAXA, an island of the prov ince and 
corregimiento of Huanta in Peru ; formed by an 
inflection of the river Angoyaco, which runs 
through this province and divides it from that of 
Angaraes. 

tAYACOOK, a settlement of Indians of the 



516 



T E B 



TEC 



province of New York, in the United States of 
America ; near the river Hudson and the fall of 
Cohoez. 

TAYEQUA, a settlement of the province 
and government of Darien and kingdom of 
T erra Firme; near the s. coast, in the Gulf of 
San Miguel. 

TAYRONAS, a barbarous nation of Indians 
of the Nuevo Reyno de Granada, in the pro 
vince and government of Santa Marta. It is one 
of the most numerous nations, and acknowledged 
to be superior, by all the others, as well for its 
valour, as because it was the only nation which 
had a metal foundry, there being a great quan 
tity of gold in the valley of its name : and it 
was on this account that its conquest was under 
taken by captain Pedro de Ursua in 1552 : but 
who, in spite of all his endeavours, was forced 
to return to Santa Marta with his army, worn 
out with fatigue from the valorous resistance it 
had made when attacked by the Taironas, in the 
most dangerous of all the passes of Origuo (this 
name having been corrupted into Rodrigo), and 
where, with only 12 Spaniards, the bold Ursua 
made front against 1000 enemies, although he 
at last, with his brave comrades, died of hunger. 

This valorous nation, which has never bowed 
its neck to the Spanish yoke, has now been for 
several years extinct, or has been mixed and 
incorporated with other nations, according to 
the opinion of the Ex-jesuit, Don Antonio Julian, 
in his History of Santa Marta, in contradistinc 
tion to the opinion of the Senor Piedrahita, who 
will have it they are totally destroyed. It is 
equally a doubt what extent of territory was 
held by the Taironas, though, with respect to 
the valley which induced the Spaniards to un 
dertake the conquest of the country, the afore 
said Senor Piedrahita asserts, that it is upon the 
?hore of the river Don Diego. The capital was 
the town of Posigueica. 

TCHAOVATCH AS, a settlement of the pro 
vince and government of Luisiana; on the shore 
of the river Mississippi. 

[TEACHES, a small island close to the e. 
shore of Northampton County, Virginia, and n. 
by e. of Parramore Island.] 
* TEALCO, a settlement of the head settle 
ment of the district of Tepexpam and akaMa 
mayor of Theotihuacan in Nueva Espaiia. 

TEBECO. See TEGUECO. 

TEBIARE, a river of the province and go 
vernment of San Juan de los Llanos in the 
Nuevo Reyno de Granada. It runs to s. w. of 



the Meta, into which it enters after having laved 
the country of the Masivaribenis Indians. 

TEBIQUARI, a river of the province and 
captainship of San Pablo in Brazil ; distinct frora 
another of the same name in Paraguay. It rises 
in the mountains not far from the coast, runs w. 
and turnings, enters the grand river San Pedro. 

TEBIQU ARI, the river of which we have spoken, 
in the province of Paraguay, runs s.e. for many 
leagues, and turning to w. enters the Parana, 
opposite the llanos of Manso in the province of 
Chaco. 

TEBIQUARI-MINI, a river of the same pro 
vince and government as the former ; which runs 
s. w. ami enters the Parana. 

TEBOKOPI, a river of the same province 
and government as the former, which enters the 
Yacavobi. 

T^CALI, a province and alcaldia mayor of 
Nueva Espafia in N. America. It is of a mode 
rate jurisdiction, but luxuriant and abounding in 
vegetable productions, which are particularly 
esteemed in the other jurisdictions. It produces 
wheat, maize, French beans, barley, large vet 
ches, and other seeds. The natives breed neat 
cattle and goats, are laborious, and fabricate 
mantles of cotton and other woven stuffs, by 
which consists their commerce. They also make 
mats of reeds of palm, and small baskets, pro 
viding with the same nearly the whole of the 
kingdom ; since, although they be made in other 
parts, these have always the preference. Here 
is also a marble quarry, in which are found many 
veins of a green and white colour, of which several 
curiosities are made ; viz. altars, and skylights as 
clear as though they were of glass. 

This jurisdiction is divided into two divisions, 
to the which 16 settlements are subject, five in 
the n. and two in the s. part, and in these are 
counted 1346 families ; and in the midst of these 
settlements is the capital. They are named as 
follows : 

Santa Maria Toxte- 
pec, 



S 



Sta. Maria Aguatepec, 
S. Miguel, 
Toxtepec, 
S. Martin, 
S. Lorenzo, 
S. Bartolome, 
Santa Clara. 

TECALI, the capital, is of the same name, with 
the dedicatory of Santiago. It contains 170 fa 
milies of Indians, and 40 of Spaniards, Mustees, 
and Mulattoes. In its church is venerated an 
image of Jesus of Nazareth, to which the pa- 



S. Buenaventura, 
S. Luis, 
S. Geronimo, 
Pedro, 



Sma. Trinidad, 



TEC 

rishioners pay particular devotion, from the sin- 

fular advantages they have received through it. 
eventeen miles from the city of La Puebla de 
los Angeles, towards the s. e. part. 

TECALTITLAN, a settlement of the head 
settlement of the district and alcaldia mayor of 
Zultepec in Nueva Espana. It is of a cold tem 
perature, anil contains 175 families of Indians, 
who trade in and live by cutting planks and mak 
ing torches, and by sowing some seeds. Three 
leagues e. of its capital. 

TECALTITLAN, another settlement, with the 
dedicatory title of La Asuncion, in the head set 
tlement of Chacaltongo, and alcaldia mayor of 
Tepozcolula in that kingdom. It contains 66 fa 
milies of Indians, employed in the cultivation of 
wheat and maize in the farms of its district. 

TECAMA, a settlement of the alcaldia mayor 
of Ecatepec in Nueva Esparia. It contains 70 
families of Indians and a convent of San Fran 
cisco. Three leagues n. of its capital. 

TECAMACHALCO, a head settlement of the 
district of the alcaldia mayor of Tepeaca in Nueva 
Espana; on the skirt of a mountain so abounding 
in water that there are streams running through 
the streets of the settlement, the houses being 
thus regularly supplied, and the gardens and or 
chards attached being rendered fertile in flowers, 
fruits, pot-herbs, and the like useful articles. Its 
population consists of 122 families of Spaniards, 
17 of Mustees and Mulattoes, and 245 of In 
dians. At the foot of a mountain, here, is a 
convent of San Francisco, a strong, old build 
ing, and which was one of the first founded by 
that order in this kingdom. Four leagues e. n. e. 
of its capital. 

TECAVIC, S. AGUSTIN DE, a settlement of 
the alcaldia mayor of Octupam in Nueva Espana. 
TECAXIC, a settlement of the head settle 
ment of the district of Huipuxtla, and alcaldia 
mayor of Tepetango in Nueva Espana. It con 
tains 72 families of Indians. 

TECAXIC, another, a head settlement of the 
district of the alcaldia mayor of Toluca in the 
same kingdom. It contains 64 families of In 
dians, and is situate at a small distance w. of its 
capital. 

TECAXTEPEC, a settlement of the head set 
tlement of the district of Coyuca in the govern 
ment of Acapulco in the kingdom of Nueva Es 
pana. It contains 126 families of Indians, and is 
eight leagues e. of its capital. 

TECHALUTLA, a settlement of the head 
settlement of Amaqueca, and alcaldia mayor of 
Zayula in Nueva Espana. It is of a mild tem- 



T E C 



517 



perature, contains 70 families of Indians, who 
occupy themselves in the cultivation and com 
merce of seeds and fruits, and cutting of wood, 
and has in it a convent of the religious of San 
Francisco. Five leagues n. of its capital. 

TECHO, orTEXo, a large and rich city of the 
Nuevo Reyno de Granada in the time of the 
gentilism of the Indians ; to the s. of the city of 
Bogota. It was taken and sacked by Gonzalo 
Ximinez de Quesada, in 1537, after which no 
thing remained of it but its name. 

TECIA, a settlement of the missions which 
were held by the Jesuits in the province and 
government of Cinaloa. 

TECLA, S. a town of the province and go 
vernment of Buenos Ay res: situate at the source 
of the river Piray-mini. 

[TECLA, S. a fort of the province and govern 
ment of Buenos Ayres ; situate on the sierra De 
St. Ignacio, which constitues the boundary be 
tween Buenos Ayres and Brazil. Lat. 31* 16 
8" s. Long. 54 14 24" w.l 

TECOANTEPEC. [See TEHUANTEPEC.] 

TECOCUILCO, an alcaldia mayor and juris 
diction of Nueva Espana, in the province and 
bishopric of Oaxaca. It is united to the alcaldia 
of Teozacualco, notwithstanding there are found 
lying between, both those of Penoles, Cinatlan, 
and part of that of Oaxaca. It has no other pro 
duction or trade, save in that of cochineal ; for, 
although the soil is fertile, and capable of yield 
ing whatever is sown, the natives despise agri 
culture, studying the cultivation of nopalares, as 
being more advantageous, and, consequently, 
sowing no more maize than what is required for 
their own consumption. 

TECOCUILCO, the capital, which is of the same 
name, is of a mild and somewhat moist tempera 
ture. Its population consists of 320 families of 
Zapotecos Indians, and 20 of Mustees and Mu 
lattoes, the latter of whom are employed in the 
ranchos of the district, and the former in the 
cultivation of cochineal. [Two hundred and 
twenty-three miles s. e. of Mexico, in lat. 17 
24 n. long. 96 13 30" w.] 

The other settlements of the jurisdiction are 
reduced to, 

San Juan de Acatepec, San Pedro Yoloxinis- 

Comaltepec, quila, 

San Juan Analco, Santiago Zucuyapa, 

Macuiltianguisco. 

TECOLOTEPEC, SANTIAGO DE, a settle 
ment of the head settlement of the district of 
Tepalcaltenec, and alcaldia mayor of Nexapa in 
Nueva Espana. It contains 51 families of In- 



513 



TEC 



dians, who, besides the trade in cochineal, reap 
very abundant crops of maize in the ranches of 
the district. 

TECOLOTLAN, a settlement of the head 
settlement of the district and alcaldia mayor of 
Autlan in the same kingdom. It is of a mild 
temperature, contains 38 families of Spaniards, 
13 of Mustees and Mulattoes, and 16 of Indians, 
with a convent of St. Francisco. Thirteen leagues 
n. of its head settlement. 

TECOLUTLA, a large river of Nueva Es 
pana, which rises between the settlements of 
Guauchinango and Totolaga, and, following its 
course with great rapidity through the defile of 
S. Pedro de Chicantla, passes by the mountain 
of Coahuitlan, and, traversing the whole of the 
jurisdiction of Papantla, runs to empty itself into 
the N. Sea, being first so swollen by many tribu 
tary streams, as to be navigable for middling- 
sized vessels. 

TECOMACHALCO, a river of Nueva Es 
pana, which rises in the mountains to the w. of 
the city of Mexico, runs from e. to w. and, unit 
ing itself with the Morales, enters the lake by 
the sluice of Villalengua. It is also called San 
Joaquin, and, anciently, De Sanctorum. 

TECOMAHUACA, a settlement of the head 
settlement of the district of Teutitlan, and alcal 
dia mayor of Cuicatlan in Nueva Espana. It 
contains 22 families of Indians, and is six leagues 
e. of its head settlement. 

TECOMAN, a settlement of the head settle 
ment of the district of Almololoyan, and alcaldia 
mayor of Colima in Nueva Espana. It is situate 
at a short distance from the shore of the S. Sea, 
is of an hot temperature, contains 62 families of 
Indians, who have no other commerce than the 
trade in salt, and is nine leagues from its head 
settlement. 

TECOMASTLAHUACA, a principal and 
head settlement of the district of the alcaldia 
mayor of Tuxilahuaca in Nueva Espana. It con 
tains 290 families of Indians, including those of 
four wards of its district. 

TECOMATLAN, a small settlement or ward 
of the head settlement of the district of Cuza- 
mala, and alcaldia mayor of Azuchitlan in Nueva 
Espana. It is of a hot and dry temperature ; si 
tuate on the margin of a rapid river. Its popu 
lation consists of Indians the poorest of the whole 
jurisdiction ; for, having sold the land which be 
longed to them, they are obliged to hire them 
selves out to labour in the ranchos of the district, 
having of their own nothing but some small crops 
of maize on the shore of the river. It contains 



TEC 

21 families of Indians, and is annexed to the cu 
racy of its head settlement. In its vicinity is an 
estate inhabited by nine families of Mulattoes. 
Twenty leagues s. of its capital. 

TECOMINUCAN, a settlement of the head 
settlement of the district of Moloacan, and al~ 
cal diet mayor ofAcayuca in Nueva Espana. It 
contains 26 families of Indians, and is two leagues 
e. of its head settlement. 

TECOREPA, or TECORIPA, a settlement of 
the province and government of Sonora in Nueva 
Espana. 

TECORIONA, a settlement of the province 
of Ostimuri in Nueva Espana, on the shore of 
the river Hiaqui. 

TECOUTLA, SANTIAGO DE, a settlement 
and head settlement of the district of the alcal- 
dia mayor of Teutila in Nueva Espana. It is of 
a hot temperature, inhabited by 40 families of 
Indians, who cultivate nothing but maize and 
some fruits of the country. 

TECPACO, a settlement of the head settle 
ment of the district, and alcaldia mayor of Zochi- 
coatlan in Nueva Espana. It contains 42 fami 
lies of Indians, and is six leagues n. of its ca 
pital. 

TECPAN, a settlement of the head settlement 
of the district, and alcaldia mayor of Nueva 
Espana. It contains 119 families of Indians, and 
40 Spaniards, Mustees, and Mulattoes. 

TECPATITLAN, an alcaldia mayor and ju 
risdiction of the kingdom of Nueva Galicia, and 
bishopric of Guadalaxara. It is of limited ex 
tent, but rather populous in the settlements and 
estates of its district. Its natives are given to 
agriculture and to the breeding of cattle ; and 
they are used to have abundant crops, so that 
they sell their produce to the other jurisdictions 
and to the establishments of the mines at no 
great distance. 

Its population consists of the capital, of the 
same name, and the settlements of, 
San Joseph, Santa Fe, 

San Miguel el Alto, Tonatlan, 
Misquitic, Tequaltitlan, 

Acatic, Ascatlan. 

Sapotlan, 

TECPATLAN, a settlement and capital of 
the province and alcaldia mayor of Los Zoques 
in the kingdom of Guatemala. 

TECUALMES, a settlement of the missions, 

which were held by the Jesuits in the province 

of Nayarith, and kingdom of Nueva Galicia of 

N. America. Fifteen leagues s. w. of La Mesa. 

TECULUTA. fi settlement of the province 



TEG 

and alcaldia mayor of Capabanastla in the king 
dom of Guatemala. 

TEFE, a settlement of the missions which 
were held by the Portuguese Carmelite fathers, 
in the province and country of Las Amazonas, 
on the shore of the river of its name, and at the 
mouth by which it enters the Maranon, and 
where also a fort has been built for its defence. 
[In lat. 3 20 s. and long. 64 48 a?.] 

TEFE, the aforesaid river, is large, and, ac 
cording to the chart of America, by the geogra 
pher D. Juan de la Cruz [and other eminent geo 
graphers, down to the present day], rises in the 
territory and country of the Curianis Indians, 
[between the Purus to the e. and the Jurua to 
the 20.], runs n. n. e. and, after several windings, 
enters the Maranon, in the district of the Indians 
of the Pavana nations. 

TEGAOGEN, a settlement of the French, in 
the province and country of the Iroquees In 
dians, on the n. shore of the lake Ontario. 

TEGUA, a small river of the province and 
government of San Juan de los Llanos, in the 
Nuevo Reyno de Granada. It runs e. and, after 
a short course, enters the Airico. 

TEGUALEMU, a settlement of Indians of 
the province and corregimiento of Itata in the 
kingdom of Chile ; between the deep ravine of 
Chanco and the point of Humos. 

TEGUAS, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Tunja, in the Nuevo Reyno de 
Granada. It is of a hot temperature, barren, 
and of a rough territory, and poor and reduced, 
its inhabitants consisting of only a few Spaniards 
and Indians, who are dreaded in all the neigh 
bouring settlements as having the credit of being- 
sorcerers. They are part of the nation of the 
same name, who inhabit a country full of woods, 
lakes, rivers, and swamps ; and who were dis 
covered by Captain Juan de San Martin in 1537. 
They are tierce, cruel, and treacherous, and even 
the few, reduced to a civil life in this settle 
ment, have a strong tendency to their native 
habits. 

It is a happy thing that this nation of savages 
has so dwindled away as to have become almost 
extinct. The settlement is 16 leagues s. e. of its 
capital, between the settlements of Lengupa and 
Tensa. 

TEGUCIGALPA, a district and alcaldia mayor 
of the province and government of Comayagua 
the kingdom of Guatemala ; which thev call 



TEH 



519 



in 



also De Santa Lucia and Guazacaran, through 
two fine silver-mines in its district, and which 



afford the principal branch of its commerce. The 
capital is the settlement of its name. 

TEGUCIGALPA, a river of the province and 
government of Honduras, which enters the sea 
near the Bay of Truxillo. 

TEGUE, a settlement of the province and go 
vernment of Cartagena, in the JVuevo Reyno de 
Granada ; situate in an island formed by the arms 
of the river Cauca. Five leagues from the town 
of San Bernardo Abad. 

TEGUECO, a settlement of the province and 
government of Cinaloa in N. America ; situate 
at the source of the river Del Fuerte, near the 
settlement of Sibirijoa. 

TEHIHUAY-GUAZU, a river of the pro 
vince and government of Paraguay, which runs w. 
TEHUACAN, DE LAS GRAN ADAS, a pro 
vince and alcaldia mayor of Nueva Espana, and 
bishopric of La Puebla de los Angeles ; thus 
called from the abundance of excellent pomegra 
nates which it produces : bounded e. by the pro 
vince of Teutitlan del Camino, no. by that of Te- 
peaca, and n. by that of Orizava and the town of 
Cordoba. 

It comprehends nine principal settlements or 
head settlements of the district; has abundant 
salines, and by these makes a great trade, as well 
as by the fruits and seeds which it produces, and 
the fish caught in its rivers. 

TEHUACAN, the capital, which is of the same 
name, is of a beautiful plant, of a mild and plea 
sant temperature, and delightfully situate in the 
high road leading to Oaxaca and to Guatemala ; 
and is, thus, a place of considerable trade. The 
waters,, which irrigate and fertilize its territory, 
are sweet and well tasted, but are full of nitrous 
particles, and, consequently, coagulate, and pe 
trify the earth in the pipes and aqueducts through 
which they pass ; depositing on them, as it were, 
a coat of stone and mortar, so that it is necessary 
frequently to change the pipes for the free pas 
sage of the water ; and thus it is common to see 
laying about the fields parts of this incrustated 
matter, which has the appearance of the ruins of 
some old buildings. This same nitre, of this 
petrifying quality in water, acts as a dissolvent 
on the stone and gravel in the bladder. 

This city has four principal temples, which are 
the parish-church and the three convents of San 
Francisco. It has, besides these, the convent of 
the Barefooted Carmelites, and that of San Juan 
de Dios, with a good hospital. The streets, 
houses, and squares, are modern and handsome, 
so that it is one of the best cities in the king- 



520 



TEH 



dom. It carries on a great trade in flour from 
the quantity of wheat grown in its district (there 
being in the valley of San Pablo alone 22 estates), 
and with this article supplies the market of Vera 
Cruz and the neighbouring provinces as far as 
the Havana and Campeche. This city is in 
habited by very many families of Spaniards, Mus- 
tees, and Mulattoes, and more than 2080 of In 
dians, not to mention 300 or more residing in 
the country estates. [It was, according to Hum- 
boldt, one of the most frequented sanctuaries of 
the Mexicans before the arrival of the Spaniards. 
One hundred and eighteen miles s. e. of Mexico. 
Lat. 18 30 n. and long. 97 W 30" ro.] 
The other settlements of its jurisdiction are, 
S. Gabriel Chilac, S. Pedro Capulco Cox- 

Santa Maria Conjo- catlan, 

meapa, Acatepec, 

S. Pedro Telitlan, S. Martin Mazapetan, 

S. Miguel Eloxuchit- Miahuatlan, 

Ian, S. Pablo Zoquitlan. 

TEHUANTEPEC, an alcaldia mayor and ju 
risdiction of Nueva Espana in the province and 
bishopric of Oaxaca. The last of this bishopric, 
and at the beginning of the kingdom of Guate 
mala, to the provinces of which it lies in the di 
rect road. It enjoys, for the most part, a hot 
climate, and is very abundant and fertile in 
maize and fruit, although its principal com 
merce is in salt. It is fertilized by several ri 
vers, and has fine pastures filled with large cattle. 
It consists of the following settlements : 
Tanapatepec, Guichovi, 

Santa Maria Chima- Sta. Maria Patapa, 
la pa, S. Mateo del Mar, 

Tequizistlan, S. Francisco del Mar. 

TEHUANTEPEC, the capital, is of the same 
name ; situate near the coast of the S. Sea, has a 
good convent of the religious of St. Domingo ; 
and its population consists of 2600 families of 
Mixtecos, Zapotecas, and Mexicanos Indians, 
50 of Spaniards, Mustees, and Mulattoes, which, 
one with another, form two companies of militia, 
which guard the coast against any invasion from 
the side of the S. Sea. The Indians maintain 
themselves by sowing maize, and the other inha 
bitants by the trade of salt. [Two hundred and 
ninety-six miles s. e. of Mexico, 250 n. w. of 
Guatemala, and 82 s.w. of Chiapa, in lat. 16 
20 X n. and long. 95 V a&amp;gt;.] 

[TEHUANTEPEC, or TEGUANTEPEQUE, a port 
in the intendancy of Oaxaca ; situate in the bot 
tom of the creek, formed by the ocean, between 
the small villages of San Francisco, San Dionisio, 



TEH 

and Santa Maria de la Mar. This port, impeded 
by a very dangerous bar, will become one day of 
great consequence, when navigation in general, 
and especially the transport of the indigo of Gua 
temala, shall become more frequent by the Rio 
Guasacualco. In lat. 16 Wn. and long. 94 58" a&amp;gt;.] 

TEHUANTEPEC, a very large open gulf in 
front of the above city, and from which it takes 
its name. 

TEHUANTEPEC, a point of land in the same 
jurisdiction, nearly separated from the shore. 

TEHUAUSTITLAN, a settlement of the 
head settlement of the district of Atengo and 
alcaldia mayor of Chilapa in Nueva Espana. 
Four leagues w. of its head settlement. 

TEHUEHUETLA, a settlement of the head 
settlement of the district of Tetela, and alcaldia 
mayor of Azuchitlan in Nueva Espana : 12 
leagues &amp;lt;?. of its capital, and 18 from the head 
settlement, but the road from the latter being so 
dangerous as to render it necessary to wade the 
river of Las Truclms upwards of 40 times. It is 
situate at the foot of the sierra Madre, is of a 
mild temperature, and fertilized by the said 
river. The commerce of its inhabitants is in the 
making of rigging and thread, and in wax seeds 
and some fruits. In the s. part extends to the 
S. Sea a large tract entirely desert, rugged, and 
uninhabited. The way leading from hence to 
Tecpan, of the jurisdiction of Zacatela, is very 
dangerous, and what is worse, there is no choice 
to be made. The population consists of 50 fa 
milies of Indians. 

TEHUETLAN, a settlement of the head set 
tlement of the district, and alcaldia mayor of Hue- 
jutla in Nueva Espana. It is of a mild tempe 
rature, and produces nothing but maguei/es, of 
which the natives make pulque and honey. The 
inhabitants consist of 44 families of Indians, and 
in its vicinity is another small settlement with 
16 families ; both annexed to the curacy of its 
capital, from whence the former lies three 
leagues to the s. 

TEHUILOTEPEC, a village of the head 
settlement of Santa Ana, and alcaldia mayor of 
Zultepec in Nueva Espana ; united to the set 
tlement of Toteolmaloya, from whence it lies 
four leagues to the w. [The position of this 
place is interesting, on account of the proximity 
of the great mines of Tasco. Long. 99 29 .] 

TEHUISNAO, SANTIAGO DE, a settlement 
of the head settlement of the district, and alcaldia 
mayor of Tasco in Nueva Espana. It contain? 
102 families of Indians. 



T E J 

TEHUIXTLA, a settlement of the head set 
tlement of the district of Xoxutla and akaldia 
mayor of Cuernavaca in Nueva Espana. 

TEIDI, a small river of the province of Gaira 
in the government of Paraguay, which runs n. 
and enters the Parana between those of the 
Yaquini and the Guazigua. 

[TEJUCO, the capital of the diamond dis 
trict of this name, in Brazil. It is situate in 
the midst of sterility, and a great portion of its 
inhabitants, in number about 6000, bear the 
usual marks of penury and wretchedness ; yet 
the place is considered in a flourishing state, and 
the shops are well stocked with English cloth, 
baizes, harns, cheese, butter, and porter, all 
brought on mules from Bahia, or Rio de Ja 
neiro ; from the first of which it is distant, in a 
straight line, about 500 English miles s. by w. 
and 400 n. of the latter : in lat. 18 IV s. and 
long. 42 30 w. according to Arrowsmith s map, 
but probably twice the distance by the zig-zag 
route of the mountains. Mr. Mawe s account 
of the above district is very full and interesting. 
We are indebted to his work for the following 
information. 

It consists of rugged mountains, that have a 
n. and s. direction, and are generally allowed to 
be the highest in Brazil. What is termed the 
Diamond Ground, of which (as we have just ob 
served) Tejuco is the capital, extends about 16 
leagues from w. to s. and about eight from e. to 
w. It was first explored by some enterprising 
miners from Villa do Principe, a few years after 
the establishment of that town. These men pro 
ceeding n. found an open country watered by 
many small rivulets, which they tried for gold 
by washing : some of them engaged their atten 
tion for a short time, but not proving sufficiently 
rich, they continued their route, passing the 
places now called San Gonzales and Melho 
Verde, until they arrived at a few streams that 
flow from the base of the mountain on which 
Tejuco is built. These rivulets were then 
washed for gold, and were considered as belong 
ing to the district of Villa do Principe. No 
idea was first entertained that the rivulets con 
tained diamonds, although it is said that some 
were collected and presented to the then go 
vernor of Villa do Principe as curious bright 
stones, and were used by him as counters at 
cards. Soon afterwards a few of them found 
their way to Lisbon, and were given as pretty 
pebbles to the Dutch minister to send to Holland, 
which was then the principal mart in Europe for 
precious stones. The lapidaries, to whom they 

VOL. IV. 



T E J 



521 



were presented for examination, pronounced 
these pebbles to be very fine diamonds. Informa 
tion was accordingly sent to the Dutch consul 
at Lisbon, who did not fail to profit by the occa 
sion ; for he managed the affair with government 
so well, that he contracted for the precious 
stones at the same time that he communicated 
the intelligence. Government afterwards endea 
voured to monopolize the diamonds, and made a 
distinct district of Cerro do Frio, placing it under 
peculiar laws and regulations. 

The number of diamonds sent over during the 
first tw r enty years after the discovery is said to be 
almost incredible, and to exceed one thousand 
ounces in weight. This supply could not fail to 
diminish the general value of diamonds, as none 
had ever before been known to come from any 
other part of the globe, except India, whither the 
Brazilian diamonds were afterwards sent, and 
found a better market there than in Europe. 

By stratagems and intrigues government was 
prevailed on to let these invaluable territories to 
a company, who were under stipulations to work 
with a limited number of Negroes, or to pay a 
certain sum per day for every Negro employed. 
This opened a door to every species of fraud ; 
double the stipulated number of Negroes were 
admitted ; and this imposition was connived at 
by the agents of government, who received pay 
in one hand and bribes in the other. Presents 
were made to men possessing influence at court, 
by the contractors, who soon became rich, and 
they continued (subject to a few regulations) in 
possession of the diamond mines until about the 
year 1772, when, government determining to 
take them into their own hands, these contracts 
were ended. 

This was the time for reforming abuses, and 
for placing this rich district under the best regu 
lations, but it was neglected ; prejudice pre 
vailed over prudence ; and the management was 
entrusted to men who did not understand the 
real interests of the concern, or, what is more 
probable, who were so shackled in their au 
thority, that they could not pursue them. From 
this time affairs became worse, and the establish 
ment was in debt to foreigners, who had ad 
vanced a considerable sum of money on the se 
curity of having all the diamonds which the mines 
produced. This debt still remains unpaid, and 
there are other incumbrances which can be re 
moved only by a total change of system. In its 
present state the establishment appears to pro 
duce much greater wealth than it actually does. 
During a period of five years, from 1801 to] 



252 



TE JU CO. 



[1896 inclusive, the expenses were .204,000 ; 
and the diamonds sent to the treasury at Rio de 
Janeiro weighed 115,675 carats. The value of 
gold found in the same period amounted to 
j17,300 sterling; from which it appears, that 
the diamonds actually cost government 33s. 9d. 

Eer carat. These years were esteemed singu- 
irly productive ; the mines do not in general 
yield to government more than 20,000 carats an 
nually. Exclusive of this amount there is a vast 
quantity smuggled. 

The town is under the absolute government 
of the intendant. The principal officers of the 
civil and military establishments are, an ouvidor 
or Jiscal, a captain of cavalry, and a captain mor. 
In the Diamond establishment there is a great 
number of officers, of whom the following are 
the principal: 1st. The intendant, who is a judge, 
and the intendant-general of the district of Mi- 
nas Geraes (this office is one of the best in the 
gift of the crown) : 2d. The treasurer, whose si 
tuation is almost a sinecure : he receives 8000 
crusades per annum; and 3d. The administrator- 

feneral, who has a salary of 6000. The book- 
eeper has 4000, and there are three clerks, or 
key-keepers, who have from 800 to 1000 each. 
These officers are employed in whatever relates 
to the treasury, or to the general concerns of the 
establishment ; they all reside in Tejuco, and are 
the most respectable of the inhabitants. The 
management of the different works is entrusted 
to eight or 10 under-administrators, each having 
in his care 200 Negroes, called a troop, to which, 
besides a clergyman and a surgeon, are attached 
several overseers and subordinate officers, who 
have salaries of from 400 to 200 crusades. The 
privilege of employing a certain number of Ne 
groes in the works is common to all the officers, 
to an extent corresponding w ith their rank : the 
superior officers let to hire as many as they 
please, say 40, and sometimes upwards of 50 ; 
the inferior officers are permitted to let out two 
or three, in preference to other individuals ; a 
decidedly bad practice, as will be shown here 
after. 

The intendant holds a place of great trust : he 
is the superior magistrate, and his duty is to ad 
minister justice, and to see that the laws peculiar 
to the district are duly executed. He is of course 
president of the assembly, or junta, and calls 
meetings whenever he thinks proper; he dis 
poses of the military force of the district, orders 
roads to be made or stopped, and stations guards 
on them to examine travellers, and to detain sus 
picious persons. He has also the privilege of 



giving or refusing permission for persons to en 
ter the district, or settle in it ; and every one, 
however high in rank or property, who passes 
thither, is supposed to have the intendant s ex 
press concurrence, which, as a matter of form, is* 
sometimes dispensed with. He appoints officers, 
signs all papers, receives all reports that are 
made, and acts accordingly. To him solely the 
treasure is entrusted for the payment of the sala 
ries of the officers, the Negroes wages, trades 
men s bills, and every incidental expense attend 
ing the establishment. He issues paper-money, 
and withdraws it from circulation whenever he 
thinks proper ; for all which he is responsible to 
government alone, and may be said to be almost 
absolute in his office. In addition to these im 
portant functions, the intendant has lately as 
sumed the whole direction and regulation of the 
mining concern, which none of his predecessors 
ever practically interfered with, it being the pe 
culiar province of the administrator-general. 

The administrator-general, to whom belong 
the direction and management of the works, 
ought to be equally experienced in mining and 
mechanics, particularly in hydraulics : he should 
be a man of general information, combined with 
great practical knowledge relative to the locality 
of the district, so as to be able to ascertain the 
real value of every situation, and to direct the 
operations accordingly. He should have a mind 
fertile in resources, and prepared to meet every 
disappointment or casualty that can possibly oc 
cur, that the time of the Negroes may not be 
employed in vain ; he should also facilitate their 
labours by the introduction of machinery, and 
should be particularly attentive to their good 
treatment, since on them his success, and con 
sequently his reputation, must in a great mea 
sure depend. 

On this latter point humanity and policy ought 
alike to direct the attention of the superiors of 
the establishment. It is natural to suppose that 
Negroes, when treated with harshness, ill fed 
and ill clothed, will be indifferent to the interests 
of their employers, and, perhaps, determined 
not to find diamonds, whereas, when subjected 
to milder and kinder usage, which might be 
done without relaxing in vigilance, they would 
become anxious to please, and would search 
more diligently in order to obtain notice and re 
ward. It must be obvious, that Negroes rarely 
conceal diamonds for themselves ; and yet cus 
tom has rendered the feelings of their real owners 
in Tejuco so irritable, on being suspected to en 
courage the practice, that if the word grimpero~\ 



T E J U C O. 



523 



[(smuggler) is mentioned in conversation, they 
shudder with horror, and distort their features, 
calling on the Virgin to witness their abhorrence 
of a crime to which government has attached 
the greatest disgraces and punishments. But, 
notwithstanding all this show of honesty, dia 
monds are bartered for every thing, and are ac 
tually much more current than specie. 

In Tejuco there are about nine or ten prin 
cipal shopkeepers, to whom the establishment 
itself, and the officers belonging to it, are fre 
quently indebted ; indeed, these men receive the 
greater part of the money due to the various 
persons employed in the works, in exchange 
chiefly for English commodities of one descrip 
tion or other. The establishment is paid once a 
vear, and for this purpose a sum not less than 
300,000 crusades is sent from V^illa Rica, to 
which may be added 60,000 or 100,000 more, 
found in the gold mines of the district. The 
greater part of this money flowing into the hands 
of the shopkeepers, as above stated, is immedi 
ately employed in a way injurious to the inte 
rests of government ; nor can worse policy be 
imagined, than that of allowing so large an ex 
penditure in a place which offers such tempta 
tions. 

Some years ago many gold-mines were washed 
in this district; but as information was given 
that diamonds were found in them, they were 
ordered to be abandoned. At present more 
equitable measures are adopted, and the pro 
prietors are commencing to work some of them 
again, under an agreement to give up what dia 
monds they find. 

There is a general order to work all the gold 
mines which were formerly confiscated, and this 
measure will, it is hoped, increase the quantity 
of gold, and have a good effect in every respect. 

If government are obliged to hire Negroes 
wherever they can obtain them, (which appears 
to be the case,) it would be at least expedient 
to have a store to supply them, in order that the 
money paid in wages to them might return into 
the funds of the establishment. 

The hiring of Negroes to the diamond-works 
is the favourite occupation of all ranks in Te 
juco ; rich and poor endeavour to engage in it 
to as great an extent as their property will al 
low. The pay of the slaves is trifling compared 
with the risk, their labour being heavy, their 
maintenance poor, and their treatment harsh; 
there must, therefore, be some temptation not 
openly seen, yet as well known as light from 
darkness. Numbers of persons are thus induced 



to reside in Tejuco under various pretexts, but 
with no other real view than to get their Negroes 
into the service, and to live idly on their wages, 
and on what they conceal or pick up. Thus all 
fatten upon the pasture, except those in the ex 
treme of indigence, and others who, from neg 
lect of economy, are always poor. There are a 
numerous class, from the age of seven years to 
upwards of twenty, who are without any visible 
means of earning their subsistence, and would 
remain idle even if manufactories were esta 
blished ; for though they are brought up from 
their infancy with Negro-children, yet in the 
working department they would abandon their 
former play-fellows. The people in general are 
rendered more averse from habits of regular in 
dustry, by the continual hopes which they in 
dulge of becoming opulent by some fortunate dis 
covery of mines ; these fallacious ideas, which 
they instil into the minds of their children, 
strongly prejudice them against labour, though 
they all exist miserably, and not unfrequently 
depend upon donations. Their education is ex 
tremely limited : they are in general total stran 
gers to the sciences, and are very scantily in 
formed on any useful subject. 

The great demand for the precious stones, and 
the facility of secreting them, have caused them 
to be searched for and carried away in violation 
of the existing laws of the country. Of the num 
bers who have engaged in this illict traffic, from 
an eager desire to become rich at once, many 
have eluded the vigilance of the guards, and 
have finished their career with credit and opu 
lence ; others, less fortunate, have been detected, 
and have incurred the punishment annexed to 
the offence, namely, the surrender of their ille 
gally acquired treasure, the confiscation of their 
whole property, and exile to Africa, or confine 
ment, perhaps for life, in a loathsome prison. 
This policy may, doubtlessly, be considered too 
severe ; for, if we should inquire who were the 
discoverers of perhaps all the diamond-mines 
which have enriched the caskets of the royal fa 
mily of Portugal beyond comparison with those 
of any other state, and which have not only 
augmented the revenues of the government, but 
have proved the source from which many respec 
table and enterprising individuals have derived 
their opulence, we should find that they were 
adventurers, who, at great risk, and with inde 
fatigable toil, had penetrated unknown forests, 
and explored deep ravines among the haunts of 
the savage Anthropophagi, in search of gold 
mines, and who have by chance found in them] 
3x2 



.524 



T E J U C O. 



[diamonds. When a place of this description has 
been once discovered by these men, it seldom 
remains long secret ; the agents of government 
take possession of it, and either work it imme 
diately, or guard it until a future occasion. The 
discoverer of course flies from the place ; and if 
he have picked up a few stones, or robbed the 
earth of some of its more brilliant rarities, he 
will seek the best and safest means of procuring 
value for them. If he be a man of sufficient 
property, he will hire a few mules, load them 
with cotton, bacon, and other commodities, and 
proceed to Rio de Janeiro in regular form. On 
his arrival there, he enters some good house in 
which he has confidence, and disposes of his con 
cealed treasure. His mind is then relieved from 
apprehension, and he begins to make prepara 
tions for his return. His first care is to lay out 
his money to the best advantage : Negroes are 
his chief object, and these pay a duty to the 
state on their leaving Angola, and another of 
10 milreis each on entering the mining country. 
If they be employed in mining, government ob 
tains a fifth of the gold found ; and if in agri 
culture, a tenth of the produce is exacted. The 
next object of the adventurer is to lay in a stock 
of woollens, and other English manufactures, 
which pay a duty of 15 per cent, on being landed, 
and are subject to another, according to their 
weight, on entering the territory of the mines. 
Thus it really appears that most of the contra 
band property is divided between the state and 
the smuggler : but this is not all ; the diamonds 
are sent out of the country, and real effects of 
value are received in return, leaving a balance 
much in favour of Brazil. 

This illicit trade has been carried on to a very 
considerable extent : there is strong presumptive 
authority for stating that, since the first disco 
very of the mines, diamonds to the amount of 
two millions sterling have thus found their way 
to Europe, exclusive of what the contractors 
accounted for. This has been owing to the ill ma 
nagement of the whole establishment, and to the 
total want of necessary regulations, which have 
prevailed so long, that it will not be easy to 
apply a remedy. Let us suppose for a moment 
the system to be changed; the 2000 Negroes 
employed in the establishment to be the property 
of the crown (whom two years profit of the 
diamond mines would be adequate to purchase) ; 
these Negroes to be supplied with every article 
for their support from a general store, and to 
be treated as mildly as possible : they would 
then form a society, and, knowing no other mas 



ters than their officers, would have only one 
common interest to serve. The contraband 
trade, by this means, though perhaps not totally 
destroyed, would receive an irrecoverable blow, 
and would be reduced almost to nothing. Should 
such a change take place, the shopkeepers, and 
those persons who subsist by hiring Negroes to 
the works, would find the source of their emo 
luments dried up, and, rather than remain at 
Tejuco, would migrate to situations more conge 
nial to their interests : thus the district would 
be freed from that bane which has so long over 
run it, and government would reap the advan 
tage of having the mines worked by their own 
Negroes, whom it would be difficult for others 
to seduce. 

Another evil which such a change of system 
would be calculated to remove, is the following : 
Every article of sustenance required for the 
establishment is purchased of farmers who re 
side a few leagues from Tejuco, or who have 
farms at a greater distance ; and this absurd 
practice is the cause of much unnecessary inter 
course. There are thousands of acres of excel 
lent land in the vicinity of the diamond works, 
having choice of situation, and fit for the growth 
of every species of produce. How well might 
a part of the military force of the place be occa 
sionally spared for a few days only, to be em 
ployed in the first operations of husbandry, 
which would be, to enclose a sufficient quantity 
of ground in various parts, for the maintenance 
of the establishment. A certain number of Ne 
groes would be allotted, in proportion to the 
land under cultivation, and on particular occa 
sions, as in harvest, an auxiliary force would be 
always at hand. This would be farming with 
double advantage ; the plough would work in 
stead of the hoe ; after-crops would be sown to 
be eaten off the ground, which would thus be 
enriched and kept in good condition. Numbers 
of acres would be planted with artificial grass, 
subject to irrigation where that was practicable, 
and thus, contrary to the general practice, the 
cattle would be provided with subsistence in the 
dry season. Indian corn, wheat, mandioca, fei- 
jones, potatoes, &amp;c. w r ould be cultivated, and, 
under proper management, would yield crops 
equal to the most sanguine expectation. Store 
houses, with requisite conveniences, would soon 
be erected, in which the grain might be kept 
without spoiling. Thus would the first prin 
ciples of husbandry be introduced into the dis 
trict, and prove a source of more lasting benefit 
to the state than mines either of gold or dia- J 



T J U C O. 



525 



[monds ; for when the latter were exhausted, 
there would remain an active and industrious 
population. It seems, indeed, to have been the 
purpose of nature, in distributing these precious 
substances in these remote and almost unknown 
parts, to allure civilized men to settle upon 
them. 

From the circumstances which have been al 
ready explained, it will appear that, under the pre 
sent system, the government pay for all the dia 
monds that are found here, and probably receive 
little more than one-half; therefore it is evident, 
that those conveyed through other channels can 
be sold to the public at a lower price than that 
at which the former are obtained. But the em 
barrassed state of the establishment is such, that 
the managers cannot lessen their expenses, being 
obliged to take credit for every article, and to 
hire almost any Negroes that are offered. These 
evils have taken too deep root to be eradicated, 
even by the abilities of the present intendant : 
had such a man been placed here 40 years ago, 
empowered to act without controul, and to go 
vern the district as private property, on the 
principles above stated, he might have rendered 
it rich and independent. 

As all the diamonds found in these works be 
long to the crown, the royal family have been 
accustomed to select from the quantity annually 
remitted whatever stones they considered worthy 
their notice, which were generally those exceed 
ing 17 carats. They were formerly sent to 
Holland to be cut, the Dutch being the con 
tractors of the diamonds from the first discovery 
of the mines ; but since the emigration of the court 
to Rio de Janeiro, that trade has been trans 
ferred to England, where these precious stones 
annually arrive, and are sold by private con 
tract. 

The collection of diamonds now in the pos 
session of the Prince Regent is unequalled in 
number, size, and quality, by that of any poten 
tate in the world ; and is supposed to exceed in 
value three millions sterling. 

The district of Tejuco has a direct communi 
cation with Bahia, and a few troops of mules 
are continually employed in going from one 
place to the other. The journey is much longer 
than to Rio de Janeiro, but the country is less 
mountainous ; there are fewer ranches or hovels 
on the road, and in two parts it is requisite to 
carry fresh water for two days consumption. 
The commodities sent from Tejuco and Minas 
Novas are very trivial, consisting of topazes, 
amethysts, and other stones ; in return for which 



are brought English fine-manufactured goods, 
particularly hats, printed cottons, stockings, and 
saddles, which have been much cheaper in Bahia 
than in England. Coarser articles are generally 
sent from Rio de Janeiro, the distance being, as 
before observed, much shorter. 

Of navigable rivers we can say but little. 
The many small streams that rise in various 
parts join and form the Jigitonhonda, which may 
be navigated to sea, without any impediment, 
in at most ten days time. How much would 
the country be benefited if a port were esta 
blished at the entrance of this river, and vessels 
were allowed to load and unload : canoes would 
find their way from thence into the interior in 
the short space of 20 days, loaded with every 
article necessary for the consumption of the dis 
trict. How superior would this mode of con 
veyance be to that of making roads through im 
pervious woods, and over almost impassable 
mountains. How many thousands of crusades, 
annually expended on mules, would be thus saved 
to the public ; and what numbers of men would 
thus be trained for the service of the marine, 
instead of those now employed as muleteers. 
With the advantage of such a communication, 
Minas Novas and Cerro do Frio would more 
than double their population, and it might be 
anticipated, that the banks of these fine rivers, 
now lying deserted and useless, would bloom 
with every variety of vegetation which this genial 
climate is capable of producing. 

Under the present system Tejuco ought to 
maintain itself, and have the least possible in 
tercourse with other places : its commerce ought 
to be confined wholly to gold and precious 
stones ; but should government determine to 
make diamonds a free trade, then a contrary 
policy would be requisite. 

The quadrupeds of this district are common 
to other parts of Brazil : mules are the principal 
beasts of burden, and are much dearer than in 
the districts more to the s. ; horses are not so 
numerous, but cheaper, being in very little re 
quest, and used only on journeys of pleasure. 
Horned cattle are bred at a considerable distance, 
and brought for the consumption of the place. 
Sheep are almost unknown ; hogs and goats are 
more plentiful ; of dogs there are but few, and 
the race is very indifferent. Ounces are very 
seldom seen; there are not many deer; the danta, 
or tapir, is not uncommon. 

Of birds there are a few varieties, but in no 
great numbers : partridges are rather common : 
many are found in the neighbourhood of the mines,] 



526 



T E J 



and they prove good eating. Domestic fowls are 
in tolerable plenty, but by no means cheap, being 
eighteen-pence to two shillings each. 

Of serpents, the greater part are harmless ; 
but the rattle-snake and the jararaca, both equally 
venomous, are common in this district. Lizards 
are very numerous, and the cayman, or alligator, 
is found in most of the rivers. 

Fish are extremely scarce in all the streams, 
owing to the quantity of matter with which their 
waters are impregnated from the numerous 
washings. 

This district is in general free from that trou 
blesome plague, the mosquito, as that insect is 
peculiar to low and swampy places, and does 
not bite with such disagreeable effect in elevated 
and airy situations. Bees are but little attended 
to, and are scarcely known ; were the manage 
ment of them better understood and practised by 
the inhabitants, they might be much increased, 
and wax might even be exported. 

In closing our observations on this district, we 
shall add some particulars relative to the capital. 
The families appear to live in great sociability ; 
they frequently form tea-parties. The dress of 
the ladies consists almost entirely of articles of 
English manufacture, cotton prints, straw hats, 
artificial flowers, jewelry, &amp;c. Owing to the 
great distance of I ejuco from a sea-port, piano 
fortes have not been introduced here, or they 
would probably be in great demand ; for the la 
dies in general have a taste for music, and touch 
the guitar with great spirit and elegance. Dancing 
is a favourite amusement, and all appear much 
pleased and animated with the English country- 
dance. The ladies seldom go abroad, except to 
mass, and then they are usually carried in a chair 
hung with curtains and a canopy, and suspended 
from a pole borne by two men. The sedentary 
habits of the females has been thought injurious 
to their health ; but, since English saddles have 
been introduced, they begin to take airings on 
horseback. 

Warm baths are very generally used, being 
considered of great efficacy in removing recent 
colds, to which all persons here are liable, on 
account of the peculiar nature of the climate. 
They are invariably offered at night to travel 
lers, as a means of relieving the pains occa 
sioned by the fatigues of the day.] 

[TEJUCO, or TAJUCA, a small island situate 
on the coast in the vicinity of the island of St. 
Catharine s : in lat. 27 IV s. long. 48 50 w. It 
is about 200 miles from Tejuco, the capital of 
the Diamond District.] 



TEL 

[TEKY Sound, on the coast of Georgia, to 
the s. of Savannah River, is a capacious road, 
where a large fleet may anchor in from 10 to 14 
fathoms water, and be land-locked, and have a 
safe entrance over the bar of the river. The 
flood tide is generally seven feet.] 

TELEMBI, SAN Luis DE, a settlement of the 
province and government of Pasto, in the Nuevo 
Rey no de Granada, of the district of Barbacoas ; 
situate on the shore of the river from whence it 
takes its name. This river rises in the vicinity 
of the city of Pasto, and enters the Patia a little 
before this runs into the S. Sea. 

[TELICA, a burning mountain on the w. 
coast of Nuevo Mexico, seen at n. n. e. over the 
ridge of Tosta. It is one of the range of volca 
noes which are seen along the coast from Fort 
St. John s to Tecaantepeck, and is 18 miles from 
Volcano del Vejo, or Old Man s Burning Moun 
tain ; and there are two others between them, 
but not so easily discerned, as they do not often 
emit smoke.] 

TELIPAN, a principal and head settlement 
of the district and alcaldia mayor of Izucar in 
Nueva Espaiia. It contains 87 families of In 
dians, who, from the fertility of the soil, gather 
abundant crops of wheat, seeds, and fruit, and is 
two leagues w. by n. of its capital. 

[TELLICO Block-house, in Tennessee, stands 
on the n. bank of Tennessee River, immediately 
opposite the remains of Fort London ; and is 
computed to be 900 miles, according to the course 
of the river, from its mouth, and 29 miles s. of 
Knoxville in Tennessee. It was erected in 1794, 
and has proved a very advantageous military post. 
It has lately been established, by the United 
States, as a trading post with the Indians.] 

[TELLIGUO, Great, in the State of Ten 
nessee, was situated on the e. side of the Chota 
Branch of Tennessee River, about 25 miles n. e. 
of the mouth of Holston River, and five s. of the 
line which marked Lord Granville s limits of 
Carolina. This was a British factory, established 
after the treaty of Westminster, in 1729. 

[TELLIGUO Mountains, lie s. of the above 
place, and seem to be a part of what are now 
called the Great Iron Mountains, in the latest 
maps.] 

TELOLOPAN, a settlement of the head set 
tlement of the district of Escateopan, and alcaldia 
mayor of Zaqualpa in Nueva Espaiia. It con 
tains 365 families of Indians, including those of 
the wards annexed to its curacy. 

TELTITLAN, SAN PEDRO DE, a principal 
and head settlement of the alcaldia mayor of Te- 



T E M 

huacan in Nueva Espaiia. It contains 100 fami 
lies of Indians, and is 16 leagues e. one-quarter 
to n.e. of its capital. 

TEMACAPLLIN, a settlement of the head 
settlement of the district, and alcaldia mayor of 
Lagos in Nueva Espaiia ; situate on the shore 
of the river of Los Ojuelos, which incorporates 
itself with the Verde. Seven leagues n. of its 
capital. 

TEMALAC, a settlement of the head settle 
ment of the district, and alcaldia mayor of Chi- 
lapa in Nueva Espana. It contains 16 families 
of Indians, and is three leagues n. of its capital. 

TEMALANZINCO, a settlement of the head 
settlement of the district of Olinala, and alcaldia 
mayor of Tlapa in Nueva Espana. It contains 
252 families of Indians, who occupy themselves 
in the cultivation and trade of cochineal, in ma 
nufacturing and painting cups, and sowing some 
seeds. In its vicinity is a mineral, but which is 
not worked through want of industry in the 
natives. Five leagues from its head settlement. 

TEMAMATLA, S. JUAN DE, a settlement of 
the alcaldia mayor of Chalco in Nueva Espana. 
It contains 200 families of Indians, and a con 
vent of religious of San Francisco. Two leagues 
w. s. w. of its capital. 

TEMASCALTEPEC, a settlement and real of 
silver-mines, of the alcaldia mayor of Zultepec in 
Nueva Espana. It is reputed the capital on ac 
count of its being the residence of the alcalde 
mayor. It is of a benign and mild temperature, 
and its population is composed of 320 families of 
Spaniards, and 200 of Mustees and Mulattoes, 
exercised in the labour of the mines, which are 
named Santa Catalina, San Antonio de Padua, 
La Genovesa, La apitana, La Magdalena, and 
La Munoz ; all of them having engines for work 
ing the silver metal, this being the only kind 
produced ; and it therefore procures every other 
requisite metal from the other settlements. 
[Sixty-five miles w. by s. of Mexico.] 

TEMASCALZINCO, SAN MIGUEL DE, a 
principal and head settlement of the district of the 
alcaldia mayor of Metepeque in Nueva Espana. 
It contains 74 families of Indians, including those 
of the wards of its district, and is 14 leagues n. 
of its capital. 

TEMASTIAN, a settlement of the head set 
tlement of Tlaltenango, and alcaldia mayor of 
Colotlan in Nueva Espana. It is eight leagues 
n. w. of its head settlement. 

TEMAXCALA, S. BALTASAR DE, a settle 
ment of the head settlement of S. Martin de Tex- 
melucan, and alcaldia mayor of Guejozinco in 



T E M 



527 



Nueva Espana. It contains 44 families of Indians, 
including those inhabiting a ward close to it. 

TEMAXCALAPA, a principal and head set 
tlement of the district of the alcaldia mayor of 
Villalta in Nueva Espana. It is of a hot tempe 
rature, contains 190 families of Indians, employed 
in cultivating cochineal, and is three leagues n. 
of its capital. 

TEMAXCALAPA, another, with the dedicatory 
title of San Francisco, in the head settlement 
of the alcaldia mayor of Teotihuacan in Nueva 
Espana. Two leagues and a half w. of its capital. 

TEMBEY, a river of the province and go 
vernment of Paraguay, which runs s. s. e. and 
enters the Parana, between the Quirapuy and 
Pirapopo. 

TEMBIO, TAMBO, or TIMBIO, a country and 
territory of the province and government of Po- 
payan, in the Nuevo Reyno de Granada, in the 
s. part. It was discovered by Sebastian de Be- 
lalcazar in 1536, is mountainous and rough, and 
watered by the river of the same name. This 
runs from e. to zo. and receives the waters of the 
Quilcase, Boxoles, Esmita, and Boticas, and af 
terwards enters the Patia, in lat. 2 12 / n. 

TEMBLOR, a river of the province and go 
vernment of Buenos Ayres ; which rises near the 
coast, and enters the sea between the river La 
Plata and the Straits of Magellan, close to the 
river Tandil. 

TEMEACHI, a settlement of the missions 
which was held by the Jesuits, in the province 
of Taraumara and kingdom of Nueva Vizcaya : 
31 leagues s.zo. one quarter s. of the town and 
real of mines of San Felipe de Chiguagua. At 
the distance of three leagues towards the n. it 
has a country estate, called Basuchil. 

TEMILOLOCAN, MAGDALENA DE, a settle 
ment of the head settlement, and alcaldia mayor 
of Orizava in Nueva Espana. It contains 63 fa 
milies of Indians, and is six leagues s. s. e. of its 
capital. 

TEMISCAMING, a lake of Canada, in the 
territory and country of the Indians of its name. 
It is formed from Lake Abitabis, and empties it 
self into the large stream of the Otaivas. 

TEMOAQUE, a settlement of the head settle 
ment of the district of Tetelzinco, and alcaldia 
mayor of Coautla in Nueva Espana. It contains 
115 families of Mexican Indians, and a convent 
of the religious of San Agustin. Five leagues 
s. e. one-quarter s. of its head settlement. 

TEMORIS, a settlement of the missions which 
were held by the Jesuits in the province and go 
vernment of Cinaloa. 



528 



TEN 



TEMOYA, SANTIAGO DE, a principal and 
head settlement of the district of the alcaldia 
mayor of Metepec in Nueva Espana; containing 
445 families of Indians. 

TEMOSOCHI, a settlement of the missions 
which were held by the Jesuits in the province 
of Taraumara and kingdom of Nueva Vizcaya. 
Thirty-one leagues from the town and real of 
mines of Chiguagua. 

[TEMPIE, a place in New Galicia, 200 leagues 
. w. of the city of Mexico.] 

TEMPLANTALE, a settlement of the head 
settlement of the district of Aytla, and alcaldia 
mayor of Villalta in Nueva Espana. It contains 
87 families of Indians, and is 15 leagues e. of its 
capital. 

[TEMPLE, a township of New Hampshire, 
Hillsborough County, ??. of New Ipswich, and 
58 miles w. of Portsmouth. It was incorporated 
in 1768, and contains 520 inhabitants.] 

[TEMPLE Bay, on the Labrador coast, oppo 
site Bellisle. A British settlement of this name 
was destroyed by the French, in October 1796.] 

[TEMPLETDN, a township in the n. w. part 
of Worcester County, Massachusetts ; containing 
950 inhabitants. It was granted as a bounty to 
the soldiers in King Philip s war, and was called 
Narraganset, N. 6, until its incorporation in 
1762. It is 53 miles w. by n. w. of Boston, and 
26 n. by w. of Worcester.] 

TEMPOAL, a principal and head settlement 
of the district of the alcaldia mayor of Tampico 
in Nueva Espail?., on the shore of a very abun 
dant stream, by which it is fertilized. It con 
tains 64 families of Milicianos, and 14 of Guaste- 
cos Indians ; both of whom cultivate fruit, garden 
herbs, maize, and French beans ; breed large and 
small cattle, and, from their vicinity to the sea, 
are fishermen. In its district are various ranchos. 
Nine leagues n. of the capital. 

TEMUCO, a small river of the kingdom of 
Chile, which runs w. and enters the Dinguilli. 

TEN, a small settlement of the province and 
government of San Juan de los Llanos, in the 
Nuevo Reyno de Granada ; annexed to the cu 
racy of the settlement of Tamara, on a spacious 
and charming plain on the shore of the river 
Ariporo, which was formerly called Guazeco. It 
is of a hot temperature, and produces wheat, 
maize, plantains, &amp;c. and the Indians who dwell 
here are very few. 

TENA, SANTA ROSA DE, a settlement of the 
head settlement and jurisdiction of Tocaima in 
the government of Mariquita, of the Nuevo 
Reyno de Granada. It is of a very hot tern- 



TEN 

perature, and thus produces maize. plantains,. 
yucas, and much sugar-cane. Its inhabitants 
may amount to 800, and they have a tradition, 
that in their mountains the Indians hid immense 
treasures upon the entrance of the Spaniards : 
but these could never be discovered in spite of 
every diligence in the search. Eight leagues 
from Santa Fe. 

TENA, another settlement, with the dedicatory 
title of S. Juan, in the province and government 
of Quixos and Macas, of the kingdom of Quito. 
It is reduced, and its situation is between two 
rivers, w r hich make it fertile in yucas, maize, and 
plantains. It has an asiento of gold mines, from 
which a certain quantity of this metal is ex 
tracted by the natives. There is also much fish 
in the rivers. 

TENALUCAN, a settlement of the head set 
tlement of the district and alcaldia mayor of 
Cuquio in Nueva Espana. Six leagues n. e. of 
its head settlement. 

TENAMAZAPA, a settlement of the head 
settlement of the district of Clanapa, and alcaldia 
mayor of Tlapa in Nueva Espana. It contains 
23 families of Indians. 

TENAMAZATLAN, a settlement of the head 
settlement of the district and alcaldia mayor of 
Autlan in Nueva Espana. It is of a hot tempe 
rature, contains 40 families of Indians, and is 
39 leagues s. by w. of its head settlement. It 
produces fruit and seeds in abundance. 

TENANFIA, SAN FRANCISCO DE, a settle 
ment of the head settlement of the district of 
Tlalixcoya, and alcaldia mayor of Mizantla in 
Nueva Espana ; containing 44 families of In 
dians. 

TENANGO, a jurisdiction and alcaldia mayor 
of Nueva Espana, with the surname Del Valle. 
Its district is limited, although there have been 
added to it three settlements of the jurisdiction 
of Tacuba. In the time of the arrival of the 
ships from the Philippines the roads which pass 
from the provinces of Zelaya, Guanajuato, and 
others, from being less rugged, are more crowded 
than is the high road leading to Mexico ; and 
thus the caravans of the merchants pass to the 
right of the capital, without touching at it, espe 
cially in the rainy season, when the way is im 
passable. This road runs through the jurisdic 
tions of Metepec, Marinalco, Temascaltepec, and 
Zultepec; and the inhabitants are regularly 
given to the employment of muleteers, though 
the greater part are miners, who labour in the 
real De Zaqualpa, abounding in silver-mines, 
which produce tolerably good profit. But, not- 



TEN 



TEN 



529 



S. Simon Totoltepec, 

Santa Maria Tonatico, 

Ixtapa, 

S. Francisco Coatepec. 



withstanding these employments, agriculture is 
not forgotten ; for the earth produces fine crops 
of wheat, maize, and other seeds ; and here are 
also some engines or mills in which they make 
sugar, honey, and loaf-sugar, which they carry 
for sale to the different provinces. 

TENANGO, the capital, is the settlement of the 
same name ; called also Teutelmango, and si 
tuate on the s. confines of the great valley of Ixt- 
lahuaca, Toluca, and Metepec. It contains 188 
families of Indians, and 25 of Spaniards and Mus- 
tees ; all given to the cultivation of the seeds 
peculiar to the cold climate, such as wheat, bar 
ley, maize, beans, and vetches : 14 or 16 leagues 
s. w. of Mexico, [It is now a very small settle 
ment, if at all in existence.] 
The other settlements of this jurisdiction are, 

Marinaltenango, Santa Maria Tololoa- 

Zaqualpa, pan, 

Santa Maria Escateo- S. Juan Alahuixtlan, 
pan, S. Juan Quetzala, 

San Francisco Zica- 
puzalco, 

Santiago, 

S. Simon Otzuma, 

Acapetlahuaya, 

TENANGO, another settlement, in the alcaldia 
mayor of Tasco; annexed to the curacy of its ca 
pital, from whence it lies three leagues to w. n.w. 
It contains 92 Indian families. 

TENANGO, another, of the head settlement of 
the district, and alcaldia mayor of Tlapa. It is 
of a mild, though rather inclined to hot, tempe 
rature ; contains 110 families of Indians, and is 
three leagues n. n. w. of its head settlement and 
capital. 

TENANGO, another, with the dedicatory of 
Santiago, in the head settlement of the Quechula, 
and alcaldia mayor of Tepeaca. It contains two 
families of Spaniards, nine of Mustees, and 30 
of Indians, and is close to its head settlement. 

TENANGO, another, of the alcaldia mayor of 
Tulanzinco. It contains 510 families of Indians, 
and is 10 leagues n. e. of its capital. Its natives 
trade in clothes and cotton manufactures, and are 
great agriculturists. It is situate in the most 
broken part of the sierra. 

TENANGO, another, a small settlement of the 
alcaldia mayor of Orizava in the district of No- 
gales, from whence it lies a quarter of a league 
to the n. 

TENANGO, another, of the head settlement 
and alcaldia mayor of Teutila. It is of a warm 
temperature, contains 100 families of Indians, 

VOL. IV. 



who trade in baynilla alone, and is 12 leagues n. 
of its capital. 

TENANGO, another, of the province and al 
caldia mayor of Zedales in the kingdom of Gua 
temala. 

TENANTITLAN, SAN JUAN DE, a prin 
cipal and head settlement of the district of the 
alcaldia mayor of Acayuca in Nueva Espana. 
It is of a hot temperature, contains 50 fami 
lies of Mulattoes, and 30 of Popolucos Indians. 
Eight leagues e. of its head settlement and ca 
pital. 

TENANZINCO, a settlement of the head 
settlement of the district of Zoquizingo, and 
alcaldia mayor of Marinalco in Nueva Espana. 
It is of a cold and moist temperature, produces 
many seeds, fruit, woods, large and small cattle, 
and swine ; contains 608 families of Indians, in 
cluding those of four wards in its vicinity, 134 of 
Spaniards, and 53 of Mustees and Mulattoes. In 
its district is a large estate called La Teneria, 
through the midst of which passes a large river, 
whose copious waters irrigate the adjoining lands, 
wherein are gathered large crops of wheat, maize, 
barley, and other seeds. This settlement is sur 
rounded by seven other estates, inhabited by 
about 50 families of Spaniards and Mustees. Two 
leagues w. of its capital. 

TENAYUCA, a settlement of the province 
and alcaldia mayor of Tacuba in Nueva Espana ; 
formerly one of the finest towns in the kingdom, 
and the capital of the empire of the Chichimecos, 
and where the Emperor Xiloc held his court and 
palace ; and at that time the lake came close up 
to it. After the conquest by the Spaniards it 
was one of the alcaldias mayores most esteemed 
for its advantages ; but time has reduced it to a 
miserable village. It is situate on the skirt of 
a mountain, which is a stone quarry, from whence 
they extract large slabs for paving the places, 
which they call tenayucas, and from whence this 
settlement takes its name. It contains 160 fami 
lies, and is three leagues n. n. w. of Mexico. 

[TENCH S Island, in the S. Pacific Ocean, 
was discovered in 1790, by Lieutenant Ball, and 
was said to lie in lat. l39 / s. and long. 151 
3V w. It was supposed to be low, and only 
about two miles in circuit, but entirely covered 
with trees, including many of the cocoa-nut kind; 
also to abound with inhabitants, and the men ap 
pearing to be remarkably stout and healthy ; but 
according to the most modern charts, this island 
seems not to exist in the place where Lieutenant 
Ball gives its position.] 



TEN 



TENECUN, a settlement of the province and 
colony of Pennsylvania in the United States ; 
where the Swedes have a house of assembly. It 
is undecided if it belong to the county of Bucks, 
or to that of Philadelphia. 

TENENE, a settlement of the province and 
government of Tucuman in Peru, belonging to the 
jurisdiction of the capital; situate on the shore 
of the river Coromoros. 

TENENTE, a settlement of the province and 
captainship of Rey in Brazil ; situate between the 
rivers Negro and Merigrande. 

TENERIFE, a town of the province and go 
vernment of Santa Marta, in the Nuevo Reyno 
de Granada ; founded on the e. shore of the 
great river Magdalena, in 1536, by the French 
captain Henry. It was a large and commercial 
town formerly ; but now reduced to a miserable 
village, inhabited only by people of colour. It 
is of a very hot and moist temperature. It had 
for its curate, for some time, San Luis Beltram, 
and in the vicinity of its parish-church is pre 
served the chasuble with which they used to say 
mass. [It is 97 miles s. with a slight inclination 
to the w. of Santa Marta, in lat. 9 45 X n. and 
-long. 74 33 o&amp;gt;.] 

TENEXAPA, a settlement of the province 
and alcaldia mayor of Chiapa in the kingdom of 
Guatemala. 

TENEXCALCO, S. NICOLAS DE, a settle 
ment of the head settlement of the district of 
Chietlan, ami alcaldia mayor of Izucar in Nueva 
Espana. 

TENEXCO, a small settlement or ward of 
the alcaldia mayor of Guachinango in Nueva 
Espana ; annexed to the curacy of the settlement 
of Pan tepee. 

TENEXPA, SANTA MARIA DE, a principal 
and head settlement of the district, and alcaldia 
mayor of Antequera in the province and bishop 
ric of Oaxaca and kingdom of Nueva Espana. 
It contains 1 1 families of Indians, employed in 
the cultivation of seeds and cochineal, in which 
consists their trade. 

TENEXTITLAN, a small settlement of the 
alcaldia mayor of Guachinango in Nueva Es 
pana ; annexed to the curacy of the settlement of 
Waupan. 

TENEXTLATILOYAN, SAN MIGUEI, DE, 
a head settlement of the district of the alcaldia 
mayor of San Juan de los Llanos in Nueva Es 
pana. From this spot begins the fertility of the 
mountains, and the waters here are so abundant 
that the whole serrania appeal s a garden covered 



TEN 

\v ith fruit trees, particularly with apples. *This 
cordillera extends as far as Zacatlan. 

Throughout the whole of this country there 
are great indications of many mines, and these 
are corroborated from there having been found 
in 1725, in the river Teitic, at the foot of a 
mountain called Tolozin, some detached pieces 
of stone inlaid with veins of silver of two or three 
marks of the finest and best alloy. Although 
many have endeavoured to trace the origin of 
these stones, all attempts have hitherto been 
vain ; nor have there been any stones of a simi 
lar nature even discovered in the neighbouring 
rivers or scrranias, so that it is thought that 
they must have been thrown to that spot bj 
some earthquake. 

In these mountains are a great number of apes, 
parrots, pheasants, and other birds, who are se 
cured by the uncultivated and craggy parts of 
the territory they inhabit. The temperatures of 
the several parts differ much ; and here are not 
wanting many lions, tigers, and venomous ser 
pents, which they call nauyaques. 

TENEZACATAN, a settlement of the pro 
vince and alcaldia mayor of Chiapa in the king 
dom of Guatemala. 

TENGUE, a river of the province and go 
vernment of Guayaquil in the kingdom of Quito ; 
which runs e. and enters the S. Sea in the Gulf 
of Guayaquil, opposite the island of Puna. 

TENGUILEN, a small river of the district 
of Guadalabquen in the kingdom of Chile. It 
runs .v. 5. e. 

TENJO, a settlement of the corregimiento of 
Bogota, in the Nuevo Reyno de Granada, cele 
brated for the houses and baths which belonged 
to the zipas, or kings, of Bogota ; from which 
court the settlement was seven leagues. It is of 
an agreeable and benign temperature, abounding 
in every species of fruit and seeds, and its popu 
lation is composed of more than 200 house 
keepers, and 100 Indians ; close to the settle 
ment of Tabio, where its jurisdiction terminates. 
Here are still remaining the vestiges of the road 
which led to Santa Fe. 

[TENISAWS, Indians of N. America, are 
emigrants from the Teneshaw River, that falls 
into the Bay of Mobile ; have resided on Red 
River about 40 years ; are reduced to about 25 
men. Their village is within one mile of the 
Pascagolas, on the opposite side ; but they have 
lately sold their land, and have, or are about 
moving to Bayau Bceuf, about 25 miles s. from 
where they lately lived. All speak French and 



TEN 

Mobilian, and live much like their neighbours, 
the Pescagolas.] 

[TENNANT S Harbour, on the coast of the 
district of Maine, lies about three leagues from 
George s Islands.! 

[TENNESSEE, a large, beautiful, and navi 
gable river of the State of Tennessee, called by 
the French Cherokee, and absurdly by others 
Hogohegee River, is the largest branch of the 
Ohio. It rises in the mountains of S. Carolina 
with the name Tennessee, in about lat. 35 n. 
but its most remote sources are in Virginia, in 
lat. 37 10 X , and pursues by its course about 1000 
English miles s. and s. w. nearly to lat. 34 30 X , 
receiving from both sides a number of large tri 
butary streams. It then wheels about to the n. 
in a circuitous course, and mingles with the 
Ohio, nearly 60 miles from its mouth. 

It is navigable for vessels of great burden to 
the Muscle Shoals, 250 English miles from its 
mouth. It is there about three miles broad, full 
of small isles, and only passable in small boats 
or batteaux. From these shoals to the Whirl, or 
Suck, the place where the river is contracted to 
the breadth of 70 yards, and breaks through the 
Great Ridge, or Cumberland Mountain, is 250 
miles, and the navigation for large boats all the 
way excellent. The highest point of navigation 
upon this river is Tellico Block-house, 900 miles 
from its mouth, according to its meanders. It 
receives Holston River 22 miles below Knoxville, 
and then running w. 15 miles receives the Clinch. 
The other waters which empty into Tennessee, 
are Duck and Elk Rivers, and Crow Creek, on 
the one side ; and the Occachappo, Chickamauga, 
and Hiwassee rivers on the s. and s. e. sides. 

In the Tennessee and its upper branches are 
great numbers of fish, some of which are very 
large and of an excellent flavour. The river to 
which the name Tennessee was formerly con 
fined, is that part of it which runs n. and re 
ceives Holston River 20 miles below Knoxville. 
The Coy eta, Chota, and Chilawee Indian towns, 
are on the w. side of the river ; and the Talasse 
Town on the e. side.] 

[TENNESSEE, EAST and WEST, form one of 
the United States of America, and, until 1796, 
were called the Tennessee Government, or Ter 
ritory of the United States s. of the Ohio. This 
State is in length 410 miles, and in breadth 90; 
between lat. 35 and 36 30 n. and long. 81 52 
and 90 3 w. It is bounded n. by Kentucky and 
part of Virginia; e. by N. Carolina; s. by 
Georgia; w. by the Mississippi. It is divided 
into three districts, viz. Washington, Hamilton, 



TEN 



531 



and Mero, which are subdivided into 13 counties, 
viz. Washington. Sullivan, Greene, Carter, Haw 
kins. Knox, Jefferson, Sevier, Rloum, Grainger, 
Davidson, Sumner, Robertson, and Montgomery. 
The first four belong to Washington District, 
the next five to that of Hamilton, and the four 
latter to Mero District. The two former dis 
tricts are divided from the latter, by an uninha 
bited country of 91 miles in extent; that is, from 
the block-houses at the point formed by the junc 
tion of the river Clinch with the Tennessee, 
called S. W. Point, to Fort Blount upon Cum 
berland River, through which there is a waggon- 
road, opened in the summer of 1795. 

There are few countries so well watered with 
rivers and creeks. The principal rivers are the 
Mississippi, Tennessee, Cumberland, Holston, 
and Clinch. The tract called the Broken Ground 
sends immediately into the Mississippi, the Wolf, 
Hatchee, Forked-Deer, Obian or Obean, and 
Reelfoot ; which are from 30 to 80 yards wide at 
their mouths : most of the rivers have exceed 
ingly rich low grounds, at the extremity of which 
is a second bank, as on most of the lands of the 
Mississippi. Besides these rivers, there are 
several smaller ones, and innumerable creeks, 
some of which are navigable. In short, there is 
hardly a spot in this country which is upwardi 
of 20 miles distant from a navigable stream. 

The chief mountains are, Stone, Yellow, Iron, 
Bald, and Unaka, adjoining to one another, from 
the e. boundary of the State, and separate it 
from N. Carolina ; their direction is nearly from 
n. e. to s. w. The other mountains are Clinch 
and Cumberland. It would require a volume to 
describe the mountains of this State, above half 
of which is covered with those that are uninha 
bitable. Some of these mountains, particularly 
the Cumberland, or Great Laurel Ridge, are the 
most stupendous piles in the United States. 
They abound with ginseng and coal. The ca 
verns and cascades in these mountains are innu 
merable. The Enchanted Mountain, about two 
miles s. of Brass Town, is famed for the curiosi 
ties on its rocks. 

There are on several rocks a number of im 
pressions resembling the tracks of turkeys, bears, 
horses, and human beings, as visible and perfect 
as they could be made on snow or sand. The 
latter were remarkable for having uniformly six 
toes each, one only excepted, which appeared 
to be the print of a Negro s foot. By this we 
must suppose the originals to have been the pro 
geny of Titan or Anak. One of these tracks 
was very large, the length of the foot 16 inches,] 
3 Y 2 



532 



TENNESSEE. 



[the distance of the extremes of the outer toes 13 
inches, the proximate breadth behind the toes 
seven inches, the diameter of the heel-ball five. 
One of the horse-tracks was likewise of an un 
common size, the transverse and conjugate dia 
meters were eight by ten inches ; perhaps the 
horse which the Great Warrior rode. 

What appears the most in favour of their 
being the real tracks of the animals they repre 
sent, is the circumstance of a horse s foot having 
apparently slipped several inches, and recovered 
again, and the figures having all the same di 
rection, like the trail of a company on a journey. 
If it be a lusus natures, the old dame never 
sported more seriously. If the operation of 
chance, perhaps there was never more apparent 
design. If it were done by art, it might be to 
perpetuate the remembrance of some remarkable 
event of Avar, or engagement fought on the 
ground. The vast heaps of stones near the 
place, said to be tombs of warriors slain in battle, 
seem to favour the supposition. The texture of 
the rocks is soft. The part on which the sun 
had the greatest influence, and which was the 
most indurated, could easily be cut with a knife, 
and appeared to be of the nature of the pipe- 
stone. Some of the Cherokees entertain an 
opinion that it always rains when any person 
visits the place, as if sympathetic nature wept 
at the recollection of the dreadful catastrophe 
which those figures were intended to comme 
morate. 

The principal towns are, Knoxville, the seat 
of government, Nashville, and Jonesborough, 
besides eight other towns, which are as yet of 
little importance. In 1791, the number of in 
habitants was estimated at 35,691. In Novem 
ber, 1795, the number had increased to 77,262 
persons, and, by the census of 1810, the total 
population was in East Tennessee - 101,367 



West Tennessee - 
Total souls - 



160,360 



261,727 



The soil is luxuriant, and will afford every 
production, the growth of any of the United 
States. The usual crop of cotton is 800 Ibs. to 
the acre, of a long and fine staple ; and of corn, 
from 60 to 80 bushels. It is asserted, however, 
that the lands on the small rivers, that empty 
into the Mississippi, have a decided preference 
to those on Cumberland River, for the produc 
tion of cotton, rice, and indigo. Of trees, the 
general growth is poplar, hickory, black and 
white walnut, all kinds of oaks, buck-eye, beech, 



sycamore, black and honey locust, ash, horn 
beam, elm, mulberry, cherry, dogwood, sassa 
fras, poppaw, cucumber-tree, and the sugar-tree. 
The undergrowth, especially on low lands, is 
cane ; some of which are upwards of 20 feet 
high, and so thick as to prevent any other plant 
from growing. Of herbs, roots, and shrubs, 
there are, Virginia and Seneca snake-root, gin 
seng, angelica, spice-wood, wild plum, crab- 
apple, sweet annise, red-bud, ginger, spikenard, 
wild hop, and grape vines. The glades are co 
vered with wild rye, wild oats, clover, buffaloe- 
grass, strawberries, and pea-vines. On the hills, 
at the head of rivers, and in some high cliffs of 
Cumberland, are found majestic red cedars ; 
many of these are four feet in diameter, and 40 
feet clear of limbs. 

The animals are such as are found in the 
neighbouring states. The rivers are well stocked 
with all kinds of fresh water fish ; among which 
are trout, perch, cat-fish, buffaloe-fish, red-horse, 
eels, &amp;c. Some cat-fish have been caught which 
weighed upwards of 100 pounds ; the w. waters 
being more clear and pure than the e. rivers, the 
fish are in the same degree more firm and sa 
voury to the taste. 

The climate is temperate and healthful; the 
summers are very cool and pleasant in that part 
which is contiguous to the mountains that divide 
this State from N. Carolina ; but on the w. side 
of the Cumberland Mountains the heat is more 
intense, which renders that part better calculated 
for the production of tobacco, cotton, and indigo. 
Lime-stone is common on both sides of Cum 
berland Mountain. There are no stagnant wa 
ters ; and this is certainly one of the reasons 
why the inhabitants are not afflicted with those 
bilious and intermitting fevers, which are so fre 
quent and often fatal near the same latitude on 
the coast of the S. States. Whatever may be 
the cause, the inhabitants have been remarkably 
healthy since they settled on the waters of Cum 
berland River. 

The country abounds with mineral springs. 
Salt licks are found in many parts of the coun 
try. [See CAMPBELL S SALINES.] Iron ore 
abounds in the districts of Washington and Ha 
milton, and fine streams to put iron-works in 
operation. Iron ore was lately discovered upon 
the s. of Cumberland River, about 30 miles be 
low Nashville, and a furnace is now erecting. 
Several lead-mines have been discovered, and 
one on French Broad has been worked ; the ore 
produced 75 per cent, in pure lead. The Indians 
say, that there are rich silver-mines in Cumber-] 






TENNESSEE. 



533 



[land Mountain ; but cannot be tempted to dis 
cover any of them to the white people. It is 
said that gold has been found here ; but the mine 
from which that metal was extracted is now un 
known to the white people. Ores and springs 
strongly impregnated with sulphur are found in 
various parts. Saltpetre caves are numerous ; 
and in the course of the year 1796, several tons 
of saltpetre were sent to the Atlantic markets. 

This country furnishes all the valuable articles 
of the S. States. Fine waggon and saddle horses, 
beef-cattle, ginseng, deer-skins and furs, cotton, 
hemp, and flax, may be transported by land ; also 
iron, lumber, pork, and flour, may be exported in 
great quantities, now that the navigation of the 
Mississippi is opened to the citizens of the United 
States : but few of the inhabitants understand 
commerce, or are possessed of proper capitals ; 
of course it is as yet but badly managed. How 
ever, being now an independent state, it is to 
be hoped that the eyes of the people will soon 
be opened to their true interest, and agriculture, 
commerce, and manufactures, will each receive 
proper attention. 

1 he Presbyterians are the prevailing- denomi 
nation of Christians ; in 1788, they had 23 large 
congregations, who were then supplied by only 
six ministers. There are also some Baptists and 
Methodists. The inhabitants have paid great 
attention to the interests of science; besides 
private schools, there are three colleges esta 
blished by law ; Greenville in Green s County, 
Blount at Knoxville, and Washington in the 
county of that name. Here is likewise a " So 
ciety for promoting Useful Knowledge." A 
taste for literature is daily increasing. The in 
habitants chiefly emigrated from Pennsylvania, 
and that part of Virginia that lies w. of the Blue 
Ridge. The ancestors of these people were ge 
nerally of the Scotch nation, some of whom emi 
grated, first to Ireland, and from thence to Ame 
rica. A few Germans and English are inter 
mixed. In 1788, it was thought there were 20 
white persons to one Negro; and the dispro 
portion is thought to be far greater now. 

This country was included in the second char 
ter of king Charles II. to the proprietors of Ca 
rolina. In a subsequent division it made a part 
of N. Carolina. It was explored about the year 
1745, and settled by about 50 families in 1754 ; 
who were soon after driven off* or destroyed by 
the Indians. Its settlement recommenced in 
1765. The first permanent settlement took place 
near Long Island of Holston, and upon Wa- 
tauga, about 1774 ; and the first appearance of 
any persons from it, in the public councils of N. 



Carolina, was in the convention of that State in 
1776. In the year 1780, a party of about 40 fa 
milies, under the guidance and direction of James 
Robertson (since Brigadier-General Robertson 
of Mero District), passed through a wilderness 
of at least 300 miles to the French Lick, and 
there founded Nashville. Their nearest neigh 
bours were the settlers of the infant state of 
Kentucky, between whom and them was a wil 
derness of 200 miles. From the year 1784 to 
1788 the government of N. Carolina over this 
country was interrupted by the assumed State of 
Frankland ; but, in the year 1789, the people 
returned to their allegiance. In 1789, N. Ca 
rolina ceded this territory to the United States, 
on certain conditions, and Congress provided for 
its government. A convention was held at Knox 
ville, in 1796, and on the 6th of February the 
constitution of the State of Tennessee was signed 
by every member of it. Its principles promise to 
ensure the happiness and prosperity of the people. 
The following are the distances on the new 
road from Nashville, in Davidson County, to 
Fort Campbell, near the junction of Holston 
with the Tennessee. 



Miles. 

.. 9 

- - 6 
;.-: i 4 

- - 6 
.. 4 

. " . - Q 
.. 5 
12 
-. 8 

- - 6 
- - 11 

-- 9 
9 
7 
Bear Creek --------18 

Camp Creek -------- 8 

King s Spring 16 

Grovet s Creek ------- 7 

The foot of Cumberland Mountain 2 
Through the mountain to Emmery s 

River, a branch of the Peleson - 11 
To the Pappa Ford of the Peleson or 

Clinch River 12 

To Campbell s Station near Holstein 10 

To the Great Island 100 

To Abingdon in Washington County 35 
To Richmond in Virginia ... 310 

Total English miles by course of the road 635] 



From Nashville to Stony River 

Big Spring - - - - 

Cedar Lick - - - - 

Little Spring - - - 

Barton s Creek - - - 

Spring Creek - - - 
Martin s Spring 

Blair s Spring - - - 

Buck Spring - - - 
Fountaines - 

Smith s Creek - - - 

Coney River - - - - 

Mine Lick - - - - 

Palling Creek - - . 

War Path - - - - 



T E O 



[By this new road, a pleasant passage may be had 
to the w. country with carriages, as there will be 
only the Cumberland Mountain to pass, and that 
is easy of ascent ; and beyond it the road is gene 
rally level and firm, abounding with fine springs 
of water. The Indian tribes within and in the 
vicinity of this State are the Cherokees and 
Chickasaws.] x 

TENO, a river of the district of Chanco in 
the kingdom of Chile. It runs e. and enters the 
Martaquino. 

[TENOCHTITLAN, or TEMEXTITAN, a 
city of the intendancy of Mexico. See MEXICO, 
intendancy of. Temistitan, Temixtitan, Tenox- 
titlan, Temihtitlan, are all vicious alterations of 
the true name of Tenochtitlan. The Aztecs, or 
Mexicans, called themselves also Tenochques, 
from whence the denomination of Tenochtitlan 
is derived.] 

TENOI, a settlement of the province and 
government of Popayan, in the Nuevo Reyno 
de Granada. 

TENSA, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Tunja, in the Nuevo Reyno de 
Granada ; situate in a healthy and pleasant 
plain ; is of a moderately hot temperature ; 
abounds in maize, sugar-canes, plantains, and 
other productions of a hot climate, and espe 
cially in anise, in which consists its chief com 
merce, sending out cargoes continually for Car 
tagena, Mompox, and other parts. It contains 
more than 400 housekeepers, and a little more 
than 100 Indians. In its territory are the cele 
brated mines of the fine emeralds of Somondoco. 
It was conquered by Gonzalo Ximin^z de 
Quesada in 1537. Ten leagues s. e. of Tunja, 
and 14 from Santa Fe. 

[TENSA W, a settlement near Mobile Bay, 
inhabited by 90 American families, that have 
been Spanish subjects since 1783.1 

TENTACION, a lake of the province and 
government of Venezuela, in the Nuevo Reyno 
de Granada : it is formed by an arm of the river 
Portuguesa, on the shore opposite the town of 
S. Jayme. 

TENTITLAN, a principal and head settle 
ment of the district of the alcaldia mayor of 
Cuicatlan in Nueva Espajna. It is of a mild 
temperature, and its population consists of eight 
families of Spaniards and 22 of Mmtees, who 
trade in seeds, cotton, and some cochineal. [Two 
hundred and four miles s. s. e. of Mexico.] 

TEOCALZINCO, a settlement of the head 
settlement of the district Xoxutla and alcaldia 
mayor of Cuernavnca in Niieva Espana. 

TEOCUITLAN, a principal and head set- 



T E O 

tlement of the district of the alcaldia mayor of 
Layula in Nueva Espana ; situate in a rough 
and stony territory, and, consequently, sterile. 
It contains 100 families of Indians, who grow 
their crops in some distant territories, and have 
a convent of Franciscans. Seven leagues e. of 
the capital. 

TEOCUCLAPA, a settlement of the head 
settlement of the district of Acantepec and alcal 
dia mayor of Tlapa in Nueva Espana ; united 
to its head settlement, and being very near to it. 

TEODORE, CABO DE, a point of land of 
the coast of Nova Scotia. 

TEOLOACHI, a settlement of the missions 
which were held by the Jesuits in the province 
of Taraumara and kingdom of Vixcaya : 31 
leagues nearly n. of the town and real of mines 
of Chiguaqua. 

TEOLOYUCA, a settlement of the alcaldia 
mayor of Coautitlan in Nueva Espana ; founded 
on the shore of the lake of Zumpango ; and on 
a point of land formed by the two rivers Za- 

Fotlan and Jondo, when they enter that lake, 
t contains 385 families of Indians, and is two 
leagues s. of its capital. 

TEOPANTLAN, a principal and head set 
tlement of the district of the alcaldia mayor of 
Izucar in Nueva Espana. It was formerly of 
the alcaldia of Aguatlan ; but from the jurisdic 
tion of this having been barren and unproduc 
tive, it was added to the former. It contains 
116 families of Indians, who gather a trifling 
quantity of seeds. Thirteen leagues e. n. e. of 
its capital. 

TEOPARI, a settlement of the missions 
which were held by the Jesuits in the province 
and government of Sonora and kingdom of Nu 
eva Espana. 

TEOPIXCA, a town of the province and 
alcaldia mayor of Chiapa in the kingdom of Gua 
temala. It was a curacy and doctrinal establish 
ment of the religious of St. Domingo, and then 
built in it a beautiful parish church. Its po 
pulation, which is numerous, is composed en 
tirely of Indians, very dexterous horsemen. The 
town is large, and passes for the principal after 
the capital. [It lies 42 miles e. with a slight 
inclination s. of Chiapa.] 

TEOPUXCO, SANTA MARIA DE, a settle 
ment of the head settlement of the district of 
Teutitlan and alcaldia mayor of Cuicatlan in 
Nueva Espana. It contains 98 families of In 
dians, who trade in cochineal, seeds, and cotton 
garments. It is of a coH and moist tempera 
ture, and is five leagues e. of its hi:ad settlement. 

TEOTALCOj S. JUAN DE, a jurisdiction and 



T E O 

alcaldia mayor of Nueva Espana. Its district is 
much reduced and without trade, and, although 
it has some mines of silver, these are scarcely 
worked, as well from the bad alloy of the metal 
as for the want of funds in the inhabitants, who 
are thus, as it were, given up to total sloth. Its 
population consists only of the capital, which is 
of a warm temperature, and of the same name, 
and inhabited by 80 families of Mexican Indians, 
and 20 of Spaniards and Muslces ; and of the 
settlements of Miltepec and Xolalpan. Twenty- 
eight leagues s. of Mexico. 

TEOTALCO, another settlement, which is the 
head settlement of the district of the alcaldia 
mayor of Villalta in the same kingdom. It con 
tains 67 families of Indians, and is 14 leagues 
from its capital. 

TEOTALCO, another, with the dedicatory title 
of S. Juan, in the head settlement and alcaldia 
mayor of Teotihuacan ; three leagues from its 
capital. 

TEOTEPEC, a principal and head settle 
ment of the district of the alcaldia mayor of Za- 
yula in Nueva Espana : it is of a mild and very 
healthy temperature, contains 50 families of 
Mustees and Mulattoes, and 200 of Indians, who 
trade alone in wheat and some large cattle. On 
the e. part is the great lake, or sear of Chapala, 
and a convent of Franciscans, which is the pa 
rish. Fifteen leagues n. by e. of its capital. 

TEOTIHUACAN, a district and alcaldia 
mayor of Nueva Espana ; bounded by those of 
Ecatepec and Tezcoco. It is eight leagues long 
from e. to w. and seven wide from n. to s. It is 
populous, and has many country estates and 
some wards included in three head settlements 
of the district. It produces in abundance maize, 
French-beans, barley, vetches, and fruit, of which 
it makes a trade ; and, although fertile and fit 
for other productions, the drought experienced 
by the territory will not admit of their cultiva 
tion ; and thus the Indians are rather given to 
the cultivation of maqueyes for the making of 
pulque, from which they derive great profit, carry 
ing it for sale to Mexico. Its population consists 
of the following settlements : 

S. Juan Totalco, Zacualuca, 

S. Francisco Temas- S.Martin, 

calapa, La Purificacion, 

Sta. Maria Actipa- S. Lorenzo, 

que, S. Juan Evange- 

S. Miguel Tlama- lista. 

xac, 

TEOTIHUACAN, the capital, is the settlement 



T E O 



535 



of the same name, w ith the dedicatory title of 
S. Juan ; of a mild temperature. It contains in 
the wards of its district 414 families of Indians, 
160 of Spaniards, 25 of Mustces, and 52 of Mu 
lattoes, and a good convent of Franciscans. 
[Twenty-three miles n. e. of Mexico, in lat. 19 
41 w. and long. 98 48 to.] 

TEOTIHUACAX, a river of Nueva Espana, [on 
which the former capital is situated], which rises 
in the mountains n. e. of Mexico, collects the 
waters of many streams and cascades, and enters 
the lake of Acuima, which empties itself into the 
great lake of Mexico, called Tezcuco. 

TEOTONGO, a settlement of the head set 
tlement of the district of Tlaxiaco, and alcaldia 
mayor of Teposcolula in Nueva Espana. It con 
tains 74 families of Indians, employed in the cul 
tivation of cochineal, seeds, and cotton ; and is 
four leagues e. by n. of its head settlement. 

[TEOWENISTA Creek, runs s. about 28 
miles, then w. six miles, and empties into Alleg- 
hany River, about 18 miles from its mouth, and 
nearly five below the Hickory Town.] 

TEOZAPOTLAN, a principal and head set 
tlement of the district of the alcaldia mayor of 
Antequera in the province and bishopric of 
Oaxaca. It contains a convent of Dominicans, 
and S80 families of Indians, who live by the trade 
in cochineal and seeds. 

TEOZAQUALCO, called alsoTEococuiLco, 
a jurisdiction and alcaldia mayor of Nueva Es 
pana, in the province and bishopric of Oaxaca. 
It is much reduced, and yields nothing but some 
cochineal and maize ; for, although it has some 
mines of silver, which were formerly worked to 
advantage, yet are they to-day all abandoned. 
The capital is the settlement of its name, con 
taining 285 Chatinos Indians, and 12 families of 
Spaniards and Mulattoes. [Two hundred and 
four miles s. e. of Mexico, in lat. 1727 / n. and 
long. 96 12 .] 

The other settlements are reduced to, 
Teoxomulco, Amoltepec, 

Tezontepec, Ixtalutla. 

TEOZELCO, a settlement of the head settle 
ment of the district of Ixtlahuacan, and alcaldia 
mayor of Xalapa in Nueva Espana. It signifies 
the place where the Indians adored as a God a 
tiger made of stone. It produces in abundance 
maize, French beans, and fruits, but the princi 
pal employment of the natives is the fishing for 
bobos in the river Huitzilapa, which runs close 
to the settlement, bounding on the same side the 
jurisdiction of the town of Cordoba. It contains 



636 



T E P 



two families of Indians, 14 of Mustees and Mu- 
lattoes, and 23 of Indians. Six leagues from its 
head settlement. 

TEOZINTLA, a settlement of the head settle 
ment of the district of Xocutla, and aJcaldia 
mayor of Chilapa in Nueva Espana. Three 
leagues e. of its head settlement. 

TEPA, a settlement of the province and go 
vernment of Sonora in Nueva Espana ; situate 
on the shore of the river Yaquis. 

TEPACHE, a settlement of the province and 
government of Sonora in Nueva Espana. 

TEPACI, a river of the province and govern 
ment of Paraguay, which rises in the sierras 
which are between the river of this name and the 
Parana. It runs e. and enters the former, be 
tween those of Corrientes and Fareiri. 

TEPACTEPEC, a settlement of the head set 
tlement of the district of Misquiahuala in the 
alcaldia mayor of Tepetango, and kingdom of 
NuevaEspana. Itcontains 180 families of Indians. 

TECALTATEPEC, S. FRANCISCO DE, a set 
tlement of the head settlement of the district of 
Pinzandaro, and alcaldia mayor of Tanzitaro in 
Nueva Espana ; of a very hot and dry tempera 
ture. It contains 65 families of Indians, and, in 
some ranchos of its district, 28 of Spaniards, and 
49 of Mustees and Mulattoes, whose trade is in 
seeds, wax, and fruit. Five leagues w. of its 
head settlement. 

TECALTATEPEC, another, with the dedicatory 
title of S. Juan, which is a head settlement of the 
district of the Chontales Indians, in the alcaldia 
mayor of Nexapa. It has annexed to its juris 
diction 55 families of Indians. 

TEPANTCINCO, a settlement of the head 
settlement of the district of Xonacatepec, and 
alcaldia mayor of Cuernavaca in Nueva Espana. 

TEPANTEPEC, S. MATEO DE, a settlement 
of the head settlement of the district of Huite- 
pec, and alcaldia mayor of Ixquintepec. It con 
tains 66 families of Indians, including those of 
the wards of its district, and is four leagues e. by 
n. of its capital. 

TEPANTLA, a settlement of the head settle 
ment of the district, and alcaldia mayor of Atlan 
in Nueva Espana. It contains 20 families of In 
dians, who gather many seeds and fruits from the 
extreme fertility of its soil. It is annexed to the 
curacy of the settlement of Tenamaztlan, from 
whence it is somewhat more than four leagues 
w. by s. 

TEPANTZINCO, the same as the settle 
ment above mentioned, under the name of Te- 



T E P 

pancinco. We prefer the spelling it with the 2, 
as the more correct way of the two. 

TEPAPAYECA, a settlement of the head set 
tlement of the district of the alcaldia mayor of 
Izucar in Nueva Espana. In the district of its 
curacy are 10 small wards at a little distance 
from each other, and in which are numbered 
420 families of Indians, and 40 of Mustees and 
Mulattoes. The territory is broken, but pro 
duces much wheat and maize. Two leagues and 
a half w. by n. of its capital, and rather to the n. 

TEPEACA, a province and alcaldia mayor of 
Nueva Espana, in the bishopric of La Puebla de 
los Angeles. It is of a great extent, and gene 
rally of a hot temperature, although it has parts, 
some of which are warm and others cold. It 
abounds greatly in small cattle, of the wools of 
which they make woven stuffs, in which consists 
its principal commerce. It produces also much 
wheat, barley, and other seeds, the crops of 
which are abundant ; and not less in fruit, flow 
ers, and garden herbs. In the celebrated valley 
of Balzaquillo, which is extensive, there are 56 
cultivated estates. In this jurisdiction is the 
volcano of Orazava. Its numerous population 
consists of the following settlement : 

TEPEACA, the capital, which is the city of 
its name, was founded near a mountain, of a mo 
derately hot temperature, and with fine fresh 
water, although, at times, it is badly supplied 
with this article, the whole of it coming from the 
lofty sierra of Tlaxcala, which is seven leagues 
distant. The inhabitants have, therefore, the 
precaution of saving it in cisterns, and from these 
the town is supplied. 

The population is composed of 80 families of 
Spaniards, 102 of Mustees^ 22 of Mulattoes, and 
481 of Indians. The principal square is large, 
and, in the middle of it, is a fort which served as 
a retreat and place of defence to the valorous 
Hernan Cortes and his army, upon his retiring 
from Mexico. This building is now in a state 
of great dilapidation, having undergone no repair 
whatever since that time. In one of the fronts 
of the said square, namely, that which looks to 
the e. is the convent of San Francisco, a large, 
magnificent, and beautiful building, founded en 
tirely on arches, all the expenses of it having 
been defrayed by Cortes and his captains ; and, 
although 250 years have now elapsed, yet is it 
entirely free from all damage or want of repair. 
On the other side of the square, and opposite 
this convent, is the parish-church, not so large, 
but of equal beauty and architecture. 



T E P 

This city has several woollen cloth manufacto 
ries, and in these consists its principal commerce 
with the other provinces. In its head settlement 
~ cultivated estates, inhabited by 177 fanii- 

- -. . ** . 



T E P 



537 



are 



lies of Indians, and in which they gather abun 
dant crops of wheat, barley, and other seeds, and, 
of the former alone, more than 100,000 fnnegas 
(bushels) yearly. [It was called in the com 
mencement of the conquest, Segura de laFrontera, 
(Cartas de Hernan Cortez, p. 155). It is 66 
miles e. by s. of Mexico, in lat. 19 n. Long. 
98 2 .] 

The other settlements of this jurisdiction are, 
La Purificacion, Santa Maria, 

Santa Maria Ostoti- San Gabriel, 

pac, Nopaluca, 

San Hipolito, Santa Maria Acaxete, 

San Nicolas, Santa Isabel, 

Santa Catalina, San Antonio Tlaco- 

San Miguel, milco, 

San Simon, Santa Maria Magda- 

Santiago, lena, 

San Bartolome, San Salvador, 

San Andres Tlalchi- San Mateo, 2, 

comula, San Simon, 

Santa Maria, San Agustin del Pal- 

Aljojuca, mar, 

San Salvador el Seco, San Miguel, 2, 
San^jflipolito, San Sebastian, 

Santa Maria Cozaqui, Ixtapa, 
Tecamachalco, Quechula, 

Santiago, Santiago Tenango, 

San Mateo, San Pedro, 

Santa Cruz Tlacote- Santa Ursola, 

pec, San Simon, 

Todos Santos, San Sebastian, 2, 

San Marcos, San Geronimo, 

San Luis, Los Reyes. 

San Andres, 

TEPEAPULCO, a princiipal and head settle 
ment of the district of the alcaldia mayor of Gua- 
yacocotla in Nueva Espana. It contains 64 fa 
milies of Indians. 

TEPEC, a settlement of the head settlement 
of the district of Amaqueca, and alcaldia mayor 
of Zayula in Nueva Espana, at the foot of a 
mountain. It contains 40 families of Indians, 
and is two leagues w. of its head settlement. 

TEPECU AC UILCO, a settlement of the head 
settlement of the district and alcaldia mayor of 
Iquala in Nueva Espana ; containing 122 fami 
lies of Indians. [Its latitude, found by the me 
thod of Douwes, is (according to Humboldt) un 
certain to the extent of nearly 3 , 18 20 0".] 

VOL. IV. 



TEPEGUANES, a settlement and garrison 
of Nueva Espana, on the shore of the river of 
Las Nasas, and founded to restrain the Infidel 
Indians of this nation ; who were at last de 
stroyed through the exertions of the Count San 
Pedro del Alamo, who was sent to defend this 
territory. 

The nation of barbarous Indians, from whom 
the above settlement took its name, inhabited the 
jurisdiction of the kingdom of Nueva Vizcaya, 
and was one of the most ferocious and valorous 
races of those regions, although not very nume 
rous. They lived in temporary huts between 
rocky and broken places ; they prided them 
selves as being superior to any of the Indians 
with whom they engaged, and particularly to the 
Acaxees and Taraumaras, their neighbours, and 
these were kept in such awe, as to permit them 
to carry away from their settlements their wives, 
without offering any resistance. 

The Spaniards, allured by the richness of the 
silver-mines, established themselves pacifically 
amongst these Indians, and the father, Geronimo 
Ramirez, of the Jesuits, entered amongst them 
to preach to them the faith. He founded the 
settlements of Santiago and Santa Catalina, and 
the numbers of his proselytes were daily encreas- 
ing by the labours of other missionaries until 
1616, when there was a general apostacy, a re 
bellion being excited amongst the other na 
tions, and the father, Hernando de Tovar, of the 
Jesuits; the father Juan de Gurierez, a Fran 
ciscan, being put to death, together with 200 
Spaniards, who were made to undergo the great 
est tortures. But the governor of Nueva Viz 
caya, Don Gaspar de Alvear, of the order of San 
tiago, after several attempts, induced them at 
last to submit to be instructed by the missiona 
ries of the Jesuits. 

TEPEHUACAN, a principal and head set 
tlement of the district of the alcaldia mayor of 
Tepic in Nueva Espana. It is of a hot tempe 
rature, contains a convent of the religious of San 
Francisco, and 74 families of Indians, who oc 
cupy themselves in the cultivation and selling of 
cotton. Twelve leagues n. of its capital. 

TEPEHUACAN, another, with the dedicatory 
title of Santiago, a head settlement of the dis 
trict of the alcaldia mat/or of Meztitlan in Nueva 
Espana. Its inhabitants, with those of the wards 
of its district, amount to 555 families, and is an 
nexed to the curacy of the settlement of Tlan- 
chinol ; being 12 leagues n. n. e. of its capital. 

TEPEMAXALCO, a principal and head set- 
3z 



538 



T E P 



tlement of the district of the alcaldla mayor of 
Metepec in Nueva Esparla. It contains 420 fa 
milies of Indians. 

TEPEQUE, a settlement of the province and 
alcaldia mayor of Chiapa in the kingdom of Gua 
temala. 

TEPESTLAHUACA, a settlement of the head 
settlement of the district of Tututepec, and alcal 
dia mayor of Xicayan in Nueva Espana. It con 
tains 60 families of Indians, and is 14 leagues 
from its capital. 

TEPETATES, a settlement and real of silver- 
mines, of the province and government of Sonora 
in Nueva Espana. 

TEPETISLAN, S. ANDRES DE, a settlement 
of the head settlement of the district, and alcaldia 
mayor of Zultepec in the same kingdom. It con 
tains 39 families of Indians, and, in its vicinity, 
a ward called Santiago, with 12 other families, 
whose trade is in the cultivation of grain and 
other productions. Haifa league s. e. of its capital. 
TEPETISQUI, a settlement of the head set 
tlement of the district of Tlazintla, and alcaldia 
mayor of Ixmiquilpan in Nueva Espana. 

TEPETITLAN, a settlement of the head set 
tlement of the district of Chiantla, and alcaldia 
mayor of Tezcoco in Nueva Espana. Of a mild 
temperature, abounding in maize and other seeds ; 
containing 164 families of Indians, and 12 of Spa 
niards. 

TEPETITLAN, another settlement, in the alcal 
dia mayor of Tula of the same kingdom ; annexed 
to the curacy of its capital, from whence it lies 
three leagues to n. It contains 69 families of 
Indians. 

TEPETLACINCO, a settlement of the head 
settlement of the district, and alcaldia mayor of 
Tlapa in Nueva Espana. It contains 24 fami 
lies of Indians, and is a little more than two 
leagues n. e. of its capital. 

TEPETLACINCO, another, a head settlement of 
the district of the alcaldia mayor of Acatlan in 
the same kingdom. It contains 470 families of 
Indians. 

TEPETLAN, S. ANTONIO DE, a small settle 
ment of the head settlement of the district of 
Naulingo, and alcaldia mayor of Xalapa in 
Nueva Espana, in the midst of various sierras; 
of a hot and sickly temperature, and peopled by 
Indians who had forsaken the old settlement of 
S. Lorenzo, two leagues off; the greater part of 
the inhabitants of the same having perished by 
an epidemy. Two leagues n. e. of its head set 
tlement. 



T E P 

TEPETLASTOC, SANTA MARIA MAGDA 
LEN A DE, a principal and head settlement of the 
district of the alcaldia mayor of Tezcoco ; situate 
in a narrow vale between two lofty mountains, 
with a good convent of Franciscans, and having 
the wards of its district inhabited by 785 families 
of Indians, and 89 of Spaniards, Mustees, and 
Mulattoes, who, for the greater part, are em 
ployed as agriculturists in the estates, sowing 
wheat, maize, and other seeds. Four miles n. e. 
of Tezcuco. 

TEPETLATA, a settlement of the head set 
tlement of the district of Xocotla, and alcaldia 
mayor of Tlapa in Nueva Espana. It contains 
104 families of Indians, and is five leagues n. n. e. 
of its head settlement. 

TEPETLATALCO, S.GERONIMO DE, a small 
settlement of the alcaldiamayor Tacuba in Nueva 
Espana. 

TEPETLATONGA, a small settlement or 
ward of the head settlement of Mixtepec, and 
alcaldia mayor of Juxtlahuaca in Nueva Es 
pana. 

TEPETLAXCO, S.CHRISTOVAL DE, a set 
tlement of the head settlement of the district of 
S. Martin de Texmelucan, and alcaldia mayor of 
Guejocinco in Nueva Espana. It contains 44 
families of Indians, and is n. of its capital. 

TEPETOTUTLA, a principal and he*id set 
tlement of the district of the alcaldia mayor &amp;f 
Teutila in Nueva Espana. It is of a cold tem 
perature, inhabited by 100 Indian families, who 
cultivate maize, of which they gather abundant 
crops. Twelve leagues n. of its capital. 

TEPETUXPAN, S. ESTEVAN DE, a settle 
ment of the alcaldia mayor of Chalco in Nueva 
Espana; situate five leagues s. of the same, and 
containing 120 Indian families. 

TEPEUZILA, a settlement of the head settle 
ment of the district of Papalotipac, and alcaldia 
mayor of Cuicatlan in the same kingdom ; of a 
cold and moist temperature, and containing 106 
families of Indians, who trade in saltpetre, co 
chineal, and cotton, of which they make good 
woven articles. Five leagues s. of its capital. 

TEPEXCO, a settlement of the head settle 
ment of the district, and alcaldia mayor of Zacat- 
lan in Nueva Espana. Four leagues from its 
capital. 

TEPEXI, or TEPEXE, DE LA SEDA, a juris 
diction and alcaldia mayor of Nueva Espana. It 
has this name from the quantity of silk which was 
formerly made in its district ; but at present no 
thing but the reputation of its wealth in this ar 



T E P 

tide remains; not that this falling offcan be traced 
to any other source than that of the indolence of 
the natives, the territory being in itself rich and 
fertile. Its jurisdiction is reduced to nearly the 
capital and to some few small surrounding settle 
ments. 

It has several rivers, by which it is irrigated, 
produces a good quantity of seeds, and has fine 
breeds of large and small cattle, of the which, 
with its cotton manufactures, it carries on a tole 
rable trade. The want of regular settlements is 
compensated by the number of its country estates, 
and in the sierras there are sufficient indications 
of mines, although none have been worked, and 
no diligence has been used in searching for 
them. 

TEPEXI, the capital, is the settlement of the 
same name ; of a hot and moist temperature. 
It contains a convent of Franciscans, and is in 
habited by 100 families of Spaniards, Mustees, 
and Mulattoes, and by 1570 of Mexican Indians, 
in which are included the wards with which it is 
surrounded. It is very fertile in flowers, fruits, 
and garden herbs, for the culture of which they 
profit by the irrigation of the rivers. [Ninety- 
one miles s. e. of Mexico, in lat. 18 21 n. and 
long. 97 59 ro.] 

TEPEXI, another, with the addition of Del 
Rio, a settlement of the alcaldia mayor of Zula 
in the same kingdom ; annexed to the curacy of 
its capital, from whence it is 2 leagues to s. s. w. 
It contains 164 families of Indians. 

TEPEXIC, SANTA MARIA DE, a settlement 
of the head settlement of the district and alcaldia 
mayor of Ixmiquilpan in Nueva Espana ; eight 
leagues n. of its capital. 

TEPEXILLO, a settlement of the head settle 
ment of the district, and alcaldia mayor of Juxt- 
lahuaca in Nueva Espana. It contains 48 fami 
lies of Indians. 

TEPEXOXUMA, a head settlement of the 
district of the alcaldia mayor of Izuca in Nueva 
Espana. It contains 296 families of Indians, in 
cluding those of the settlements in its vicinity, 
and 173 of Spaniards, Mustees, and Mulattoes. 
Its temperature is the most benign of the whole 
jurisdiction, and the soil fertile in many produc 
tions, both in the cultivated estates and sugar- 
engines which it possesses. Three leagues n.n.e. 
of its capital. 

TEPEXOYUCA, ASUNCION DE, a head set 
tlement of the district of the alcaldia mayor of 
Metepec in Nueva Espana. It contains 192 fa 
milies of Indians, and is three leagues s.w. of its 
capital. 



T E P 



639 



TEPEXPAN, SANTA MARIA DE, a head set 
tlement of the district of the alcaldia mayor of 
Teotihuacan in Nueva Espana. It contains a 
convent of Augustins and 261 families of Indians, 
including those of four wards. Three leagues 
w. of its capital. 

TEPEZIMATLAN, a head settlement of the 
district, and alcaldia mayor of Chichicapa in the 
province and bishopric of Oaxaca. It is of a mild 
temperature, produces cochineal and seeds, in 
the cultivation of which its natives, consisting of 
34 families of Indians, are employed; and is 
six leagues s. w. of its capital. 

TEPEZITLA, a small settlement of the alcal 
dia mat/or of Guauchinango in Nueva Espana ; 
annexed to the curacy of the settlement of Tham- 
pacachi. It contains 122 families of Indians, 
who trade in chile , common wax, pita, fish, and 
neat cattle. East of its head settlement. 

TEPEZOZOLCO, a head settlement of the 
district of the alcaldia mayor of Chalco, in the 
same kingdom as the former, and five leagues s. 
of the same. It contains 120 Indian families. 

TEPIC, a jurisdiction and alcaldia mayor of 
Nueva Espana, in the kingdom of Nueva Galicia 
and bishopric of Guadalaxara. It enjoys vari 
ous temperatures, produces much maize, cotton, 
and other seeds, which are cultivated in the ran- 
chos and estates, and its district extends as far as 
the coast of the S. Sea, in which is the port of 
Matanchel. 

TEPIC, the capital, is the settlement of its 
name ; of a cold temperature, it being situate 
on the top of a mountain, inhabited by 95 fami 
lies of Spaniards, Mustees, and Mulattoes, and 
65 of Mexican Indians. It has a good convent 
of Franciscans, and is 97 miles w. with a slight 
inclination to the n. of the capital Guadalaxara, 
and 344 n. w. from Mexico, in lat. 21 36 n. 
long. 104 45 w. 

The other settlements are, 

Xalisco, Tepehuacan, 

Xaltocan, San Andres, 

Mecatlan, Simochiqui, 

Guainamota, Zapotlan, 

Guaristemba, Mazatlan. 

TEPICHITAN, a settlement of the head set 
tlement of the district of Tlaltenango, and alcal 
dia mayor of Colotlan in Nueva Espana. Four 
leagues s. of its head settlement. 

TEPIQUE, an abundant river of Nueva Es 
pana, in the jurisdiction and alcaldia mayor of 
Compostela, and kingdom of Nueva Galicia. It 
rises near the settlement of Santiago de Cali- 
maya, 14 leagues from Mexico. It runs more 
3z 2 



540 



T E P 



than 200 leagues from e. to w. making different 
curves, until it unites itself with the Guada- 
laxara, and disembogues itself into the S. Sea, 
six leagues n. w. of the Port of Matanchel, just 
after that of the Guadalaxara. [Its course, how 
ever, is but little ascertained, and the name is at 
present very little known. It is supposed to be 
a branch of what is now called the river Grande 
Santiago.] 

TEPIRU, a settlement of the province and 
goverment of Tucuman in Peru, of the jurisdic 
tion of Santiago del Estero, on the shore of the 
river Dolce. 

TEP1TONGO, a settlement of the head set 
tlement of the district of Totontepec, and alcaldia 
mayor of Villalta in Nueva Espana. It is of a 
cold temperature, contains 54 families of Indians, 
and is a little more than seven leagues e. of its 
capital. 

TEPOCAS, a settlement of the province and 
government of Sonora in Nueva Espana, in the 
Gulf of California, and near the swamp of Los 
Ceres. 

TEPOLULA, S. JUAN TENANGO DE, a head 
settlement of the district of the alcaldia mayor of 
Chalco in Nueva Espana, two leagues s. e. of its 
capital. It contains 178 families of Indians, be 
sides a great population of Mustees and Mulat 
toes, and a good convent of Dominicans. 

TEPONASTLA, S. JUAN DE, a settlement 
of the head settlement of the district of Papaloti- 
pac, and alcaldia mayor of Cuicatlan in Nueva 
Espana. It is of a mild temperature, contains 
56 families of Indians, employed in the trade of 
saltpetre, cochineal, and cotton, of which they 
make various woven stuffs, and is five leagues e. 
of its head settlement. 

TEPOTE, a river of the province and govern 
ment of Paraguay, which runs w. and enters the 
river of this name, between that of Corrientes 
and the settlement of Pan de Azucar. 

TEPOTLAN, a head settlement of the dis 
trict of the alcaldia mayor of Tequepespa in 
Nueva Espana. It contains 25 families of In 
dians, who employ themselves in agriculture, 
and with the fruits of the same carrying on a 
trade. 

TEPOXTLAN, a head settlement of the dis 
trict of the alcaldia mayor of Cuernavaco in 
Nueva Espana. It is one of the most populous 
of its jurisdiction, containing in it and in six 
wards annexed to it, 963 families of Indians. It 
has a good convent of Dominicans, produces 
much maize, French beans, and wood, by the 
cutting of which it carries on a great commerce, 



T E P 

as well as by the sale of fruit gathered from 
14,000 trees. Three leagues n. of its capital. 

TEPOXTLAN, another settlement, of the head 
settlement of the district of Atengo, and alcaldia 
mayor of Chilapa in the same kingdom. Three 
leagues e. of its head settlement. 

TEPOZCOLULA, a jurisdiction and alcaldia 
mayor of Nueva Espana, one of those of the first 
class, and of the greatest estimation both as to 
its quality and extent ; since it comprehends that 
of Yanguitlan, and as there are, in both, 32 settle 
ments, which are head settlements of the dis 
trict. It is generally of a cold temperature, very 
fertile in cochineal, maize, and other seeds, as 
well as in cotton, of which they make very good 
woven stuffs ; as also excellent chamois^ from the 
stags which they hunt on the mountains. 

In the same mountains are found eagles with 
two heads and of great size, as was that which 
was presented to the viceroy of that kingdom, 
the Marquis de Valero, who sent it to the king. 

TEPOZCOLULA, the capital, is of the same 
name, of a cold temperature, contains a convent of 
Dominicans, and 160 families of Spaniards, Mus- 
tees, and Mulattoes, and 717 of Mistecos Indians, 
who cultivate cochineal, manufacture cotton 
stuffs and chamois. [One hundred and fifty miles 
s. s. e. of Mexico, in lat. 17 16 30" n. long. 79 
51 w. 

The other settlements are, 

Santiago Fexupa, Xattepeton, 

S. Miguel Guatla, Apuala, 

Concepcion de Atoya- Natividad de Chacal- 
que, 

S. Juan, 

Santo Tomas de Oco- 
tepec, 

S. Andres Chicahu- 
axtla, 

Santa MariaTlaltepec, 

Tlaxiaco, 

Santa Maria Cuiquila, 

Santa Maria Yolote- 



tongo, 

Asuncion Tecaltitlan, 
S. Juan Copala, 
S. Andres delos Reyes, 
Santa Cruz Yunduza, 
Monte Leon, 
Chilapa, 

S. Miguel Achiautla, 
S. Bartolome Malinal- 

tepec, 

S.Miguel Tulanzinco, 
S. Mateo del Penasco, 
Santiago Teotongo, 
Tamayulapa, 
Xipacoya. 



pec, 

S. Francisco Petlastla- 
huaca, 

S. Juan Atoyaquillo, 

S. Estevan Atlatlauca, 

Tonacatepec, 

TEPOZOTLAN, a settlement of the alcaldia 
mayor of Coautitlan in Nueva Espana. It con 
tains 521 families of Indians, divided into dif 
ferent wards and villages ; and in it the Jesuits 
had a magnificent college, a house for novices 
and studies; situate between the river of its 



T E Q 

name and a stream which, at a small distance, 
runs to enter the Lake of Zumpango. It has a 
very good bridge opposite the deposit of waters. 
One league n. w. of its capital. 

TEPOZOZUCA, a settlement of the head 
settlement of the district of Zoquizinco, and al- 
caldia mayor of Marinalco in Nueva Espana. It 
is very close to its head settlement, and five 
leagues n. of the capital. 

TEPQUIS, a barbarou? nation of Indians of 
Peru, who dwell to the n. of the city of Guanuco. 
They are very rational, observe monogamy, and 
respect the laws of hospitality ; and have a set 
tlement of their name, with the dedicatory title 
of La Santisima Trinidad, which was first founded 
in 1732. 

TEPUNAHUASCO, a settlement of the head 
settlement of the district and alcaldia mayor of 
Cuquio in Nueva Espana. One league s. of its 
head settlement. 

[TEQUAJO,orTiQU AS, aprovince of Mexico; 
according to some Spanish travellers, being about 
lat. 37, where they found 16 villages.] 

TEQUALA, a settlement of the head settle 
ment of the district and alcaldia mayor of Acapo- 
neta in Nueva Espana. Three leagues s. w. of 
its capital. 

TEQUALTICHI, or TECOALTICHE, a dis 
trict and alcaldia mayor of the kingdom of Nueva 
Galicia, of a very limited jurisdiction, the same 
comprehending only the territory lying between 
the river Verde, which comes from the district 
of Aguas Calientes, and the river Aljojuca: this, 
as well as the other, running from n. to s. and 
being three leagues distant from each other : 
the same distance forms the width of the terri 
tory, which has only three settlements, inhabited 
by many Spaniards, Indians, and Mulattoes, al 
though there are some living in the estates of 
Aljojuca and Guadalupe ; situate in the bay 
formed by the rivers Chico and Aljojuca, and 
where they gather abundant crops of wheat, 
maize, and other seeds. 

It has silver mines, in which is found an abun 
dance of tin in very soft and polished stones, 
with shades and tints approaching to black, in 
globular, oval, and triangular figures, and of so 
solid and smooth a contexture, that they supply 
the place of smoothing iron. 

TEQUALTICHI, the capital, is the settlement of 
the same name : [33 miles e. of Guadalaxara, in 
lat. 21 W n. long. 102 30 w. ] 

The other settlements are, 

Michoacanejo, Thecoaltitlan. 

Iluejotitlan, 



T E Q 



541 



TEQUALTITLAN, a settlement of the head 
settlement of the district and alcaldia mayor of 
Tecpatitlan in the kingdom and bishopric of 
Nueva Galicia. Seven leagues e. of its ca 
pital. 

TEQUANAPA, S.JUAN DE, a settlement of 
the jurisdiction of the government of Acapulco 
in Nueva Espana, and of the bishopric of La 
Puebla de los Angeles : situate in the boundaries 
which divide this jurisdiction from that of Ya- 
gualica. It contains 182 families of Indians, and 
is 12 leagues e. of its capital. 

TEQUENDAMA, a celebrated fall of the 
river Bogota, in the Nuevo Reyno de Granada ; 
and which is looked upon as a prodigy of nature : 
for the impetuous current of this river being con 
fined within very narrow limits, bursts forth 
through an opening at the top of the sierra as 
it were through a spout, forming by its water* a 
bow of 220 fathoms in length, and altogether 
with a noise so tremendous as to be heard at 
seven leagues distance. 

The water falls into a basin of more than a 
league in circumference. The quantity and force 
of the falling water causes thick clouds to arise 
around this spot, insomuch as that it is impos 
sible to examine it in the evening ; but, in the 
morning it forms a spectacle the most delightful, 
for the rays of the sun beaming upon the spray 
of the waters, a thousand beautiful rainbows are 
formed ; and the whole prospect is rendered 
grand and sublime by the immense square stones 
which form the basin, and which are as perfect 
as though they had been cut by the chisel and 
with the greatest labour. 

The tops of these stones are covered with 
beautiful trees and flowers, and the whole pro 
spect, with the delightful song of a multitude of 
birds, forms a complete paradise. 

[TEQUEPA, a part of the coast of Nuevo 
Mexico, about 18 leagues n. w. of Acapulco.]) 

TEQUEPEXPA, a jurisdiction and alcaldia 
mayor of the kingdom of Nueva Galicia and 
bishopric of Guadalaxara. Its jurisdiction is 
very limited, containing only two settlements, 
which are head settlements of the district, and 
some small wards. It is equally scarce in pro 
ductions ; for, although the soil is fertile, and 
yields whatever is sown, the Indians are so sloth 
ful as to cultivate only some maize and French- 
beans. 

TEQUEPEXPA. The principal settlement of 
the same name, of a cold temperature, and in 
habited by 65 families of Indians and 10 of Mus- 
tees and Mulattoes, who cultivate nothing but 



542 

the productions aforesaid: 44 leagues w. s. w. of 
Guadalaxara. The other settlements are : 
Santa Maria, San Luis, 

Santa Pedro de La- Comatlan, 
gunilla, Tepotlan. 

[TEQUERY Bay, on the s. e. part ot the 
coast of the island of Cuba, between Cape Cruiz 
and Cape Maizi, at the e. end. It affords good 
anchorage and shelter for ships, but is not much 
frequented.] 

TEQUIA, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Tunja in the Nuevo Reyno de 
Granada; situate where Geronimo de Aguayo 
founded, by order of the captain, Gonzalo Suarez 
Rondon, the city of San Geronimo de Malaga 
in 1541, but which was a few years after depo 
pulated. Its temperature is mild, and the coun 
try pleasant and delightful ; it produces in abun 
dance fruits of a warm and cold climate, and 
excellent flour : also they make here much sugar 
and sweetmeats, and breed much neat cattle, 
sheep, goats, and mules, highly esteemed; carry 
ing on in all the above a great trade with all the 
other provinces at the market, which is held on 
Saturdays. 

It contains 15,000 housekeepers of the most 
respectable kind, and who are docile and of good 
character : [99 miles n. n. e. of Tunja, and 32 
s. s. w. from Pamplona,] in the high road leading 
to this city, to Merida, and to Caracas. 

TEQUIA, another settlement, in the same pro 
vince and kingdom ; eight leagues from the for 
mer. It enjoys the same temperature, and has 
the same productions, and is inhabited only by 
Indians, who amount to 60, and maintain them 
selves by making straw-hats, very fine and much 
esteemed in all parts, and therefore are they 
little solicitous about agriculture. Forty leagues 
. of its capital. 

TEQUIARI, a river of the province and cor 
regimiento of Pomabamba in Peru. It rises in 
the mountains of the Andes of Cuchao, runs 
nearly e. and enters the abundant river of Beni. 

TEQUILA, or Rio HONDO, ahead settlement 
of the district of the alcaldia mayor of Chiapa, 
in the province and bishopric of Oaxaca in 
Nueva Espana. It contains 400 families of In 
dians, applied to the culture of cochineal and 
seeds, especially maize, and is seven leagues e, 
of its capital. 

TEQUILAN, SAN PEDRO DE, a head settle 
ment of the district of the alcaldia mayor of Ori- 
zava in Nueva Espana, on the top of an exten 
sive sierra. It contains 338 families of Indians, 
and is seven leagues s. s. e. of its capital. 



T E Q 

TEQUISISTEPEC, SAN MIGUEL DE, a set- 
tleinent of the alcaldia mayor of Yanguitlan in 
Nueva Espana. It is ot a cold temperature, 
contains 88 families, who breed cattle, and make 
woven cotton stuffs ; has a convent of Domini 
cans, and is eight leagues w. by n. of the head 
settlement of Zoyaltepec. 

TEQUISISTEPEC, another settlement, with the 
dedicatory title of San Pedro, the head settle 
ment of the district of the alcaldia mayor of Gu- 
juapa in Nueva Espana. It contains 480 families 
of Indians, and a convent of religious of St. 
Domingo. 

TEQUISISTLAN, SAN BARTOLOME DE, a 
settlement of the head settlement of the district 
and alcaldia mayor of Teotihuacan. It is of a 
cold and moist temperature, has united to it six 
small settlements, of which its population is com 
posed ; the whole of the same amounting to 126 
families of Indians, 15 of Spaniards, and 20 of 
Mustees and Mulattoes. Three leagues s. of its 
capital. 

TEQUISISTLAN, another, a head settlement of 
the district, in the alcaldia mayor of Tehuante- 
pec. It is of a hot temperature, situate in the 
middle of the high road which leads from the 
capital of this jurisdiction to the city of Oaxaca. 
It contains 180 families of Indians, including 
those of the wards of its district, and 20 of 
Mustees and Mulattoes, who trade in cochineal 
and seeds. Twelve leagues e. of the capital. 

TEQUISQUIAC, SANTIAGO DE, a settle 
ment of the alcaldia mayor of Zumpango in 
Nueva Espana. It contains 125 families of In 
dians of the Otomi nation, four of Spaniards, 
23 of MusteeS) and 10 of Mulattoes, who trade, 
some of them in pulque, and others as muleteers, 
though the greatest part are agriculturists. 
Three leagues n. of its capital. 

TEQUISQUIAPAN, SANTA MARIA DE, a 
settlement of the head settlement of the district 
of San Juan del Rio, and alcaldia mayor of Que- 
retaro in Nueva Espafia ; annexed to the curacy 
of its head settlement. It contains 283 families 
of Indians. 

TEQUISQUIAPAN, another, a small settlement 
in the alcaldia mayor of San Luis de Potosi and 
bishopric of Mechoacan. It contains 20 families 
of Mustees and Mulattoes, and 70 of Indians, 
who employ themselves in the gardens of its dis 
trict : w. of the city. 

TEQUISQUINAHUAC, SANTA MARIA DE, 
a settlement of the alcaldia mayor of Tezcoco in 
Nueva Espana ; of a mild temperature, annexed 
to the curacy of the settlement of Huejutla, from 



T E R 

whence it lies half a league, and contains 100 fa 
milies of Indians, who cut wood to be carried to 
Mexico in large canoes by the lake. 

TEQUISQUIPA, S. MARTIN DE, a settle 
ment of the alcaldia mayor and real of mines of 
Temascaltepec in Nueva Espana. It contains 
27 families of Indians dedicated to the cultiva 
tion of seeds, and is three leagues w. of its ca 
pital. 

TEQUISQUITENGO, a settlement of the 
head settlement of the district of Xoxutla and 
alcaldia mayor of Cuernavaca in Nueva Espana. 

TEQUfSTLAHUACA, a settlement of the 
head settlement of the district of S. Luis de la 
Costa and alcaldia mayor of Tlapa in Nueva Es 
pana. It is of a hot temperature, contains 74 
families of Indians, and is five leagues from its 
head settlement. 

TEQUIZIAPAN, S. MIGUEL DE, a settle 
ment of the alcaldia mayor of Tixtlan in Nueva 
Espana ; situate on the share of the river of 
Las Balsas ; containing 82 families of Indians. 
Three leagues from the settlement of Ozamatlan. 

TERABLE, S. RAFAEL DE, a fort of the 
province and kingdom of Tierra Firme ; built 
in an advantageous spot, on a strip of land run 
ning into the river Bajano, and which forms, with 
another small river, a peninsula. It is useful for 
restraining the incursions of the infidel Indians 
of Darien, and was built by the president, Don 
Dionisio de Alcedo, in 1745. In it there is a 
detachment of troops from the city of Panama, 
the capital of the kingdom, [and from hence it 
lies 29 miles to the e. with a slight inclination 
to the w.] 

TERAMA, ALTA, a settlement of the juris 
diction of the city of La Palma and corregimiento 
of Tunja in Nuevo Reyno de Granada; situate 
in a rough, mountainous, and swampy country. 
It is of a moderately hot temperature, and greatly 
abounding in sugar-canes, cotton, maize, yucas, 
and plantains ; has many mills and looms, in 
which they manufacture much sugar and linens, 
with which the natives carry on a good trade. 

The inhabitants amount to 600 housekeepers ; 
the greater part of them the richest of any people 
in this jurisdiction ; but they are troubled with 
a variety of venomous insects, with which the 
climate abounds. 

TERAMA, another settlement of the same ju 
risdiction, with the addition of Baxa, to distin 
guish it : annexed to the curacy of the settle 
ment of Minipi, and situate also in a rough, 
mountainous, and very swampy country, but of 
a good temperature, and abounding in tobacco, 



T E R 



543 



cotton, sugar-cane, maize, yucas, plantains, and 
other fruits of a warm climate. It has large 
breeds of swine, the chief traffic of the inha 
bitants ; and these amount to 350, with some few 
Indians. 

TERCERO, a river of the province and go 
vernment of Tucuman in Peru ; it rises in the 
serranias to the s. w. of the city of Cordoba, 
called mountains of Achala ; runs e. collecting 
the waters of a smaller river, called Saladillo. 
On its shores are many estates of cattle, which 
are frequently attacked and plundered by the 
Abipones and Guaicurus Indians. 

Whenever this river is high, its pass is difficult, 
though the Indians of the district are very dex 
trous in crossing it in a cow-skin, as in a basket, 
drawn by two horses. [It enters the river Pa 
rana just above the town of Rosario, and 73 
miles s. of the city of Santa Fe.J 

TEREMENDO, a jurisdiction and alcaldia 
mayor of the province and bishopric of Mechoa- 
can in Nueva Espana. It is much reduced and 
profitless, not being able to support its corregi- 
dor ; and it is thus looked upon as united to the 
jurisdiction of Xocona. It is of a cold tempe 
rature, and produces nothing but what is just 
necessary to support its scanty population. 

It consists only of a capital of its name, with 
90 families of Indians, and of the settlement of 
Jaso, very close to it, and of six or eight Spanish 
families, who live in some ranches and cow-sheds 
of its district. At a little distance is a mountain 
thickly covered with trees and shrubs, in which 
have been discovered mines of silver of excellent 
quality; and in 1712, there was found in a deep 
glen a very capacious mouth, or entrance of a 
certain cave, but which the Spaniards were afraid 
of entering from the idea that it was inhabited 
by wild beasts. They accordingly let off at its 
mouth different fireworks, which caused several 
foxes, and screech owls, and crows, to issue from 
it; and then entering it with lighted torches, 
they dicovered some prodigious apartments or 
vaults, which had belonged to the Indians in 
their gcntilism, and which were supported by 
very strong walls. 

Iji the middle of the second of these vaults 
was found a bank in the shape of an altar, on 
which were a certain number of idols and newly- 
made offerings, such as of copal or incense, and 
of woollen yarn, as also various figures of men 
and animals. On examination of the manner in 
v&amp;gt; hic i this cave was built, it was found that the 
stones were of a nature very easy to be wrought, 
and that the angles between the tops on the out- 



544 



T E R 



TEH 



side of the several vaults had been so connected 
together, and rendered one plain superficies by 
means of burning wood upon them; that they 
had, through course of time, become a plain co 
vered with thick trees. This settlement is eight 
leagues from the capital Valladolid, to w. s. w. 

TERESA, S. a settlement of the missions 
which were held by the Jesuits in the province 
of Nayarith and kingdom of Nueva Galicia : 
12 leagues n. of the settlement of La Mesa. 

TERESA, S. another, with the addition of Los 
Salivas, of the missions held by the same mis 
sionaries in the river Orinoco; four leagues from 
the torrent of Carichana, at the mouth of the 
river Meta. Its natives are docile, well inclined, 
and some of the best of any in those regions. 

TERESA, S. another, of the missions which 
were held by the Jesuits in the province and go 
vernment of Mainas and kingdom of Quito ; on 
the shore of the river Aguarico. 

TERESA, S. another, of the province and go 
vernment of Maracaibo in the Nuevo Reyno 
de Granada ; on the shore of the river Chama, 
and s. of the city of Merda, at four leagues dis 
tance. 

[TERESA, S. a fort of the province and go 
vernment of Buenos Ayres ; situate near the sea- 
coast, about 80 miles n. e. of Maldonado. Lat. 
33 58 5" s. Long. 53 34 15" o&amp;gt;.] 

TERESEN, a settlement of the province and 
government of Cumana, situate in the serrania : 
one of the missions held there by the Aragonese 
Capuchins ; on the shore of the river Aren. 

TERMINOS, LACUNA DE, a lake in the 
province and government of Yucatan ; thus 
named by the pilot Antonio de Alaminos ; who 
discovered it on his voyage made with Captain 
Juan de Grijalva in 1518. Its mouth is a secure 
port, and has saved many vessels from being 
wrecked. A great number of altars and idols, 
and also much game, are found upon its shores. 

TERNERA, a settlement of the province 
and government of Cartagena in the Nuevo 
Reyno de Granada : one of the new towns 
formed by Don Francisco Pimienta, being go 
vernor in 1776, by the union of several small 
settlements : two leagues n. of its capital. 

[TERRA BLANCA, a town of Mexico. See 
ANGELOS.] 

[TERRA DE LATRATON, that is, the 
Ploughman, or Labourer s Land, the name given 
by the Spaniards to Labrador or Britain, inha 
bited by the Esquimaux J 

[TERRA DEL FUEGO Island. SeeFuEeo.] 

[TERRA FIRMA, or CASTILE DEL ORO,the 



most n. province of S. America. See TIERRA 
FIRME.] 

[TERRA MAGELLANICA. See PATA 
GONIA.] 

[TERRA NIEVA, near Hudson s Straits, is 
in Jat. 62 4 n. and long. 67 o&amp;gt;. ; high water, at 
full and change, a little before 10 o clock.] 

TERRANOVA. See NEWFOUNDLAND. 

TERRENAFE, a large and populous settle 
ment in the province and corregimiento of Sana 
and kingdom of Peru. 

[TERRITORY N.W. OF THE OHIO, or N.W. 
TERRITORY, a large part of the United States, 
is situated between lat. 37 and 50 n. and be 
tween long. 81 8 and 98 S w. Its greatest 
length is about 900 miles, and its breadth 700. 
This extensive tract of country is bounded n. by 
part of the n. boundary line of the United States; 
e. by the lakes and Pennsylvania; s. by the Ohio 
River; w. by the Mississippi. Mr. Hutchins, 
the late geographer of the United States, esti 
mates that this tract contains 263,040,000 acres, 
of which 43,040,000 are water ; this deducted, 
there will remain 220,000,000 of acres, belonging 
to the Federal Government, to be sold for the 
discharge of the national debt ; except a narrow 
strip of land bordering on the s. of Lake Erie, 
and stretching 120 miles w. of the w. limit of 
Pennsylvania, which belongs to Connecticut. 
But a small portion of these lands is yet pur 
chased of the natives, and to be disposed of by 
Congress. Beginning on the meridian line, which 
forms the w. boundary of Pennsylvania, seven 
ranges of townships have been surveyed and 
laid off by order of Congress. As a n. and s. 
line strikes the Ohio in an oblique direction, the 
termination of the seventh range falls upon that 
river, nine miles above the Muskingum, which 
is the first large river that falls into the Ohio. It 
forms this junction 172 miles below Fort Pitt, 
including the windings of the Ohio, though, in 
a direct line, it is but 90 miles. That part of 
this territory in which the Indian title is extin 
guished, and which is settling under the govern 
ment of the United States, is divided into five 
counties, as follows : 

Counties. When erected. 

Washington, - - - July 26th, 1788. 

Hamilton, - - - - Jan. 2d, 1790. 

St.Clair, - - - - April 27th, 1790. 

Knox, June 20th, 1793. 

Wayne, 1796. 

These counties have been organized with the 
proper civil and military officers. The county 
of St. Clair is divided into three districts, viz. 



TERRITORY N. W. OF THE OHIO. 



545 



[the district of Cahokia, the district of Prairie- 
du-rochers, and the district of Kaskaskias. 
Courts of general quarter-sessions of the peace, 
country courts of common pleas, and courts of 
probate", to be held in each of these districts, as 
if each was a distinct county ; the officers of the 
county to act by deputy, except in the district 
where they reside. 

The principal rivers in this territory are, 
Muskingum, Hockhocking, Sciota, Great and 
Little Miami, Blue and Wabash, which empty 
into the Ohio ; Au Vase, Illinois, Ouisconsing, 
and Chippeway, which pay tribute to the Mis 
sissippi, besides a number of smaller ones. St. 
Lewis, Kennomic, St. Joseph s, Barbue, Grand, 
Miami of the Lakes, Sandusky, Cayahoga, and 
many others which pass to the lakes. Between 
the Kaskaskias and Illinois Rivers, which are 
84 miles apart, is an extensive tract of level 
rich land, which terminates in a high ridge, 
about 15 miles before you reach the Illinois Ri 
ver. In this delightful vale are a number of 
French villages, which, together with those of 
St. Genevieve, and St. Louis, on the w. side of 
the Mississippi, contained, in 1771, 1273 fencible 
men. 

The number of souls in this large tract of 
country has not been ascertained. From the 
best data that has been received, the population 
was estimated, in 1792, as follows : 

Indians (suppose), - - - - 65,000 1792 

Ohio Company purchase, - 2,500 do. 

Colonel Symmes s settlements, 2,000 do. 

Galliopolis (French settlements), 

opposite the Kanhawy River, 1,000 do. 

Vincennes and its vicinity, on 

the Wabash, 1,500 do. 

Kaskaskias and Cahokia, - - 680 1790 

At Grand Ruisseau, village of St. 

Phillip, and Prairie-du-rochers, 240 do. 

Total 72,920 

In 1790, there were in the town of Vincennes 
about 40 American families and 31 slaves, and 
on the Mississippi 40 American families and 73 
slaves, all included in the above estimate. On 
the Spanish or w. side of the Mississippi there 
were, in 1790, about 1800 souls, principally at 
Genevieve and St. Louis. 

The lands on the various rivers which water 
this Territory, are interspersed with all the va 
riety of soil which conduces to pleasantness of 
situation, and lays the foundation for the wealth 
of an agricultural and manufacturing people. 

VOL. IV. 



Large level bottoms, or natural meadows, from 
20 to 50 miles in circuit, are found bordering 
the rivers, and variegating the country in the 
interior parts. These aftbrd as rich a soil as 
can be imagined, and may be reduced to proper 
cultivation with very little labour. The pre 
vailing growth of timber, and the most useful 
trees, are, maple or sugar-tree, sycamore, black 
and white mulberry, black and white walnut, 
butternut, chesnut; white, black, Spanish, and 
chesnut oaks, hickory, cherry, buckwood or horse- 
chesnut, honey-locust, elm, cucumber-trees, lynn- 
tree, gum-tree, iron-wood, ash, aspin, sassafras, 
crab-apple tree, paupaw or custard apple, a va 
riety of plum trees, nine bark spice, and leather- 
wood bushes. White and black oak, and ches 
nut, with most of the above-mentioned timbers, 
grow large and plenty upon the high grounds. 
Both the high and low lands produce great 
quantities of natural grapes of various kinds, of 
which the settlers universally make a sufficiency 
for their own consumption, of rich red wine. It 
is asserted in the old settlement of St. Vincent, 
where they have had opportunity to try it, that 
age will render this wine preferable to most of 
the European wines. Cotton is said to be the 
natural production of this country, and to grow 
in great perfection. The sugar-maple is the most 
tree for an inland country. Any number of in 
habitants may be for ever supplied with a suffi 
ciency of sugar, by preserving a few trees for the 
use of each family. A tree will yield about lOlbs. 
of sugar a yeur, and the labour is very trifling. 
Springs of excellent water abound in this terri 
tory, and small and large streams, for mills and 
other purposes, are actually interspersed, as if 
by art, that there be no deficiency in any of the 
conveniences of life. Very little waste land is 
to be found in any part of this tract of country. 
There are no swamps but such as may be readily 
drained, and made into arable and meadow land ; 
and though the hills are frequent, they are gen 
tle, and swelling no where high, or incapable of 
tillage. They are of a deep rich soil, covered 
with a heavy growth of timber, and well adapted 
to the production of wheat, rye, indigo, tobacco, 
&amp;c. 

The communication between this country and 
the sea will be principally in the four following 
directions : 1. The route through the Scioto and 
Muskingum to Lake Erie, and so to the river 
Hudson, described under New York head. 2. 
The passage up the Ohio and Monongahela to 
the portage above mentioned, which leads to the 
navigable waters of the Patowmack. This port-] 
I A 



546 



TERRITORY N. W. OF THE OHIO. 



[age is 30 miles, and will probably be rendered 
much less by the execution of the plans now on 
foot for opening the navigation of those waters. 
3. The Great Kanhaway, which falls into the 
Ohio from the Virginia shore, between the 
Hockhocking and the Scioto, opens an extensive 
navigation from the s. e. and leaves but 18 miles 
portage from the navigable waters of James s 
River in Virginia. This communication, for the 
country between Muskingum and Scioto, will 
probably be more used than any other for the 
exportation of manufactures, and other light and 
valuable articles, and especially for the importa 
tion of foreign commodities, which may be 
brought from the Chesapeak to the Ohio much 
cheaper than they are now carried from Phila 
delphia to Carlisle, and the other thick-settled 
back counties of Pennsylvania ; though, indeed, 
a gentleman of much observation, and a great 
traveller in this country, is of opinion that this 
communication, or route, is chimerical. 4. But 
the current down the Ohio and the Mississippi, 
for heavy articles that suit the Florida and W. 
India markets, such as corn, flour, beef, lumber, 
&amp;c. will be perhaps as frequently loaded as any 
stream on earth. 

The distance from the Scioto to the Mississippi 
is 800 English miles ; from thence to the sea is 
900, including its meanders. This whole course 
is easily run in 15 days; and the passage up those 
rivers is not so difficult as has usually been re 
presented. It is found, by late experiments, 
that sails are used to great advantage against the 
current of the Ohio ; and it is worthy of ob 
servation, that in all probability steam boats will 
be found to do infinite service in all the exten 
sive river navigation. 

No country is better stocked with wild game 
of every kind. The rivers are well stored with 
fish of various kinds, and many of them are 
of an excellent quality. They are generally 
large, though of different sizes ; the cat-fish, 
which is the largest, and of a delicious flavour, 
weighs from six to eighty pounds. 

The number of old forts found in this w. coun 
try are the admiration of the curious, and a 
matter of much speculation. They are mostly 
of an oblong form, situated on strong well- 
chosen ground, and contiguous to water. When, 
by whom, and for what purpose, these were 
thrown up, is uncertain. They are undoubtedly 
very ancient, as there is not the least visible 
difference in the age or size of the timber grow 
ing en or within these forts, and that which 
grows without; and the oldest natives have lost 



all tradition respecting them. There are posts 
established for the protection of the frontiers. 

By an ordinance of Congress, passed on the 
13th of July, 1787, this country, for the purposes 
of temporary government, was erected into one 
district, subject, however, to a division, when 
circumstances shall make it expedient. The or 
dinance of Congress, of July 13th, 1787, ar 
ticle 5th, provides, that there shall be formed 
in this territory, not less than three, nor more 
than five states ; and the boundaries of the states 
shall become fixed and established as follows, 
viz. the w. state in the said territory shall be 
bounded on the Mississippi, the Ohio, and Wa- 
bash rivers ; a direct line drawn from the Wa- 
bash and Post Vincents due n. to the territorial 
line between the United States and Canada, and 
by the said territorial line to the Lake of the 
Woods and Mississippi. The middle state shall 
be bounded by the said direct line, the Wabash 
from Post Vincents to the Ohio ; by the Ohio by 
a direct line drawn due n. from the mouth of the 
Great Miami to the said territorial line, and by 
the said territorial line. The e. state shall be 
bounded by the last-mentioned direct line, the 
Ohio, Pennsylvania, and the said territorial line : 
provided however, and it is further under 
stood and declared, that the boundaries of these 
three states shall be subject so far to be altered, 
that if Congress hereafter shall find it expedient, 
they shall have authority to form one or two 
states, in that part of the said territory which lies 
n. of an e. and w. line drawn through the s. bend 
or extreme of Lake Michigan ; and when any of 
the said states shall have 60,000 free inhabitants 
therein, such state shall be admitted by its dele 
gates into the Congress of the United States, on 
an equal footing with the original states in all 
respects whatever; and shall be at liberty to 
form a permanent constitution and state govern 
ment; provided the constitution and government 
so to be formed shall be republican, and in con 
formity to the principles contained in these arti 
cles ; and so far as it can be consistent with the 
general interest of the confederacy, such admis 
sion shall be allowed at an earlier period, and 
when there may be a less number of free inhabi 
tants in the state than 60,000. 

The settlement of this country has been 
checked, for several years past, by the unhappy 
Indian war, an amicable termination of which 
took place on the 3d of August, 1795, when a 
treaty was formed at Grenville, between Major- 
general Anthony Wayne, on the part of the 
United States, and the chiefs of the following] 



T E R 

[tribes of Indians, viz. the Wyandots, Delawares, 
Shawanoes, Ottawas, Chippewas, Putawatimes, 
Miamis, Eel River, Weeas, Kickapoos, Pian Ka- 
shavvs and Kaskaskias. By the third article of 
this treaty, the Indians cede to the United States, 
for a valuable consideration, all lands lying e. 
and s. of a line " beginning at the mouth of Ca- 
yahoga River, and running thence up the same 
to the portage between that and the Tuscarawas 
Branch of the Muskingum ; thence down that 
branch to the crossing-place above Fort Law 
rence ; thence w. to a fork of that branch of the 
great Miami River, running into the Ohio, where 
commences the portage between the Miami of the 
Ohio, and St. Mary s River, which is a branch of 
the Miami of the Lake ; thence a w. course to 
Fort Recovery, which stands on a branch of the 
Wabash, then s. w. in a direct line to the Ohio, 
so as to intersect that river opposite the mouth 
of Kentucky or Catawa River." Sixteen tracts 
of land, of six and 12 miles square, interspersed 
at convenient distances in the Indian country, 
were, by the same treaty, ceded to the United 
States, for the convenience of keeping up a 
friendly and beneficial intercourse between the 
parties. The United States, on their part, " re 
linquish their claims to all other Indian lands n. 
of the river Ohio, e. of the Mississippi, and w. 
and s. of the Great Lakes and the waters uniting 
them, according to the boundary-line agreed on 
by the United States and the king of Great Bri 
tain, in the treaty of peace made between them 
in the year 1783. 

But from this relinquishment, by the United 
States, the following tracts of land are explicitly 
excepted. 1st. The tract of 150,000 acres near 
the Rapids of the Ohio River, which has been 
assigned to General Clark, for the use of himself 
and his warriors. 2d. The post of St. Vincents 
on the river Wabash, and the lands adjacent ; of 
which the Indian title has been extinguished. 
3d. The land at all other places in possession of 
the French people and other white settlers among 
them, of which the Indian title has been extin 
guished, as mentioned in the third article ; and, 
4th. The post of Fort Massac, towards the mouth 
of the Ohio. To which several parcels of land 
so excepted, the said tribes relinquish all the 
title and claim which they or any of them may 
have." Goods to the value of 20,000 dollars 
were delivered the Indians at the time this treaty 
was made ; and goods to the amount of 9500 dol 
lars, at first cost in the United States, are to be 
delivered annually to the Indians at some conve 
nient place n. of the Ohio. 



T E T 



547 



A trade has been opened, since this treaty, by 
a law of Congress, with the fore-mentioned tribes 
of Indians, on a liberal footing, which promises 
to give permanency to this treaty, and security 
to the frontier inhabitants.] 

TESALONS, Point of, in the channel or 
waste water of Lake Superior in Canada. 

TESIA, a settlement of the province and go 
vernment of Cinaloa in Nueva Espafia, on the 
shore of the river Mayo, between the settle 
ments of Canamoa and Nabajoa. 

TESICO, or GUATI, a settlement of the 
province and government of Ostimuri in Nueva 
Espafia. 

TESISTEPEC, SAN MIGUEL DE, a settle 
ment of the head settlement of the district and 
alcaldia mayor of Acayuca in Nueva Espafia ; of 
a hot and moist temperature. It produces maize, 
French-beans, fruit, and much thread of pita, 
which is the principal branch of its commerce; 
contains 63 families of Indians, and is three 
leagues from its capital. 

TESISTLAN, a settlement of the head settle 
ment of the district and alcaldia mayor of Zapo- 
pan in Nueva Espaiia; inhabited by some Mus- 
tees, Mulattoes, and Indians, who live by culti 
vating seeds. 

TESORO, Island of, in the river Missis 
sippi, near the coast of the province and go 
vernment of Cartagena, and JVuevo Reyno de 
Granada ; between that city and the island of 
Baru. 

TESTES-BOWLES,asmall river of Canada; 
which runs s. w. and enters the lake Superior by 
the e. part. 

[TESTIGOS. Several islands near the coast 
of Cumana in Tierra Firme, on the s. coast of 
the Caribean Sea in the W. Indies, at the e. end 
of the island of Margarita. Lat. 1 1 25 n. Long. 
63 10 w.l 

TESTU, a small river of the island Guada- 
lupe, which runs to s. e. and enters the sea in the 
bay of the Grand Cul de Sac. 

TESUQUE, a settlement of the province and 
government of Nuevo Mexico ; situate on the 
shore of the river Grande del Norte : between 
the settlements of Nambe and Santa Fe. 

TETA, a settlement of the province and go 
vernment of the Rio del Hacha, in the Nuevo 
Reyno de Granada. 

TETECALA, S. FRANCISCO DE, a settlement 
of the head settlement of the district of Huitepec, 
and alcaldia mayor of Cuernavaca in Nueva Es- 
pafia ; situate half a league from the settlement 
ofMazatepec, in a plain; and is very pleasant 
4 A 2 



548 



T E T 



and fertile. It contains 171 families of Indians, 
and 14 of Spaniards and Mustees. 

TETECALA, another, in the head settlement of 
the district of Xoxutla, and of the same alcaldia 
mayor. 

TETELA, DEL VOLCAN, a jurisdiction and 
alcaldia mayor of Nueva Espaiia. It is one of 
the most limited and reduced of that kingdom ; 
since its limits do not exceed five leagues from 
n. to s. and since its whole territory is of moun 
tains and deep ravines totally incapable of culti 
vation. It is two leagues wide from e. to w. and 
in its few plains are gathered some scanty crops 
of maize, lentils, and fruits of the country ; these 
affording its only branch of trade. For, al 
though they formerly collected large quantities 
of cochineal, yet has this custom entirely fallen 
off, from the Indians having lost the nopaleras y 
from which the cochineal was procured ; again, 
although it is known that there are some silver- 
mines in this jurisdiction, yet are they not 
worked. It was in former times more populous, 
as well in Spaniards as in Indians, but when its 
productions began to decline, its inhabitants be 
took themselves to the neighbouring jurisdic 
tions ; and, indeed, those that remain, pay their 
tribute in the jurisdiction of Coautla Amilpas, 
and obtain necessaries out of the jurisdiction. 
Its population consists of only three settlements, 
which are, 

Metepec, Xuchicalco, Hueyapan. 

TETELA, the capital, is the settlement of the 
same name, contains 100 families of Mexican In 
dians, and 10 of Spaniards, and a convent of Do 
minicans. Twenty leagues s. e. of Mexico. 

TETELA, SAN GASPAR DE, a settlement of the 
head settlement of the district and alcaldia mayor 
of Cuernavaca in the same kingdom. 

TETELA, another, of the head settlement of 
Xonocatepec, and of the same alcaldia mayor as 
the former. 

TETELA, another, with the dedicatory title 
of Santa Maria, in the head settlement of the 
district of Tlalixcoya, and alcaldia mayor 
of Mizantla. It contains 52 families of In 
dians. 

TETELA, another, with the surname Del Rio, 
a head settlement of the district of the alcaldia 
mayor of Azuchitlan. It was formerly the capi 
tal. Its situation is between two lofty moun 
tains, and near it runs the river of Las Balzas, 
fertilizing its territory by the n. and that of Las 
Truchas by the o&amp;gt;. part; and these unite within 
a small distance from the town. It contains 80 
families of Indians, and seven of Mustees, whose 



T E T 

trade is very small. Fifteen leagues s. e. of its 
head settlement. 

TETELA, another, a real of silver-mines, and a 
modern town, of the same head settlement and 
alcaldia mayor as the former. 

TETELA, another, also a real of silver-mines, 
of the alcaldia mayor of Zetela Xonotla. It con 
tains 32 families of Spaniards, 107 of Mulattoes, 
Mustees, and Negroes, who, at the cost of the 
miners, have erected a beautiful temple, which is 
a chapel of ease of the head settlement of the 
district of Xonotla. In this settlement resides 
the lieutenant of the alcalde mayor. Its inha 
bitants are employed in sowing seeds, cutting 
woods, and making charcoal, and torches for 
the use of the mine. In this mine there is a 
vein of gold, but of such base alloy as to render 
but little profit, so that the mine is worked very 
little. 

TETELA, another jurisdiction and alcaldia 
mayor, with the addition of Xonotla. It is small 
and much reduced, and its trade consists in the 
working of one mine, which, although there be 
many others, is the only one that is worked. 
The inhabitants sow maize, French beans, beans, 
and axonjott, and of these they gather great 
crops, as the soil is particularly favourable to 
their .cultivation. The nuts here are also much 
esteemed in all the provinces, and especially at 
Mexico, whither there is a great quantity re 
gularly carried. In all this jurisdiction there is 
no other than one estate called Totonalapa, which 
is two leagues from the capital, and in which 
they breed much large and small cattle. This 
alcaldia is composed of two districts ; the one 
of Tetela and the other of Xonolta ; so that it 
takes the name of both. In the former the po 
pulation is reduced to three settlements besides 
the capital, and which are, 

San Pedro, San Christoval, San Estevan. 

And the second to five, which are, 

San Martin, San Andres, 

San T rancisco, Los Reyes. 

Santiago, 

TETELA, the capital of them all, which, as we 
have observed, is of the same name, is of a cold 
and moist temperature, contains 242 families of 
Indians, and 40 of Spaniards. Before it runs an 
abundant stream, which, diffusing its waters 
through that territory, renders it fertile and de 
lightful; and there are here, in consequence, 
many gardens full of flowers, fruits, and pulse. 
The said river, after surrounding the real of the 
mines, fertilizes its district. Thirty-six leagues 
n. of Mexico. 



T E T 



T E V 



549 



TETELA, another jurisdiction or alcaldia mayor 
in the same kingdom, with the name of Del Rio. 
See AZUCHITLAN. 

TETELPA, S. JUAN DE, a settlement of the 
head settlement of the district of Mazacatepec, 
and alcaldia mayor of Cuenavaca in Nueva Es 
pana, on the shore of a river. It contains 34 
families of Indians, who cultivate much maize, 
fruit, and cotton, and is five leagues from its 
head settlement. 

TETELZINCO, a settlement of the head set 
tlement of the district of Chipalzinco, and alcal 
dia mayor of Tixtlan in Nueva Espana ; situate 
between two mountains, near the river of Las 
Balzas. It contains 80 families of Indians, and 
is annexed to the curacy of its head settlement, 
from whence it lies two leagues.^ 

TETELZINCO, another, a hJRi settlement of 
the district, in the alcaldia mayor of Coautla in 
the same kingdom. It contains 250 families of 
Mexican Indians, and, at the distance of three- 
quarters of a league to n. n. w. it has a sugar- 
engine, called San Pedro Martin ; where there is 
also a sumptuous temple, and many houses, in 
habited by 40 families of Spaniards, Mulattoes, 
and Mustees, and a great number of Gananes 
Indians : also at another engine called De Cal- 
deron, are 13 families of Mulattoes. This settle 
ment is one league n. of its capital. 

TETEPAM, a settlement of the head settle 
ment of the district of Tuscacuezco, and alcaldia 
mayor of Amola in the same kingdom as the 
former. It contains 70 families of Indians, and 
is 1| leagues from its head settlement. 

TETEPANGO, HUIPUXTLA, a jurisdiction 
and alcaldia mayor of Nueva Espana. It is 
much reduced, and, in consequence, there have 
been added to it the districts of Huipuxtla and 
Mizquiahuala. It is very scarce of water, and 
the natives cultivate nothing but some wheat and 
rnaize with labour, dedicating themselves rather 
to the fattening of swine, in which consist their 
principal trade ; and, although in the gardens 
they gather some fruits, yet, as from the distance, 
they cannot carry them to Mexico, they are of 
little profit. 

It is computed that this district contains 1000 
families of Indians, who, for the most part, live 
in the cultivated estates and in the ranchos, where 
there are also 100 other families of Spaniards, 
Mustees, and Mulattoes. The capital is the 
settlement of Huipuxtla, and is the residence of 
the corregidor; and the others are as follows : 

Tetepango, S. Nicolas de Yete- 

Axacuba, comatl, 



Tuzantalpa, 

Tonacustla, 

Zayula, 

Texaxic, 

Chiscahuasco, 

Atitalaquia, 

Atotonilco, 



Tlamaco, 

Apasco, 

Mizquiahuala, 

S. Martin Atengo, 

Tlacoazpan, 

Tepactepec, 

Tezontepec. 



TETEPANGO, another settlement of the juris 
diction and alcaldia mayor of Tlaxcala, in the 
bishopric of La Puebla de los Angles and king 
dom of Nueva Espana. 

TETEPELZIN, a settlement of the head set 
tlement of the district and alcaldia mayor of Xi- 
cayan. It is of a hot temperature, and contains 
24 families of Indians. 

[TETEROA Harbour, on the w. side of the 
island of Ulietea, one of the Society Islands. 
Lat. 16 51 s. Long. 151 27 o&amp;gt;.] 

[TETHUROA, an island in the S. Pacific 
Ocean, about 24 miles from Point Venus in the 



Lat. 17 s. 



Long. 149 C 



island of Otaheite. 
30 a&amp;gt;.] 

TETIPAC, a head settlement of the district 
of the alcaldia mayor of Chichicapa, in the pro 
vince and bishopric of Oaxaca and kingdom of 
Nueva Espana. It contains 870 families of In 
dians, including those of its wards ; and all are 
employed in the cultivation and trade of cochi 
neal and seeds. 

TETLA, SAN JUAN DE, a settlement of the 
head settlement of the district and alcaldia mayor 
of Guejozinco in Nueva Espana. It contains 22 
families of Indians. 

TETLA, another settlement, with the same de 
dicatory title, of the missions held by the religi 
ous ,of S. Francisco, in the alcaldia mayor of S. 
Luis de Potosi. 

TETLAMA, SAN AGUSTIN DE, a settlement 
of the head settlement of the district of Huitepec, 
and alcaldia mayor of Cuernavaca in Nueva Es 
pana. It contains 25 families of Indians. 

TETLAMA, another, with the dedicatory title 
of Santa Ana, in the head settlement of the dis 
trict of Pinzandaro, and alcaldia mayor of Tanzi- 
taro. It is of a hot temperature, contains 40 fa 
milies of Indians, and is seven leagues w. of its 
head settlement. 

TETON,a settlement of the province and go 
vernment of Cartagena, in the Nuevo Reyno de 
Granada ; on the shore of the Grande de la 
Magdalena. 

[TETZEUCO, a brackish lake in Mexico. 
See MEXICO.] 

TEV ANONDADON, a settlement of Indians 
of the province of Pennsylvania in the United 



550 



T E U 



TEX 



States, on the confines of New York, and at the 
e. head of the river Susquehannah. 

TEUCHITAN, a settlement of the head set 
tlement of the district and alcaldia mayor of Tala 
in Nueva Espafia. 

TEVERTON, a settlement of New England, 
in the United States, on the e. coast of Bristol. 

TEULTEPEC, a settlement of the province 
and alcaldia mayor of Chiapa in the kingdom of 
Guatemala. 

[TEUSHANUSHSONG.GOGHTA, an In 
dian village on the n. bank of Alleghany River 
in Pennsylvania. Five miles n. of the s. line of 
the State, and 14 e. s. e. of Chatoughque Lake.] 

TEUTALPAN, SAN ANDRES DE, a head set 
tlement of the district of the alcaldia mayor of 
Zacatlan in Nueva Espaua. It contains 445 fa 
milies of Indians, including those of the settle 
ments of its district. 

TEUTILA, a jurisdiction and alcaldia mayor, 
in the province and bishopric of Oaxaca and king 
dom of Nueva Espaiia. It consists of 13 settle 
ments, head settlement of the district, is for 
the most part barren, and produces nothing but 
maize. 

TEUTILA, the capital, of the same name, en 
joys a mild temperature, and contains 164 fami 
lies of Mazatecos Indians, and is 29 leagues e. s.e. 
of Mexico. 

The other settlements are, 

Tlacomal tepee, Guaxospan, 

Ixcatlan, Quetzalapan, 

Tlaquazintepec, Santiago Tecoutla, 

Zoyaltepec, S. Lucas Oxitlan, 

Tenango, S. Felipe Xalapa, 

Ayautla, Tepetotutla. 

TEtJTITLAN, DEL VALLE, a jurisdiction 
and alcaldia mayor of Nueva Espana, in the pro 
vince and bishopric of Oaxaca. It is very fertile 
in wheat, maize, and French beans. 

TEUTITLAN, the capital, is of its name, of a 
mild temperature, contains a convent of Domi 
nicans, and 237 families of Indians, who live by 
trading in cochineal and seeds, which they grow 
in the ranchos in its district. It has also seven 
estates, and a sugar-engine, at which assist some 
families of Spaniards and Mustees. [One hun 
dred and ninety-nine miles s. e. of Mexico, in 
lat. 17 2 n. long. 96 30 o&amp;gt;.] 

The other settlements are, 

Tlacolula, S. Miguel, 

Mitla, S. Francisco, 

S. Miguel de Abar- Santa Catalina, 
radas, Santa Maria Zapo- 



S. Lorenzo, 
Santiago Huizitlal- 

tepec, 
Matatlan, 
Santo Tomas, 
Santo Domingo, 
S. Juan, 



Santa Ana, 

S. Luis, 

Quiatoni, 

Sta. Ana del Valle, 

Macuilzuchil, 

Xilotepec, 

S. Juan Guelavia. 



Santo Domingo, 



titlan, 



TEUTLA, a settlement of the alcaldia mat/or 
of Teotalco in Nueva Espana. It contains 15 
families of Indians, and is annexed to the curacy 
of Xolalpan. 

TEUTLAN, a settlement of the head settle 
ment of the district of Tuzcacuezco, and alcal 
dia mayor of Amola in Nueva Espana. It is very 
small, and lies three leagues w. of Xiquilpa. 

TEUSACA, a city of the province of Bogota, 
and of the natioji of the Moscas Indians, of the 
Nuevo Reyno ""He Granada. It was gained by 
Gonzalo Ximenez de Quesada in 1538, and was 
afterwards destroyed, nothing of it remaining at 
the present day but a miserable village of In 
dians. 

TEUZITLAN, a jurisdiction and alcaldia 
mayor of Nueva Espana. It is of small extent 
and moderate commerce : produces wax, pitch, 
maize, French beans, and some fruits, sufficient 
scantily to provide for the wants of the inhabi 
tants. It has 18 mills or engines, where they 
make nothing but brown and white sugar, and 
these articles, with some breeds of large cattle, 
constitute its commerce. 

The jurisdiction is composed of six settle 
ments, which are, 

Chiautla, S. Juan Zimpaco, 

Atempa, S. Sebastian Petatlan, 

Atoluca, 

and the capital, of the same name, inhabited by 
303 families of Mexican Indians, 102 of Spa 
niards, 163 of Mustees, and 65 of Mulattoes. 
Forty leagues e. n. e. of Mexico. 

TEVIQUARI, a river of the province and 
captainship of Brazil. It rises near the coast, 
runs many leagues to w. and turning its course 
to s. enters the sea. 

TEWKSBURY, a town of the province of 
Massachusetts ; one of those composing New 
England, in the United States ; situate on the 
shore of the river Pennycook. 

TEXAS, or NUEVAS FILIPINAS, a province 
and government of N. America, and one of the 
greatest extent ; bounded s. e. by the Bay of 
Mexico, e. and n. e. by Louisiana. It begins at 
the river of Medina, the boundary between it and 
the province of Coaguila. Its extent is more 
than 220 leagues to n. n. e. and it is more than 



TEX 

60 in width ; and in all this vast extent it has 
not more than four settlements, very distant from 
each other. 

This country can vie with the richest and most 
fertile countries of Europe, produces in abun 
dance maize, French beans, much cattle, large 
and small, and in its woods are Mexican bulls, 
deer, bears, wild boars, partridges, turkeys, hares, 
rabbits, and a great variety of other birds and 
animals. It is fertilized by various rivers, which 
are so stocked with fish that they may be caught 
with the greatest ease. The most considerable 
rivers are the San Antonio, the shores of which 
are covered with elms and fruit trees, especially 
with plums and blackberries ; that of Los Ino- 
centes, that of Guadalupe, and those of Las Ani- 
mas de Arriba and De Abaxo, and that of Colo 
rado ; also that of Los Brazos de Dios, and that 
of La Santisima Trinadad; and, besides these, 
there are several streams, which, in other parts, 
would pass for rivers; and which are named Del 
Leon, Salado, Cibolo, San Miguel, San Rafael, 
Garrapatas, Nuncio, Corpus Christi, Navasoto, 
San Juan, Santa Efegenia, and Santa Coleta. It 
has also a large lake of sweet water, called Santa 
Ana. 

In its mountains grow medlars, chesnuts like 
those of Europe, all kinds of walnuts ; and vines, 
which, without being planted, spring up volun 
tarily, and entwine themselves in the branches 
of the trees, forming a delightful and luxuriant 
prospect : not but that the other vegetable pro 
ductions do, in the like manner, yield their fruits 
without cultivation. This extensive country is 
inhabited by infinite nations of Indians, now 
pacified. 

The capital is the town and garrison of San 
Antonio de Bejar. The other settlements are, 
Nuestro Senora del Pilar de los Adaes, 
Nuestra Senora de los Dolores, 
La Bahia del Espiritu Santo, 
And the town of San Fernando. 

TEXAS, a small settlement of Indians, of the 
same province and government. 

TEXCALA, SAN FRANCISCO DE, a settle 
ment of the head settlement of the district of 
Xacapistla, and alcaldia mayor of Cuernavaca in 
Nueva Espana. 

TEXCALICAQUE, SAN MATEO DE, a head 
settlement of the district of Metepec in Nueva 
Espana ; containing 358 families of Indians. 

TEXHUACAN, S. MIGUEL DE, a settlement 
of the head settlement of the district of Chacal- 
tianguis, and alcaldia mayor of Cozamaloapan in 
Nueva Espana, on the banks of a river which 



TEX 



551 



flows down from the sierra of Villalta, and runs 
to unite itself with the Alvarado, a league before 
you come to the settlement of Amatlan. 

It is of a hot temperature, and its population is 
composed of three families of Spaniards, five of 
Mustees, and 87 of Mulattoes and Negroes. It 
was formerly inhabited by many Indians, but 
there are none of these now remaining, owing to 
the little union existing between them and the 
Mulattoes and Negroes. The trade of this place 
consists in the barter of cotton for cochineal with 
the jurisdiction of Villalta. Eight leagues e. of 
its head settlement. 

TEXMELUCAN, S. SALVADOR DE, a head 
settlement of the district of the alcaldia mayor of 
Guejozinco; containing 60 families of Indians. 

TEXMELUCAN, S. MARTIN DE, a settlement of 
the same head settlement and alcaldia mayor as 
the former. It contains 150 families of Spa 
niards, Mustees, and Mulattoes, and 94 of In 
dians, and a convent of the barefooted order of 
St. Francis, w. of its head settlement. In its dis 
trict are 56 cultivated estates, which produce 
annually abundant crops of wheat and other 
seeds. 

TEXMELUCAN, SANTA MARIA DE, a settle 
ment in the head settlement of San Salvador, 
and of the same alcaldia mayor as the former, 
arid containing 91 Indian families. 

TEXOCOMULCO, a head settlement of the 
district of the alcaldia mayor of Teozacoalco in 
Nueva Espana. It contains 150 families of In 
dians, and some of Mustees and Mulattoes; is of 
a moist temperature, and its inhabitants main 
tain themselves by the cultivation and trade of 
cochineal. Although they formerly worked some 
silver-mines here, they are now abandoned. 

TEXOCOTLA, a settlement of the head set 
tlement of the district of Atlistac, and alcaldia 
mayor of Tlapa in Nueva Espana; containing 
24 families of Indians. 

TEXPAN, S. MIGUEL DE, a settlement of 
the head settlement of the district of Texpcxpan, 
and alcaldia mayor of Teotihuacan. It contains 
only six families of Indians, and seven of Mus- 
tets, who maintain themselves by making pulque, 
and by cultivating some seeds. It is of a cold 
temperature. 

TEXTIPAC, a head settlement of the dis 
trict of the alcaldia mayor of Tasco in Nueva 
Espana. It contains 65 families of Indians, and 
is four leagues n. one quarter n. w. of its capital. 

TEXUPA, a head settlement of the district 
of the alcaldia mayor of Tepozcolula, in the pro 
vince and bishopric of Oaxaca and kingdom of 



552 



T E Z 



Nueva Espana. It is of a mild temperature, 
contains a convent of Dominicans, 192 families 
of Indians, some of Spaniards, Mustees^ and Mu 
lattoes, who are given to agriculture and to the 
cultivation of cochineal. The country of its dis 
trict is very fertile, pleasant, and abounding in 
fruit. Five leagues w. by n. of its capital. 

TEXUPILCO, SAN PEDRO DE, a settlement 
of the head settlement of the district of San Fran 
cisco del Valle, and alcaldia mayor of Zultepec 
in Nueva Espana. It contains 12 families of 
Spaniards and Mustces, and 42 of Indians ; is 
surrounded by various ranches which are Cam- 
puzano, with 12 families of Spaniards and Mus- 
tees ; S.Juan, with four; Aguirre, with eight; 
Lopez, with four ; Pinzon, with five ; all those 
of the Spaniards being dedicated to the sowing 
of wheat, maize, and French beans. Seven leagues 
s. of the capital. 

TEXUTEPEC, a settlement of the alcaldia 
mayor of Nochistlan in Nueva Espana. It is 
very small, and has only 15 families of Indians. 

TEYAOGEN, a small river of the province 
of Pennsylvania in the United States. It runs 
5. e. and enters the source of the e. arm of the 
Susquehannah. 

TEYUPA, a small river of the province and 
government of Paraguay, which runs to s. t. w. 
and enters the Yaquini. 

TEZAHUAPA, a head settlement of the dis 
trict of the alcaldia mayor of Zempoala in Nueva 
Espana. It contains 25 families of Indians. 

TEZAYUCA, a settlement of the jurisdiction 
and alcaldia mayor of Pachuca in Nueva Espana. 
It contains 80 families of Indians. 

TEZCOCO, or TEZCUCO, a jurisdiction and 
alcaldia mayor of Nueva Espana. It is of small 
extent, bounded by the corrcgimiento of Mexico ; 
but is very populous, fertile, and abounding in 
wheat, maize, seeds, and garden herbs. It also 
produces many woods, which they carry in canoes 
to Mexico by the lake ; nor do they want manu 
factories, where they make no small quantity of 
serges and other stuffs from the wool of the cattle 
which is found here in tolerable numbers. Here 
are also breeds of swine, and with these, besides 
some salt, does this jurisdiction carry on a fair 
trade with the capital and the neighbouring ju 
risdictions. It enjoys a benign and mild tempe 
rature, but is scantily supplied with water for ir 
rigation. Its population consists of 16 principal 
settlements or head settlements of the district, 
and of many smaller. 

TEZCOCO, the capital, is the city of the same 
name, which, through corruption, they call com- 



T E Z 

monly Tezcuco. It was in the time of the geii- 
tilism of the Indians, one of the most populous 
and celebrated ; governed by many kings of va 
rious nations, especially of the Chichimecan. It 
was here that the king Nazahualcoyot, so famous 
as well for valour as for government, maintained 
his sovereignty ; and, after the establishment of 
the Mexican empire, it was the court of the 
princes of the race of Moctezuma, and was, con 
sequently, a place of great magnificence. It was 
also the military school, wherein was taught the 
management of arms, and the characters in which 
their histories were written, and which were si 
milar to the hieroglyphics used by the Egyptians. 
In these they handed down to posterity the rites 
and ceremonies of their false religion, and they 
had a method of forming their calendars so exact 
as to keep the nicest account of the years, of 
the movements of the stars, and of the increase 
and wane of the moon ; and thus did they, with 
out the knowledge of a single letter, clearly ex 
plain, by figures of men and animals, whatsoever 
they wished to transmit to memory. 

At the time of the conquest by the Spaniards, 
when Cortes drew near to this city, Moctezuma 
assembled in it all his augurs and necromancers, 
to consult them ; and in it the same Hernan 
Cortes afterwards held his garrison, and built 
some brigantines, making all the other necessary 
arrangements for the siege of Mexico. At pre 
sent this beautiful town is nearly destroyed, from 
the want of trade ; although it still has some 
magnificent buildings, in memory of what it 
was. Its streets are very wide and handsome, 
and is the first city wherein the Spanish govern 
ment was established in that kingdom. 

It has a very fine convent of Franciscans, and 
another of San Juan de Dios, which is an hospi 
tal : it is inhabited by 1250 families of Indians, 
and 150 of Spaniards, Mulattoes, and Mustees. 
At half a league s distance from it is the holy 
sanctuary of Nuestra Senora de Tulantongo, 
which is the chapel of ease to the city : in the 
same is a beautiful picture on a tablet of three 
quarters of a yard long, and of two-thirds wide. 
There is a tradition that this picture, having 
been damaged in the house of a certain Indian, 
was conveyed to a blind Indian, a neighbour, in 
order that he might pray before it, to be released 
irom his infirmity ; and that whilst he was pray 
ing, he heard a voice, telling him to wash his 
eyes with the water of the well which is in the 
church ; that he immediately did so, and recovered 
his sight, whilst the image presented itself to his 
view in a perfect state. The whole of the city 



T E Z 

was soon assembled to witness this prodigy, and 
ever since that time, now 200 years, have the 
colours of the painting remained as lively as 
though they were just laid on ; and the most ex 
traordinary devotion is manifested towards it, 
as well by the inhabitants of this as of the other, 
the most distant jurisdictions. 

[This city formerly possessed very considerable 
cotton manufactories ; but they have suffered 
much in a competition with those of Queretaro. 
Its present population, according to Humboldt, 
amounts to 5000. It is 15 miles e. n. e. of 
Mexico, at the foot of the sierra, which is the 
e. wall of the valley of Tenoxtitlan ; in lat. 19 
31 30" n. and long. 98 52 w.~] 

The other settlements are : 



T H A 



553 



S. Andres Chiautla, 

Tepetitlan, 

S. Agustin Acolman, 

S. Miguel Zometla, 

Santiago Atlatongo, 

Tezontepec, 

S. Mateo Ixtlahua- 

can, 

S.Felipe Zacatepec, 
S. Juan Tezontla, 
Santa Maria Ilailot- 

lacan, 
San Buenaventura 

Tezozuca, 
S. Simon Capulalpa, 
S. Mateo Actipa, 
S. Christoval Nex- 

quipayac, 
S. Miguel Chicon- 

quac, 



S. Marcos Guaquil- 

_ P a 

Santa Maria Cua- 

nala, 
Santa Magdalena 

Tepletastoc, 
S. Luis Huejutla, 
Santa Maria Te- 

quisquinahuac, 
S. Miguel Coatlin- 

chan, 

Santiago Cuatalpan, 
S. Salvador Atengo, 
Santo Toribio Papa- 

lotla, 
Nuestra Senora de 

la Purificacion, 
Santa Catalina, 
S. Geronimo, 
Santiago Cuala. 



[TEZCOCO, a lake of the above jurisdiction 
and alcaldia may or , the actual bounds of which 
are not very well determined, the soil being so 
argillaceous and smooth, that the difference of 
level for a mile is not more than two decimeters, 
or 7.874 inches. When the e. winds blow with 
any violence, the water withdraws towards the 
w. bank of the lake, and sometimes leaves an 
extent of more than 600 metres, or 1968 feet, 
dry. See MEXICO, Intendancy of.] 

TEZCOCO, a river of the same alcaldia mayor; 
which rises in the mountains to the e. of Mexico, 
and enters the lake. On its shores stands the 
above city. 

TEZISTAC, a settlement of the head settle- 
ment of the district of Clanapa and alcaldia mayor 
of Tlapa in Nueva Espana, containing 19 Indian 
families. 

TEZOCUCA, S. BUENAVENTURA DE, a set- 

VOL. IV. 



tlement of the head settlement of the district and 
alcaldia mayor of Tezcoco in Nueva Espana ; 
situate on the skirt of a mountain. It contains 
186 families of Indians, and is half a league w. 
of its capital. 

TEZONTEPEC, a settlement of the head 
settlement of the district of Teoxornulco and 
alcaldia mayor of Teozaqualco in Nueva Espaua. 
It contains 180 families of Indians, who cultivate 
cochineal and some maize, and is 15 leagues 
from its capital. 

TEZONTEPEC, another settlement, in the al 
caldia mayor of Pachuca, annexed to the curacy 
of the settlement of Tezayuca, and containing 
30 families of Indians. 

TEZONTEPEC, another, of the head settlement 
of the district of Mizquiahuala and alcaldia mayor 
of Tepetango, containing 130 families of Indians. 
TEZONTLA, S. JUAN DE, a settlement of 
the head settlement of the district and alcaldia 
mayor of Tezcoco ; at the foot of a mountain, 
and having in its vicinity four wards, in which 
are contained 116 families of Indians: one league 
n. of its capital. 

TEZOZOLA, S. JUAN DE, a head settlement 
of the district of the alcaldia mayor of Ante- 
quera, in the province and bishopric of Oaxaca. 
It contains 68 families of Indians, who cultivate 
and trade in cochineal and seeds. 

TEZOZOLCO, a head settlement of the 
district of the alcaldia mayor of Chalco in Nueva 
Espana, containing 39 families of Indians. 

TEZUATLAN, a settlement of the alcaldia 
mayor of Guajuapa in Nueva Espana ; in the 
which, and in the wards of its district, live 324 
families of Indians. 

TEZUQUE, a settlement of the missions 
held by the religious of San Francisco, in the 
kingdom of Nuevo Mexico. 

THADO, S. FRANCISCO DE, a settlement of 
the province and government of Choco, in the 
Nuevo Reyno de Granada ; on the shore of the 
river San Juan, and in the division and district 
of Novita. 

THALAMA, a settlement of the province and 
government of Antioquia, in the Nuevo Reyno 
de Granada; on the shore of the river of its 
name, and just before this enters the S. Agustin. 
THALAMA, the said river, rises in the moun 
tains of the valley of Zopia, and, running from 
s. to n. enters the S. Agustin. 

THAMAPACHI, a head settlement of the 

district of the alcaldia mayor of Guanchinango 

in Nueva Espana. It contains five families of 

Spaniards and 260 of Mulattoes, who are indera- 

4 B 



554 



nified from paying tribute, on account of their 
standing as guards and centinels along the coast, 
and at the neighbouring port of Tabuco. In 
its district are three settlements, in which dwell 
366 families of Indians ; whose trade is in white 
chile, common wax, sugar, pita, neat cattle, and 
fish. Forty leagues e. n. e. of its capital. 

[THAMES River, in Connecticut, is formed 
by the union of Shetucket and Little, or Norwich 
Rivers, at Norwich Landing, to which place it 
is navigable for vessels of considerable burden ; 
and thus far the tide flows. From this place the 
Thames pursues a s. course 14 miles, passing by 
New London on its w. bank, and empties into 
Long Island Sound ; forming the fine harbour of 
New London.] 

THAOS, S. GERONIMO DE, a settlement of 
the kingdom of Nuevo Mexico. 

THAOS, a river of this name, in the same 
kingdom. 

THAREXERO, S. FRANCISCO DE, a settle 
ment of the head settlement of Tirindaro and 
alcaldia mayor of Valladolid in Nueva Espana, 
and province and bishopric of Mechoacan. It 
contains 80 families of Indians, and is situate on 
the shore of the swamp, one league and a half 
c. of its head settlement. 

[THATCAER S Island, lies about a mile e. of 
the s. e. point of Cape Ann, on the coast of Mas 
sachusetts, and forms the n. limit of Massachu 
setts Bay; and has two light-houses. Cape Ann 
light-house lies in lat. 42 36 n. and long. 70 
37 w.l 

THEAKIKI, an abundant river of Canada ; 
which rises from a small lake between the lakes 
Michigan and Erie, runs 5. w. and enters the ri 
ver Illinois in the part called La Fourche. 

[Theakiki may be properly denominated the c. 
head-water of Illinois River ; for it rises about 
eight miles s. of Fort St. Joseph. After running- 
through rich and level lands, about 112 English 
miles by its course, it receives Plein River in 
lat. 41 42 n. and from thence the confluent 
stream assumes the name of Illinois. In some 
maps it is called Huakita.] 

THECOMATLAN, SAN MIGUEL DE, a set 
tlement of the alcaldia mayor of Marinalco in 
Nueva Espana, situate on a lofty mountain of 
loose stone. 

It is of a cold and moist temperature ; its in 
habitants are employed in cultivating seeds, 
fruit, and garden-stuff, through the advantages 
of irrigation by a river which runs by the n. 
part from the settlement of Tenanzinco : one 
league and a half n. of its capital. 



T H O 

THEBACUI, an ancient fortress of the Zi- 
pas, or kings of Bogota, in the Nuevo Reyno 
de Granada. It stood on the frontier of the 
Panches Indians, and near it a complete victory 
was gained over them by Captain Juan de Ces- 
pedes in 1538. 

THEOTALZINCO, a head settlement of the 
district of the alcaldia mayor of Villalta in Nueva 
Espana. It is of a hot temperature, contains 112 
families of Chinantecos Indians, and is 15 leagues 
e. by n. of its capital. 

[THETFORD, a township in the s. e. corner 
of Orange County, Vermont, on the w. bank of 
Connecticut River, about 10 miles n. of Dart 
mouth College, and contains 862 inhabitants] 

THOCINTLAN. a settlement of the head 
settlement of the district and alcaldia mayor of 
Zochicoatlan in Nueva Espana. It contains 22 
families of Indians, and is 13 leagues n. of its 
capital. 

THOE, a settlement of the province and cor- 
regimiento of Chachapoyas in Peru, annexed to 
the curacy of the settlement of Soritor. 

THOLIMAN, SAN PEDRO DE, a head set 
tlement of the district of the alcaldia mayor of 
Queretaro in Nueva Espana. It contains 132 
families of Indians, and is 16 leagues n. of its 
capital. 

[THOMAS, S. a settlement of the govern 
ment of Buenos Ayres. See S. TOME.] 

THOMAS, S. a settlement of the head settle 
ment of the district of San Francisco del Valle 
and alcaldia mayor of Zultepec in Nueva Espana ; 
on the shore of an abundant river, which runs 
through the whole jurisdiction from n. to s. It 
contains 57 families of Indians, who cultivate 
many gardens and orchards irrigated by the said 
river ; and supply with herbs, fruits, and corn, 
the labourers of the mines. 

THOMAS, S. another settlement, of the pro 
vince and corregimiento of Chumbivilcas and king 
dom of Peru. 

THOMAS, S. another, of the head settlement of 
the district of Acahuatlan and alcaldia mayor of 
Zacatlan in Nueva Espana : two leagues from 
its head settlement. 

THOMAS, S. another, of the head settlement 
of the district of Zultepec and alcaldia mayor of 
this name in the same kingdom. It contains 16 
families of Indians, and is four leagues s. of its 
capital. 

THOMAS, S. another, with the surname of 
Tierra Blanca in the alcaldia mayor of San Luis 
de la Paz and bishopric of Mechoacan ; annexed 
to the curacy of Tzichu. It contains 593 fami- 



T H O 

lies of Indians ; dedicated, some to agriculture, 
and others to the labour of the mines : six leagues 
e. of its capital. 

THOMAS, S. another, of the head settlement 
of the district of Hizcatepec and alcaldia mayor 
of Nezapa in the same kingdom. It is of a cold 
temperature, and accustomed to continual rains 
and clouds. It contains 70 families of Indians. 

THOMAS, S. another, of the head settlement of 
the district of Matatlan and alcaldia mayor of 
Teutitlan in the same kingdom. It contains 32 
families of Indians. 

THOMAS, S. another, of the missions which 
were held by the Jesuits in the province of Te- 
peguana and kingdom of Nueva Vizcaya. 

THOMAS, S. another, of the province and go 
vernment of Cartagena in the Nuevo Reyno de 
Granada, in the same island as its capital, and 
on the shore of the river Grande de la Magda- 
lena. 

THOMAS, S. another, with the surname of 
Barranquilla; in the same province and kingdom 
as the former ; situate also on the shore of the 
Magdalena. 

THOMAS, S. another, with the surname of Can- 
tuarense, in the same province and kingdom ; 
founded in 1776 by the governor Don Francisco 
Pimienta in the Sabanas ; near the river Grande 
de la Magdalena. 

THOMAS, S. another, of the missions which 
were held by the Jesuits in the province and go 
vernment of Paraguay, on the shore of the river 
Uruguay, opposite the mouth of the Icabaqua. 

THOMAS, S. another, the capital of Spanish 
Guayana, of the province and government of 
Cumana ; and situate on the shore of the Ori 
noco. [See THOME, S. DE LA GUAYANA.] 

THOMAS, S. another, which is a parish and 
head settlement of the district of the island of 
Barbadoes; e. of the island of Santiago, near, 
the w. coast. 

THOMAS, S. another, a parish of the English 
in the island of Jamaica. 

THOMAS, S. another, of the province and king 
dom of Guatemala. 

THOMAS, S. another, of the province and al 
caldia mayor of Zacapula in the same kingdom 
as the former. 

THOMAS. S. another, of the French, in Ca 
nada; on the shore of the river St. Lawrence; 
six leagues from Quebec. 

THOMAS, S. another, of the missions which 
were held by the Jesuits in the province of Ta- 
raumara and kingdom of Nueva Vizcaya ; 38 
leagues from the town and real of mines of San 



T H O 



555 



Felipe de Chiguagua, between the settlements of 
Pitrachiqui and Sisohuichi. In its vicinity are 
some large country estates, called Teubachy, 
Cogunapuchi, and Lechuguilla. 

THOMAS, S. another, with the surname of 
Castilla, in the province and government of 
Honduras and kingdom of Guatemala. It is a 
small population, established from the conve 
nience of its port, which is very secure and ?nach 
frequented. It was discovered by the Spaniards 
in 1525, on the day of St. Thomas Aquinas, and 
from this circumstance it took its name. It has 
a castle, built for its defence, and is 60 leagues 
from the capital, Guatemala. 

THOMAS, S, an island of the N. Sea, one of 
the Antilles, or Virgin Islands, the largest of 
them to the e. of Puertorico, and that which, 
according to Molly, is nearest to the Anegada, 
although the father Labat places it more w. [It 
is, accurately speaking, 10 miles long and three 
wide.] It abounds greatly in papas, millet, and 
other seeds, fruits and garden herbs, but much 
infested by mosquitoes and insects. 

The English established themselves in this 
island, together with some French, who were 
driven from their own country. Percy asserts 
that this island produces oranges, citrons, limes, 
guanas, plantains, and figs ; and, according to 
father Labat, it has very few horses and large 
cattle ; but is provided with flesh-meat from the 
island of Puertorico. In this island are found 
excellent kids, and all sorts of wild birds; 
though its great population and riches cause 
every thing to be very dear. 

William Dampierre calls the port of this island 
Port Franco, and a receptacle for pirates ; assert 
ing that it belongs to the King of Denmark, as 
well as the island itself, and that it regularly 
maintains its neutrality in the wars of Europe ; 
is open for all nations, and is very large, conve 
nient, and safe : it has two natural ramparts, 
whereon, in case of necessity, might be planted 
two batteries to defend the entrance. Although 
this island is not more than six or seven leagues 
in circumference, a part of it is held by the Bran- 
denburgans, under the protection of the King of 
Denmark ; but the whole of the trade is carried 
on by the Dutch, under the name of the Danes. 
Nearly in the centre of the fort is a small port, 
but without a ditch or any other work ; and the 
city, which begins about 60 paces to the w. of 
the fort, consists of a very long street, at the 
end of which is the factory : this is a very large 
building, with necessary storehouses for the mer 
chandise, and for receiving the Negroes, who are 
4 B 2 



556 



T H O 



here sold to other nations. On the right hand of 
this factory is the part appropriated to the mer 
chants or traders of Brandenburg, consisting of 
two small streets inhabited by French refugees 
from Europe and the American colonies. 

The greater part of the houses are of brick 
and in the Dutch fashion, but are only one story 
high, it not being possible to give them much 
foundation, owing to the soil being sandy and 
the springs lying within three feet of the level. 

The commerce of this small island is very 
considerable, especially in time of peace, and it 
may be considered as the emporium of the con 
traband trade of the English, French, Dutch, 
and Spanish ; and, in the time of war, the pri 
vateers come in hither to sell their prizes. Every 
day many vessels leave this island for the carry- 



T H O 

ing on a traffic with the coasts of Tierra Firme, 
and return with great quantities of money, and 
with productions of much value; so that the 
town is very rich and well provided with all ne 
cessaries. 

This island belonged formerly to a Danish 
company, but produced nothing until it was sold 
to the king, who made it a port of free commerce 
to all nations. In 1688 the factory was attacked 
and plundered by the Flibustiers ; after which a 
battery was constructed in the interior of the 
port, mounting 20 cannons. [The island of St. 
Thomas, with most of the smaller islands in the 
West Indies, has fallen into the hands of the 
British in the present war. It has been said, 
by our author, that its trade is important : the 
following documents will verify his assertion. 



The official value of the Imports and Exports of St. Thomas was, in 

Imports. Exports. 

1809 .194,121 .886,810 

1810 .437,030 .862,585 

And the quantities of the principal articles imported into Great Britain were, in 



Coffee. 


Sugar. 


Rum. 


Cotton Wool. 


British Plant. 


Foreign Plant. 


British Plant. 


Foreign Plant. 






Cwt. 

1809 523 
1810 1,488 


Cwt. 

18,876 
59,354 


Cwt. 

27,496 
16,438 


Cwt. 
3,991 

2,889 


Galls. 

28,745 
1,400 


Libs. 

387,476 
355,467 



St. Thomas is in lat. 18 22 n. Long. 64 



57 

THOMAS, S. a cape, or point of land, on the 
coast of the province and captainship of Rio Ja- 
neyro and kingdom of Brazil, near Cape Frio. 

THOMAS, S. a strait, formed by the river Pa 
raguay, in the province and government of this 
name, opposite the sierra of Las Quince Puntas. 

THOMAS, S. a lake of Canada, in the country 
and territory of the Algonovius Indians. 

[THOMAS S Bay, on the w. coast of the island 
of Antigua. It affords some shelter from the 
s. and s. e. winds.] 

[THOMAS Island, St. on the w. coast of Nuevo 
Mexico, in lat. 20 10 n. ] 

[THOMAS Port, St. a harbour of the Bay of 
Honduras, on the Spanish main, from which 
goods are shipped to Europe.] 

[THOMAS, ST. a parish of Charleston District, 
in S. Carolina. It contains 3836 inhabitants ; 
of whom 397 are whites, and 3405 slaves.] 

[THOMASTOWN, a post-town of the Dis 



trict of Maine, Lincoln County, on the w. side of 
Penobscot Bay, and about four leagues from 
Franklin Island, at the mouth of the river St. 
George, which divides this town from Warren 
and Gushing, to the w. A considerable river in 
the s. e. part of the township is called Wesso- 
wessgeeg. From the hill of Madambettocks may 
be seen islands and lands to a great distance ; 
and near it there is thought to be plenty of iron 
ore ; but no attempts have been made to ascer 
tain its quality. The grand staples of Thomas- 
town are lime and lumber. Limestone is very 
common, and spots of land, or rather rock, of six 
rods square, are frequently sold for 100 dollars. 
There are now about 35 kilns erected, each of 
which, on an average, will produce 200 fifty 
gallon casks. These kilns, if burned only three 
times a year, (though many are five or six times) 
will furnish about 21,000 casks ; which net, after 
all expenses, about six shillings a cask. Too 
much attention being paid to this business, pre 
vents a due cultivation of the lands. In 1792 



T H O 

there were owned on the river 12 brigs, schooners, 
and sloops, equal to about 1100 tons, employed 
in foreign and coasting voyages. 

On the river, and its several streams, arc a 
number of tide and other grist and saw mills, 
which afford great profit to their owners. A fort 
with a number of cannon, and a regular garrison 
of provincials, was formerly stationed about five 
miles below the head of the tide. Few vestiges 
of the fort now remain ; but in place of it an ele 
gant building was erected in 1794, by the Hon. 
Henry Knox, Esq. The settlement of Thomas- 
town began about 1720, in 1777 it was incorpo 
rated, in 1790 it contained 801 inhabitants ; and 
it was computed to contain in 1796 above 1200. 
There are here no public schools constantly kept, 
though there are several private ones throughout 
the year. There are two churches, the one for 
Baptists, who are the most numerous, and the 
other for Congregationalists. Here is also a 
social library. The compact part of the town is 
seven miles s. of Camden, seven e. of Warren, 
32 n. e. of Wiscasset.l 

THOMATLAN, S. MIGUEL DE, a head set 
tlement of the district of the alcafdia mayor of 
Orizava in Nueva Espana. It is of a warm and 
moist temperature, contains 28 families of In 
dians, and 14 of Mustees, and is five leagues n. e. 
of the capital. 

THOMATLAN, SANTIAGO DE, a settlement of 
the head settlement of the district of Pinzan- 
daro and alcaldia mayor of Tanzitaro in the same 
kingdom. It is of an extremely hot and dry- 
temperature, but abounding in wholesome wa 
ters ; contains 42 families of Mustees and Mu- 
lattoes and 17 of Indians, who trade in maize 
and rice, but addicting themselves rather to the 
latter, from the great profits acquired by it. It 
has a convent of Franciscans, and is two leagues 
w. of its head settlement. 

THOME, S. DE LA GUAYANA, called also St. 
Thomas, the capital of the province and govern 
ment of this name ; founded by the governor 
Antonio Berrio on the shore of the abundant 
river Orinoco in 1588. It is small, has, besides 
the paris"h church, which was erected into an 
abbey in 1640, although it never was completely 
endowed as such, a convent of Franciscans, 
which is at present destroyed, and a college of 
Trinitarians, somewhat smaller than the former. 
It has also a convent of the title of San Juan 
de Dios, which is an hospital, and was founded 
by the governor D. Juan de Dios Valde. It is 
of a hot temperature, and very unhealthy from 
the damps, arising from the stagnant waters left 



T H O 



557 



by the floodings of the Orinoco ; and it would 
be very scant in provisions, but for the zeal and 
attention of the Catalonian Capuchin missiona 
ries. The English pirate (for so the Spaniards 
call him), Walter Raleigh, sacked it in 1618, 
and, after this, two redoubts were rebuilt for its 
defence, although they are now in a state of ruin, 
and in their stead Charles III. ordered a fort to be 
built at the mouth of the channel formed by the 
river, and which they call De Limones. [The 
governor s salary is 3000 piastres fortes, but he 
is subject to the captainship-general of Caracas : 
244 miles w. of the mouth of the river Orinoco, 
in lat. 8 T n. and long. 63 55 o&amp;gt;.] 

THOME, S. another city. See VALENCIA. 

THOME, S. a settlement, on a plain of the 
island St. Domingo ; at the foot of the mines of 
Ciboo, not far from the source of the river Arti- 
bonito. [The above plain is contiguous to the 
n. of that of St. John of Maguana. The fort of 
St. Thomas was erected here, near the head of 
the Artibonito, by Christopher Columbus, to pro 
tect the mines against the Indians. There is 
now no vestige of the fort remaining.] 

THOME, S. another settlement of the missions 
which were held by the Jesuits in the province 
of Gaira and government of Paraguay ; on the 
shore of the river Guabay. The Portuguese of 
San Pablo destroyed it at the end of the last 
(16th) century, and the ruins of it are still to be 



seen. 



THOME, S. another, of the province and cap 
tainship of San Vicente in Brazil : on the shore 
of a river, which is of the same name. 

THOME, S. a port of the bay of La Concep- 
cion, of the kingdom of Chile, little frequented 
by vessels, as being insecure. 

THOME, S. a river of the province and cap 
tainship of San Vicente in Brazil. It runs to 
s. s. w. and enters the sources of the Uruguay. 

THOMPSON, a small settlement of the Eng 
lish in the island of Barbadoes. 

[THOMPSON, a township of Windham County, 
in the n. e. corner of Connecticut ; having the 
town of Killingly on the s. the State of Rhode 
Island e. and that of Massachusetts on the n. ; 
from which last it receives Quinabaug and Five- 
mile Rivers.] 

[THOPICANOS, a small river of the N.W. 
Territory, which runs s. to Wab ash" River, into 
which it enters a few miles e. of Ouixtanon.] 

[THORNTON, a township of New Hamp. 
shire in Grafton County, at the head of Merri- 
mack River, which contains 385 inhabitants. It 
was incorporated in 178 l.J 



558 



T H IT 



THORNTON, a river of the province and co 
lony of Virginia in N. America. It runs to s. s. e. 
and enters the Rapahanock.] 

THORPE, a settlement of the island of Bar- 
badoes, in the district and parish of Santiago, 
near the w. coast. 

[THOULOUSE, Port, on the s. coast of the 
island of Cape Breton, near the entrance of the 
Strait of Fronsac or Canso, lies between the 
gulf called Little St. Peter and the islands of St. 
Peter. It was formerly called Port St. Peter, 
and is 60 miles w. of Gabaron Bav.] 

[THOUSAND ISLES, are situated in St. 
Lawrence, or Iroquois River, a little n. of Lake 
Ontario.] 

[THOUSAND LAKES, a name given to a great 
number of small lakes near the Mississippi, a 
little to the n. e. of St. Francis River, which is 
about 60 miles above St. Anthony s Falls. The 
country about these lakes, though but little 
frequented, is the best within many miles 
for hunting; as the hunter seldom fails re 
turning loaded beyond his expectation. Here 
the river Mississippi is not above 90 yards 
wide.] 

[THREE BROTHERS, three islands within 
the river Essequibo, on the e. coast of S. Ame 
rica.] 

[IHREE ISLANDS BAY, or HARBOUR, on the 
e. coast of the island of St. Lucia, in the W. 
Indies.] 

[THREE POINTS, Cape, on the coast of Gui 
ana in S. America. Lat. 10 45 n. Long. 62 
45 w.] 

[THREE RIVERS, in Canada. See TROIS 
RIVIERES.] 

[THREE SISTERS, three small isles on the w. 
shore of Chesapeak Bay, which lie between W. 
River and Parker s Island.] 

[THUM CAP, in the S. Pacific Ocean, a 
small circular isle, not more than a mile in cir 
cumference, seven leagues n. 52 n. w. from La 
goon Island. High water, at full and change, 
between 11 and 12 o clock. Lat. 18 35 s. Long. 
1394 K;.] 

[THULE, SOUTHERN, an island in the S. 
Atlantic Ocean, the most s. land ever disco 
vered; hence the name. Lat. 59 34 s. Long. 
29 45 o&amp;gt;.] 

[THURMAN, a township in Washington 
County, New York; taken from Queensburg, 
and incorporated in 1792.] 

[THUNDER Bay, in Lake Huron, lies about 
half-way between Sagana Bay and the n. w. cor 
ner of the lake ; it is about nine miles across 



T I A 

either way, and is thus called from the thunder 
frequently heard there.] 

THY, SAN MIGUEL DE, a small settlement 
of the head settlement of the district of San Juan 
and alcaldia mayor of Queretaro in Nueva Es 
pana. It contains 15 families of Indians. 

TIABAYA, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Arequipa in Peru. 

TIAHUANACU, a territory of an ancient 
and small province to the s. of Cuzco, and to 
the e. of the lake Titicaca. The Inca Mayta- 
Capac subjected and united it to the empire. It 
is famous for the celebrated edifices which be 
longed to that emperor, and of which the ruins 
still remain, exciting- astonishment from the im 
mensity of the stones : [in lat. 17 17 s. and 
very near the s. e. coast of the lake Titicaca, 28 
miles e. of the bridge of the Inca Huama-Capac, 
or Mayta-Capac.] 

TIAHUANACU, a settlement of the province 
and corregimiento of Pacages in Peru. 

TIAMANCHU, a river of the province of 
Moxos, and government of Quito ; which runs 
from s. w. to n. e. near the settlement of S. Xa- 
vier, and enters the Marmore by the w. parts in 
lat. U}3 s. 

TIAN, a river of the province and govern 
ment of Honduras and kingdom of Guatemala ; 
which runs n. and enters the sea between the 
Pico de Gata and the Triumfo de la Cruz. 

[TIANADERHA River. See UNADILLA 
River.] 

TIANGUISMANALCO, a settlement of the 
head settlement of the district of Calpa and al~ 
caldia mayor of Atrisco in Nueva Espana. It 
contains 90 families of Indians, who cultivate 
some hemp and flax for making rigging and 
traces. Three leagues e. n. e. of its capital. 

TIANGUISMANALCO, another, a small settle 
ment, in the head settlement of the district of 
Texmelucan and alcaldia mayor of Guejo- 
zinco. 

TIANGUISTENGO, SAN MIGUEL DE, a 
settlement of the head settlement of the district 
and alcaldia mayor of Guejozinco in Nueva 
Espana. It contains 38 families of Inflians, and 
is situate . of its capital. 

TIANGUISTENGO, SANTIAGO DE, a head set 
tlement of the district of the alcaldia mayor of 
Metepec in Nueva Espana. It contains 249 fa 
milies of Indians, and is four leagues s. s. w. of 
its capital. 

TIANGUISTENGO, another, of the head settle 
ment of the district of Tepehuacan and alcaldia 
mayor of Meztitlan in Nueva Espana. It con- 



T I 



T 1 B 



55&amp;lt;&amp;gt; 



tains a convent of Augustins and 250 families of 
Indians. Ten leagues s. e. of its head settle 
ment. 

TIANGUISZOLCO, SAX MIGUEL DE, a 
settlement of the head settlement of the district 
and alcaldia mayor of Guejozinco in the same 
kingdom as the former. It contains 25 families 
of Indians, and is situate w. of its capital. 

[TIAOGU, an ancient Indian town, about 
150 miles up the Susquehannah River.] 

TIAPORO, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Aimaraez in Peru, annexed to 
the curacy of the settlement of Ancobamba. 

TI APOLLO, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Luya and Chillaos in Peru, an 
nexed to the curacy of the settlement of Coro- 
bamba in the province of Chachapoyas. 

TIATA, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Chachapoyas in Peru ; annexed 
to the curacy of the settlement of Chisquilla. 

TIAUMfi, a river of the province and go 
vernment of Esmeraldas in the kingdom of 
Quito; which laves the skirt of the mountain of 
Esmeraldas, and the country which was inha 
bited by the Indian nation of this name. It runs 
from s. to n. and enters by the s. part the river of 
Esmeraldas, near its mouth, in lat. 56 n. 

TIBACUI, a settlement of the corregimiento 
of Pasca, and province of Panches, in the Nuevo 
Reyno de Granada. It is of a cold temperature, 
though abounding in vegetable productions of 
this climate, and of a warm soil. It contains 
more than 100 housekeepers and 60 Indians, 
[and is 30 miles w. of Santa Fe.] 

TIBANA, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Tunja in the Nuevo Reyno de 
Granada. It is of a mild temperature, plea 
sant, and very healthy, produces much wheat, 
vetches, papas, plantains, and other fruits, and 
is near a river. Its inhabitants are few, not ex 
ceeding 50 ; but they live very comfortably, 
having large breeds of neat cattle and sheep, and 
making very good woven stuffs of the wool of 
the latter. Four leagues s. w. of Tunja. 

TIBANOS, a settlement of the province and 
captainship of San Vicente in Brazil; on- the 
shore and at the source of the river Uruguay. 

TIBASOSA. a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Tunja in the Nuevo Reyno de 
Granada ; situate in the llano of Sogamoso. It 
is of a cold temperature, and the night air here 
is very hurtful, on account of some swamps 
which surround it. It produces much wheat and 
other fruits of a cold climate ; is annexed to the 
curacy of the settlement of Nopsa, contains more 



than 150 whites and 100 Indians, and is eight 
leagues from Tunja. 

[TIBER Creek, a small stream which runs 
s. through the city of Washington, and empties 
into Patowmac River. Its source is 236 feet 
above the level of the tide in the creek ; the wa 
ters of which, and those of Reedy Branch, may 
be conveyed to the president s house, and to the 
capital.] 

[TIBERON, Cape, a round black rock on the 
s. zc. part of the s. peninsula of the island of St. 
Domingo, and forms the n. w. limit of the Bay of 
Tiberon.] 

[TIBEROX, or TIBUROX, a cape, bay, and 
village, on the s. w. part of the island of St. Do 
mingo. The bay is formed by the cape of its 
name on the n. w. and Point Burgau on the s. e. 
a league and three-fourths apart. The stream, 
called a river, falls in at the head of the bay, on 
the w. side of the village ; which stands on the 
high road, and, according to its course along the 
sea-shore, 10 leagues s. of Cape Dame Marie, 
20 from Jereme, and 32 by the winding of the 
road from Les Cayes. The cape is in lat. 18 
20 30" n. and in long. 64 28 40" w. The ex 
ports from Cape Tiberon, from January 1, 1789, 
to December 31, of the same year, were lOOOlbs. 
white sugar, 377,8001bs. brown sugar, 600,0021bs. 
coffee, 13,6721bs. cotton, 10881b. indigo, and 
small articles to a considerable amount. Total 
value of duties on exportation, 2465 dollars 76 
cents.] 

[TIBER ox, a fort, near the town or village 
above mentioned; taken by the French the 21st 
March, 1795.] 

TIBI, an island of the N. Sea, near the coast 
of the province and government of Georgia in 
the United States. 

TIBILOS, S. LOREXZO DE, a settlement of 
the missions, which were held by the Jesuits 
in the province and government of Mainas and 
kingdom of Quito : founded in 1670 by the Fa 
ther Lorenzo Lucero, on the shore of the river 
Guallaga. 

TIBIQUARI, a river of the province and go 
vernment of Paraguay. 

TIBIRITA, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Tunja, in the Nuevo Reyno de 
Granada; of a mild temperature, and producing 
fruits of a cold soil, such as wheat, papas, &amp;c. as 
well as those of a- warm soil, such as sugar canes, 
anniseed, and garbanzos. 

It has in its vicinity a place which they call 
Manta, where there is an abundant mine of cop 
per, of which they make choppers, caldrons, stir- 



T I C 



T I C 



rups, and other articles, of which consists its 
trade. Its population is of 100 housekeepers 
and 60 Indians, and it is situate between Santa 
Fe and Tunja, at the back of the settlement of 
Choconta. 

[TIBURON. SeeTiBERON.] 
TIBURON, a point of land or cape of the coast 
and captainship of Espiritu Santo in Brazil ; be 
tween the sierra Lunar, or De Maestro Alvaro, 
and the capital of the province. 

TIBURON, another, in the province and cap 
tainship of Seara in the same kingdom, near the 
extremity of the n. coast. 

TIBURON, another, on the n. coast of the pro 
vince and government of Darien, and kingdom of 
Tierra Firme ; one of those forming the semi 
circle of the Baj or Great Gulf of Uraba or Tuc- 
mari. 

TIBURON, a large island of the Gulf of Cali 
fornia or Mar Roxo de Cortes, very near the 
coast and in the interior of the same. 

TIBURONES. Some rocky shoals near the 
coast of the province and government of Hon 
duras, close to the cape of Gracias a Dios. 

TICANI, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Paucarcolla in Peru ; annexed 
to the curacy of the settlement of Huancani. 

TICAPA, a settlement of the province and go 
vernment of Sonora in Nueva Espana, on the 
shore of a river; between the settlements of Cu- 
curpe and Opodepe. 

TICAPAN, a settlement of the jnrisdiction 
and alcaldia mayor of Cuyoacan in Nueva Es 
pana. 

TICHBURN, a settlement of the English in 
the island of Barbadoes, in the s. part of the 
same. 

TICKE, or TICKLE, a settlement of the island 
of Newfoundland, on the e. coast, on the shore 
of Trinidad Bay. 

TICKLE ME QUICKLY, a name given by 
the English to an excellent bay on the coast of 
the Isthmus of Darien and kingdom of Tierra 
Firme, in the n. w. extremity of a cordillera of 
rocks; with a good anchorage and secure land 
ing, the same being guarded on the one side by 
a part of the aforesaid rocks and by the islands 
Samballs on the other, and which form this bay, 
which is much frequented by pirate vessels. 

TICLLACAYAN, a settlement of the pro 
vince and corregimiento of Tarma in Peru ; an 
nexed to the curacy of the settlement of Hua- 
riaca. 

TICLLA-COCHA, a great lake in the pro 
vince and corregimiento of Yauyos of the king 



dom of Peru ; formed by some streams and from 
the river Canete, which runs w. till it enters the 
S. Sea. 

TICLLAS, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Huanta in Peru. 

TICLLOS, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Caxatambo, in the same king 
dom as the former. 

TICNABAR, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Arica in the same kingdom as 
the former ; annexed to the curacy of the settle 
ment of Copta. 

TICOMAN, a settlement of the head settle 
ment of the district of Yautepec, and alcaldia 
mayor of Cuernavaca in Nueva Espana. It con 
tains 116 families of Indians, dedicated to the 
cultivation of cotton and garden herbs. Three 
leagues s. of its head settlement. 

TICONDEROGA, or TICONDIRAGO, a fort 
built by the French in Canada, in the year 1756, 
on the n. side of a peninsula, or communication 
between the two lakes George and Champlain. 
It has all the advantages both of nature and of 
art, and is defended on three sides by water sur 
rounded by rocks, and in one half of the fourth 
side by a strand, where the French built an out 
work of nine feet high, in the war between the 
English colonies of America and the French and 
the parent country. 

[This fort is now a heap of ruins, and forms 
an appendage to a farm. Its name signifies 
Noisy, in the Indian language, and was called by 
the French Corillor. Mount Independence, in 
Addison County, Vermont, is about two miles 
s. e. of it, and separated from it by the narrow 
strait which conveys the waters of Lake George 
and South River into Lake Champlain. This 
was the first fortress attacked by the Americans 
during the revolutionary war. The troops under 
General Abercrombie were defeated here in the 
year 1758, but it was taken the year following 
by General Amherst. It was surprised by Co 
lonels Allen and Arnold, May 10, 1775, and was 
retaken by General Burgoyne in July, 1777.] 

TECO PORO, a settlement of the province 
and government of Maracaibo, in the Nuevo 
Reyno de Granada ; on the shore of the river of 
its name, and to s. of the city of Pedraza. It is 
one of those under the charge of the missionaries 
of St. Domingo. 

TECOPORO, the said river, rises in the sierra 
Nevada, and enters the Apure. 

TICSAN, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Cuenca in the kingdom of Quito. 
It is nearly desert and abandoned, through the 



T I E 

many damages it has received on different occa 
sions by earthquakes. In its district are the 
estates of MOV ocancha, Atapu, Totora, Sula, 
Macrallan, and others. It is of a healthy cli 
mate and fertile soil, and on the confines of Rio- 
bamba, n.e. of the settlement of Alausi, and s. w. 
of Mov ocancha, in lat. 2 8 s. 

TICUNAS, a barbarous nation of Indians in 
the province and country of Las Amazonas, who 
dwell in the woods in the n. part. Some fami 
lies of them have been reduced to the faith, 
forming the settlements of S. Ignacio de las 
Pevas, and De Nuestra Senora de Loreto de Ti- 
cunas, which is the last of the lower mission of 
Mainas, and bounded by the territory of the 
Portuguese. The poison, which these Indians 
make for envenoming their arrows, is the most 
active of any known. [The settlement of Loreto 
is situate on the n. e. shore of the river Amazonas, 
in lat. 3 5 1 . y. and long. 69 41 w.~] 

TICUZES. See TEQUANHUNA.] 

TIDCOME, a settlement of the island of Bar- 
badoes, on the zo. coast, and at the extremity of 
the island. 

TIEMPO, Cape of Good; which the English 
call Fair Weather : a point of land on the coast 
of the country of the Patagonian Indians ; be 
tween the river La Plata and the Straits of Ma 
gellan. 

[TIERRA AUSTRAL DEL ESPIRITU 
SANTO, called by Bougainville, The Archi 
pelago of the Great Cyclades, and by Captain 
Cook, The New Hebrides, may be considered as 
the e. extremity of the vast Archipelago of Nueva 
Guayana. The islands are bituate between lat. 
14 29 and 20 14 s. and between long. 166 
and 170 21 e. from Greenwich ; and consist of 
the following islands, some of w r hich have re 
ceived names from the different European navi 
gators, and others retain the names which they 
bear among the natives; viz. Tierra Austral del 
Espiritu Santo, St. Bartholomew, Mallicollo, 
Pic de 1 Etoile, Aurora, Isle of Lepers, Whit 
suntide, Ainbrym, Paoon, Shepherds Isles, Sand 
wich, Erromango, Immer, Tana, Erronan, An- 
netom, Apee, Three Hills, Montagu, Hinchin- 
brook, and Erromanga. 

Quiros, who first discovered these islands, in 
1606, describes them, as " richer and more fer 
tile than Spain, and as populous as they are fer 
tile ; watered with fine rivers, and producing 
silver, pearls, nutmegs, mace, pepper, ginger, 
ebony of the first quality, wood for the construc 
tion of vessels, and plants which might be fabri 
cated into sail-cloth and cordages, one sort of 



T I E 



561 



VOL. IV. 



which is not unlike the hemp of Europe." The 
inhabitants of these islands, he describes as of 
several different races of men ; black, white, mu 
latto, tawny, and copper-coloured ; a proof, he 
supposes, of their intercourse with various people. 
They use no fire-arms, are employed in no mines, 
nor have they any of those means of destruction 
which the genius of Europe has invented. In 
dustry and policy seem to have made but little 
progress among them : they build neither towns 
nor fortresses ; acknowledge neither king nor 
laws, and are divided only into tribes, among 
which there does not always subsist a perfect 
harmony. Their arms are the bow and arrows, 
the spear and the dart, all made of wood. Their 
only covering is a garment round the waist, 
which reaches to the middle of the thigh. They 
are cleanly, of a lively and grateful disposition, 
capable of friendship and instruction. Their 
houses are of wood, covered with palm-leaves. 
They have places of worship and burial. They 
work in stone, and polish marble, of which there 
are many quarries. They make flutes, drum?, 
wooden spoons, and from the mother-of-pearl, 
form chissels, scissars, knives, hooks, saws, 
hatchets, and small round plates for necklaces. 
Their canoes are well built and neatly finished. 
Hogs, goats, cows, buffaloes, and various fowls 
and fish, for food, are found in abundance on and 
about these islands. Added to all these and 
many other excellencies, these islands are re 
presented as having a remarkably salubrious air, 
which is evinced by the healthy robust appear 
ance of the inhabitants, who live to a great age, 
and yet have no other bed than the earth. 

Such is the description which Quiros gives of 
these islands, in and about which he spent some 
months, and which he represents to the King of 
Spain as " the most delicious country in the 
world; the garden of Eden, the inexhaustible 
source of glory, riches, and power to Spain." 
On the n. side of the largest of these islands, 
called Espiritu Santo, is a bay, called San Felipe 
and Sant-Yago, which, says Quiros, " penetrates 
20 leagues into the country ; the inner part is all 
safe, and may be entered with security, by night 
as well as by day. On every side, in its vicinity, 
many villages may be distinguished, and if we 
may judge by the smoke which rises by day, and 
the fires that are seen by night, there are many 
more in the interior parts." The harbour in 
this bay was named by Quiros, La Vera Cruz, 
and is a part of this bay, and large enough to 
admit 1000 vessels. The anchorage is on an ex 
cellent bottom of black sand, in water of different] 
4 c 



562 



T I E 



T I E 



[depths, from six to 40 fathoms, between two fine 
rivers/] 

TIERRA FIRME, a kingdom of S. America ; 
bounded e. by the province and government of 
Cartagena, from which it is divided by the river 
S.Juan, w. by the province of Costarica in the 
kingdom of Guatemala, and n. and s. by the two 
seas, at the Isthmus of Panama, or Tierra Firme. 



It is 146 leagues 



long, 90 wide in the broadest 



part, and eight at the narrowest, and at the afore 
said isthmus, the which is the most celebrated of 
any ever heard of. 

This kingdom is divided into three provinces, 
which are those of Darien, Veragua, Panama or 
Tierra Firme ; which, united, give the whole the 
latter name. It is of a hot and moist tempera 
ture, though the nights are fresh and agreeable, 
for from five o clock in the evening the wind from 
the sea springs up. 

It is watered by an infinite number of rivers, 
the most considerable of which are, the Chagre, 
Bayano, Atrato, Tiura, some of which enter the 
N. and others the S. Sea. The territory is for 
the most part mountainous and craggy, and al 
most inaccessible, owing to the great cordillera 
which intersects it ; not but that it has some fer 
tile, though little cultivated llanuras ; the natives 
being rather dedicated to the commerce with the 
provinces of Peru and with Europe, as, in the 
time of the galleons, they lay in the very way for 
such a trade. They, consequently, only cultivate 
such maize as may be necessary for the subsist 
ence of the Negroes and the great herds of cattle 
which they breed, and of the flesh of which they 
make, by drying it in the sun, salted meat in 
strips of three fingers wide, which they call tasajo, 
and which is also the common food. 

Here are some gold mines, particularly in the 
province of Darien, the same which were formerly 
worked with great success, but which are now 
abandoned through the incursions of those In 
dians ; and there are now no other mines worked 
but some in the province of Veragua, which are 
of very good alloy. In the mountains are found 
an infinity of strange birds and animals, the 
former of great beauty and delightful note ; and, 
amongst the latter, many which have excited the 
particular attention of the naturalist. Amongst 
others is a species of the sloth, thus called from 
the difficulty with which it moves, inasmuch as 
he is whole hours in proceeding only a few steps. 
This animal is of the shape of a cat, and utters 
lamentable groans upon moving either his fore 
or hind feet, and it is said that he does so from 
the great pain occasioned by the exertion. 



Amongst the birds, the king of the fowls deserves 
attention, as being rare and of exceeding beauty, 
with wings of different colours, and of the size 
of a moderate sized turkey-cock. Should there 
happen to be any animal killed near the spot 
where this king-bird is setting, the other birds, 
although they may be assembled around in vast 
numbers, never presume to touch the prey until 
the king shall have first darted upon it. He gene 
rally satiates himself with the eyes and the heart; 
and his retiring is the signal for the rest to begin 
their feast. 

In the province of Veragua are some smal 
monkeys of a yellow colour, and with a white 
crown, with a skin as fine as the best silk. They 
are extremely gentle, but so delicate, that they 
invariably die upon being removed from their 
native place ; for, although every precaution to 
bring them to Europe has been adopted, they 
have all been unsuccessful. In this kingdom are 
abundance of insects, snakes of many kinds, spi 
ders, centipedes, mosquitoes, and various others, 
which are troublesome in the extreme. 

There are several very good ports on the 
coasts of both seas, serving as asylums for the 
illicit traders, the commerce of this kingdom 
having greatly diminished since the establish 
ment of that of Buenos Ayres. It has therefore 
become much less opulent than formerly, since 
then all the trade which was done by Peru and 
Guatemala with Spain, and nice versa, passed 
through Tierra Firme, and was shipped and 
landed at Portobello. The population is not 
proportionate to its size. See an account of the 
same under the article of each of the three pro- 
vinces composing this kingdom. The capital is 
the city of Panama. 

TIERRA FIRME, one of the provinces of the 
above kingdom, and from whence the kingdom had 
its name. It lies between the province of Darien 
to the e. and that of Veragua to the w. is 55 
leagues long from the jurisdiction of the alcaldia 
wrtyor of Nata, by a line which runs from the 
isle of Veragua in the N. Sea, as far as the set 
tlement and isle ofGuarare in the S. Sea, and, 
on the opposite part, by another line, which runs 
from the great strand on the n. coast of the pro 
vince of Darien to the Port Quemado in the S. 
Sea. In this province the isthmus, dividing the 
two seas, is the narrowest, being only eight 
leagues across ; although, from the roughness 
of the mountains and from the abundance of 
the waters of the rivers, it is necessary to pass 
across by a circuitous rout of no less than 16 
leagues. 



TIG 

This province is very fertile, and would, if cul 
tivated, produce great profit ; has large estates, 
in which are bred much cattle, and some mills 
in which sugar and brandy are made. The com 
mon people use guarapo for their drink, which is 
a fermentation of plantations, and the consump 
tion of this is very great. The Indians who have 
remained here are now very few indeed, and the 
greater part of the inhabitants are Negroes, 
slaves, and freemen, Mulattoes, and Zambos. 
The capital is also that of the kingdom ; and the 
other settlements are, 

Portobello, Sajalices, 

Cruces, Palenque, 

Nata, Santa Maria, 

Villa de los Santos, Parita, 
Penonome, Gorgona, 

Chame, Chepo, 

Anton, Chorrera, 

Capita, San Juan. 

TIERRA PEQUENA, or PETITE TERRE, a name 
given by the French to three small islands ; si 
tuate near the n. coast of the island Marigalante ; 
between this island and the point of Los Castil- 
los of the island of Guadalupe. 

[TIETE, a river of the province of Paraguay. 
See PARAGUAY River.] 

TIETE. See HARIHAMBU, or ANEMBI. 

TIGIOCA, Point of, on the coast of the pro 
vince and country of Las Amazonas, and territory 
of the Portuguese ; one of those which form, 
with the point of Maguari in the island of Ma- 
rajo, the second mouth of that great river. Off 
here are several shoals of the same name. 

TIGITAS, a small river of the province and 
government of Venezuela in the kingdom of 
Granada. It rises s. of the town of La Concep- 
cion de Pao, and, shortly after, unites itself with 
the Gamalotal. 

TIGLA, a river of the province and govern 
ment of Darien, and kingdom of Tierra Firme ; 
which rises in the mountains of the e. side, and 
enters by this rhumb into the channel of Tarena. 

TIGLAGANTI, a river of the same province 
and kingdom as the former, which rises in the 
mountains of the n. part, and enters the sea in 
the Gulf of Tucumari, or of Atrato. 

[TIGNARES, the chief town of the captain 
ship of Rio Grande in Brazil.] 

TIGRE, a settlement of the province and go 
vernment of Maracaibo, in the N uevo Reyno de 
Granada ; on the shore of the river St. Domingo, 
to the s. of the city of Barinas Nueva. 

TIGRE, another settlement, called also Pozo 
del Tigre, in the province and government of 



T I G 



563 



Tucuman and kingdom of Peru, on the shore 
and at the source of the river San Miguel. 

TIGRE, a large and abundant river of the king 
dom of Nueva Grenada, which rises in the pro 
vince of Quijos and Macas in Suchahuacaurui, 
between the river Villano to the n. and the Sa- 
rayacu to the s. It becomes united itself with 
the Collana, which enters it by the n. part in the 
territory of the ancient nation of the Gayes; and 
near its shores, amongst some thick woods, dwell 
many barbarous nations of Indians, of which the 
most known are the Annales, Yameos, and Iqui- 
tos ; and also upon the same shore are situate 
the settlements of Yameos and Del Angel Cus- 
todio ; and here this river is entered by the 
Nahuapo, three leagues before it joins the Ma- 



ranon, in lat. 4 53 s. 



TIGRE, a river of the province and govern 
ment of Cumana, which rises in the interior of 
the serrania, and, at a small distance, incorporates 
itself with the Guarapiche. 

TIGRE, another, of the kingdom of Quito, in 
the province and corregimiento of Chimbo, which 
flows down from the mountain called Chima, runs 
very rapidly n. until it unites itself with the 
Tinto and the San Christoval, and enters the 
Ojiva, in lat. 1 46 s. 

TIGRE, a small island of the S. Sea, nearly 
united to the coast, of the district and alcaldia 
mayor of Penonome in the province and kingdom 
of Tierra Firme, opposite the settlement of 
Chame and the island Otoque. 

TIGRE, another, also a small island of the S. 
Sea, near the coast of the province and govern 
ment of Nicaragua, and kingdom of Guatemala, 
at the mouth of the Bay of Fonseca. 

TIGRE, a large oval lake, formed by the wa 
ters of the river Choco, in the province and go 
vernment of this name, and Nuevo Reyno de 
Granada. It has a mouth by which it disem 
bogues itself, forming various rivers. 

TIGRES, Mountain of the, in the island of 
Cayenne or Cayana, on the skirt of which the 
French have an establishment. It takes this 
name from the abundance of large and beautiful 
tigers found in it. 

TIGUA, Point of, on the coast of the province 
and government of Cartagena and Nuevo Reyno 
de Granada; between the points Comisario and 
San Bernardo. 

TIGUA, a river of the province and govern 
ment of Esmeraldas in the kingdom of Quito, in 
the s. part. It descends from the mountain of 
Guanas, runs to n. w. and enters the Toachi, in 
lat. 19 s. 



564 



T I L 



TIGUANASQUI, a settlement of the province 
and corregimiento of Caxamarquilla in Peru. 

TIGUARA, a small river of the province 
and country of Las Amazonas, in the part 
possessed by the Portuguese. It rises between 
the rivers Jurubechi and Nuisi, runs e. and enters 
the Negro, opposite the settlement of Maravia. 
TILACO, a settlement of the head settlement 
of the district of Tamazunchala, and alcaldia 
mayor of Valles in Nucva Espafia. It is very 
small, and its inhabitants are Indians, who live 
nearly like gentiles. 

TILANTONGO, a settlement of the alcaldia 
mayor of Nochiztlan, in the same kingdom as 
the former. It contains 102 families of Indians, 
who occupy themselves in agriculture, and is 
seven leagues s. of its capital. 

TILAPAN, SANTIAGO DE, a small settlement 
or ward of the district of Ixtazoquitlan, and 
alcaldia mayor of Orizava in Nueva Espana. It 
contains 120 families of Indians. 

TILAPAN, another, in the head settlement of 
the district of Zuchiquilatzan, and alcaldia mat/or 
of Juxtlahnaca in the same kingdom. 

TILCAXETE, a settlement of the head settle 
ment of the district and alcaldia mayor of Ante- 
quera, in the province and bishopric of Oaxaca, 
and kingdom of Nueva Espaua. It is of a hot 
and dry temperature, abounding in cotton, in 
which, with some cochineal, its commerce consists ; 
has a convent of Dominicans, and 260 families of 
Indians, and is three leagues e. of its capital. 

TILLO, SANTIAGO DE, a settlement of the 
alcaldia mayor of Yauguitlan in Nueva Espana. 
It contains 180 families of Indians, and is one 
league e. by n. of its capital. 

TILONZINGO, S. MARCOS DE, a settlement 
of the alcaldia mayor of Zunipango in Nueva Es 
pana, of a mild climate, and producing seeds and 
pulque, its principal branches of trade. It con 
tains 30 families of Otomies Indians, annexed to 
the curacy of Guipuxtla, and is \\ leagues n. of 
its capital. 

TILTEPEC, a settlement of the alcaldia mayor 
of Nochiztlan in Nueva Espana. It contains 
109 families of Indians, including those of the 
wards of its district, and is one league 5. of its 
capital. 

TILTEPEC, another settlement, in the head 
settlement of Totontepec, and alcaldia mayor of 
Villalta in Nueva Espana. It is of a cold tem 
perature, contain 33 families of Indians, and is 
four leagues e. of its capital. 

TILTEPRC, another, with the surname of Rin- 
con, the head settlement of the district, of the 



T I M 

same alcaldia mayor as the former, containing- 
174 Indian families. 

TILTIL, a small settlement of Indians of the 
province and corregimientn of Santiago in the 
kingdom of Chile. It is near its capital, and is 
celebrated for a rich gold mine, but is nearly 
abandoned from want of hands to work the said 
mine. 

TIMANA, a town of the province and govern 
ment of Popayan, in the Nuevo Reyno de Gra 
nada ; founded by order of Sebastian de Belal- 
cazar, by Captain Juan de Anasco in 1538, in the 
territory of the Faeces and Pijaos Indians. It is 
of a hot but healthy temperature, of a very re 
duced population, and little fertile in grain and 
vegetable productions, but abounding in cotton, 
pita, wax, honey, and com, in all of which con 
sists its trade, as well as in infinite breeds of cat 
tle, from the largeness and richness of the pas 
tures. Its natives make a very delicious sweet 
meat of almonds, esteemed in all parts of the 
kingdom. 

In its district is a mountain, in which they 
find loadstone, and in which there are mines of 
amathists and other precious stones. These 
productions would have much enriched this 
town, had it not been for the misfortunes it has 
experienced from the attacks of the barbarian 
Indians : [81 miles e. of Popayan and 160 s. from 
Santa Fc ; in lat. 2 W n. and long. 75 12 o&amp;gt;.] 

TIMAR, a settlement of the province and 
corregin/iento ofArica in Peru; annexed to the 
curacy of the settlement of Copta. 

TIMBAS, a barbarous nation of Indians, 
which gave its name to an ancient province of 
the Nuevo Reyno de Granada. They were vi 
sited by Sebastian de Belcazar in 1536, and were 
one of those which gave the most strenuous re 
sistance to the Spaniards. Their country is un 
cultivated, rough, and barren, but abounds in 
gold mines. It is not known whether any of 
these barbarians yet exist. 

TIMBIO, a settlement of the province and 
government of Popayan in the Nuevo Reyno de 
Granada ; situate on the shore of the river from 
whence it takes its name. 

TIMBIO. This river rises near the capital 
towards the o\ and shortly after enters the Patia. 

TIMBIQUI, a settlement of the province and 

g)vernment of Choco and Nuevo Reyno de 
ranada ; belonging to the district of Barbacoas. 
TIMBOI, a small river of the province and 
government of Buenos Ay res in Peru ; which 
runs c. and enters the Uruguay, close to the river 
of Moconeta-guazu. 



TIM 

TIMBUES, a nation of Indians of the pro 
vince and government of Paraguay ; discovered 
by Captain Pedro de Mendoza : they dwell on 
the shores of the river La Plata, and maintain 
themselves by fishing alone. They are at present 
very few, and are reduced to the Catholic faith, 
living in a settlement. 

TIMEN, a settlement of the missions which 
were held by the Jesuits in the province and go 
vernment of Sonora. 

TIMERARIS, a river of the Dutch province 
and colony of Berbis ; which runs fertilizing 
that territory, and enters the Atlantic. On its 
shores are some plantations of sugar-cane, of 
which they make much sugar. 

TIMIR1GUACO, a settlement of the pro 
vince and o-overnment of Cartagena in the Nuevo 
Reyno de Granada; situate on the shore of a 
stream, right leagues 5. of its capital. 

[TIMMISKAMAIN Lake, in Lower Canada, 
is about 28 miles long and 10 broad, having seve 
ral small inlands. Its waters empty into Utawas 
River, by a short and narrow channel 38 miles n. 
of the n. part of Nepissing Lake. The Indians 
named Timmiscamaings reside round this lake.] 

TIMMONES, a port of the inland of Cuba, 
on the n. coast, between the bay of Guibara and 
the river of Naranjas. 

TIMOTES, a settlement of the government 
and jurisdiction of Maracaibo in the Nuevo 
Reyno de Granada ; situate near the river of its 
name, in the district which divides the limits of 
the cities of Merida and Truxillo. It is of a mild 
temperature, and produces much wheat, garlic, 
onions, maize, papas, &amp;c. It abounds in all 
kinds of cattle, as well neat as sheep and horses ; 
and its population consists of 150 Indians and 
50 whites. 

TIMOTI, a river of the province and govern 
ment of Darien and kingdom of Tierra Firme : 
it rises in the mountains of the n. coast, runs 5. w. 
and enters the Chuqunaqui. 

TIMOUQUAS, a country and territory of 
Florida ; bounded n. by Georgia. It takes its 
name from a nation of Indians, who were en 
tirely destroyed by the English of Carolina in 17f 6. 

[f IMPANOG OS Lake, a lake of N. Ame 
rica, which, as Humboldt observes, has its limits 
but imperfectly known from the journals of Fa 
ther Escalante, and is perhaps the Teguayo 
Lake, from the borders of which, according to 
some historians, the Azteques removed to the 
river Gila.J 

TIMUSI, a settlement of the province and 



565 



corregimiento of Larecaxa in Peru, annexed to 
the curacy of the settlement of Ambana. 

TINACO, a settlement of the province and 
government of Venezuela in the Nuevo Reyno 
de Granada; on the skirt of a mountain, and 
on the shore of a river from whence it takes its 
name. 

TINACO. This river rises very near the 
former settlement, and then enters that of La 
Portuguesa. 

TINAJA, a settlement of the province and 
government of Sonora in Nueva Espana, in the 
interior and towards the n. in the territory and 
country of the Papagos Indians. 

TINAQUILLO, a settlement of the province 
and government of Venezuela in the Nuevo 
Reyno de Granada ; situate on the shore and at 
the source of the river Coxede, s. of the city of 
Valencia. 

TINGANASES, a barbarous, ancient, and 
numerous nation of the province of Los Pana- 
taguas ; but little known. 

TIXGO, a settlement of the province and 
correginuento of lea in Peru ; annexed to the 
curacy of Yanaconas in its capital. 

TINGO, another settlement in the province 
and corregimiento of Chachapoyas of the same 
kingdom ; annexed to the curacy of the settle 
ment of Quillay. 

TINGS, a city of the province of Hampshire, 
one of the provinces of New England, in the 
United States; situate on the shore of the river 
Pennycook. 

TINGUA, a river of the province and corre 
gimiento of Maule in the kingdom of Chile. It 
runs w. laves the city of San Fernando, and en 
ters the Maule. 

TINGUINDIN, or TINGUIRINDIN, a juris 
diction and alcaldia mayor, of the province and 
bishopric of Mechoacan in Nueva Espana. It 
is much reduced, and is annexed to the juris 
diction of Xiquilpa and Periban. Its produc 
tions are wheat, maize, loaf-sugar, and fish ; and 
it has some breeds of large cattle. In its dis 
trict, two leagues w. of the capital, is the rancha 
of Guascaro ; in which there are 17 families of 
Spaniards and Mustees, exercised in agriculture; 
also two leagues to the s. is the settlement of 
Tacumbo with 24 families, and, at a less dis 
tance, the estate of La Laguneta, with 1 1 fami 
lies of Spaniards ; and also there are in that of 
Ayumba, two leagues to the n. and in that of 
Magdalena, close by, nine other families of Mus- 
tees and Mulattoes. 



566 



T I N 



The capital is the settlement of its name, of a 
cold temperature, and inhabited by 28 families of 
Spaniards and Mustees, and 60 of Indians : [140 
miles w. \ s. of Mexico.] 

TINGUINEO, a settlement of the head 
settlement of the district of Zitaquaro and 
alcaldia mayor of Maravatio in the bishopric 
of Mechoacan. It contains 47 families of In 
dians, and is four leagues e. of its head settle 
ment. 

TINGUIRIRICA, a river of the kingdom of 
Chile ; which rises in the mountains of the cor- 
diUerd) and enters the river Rapel, five leagues 
before this river runs into the sea. It is noted 
for the lamentable accidents which have hap 
pened to those who have endeavoured to cross it 
when it has been flooded. 

TINGUIS, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Caxamarca in Peru ; annexed to 
the curacy of the settlement of Nepos. 

[TINICUM, two townships of Pennsylvania ; 
the one in Buck s County, the ether in that of 
Delaware.! 

TINJACA, a settlement of the corregimiento 
of Sachica, and jurisdiction of the town of Leiba, 
in the Nuevo Keyno de Granada. It is of a 
benign temperature, produces much wheat of 
excellent quality, maize, papas, &amp;c. and abounds 
in cochineal and other substances for dyeing ; 
contains 80 housekeepers and as many Indians, 
and is two leagues from Leiba, and four from 
Chiquinquira, and six from Tunja. 

TINKERS, an island of the N. Sea; one of 
the Elizabeth Isles, and the second in size ; at 
the entrance of Buzzard s Bay ; distant one mile 
from the island of Nashawn, and from the 
nearest land on Barnstable coast. It is three 
miles long from n. to 5. and one and a half wide 
from e. to w. and having to the w. at a mile dis 
tance farther, Stocum s Island. 

[TINMOUTH, a township of Nova Scotia on 
the e. coast. It was formerly called Pictou, and 
lies about 40 miles from Truro. See PICTOU.] 

[TINMOUTH, a township of Vermont, Rutland 
County, and contains 935 inhabitants.] 

TINQUIPAYA, a settlement of the province 
and corregimiento of Porco in Peru. 

TINQUICHISGUA, a territory of the coast 
of the Strait of Magellan ; inhabited by some 
tall and warlike Indians. 

TINQUICHISGUA, a point of land on the s. 
coast of the Straits of Magellan ; being one of 
those which form the mouth of the channel of 
San Juan. 



T I O 

[TINSIGNAL, a rich silver mine in the pro 
vince of Costa Rica ; which see.] 

TINT A, a province and corregimiento of Peru. 
See CANES and CANCHES. 

TINT A, the settlement and capital of this pro 
vince. 

TINT A, another settlement of the province 
and corregimiento of Caxatambo in the same 
kingdom ; annexed to the curacy of the settle 
ment of Churin. 

TINTAI, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Lucanas in the same kingdom 
as those above ; annexed to the curacy of the 
settlement of Huacana. 

[TINTAMARE, a river of Nova Scotia, 
which is navigable three or four miles up for 
small vessels.] 

TINTIN, a settlement of the province and 
government of Mizquee in Pei ii. 

TINTIPAN, a large island of the N. Sea ; 
belonging to the district and government of Car 
tagena in the Nuevo Reyno de Granada ; oppo 
site the point and islands of S. Bernardo, and 
further from the coast than these islands. 

[TINTO, a river of Tierra Firme, 20 leagues 
to the e. of Cape Honduras.] 

TINTON, a lake of the province and go 
vernment of Louisiana in N. America; between 
the rivers Missouri and Moingona. 

TIN TONES, a settlement of Indians of the 
nation of this name, of the same province and 
government as the former lake, and situate on 
its shore. 

TINUL, a small river of the province and 
country of Las Amazonas. It rises in the ter 
ritory of Cocamas, flat-headed Indians, runs n. 
and enters the Maranon, opposite the settlement 
of San Joaquin de los Omaguas. 

TIO, a fort of the province and government 
of Tucuman in Peru ; built to restrain the In 
dians. 

TIOCAXAS, a large plain of the province 
and corregimiento of Riobamba in the kingdom 
of Quito ; at a small distance a. of the capital, 
and memorable for the bloody battle which was 
fought between Sebastian de Belalcazar and the 
Puruayes Indians, when these disputed the en 
trance into the territory. 

[TIOGA, a township of Pennsylvana, in Lu- 
zern County.] 

[TioGA, a county of New York, bounded e. by 
Otsego, w. by Ontario, n. by Onondago, and s. 
by the State of Pennsylvania. It contains the 
towns of Newtown, Union, Chemung, Oweg, 



TIP 

Norwich, Jerico, and Chenengo, in which are 
1165 electors, according to the state census of 
1796. The courts of common pleas and general 
sessions of the peace for the county are held on 
the first Tuesdays in May, October, and February, 
in every year, alternately, at Chenengo, in the 
town of Union, and at Newtown Point, in the 
town of Chemung. Some curious bones have 
been dug up in this county. About 12 miles 
from Tioga Point, the bone or horn of an ani 
mal was found, six feet nine inches long, 21 inches 
round, at the long end, and 15 inches at the small 
end. It is incurvated nearly to an arch of a large 
circle. By the present state of both the ends, 
much of it must have perished; probably 2 or 3 
feet from each end.] 

[TioGA Point, the point of land formed by the 
confluence of Tioga River with the E. branch of 
Susquehannah River. It is about 5| miles s. 
from the line which divides New York State 
from Pennsylvania, and is about 137 miles n. by 
w. of Philadelphia, and 20 s. e. of Newtown. 
The town of Athens stands on this point of 
land.] 

[TioGA River, a branch of the Susquehannah, 
which rises in the Alleghany Mountains, in about 
lat. 41 50 , and running e. empties into the Sus 
quehannah at Tioga Point, in lat. 41 56 . It is 
navigable for boats about 50 miles. There is 
said to be a practicable communication between 
the s. branch of the Tioga, and a branch of the 
Alleghany, the head waters of which are near 
each other. The Seneca Indians say they can 
walk four times in a day, from the beatable wa 
ters of the Alleghany, to those of the Tioga, at 
the place now mentioned.] 

TIOLOMA, a paramo and very lofty moun 
tain of the kingdom of Quito ; on the top of 
which are four lakes, called Colay, Pichavinac, 
Matallan, and Cubilli. The first, which is the 
largest, is half a league long, and from them all 
is formed the river Las Cebadas. 

[TIOOKEA, an island in the S. Pacific Ocean, 
one of those called George s Islands. Lat 14 
27 s. Long. 144 56 EJ.] 

[TIOUGHNIOGA River. See CHENENGO 
River.] 

TIPAN, a settlement of the province and cor- 
regimiento of Condesuyos de Areqviipa in Peru : 
annexed to the curacy of the settlement of Vi- 
raco. 

TIPAZOQUE, a settlement of the province 
and government of San Juan de los Llanos in the 
Nuevo Reyno de Granada. 

TIPINAPA, a settlement of the head settle- 



T I Q 



567 



ment of the district of Teotalzinco and akaldia- 
mayor of Villalta in Nueva Espana. It contains 
35 families of Indians, and is 22 leagues from its 
capital. 

TIPIRIN, a settlement of the province and 
government of Cumana, situate in the serrania; 
being one of the missions planted here by the 
Aragonese Capuchin fathers. It is on the shore 
of the river Guarapiche, near where this enters 
the gulf Triste. 

TIPOURABO, a part of the province and 
government of Guayana, in which the river 
Aprouac loses itself amongst some rocks, and 
where it is heard to make a great noise, though 
it be no longer visible. Before the canoes can 
resume the navigation of this river, they must 
be carried for more than 1200 paces over a 
mountain which is 60 toises high. 

TIPUANE, a settlement of the missions 
held by the religious of San Agustin in the 
country of Paititi, of the province and corre- 
gimiento of Larecaxa in Peru. 

TIPUANIS, a river of the kingdom of Peru, 
which laves the confines of the province of Ta- 
rija, dividing the same from the territory and 
woods of the infidel Indians. In the sands of 
this river are found grains of gold, which, when 
the water is low, the Indians pick up for the 
purpose of paying therewith their tribute. 

TIPUTINI, a river of the province and go 
vernment of Mainas in the kingdom of Quito ; 
which rises in the province of Quixos and Ma- 
cas, runs e. and enters the Napo, opposite the 
settlement of San Juan Nepomuceno. 

TIQUE, a river of the province and govern 
ment of Cumana, which rises in the table of 
Guanipa, runs in a serpentine course to n. and 
unites itself with the Murichal to enter the Gua 
rapiche. 

TIQUICHEO, a settlement of the head set- 
tlement of the district of Tuzantla and alcaldia 
mayor of Maravatio in Nueva Espana. It was 
formerly populous, but nearly ruined by an epi 
demic disorder : 20 leagues e. of its head settle 
ment. 

TIQUICIO DE ADENTRO, a settlement of the 
province and government of Antioquia in the 
Nuevo Reyno de Granada, on the shore of a 
lake formed by the river Perico, in the sierras of 
Guamoco : three leagues from the town of Zi- 
miti. 

TIQUICIO, another, called De Afuera, in the 
same province and kingdom ; also situate on 
the shore of that lake. 

TIQUIHUA, a settlement of the province 



568 



T I R 



T I T 



and corregimiento of Vilcas Huaman in Peru ; 
annexed to the curacy of Hualla. 

TIQUILLACHA, a settlement of the pro 
vince and corregimiento of Paucarcolla in Peru. 

TIQUILIGASTI, a settlement of the pro 
vince and government of Tucuman in Peru ; 
on the shore of the river Salado. 

TIQUINA, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Omasuyos in Peru ; annexed to 
the curacy of the settlement of Copacavana ; on 
the s. shore of the lake Titicaca. 

TIQUIPAYA, a settlement of the province 
and corregimiento of Cochabamba in Peru. 

TIQUIRI, a settlement of the island of 
Cuba ; on the s. coast, close to the point of Pe- 
dernales. 

TIRAMENA, a settlement of the missions 
which were held by the Jesuits in the province 
and government of San Juan de los Llanos of 
the Nuevo Reyno de Granada, and now under 
the charge of the religious of St. Domingo. 

TIRAMUTO, a very lofty mountain of the 
province and government of Guayana or Nueva 
Andalucia ; 5. of Ciudad Real. 

TIRANO, NUESTRA SENORA DE GUADA- 
LUPE DE, a settlement of the corregimiento of 
the jurisdiction of Velez : it is of a hot tempe 
rature, produces sugar-canes, i/ucas, maize, 
plantains, &amp;c. ; contains 400 housekeepers, [and 
is 38 miles n. e. of Velez, and 49 s. s. w. from the 
city of San Gil.] 

TIRANO, a port of the island of Margarita; 
on the n. coast on the w. side of N. Cape. 

TIRINIDARO, SANTOS REYES BE, a head 
settlement of the district of the alcaldia mayor 
of Valladolid in the province and bishopric of 
Mechoacan ; situate in a plain of mild tempera 
ture, on the side of a swamp ; so that its waters are 
thick and unwholesome. It contains 100 fami 
lies of Indians, and is 10 leagues n. of its ca 
pital. 

TIRIPITIO, a head settlement of the dis 
trict of the same alcaldia mayor as the former. 
It is of a cold temperature, and contains a convent 
of the religious of San Agustin, four families of 
Spaniards, and 32 of Indians. In this settle 
ment Alonso de Veracruz, a religious Augustin, 
founded the royal university, which was after 
wards translated to Mexico. Six leagues e. of 
the capital Pasquaro. 

TIRIRICO, a very lofty mountain of the pro 
vince and country of the Chiquitos Indians in 
Peru : it is on the shore of the river Ubay, and 
n. n. w. of the settlement of San Francisco Xa- 
vier. 



TITCREL, a settlement of the island of Bar 
bados : ,v. of the parish Santa Lucia. 

Tilt U HA, a river of the district of Tolten 
Baxo in the kingdom of Chile : it runs with a 
serpentine course to w. and enters the sea near 
the point of its name. 

TIRUMENCOS. See PATAGONES. 

TISALEO, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Riobamba in the kingdom of 
Quito. 

[TISBURY, a small fishing town on the s. 
side of the island of Martha s Vineyard, nine 
miles from Chilmark, and 64 from Boston. The 
township was incorporated in 1671, and contains 
1142 inhabitants. It is in Duke s County, Mas 
sachusetts, and in 1796 the e. part was incorpo 
rated into a separate township. | 

[TISCAN, a village of Cuenca, and depart 
ment of Alansis, in Quito, in S. America, which 
was entirely destroyed by an earthquake, but the 
inhabitants escaped, and removed to a safer situa 
tion. The marks of this dreadful convulsion of 
nature are still visible.] 

TISCO, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Collahuas in Peru. 

TISQUI, a river of the province and govern 
ment of Esmeraldas in the kingdom of Quito : it 
runs n. w. and empties itself into the Blanco by 
the n. part, opposite the mouth of the Quinindi, 
in lat 21 30" n. 

TITACO, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Arica in Peru, annexed to the 
curacy of the settlement of Tarata. 

TITANES, a barbarous nation of Indians of 
the province and government of Santa Cruz de la 
Sierra in Peru, in thee. 5. e. part. Their country 
is fertile, and in their mountains are found mines 
of copper, lead, and iron, and some of silver. 
These Indians are ferocious, and live constantly 
retired in the woods. 

TITICACA. See CHUCUITO. 

TITICACA, a large island of the lake of its 
name, and the largest of any in the same ; belong 
ing to the province and corregimiento of Oma 
suyos in Peru : it is three leagues long, one wide, 
and five in circumference, and one mile from the 
shore. This island was mountainous and unculti 
vated, but the Incas did much for it, bringing earth 
from other parts : it was naturally irrigated 
by 13 streams, is very fertile, the temperature 
being altogether milder here than in the province. 
Thus it is that in the many estates here, they 
gather in abundance seeds, flowers, and fruits, and 
bread much cattle ; and in the woods are found 
wild rabbits and pigeons. 



T I X 

The Indians assert that the first Inca of Peru 
came from this island, his name being Manco 
Capac ; and with him his sister and wife Mama 
Olio Huacu, making the Indians believe that they 
were born of the Sun, and that they were sent to 
them to instruct them in the manners of civilized 
life ; and here, as in a sacred place, did they 
build the celebrated Temple to the Sun, covered 
all over with gold, and certainly the most magni 
ficent of any temple in that kingdom. At this 
temple the lords and vassals of the whole king 
dom met annually with their presents to acknow 
ledge this feigned deity. 

It was also said that the Inca s palace was 
here ; but this is a false assertion ; since, through 
out the whole island, no vestiges have been seen 
of that grandeur which are found in Tiahuanaco 
and other parts, although, upon the arrival of the 
Spaniards, those elegant edifices were said to be 
razed to the ground, and with their very founda 
tion stones and the other riches and valuables of 
the Inca, to have been thrown into the lake. In 
this island is the grand settlement of Copacavana, 
celebrated for the sanctuary of Nuestra Senora, 
^vhich is in it of this title. 

TITUMATI, a river of the province and 
government of Darien and kingdom of Tierra 
Firme. It has its origin in the mountains of the 
n. coast, runs w. and enters the Chugunaqui. 

TITUMATI, another river in the same province 
and kingdom ; which rises in the e. part, and 
enters the sea in the bay and gulf of Tucumari, 
near the mouth of the Tarena. 

[TIVERTON, a township of Rhode Island, 
in Newport County, having the Eastern Passage 
and part of Mount Hope Bay on the &amp;lt;r. and n. w. 
the State of Massachusetts on the n. and e. and 
Little Compton township on the s. It contains 
2453 inhabitants, including 25 slaves. It is 
about 13 miles w. n. e. of Newport.] 

TIVILLO, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of lea in Peru, annexed to the cu 
racy of the settlement of Palpa. 

TIXTLAN, a jurisdiction and alcaldia mayor 
of Nueva Espana; bounded by the jurisdiction 
of Chilapan by the e. by that of Azuchitlan by 
the w. by that of Acapulco by the s. and by that 
of Iguala by the n. It is for the most part of a 
mild temperature, although, in some of the set 
tlements, hotter. It has many breeds of large 
cattle, and produces in abundance maize, French 
beans, and sugar-cane, of which they make loaf- 
sugar in its mills, and in these articles carry on 
a trade. Its population, which is considerable, 
is contained in the following settlements : 

VOL. IV. 



T I Z 



569 



Atliacan, 

San Francisco Apan- 



co, 



San Marcos Huaca- 

zingo, 
Tetelzingo, 
Ahualican, 
Huiziltcpeque, 
Zumpango del Rio, 
Chipalzingo, 
Petaquillas, 
Nochitlan. 



Totolzintla, 
Tlostotipan, 
Ozomatlan, 
San Miguel Tequi- 

ziapan, 
Oapan, 

TIXTLAN, the capital of the same name, is 
situate 30 leagues from the coast of the S. Sea ; 
is of a mild temperature, has a very good parish- 
church belonging to the bishopric of La Puebla 
de los Angeles, and has a population of 146 fa 
milies of Spaniards, JWustees, and Mulattoes, 
and 404 of Indians ; including those of the 
wards of its district. It is the residence of a 
lieutenant-governor of Acapulco, who is equally 
the alcaldia mayor of this jurisdiction. 

TIXTLANZINCO, a settlement of the head 
settlement of the district of Coyuca and govern 
ment of Acapulco in Nueva Espana: six leagues 
n. n. e. of its capital, and containing 67 families 
of Indians. 

TIZAPAN, a settlement of the head settle 
ment of the district and alcaldia mayor of Tlajo- 
mulco in Nueva Espana, in which there is a 
convent of San Francisco. 

TIZAPAN, another, in the head settlement of 
the district of Amaqueca and alcaldia mayor t&amp;gt;f 
Zayula in the same kingdom. It has in its vi 
cinity a lake, affording water to the great num 
ber of cattle bred in its neighbourhood. Its 
population consists of 78 families of Indians. 
Six leagues n. of its head settlement. 

TIZAPAN, another, in the same alcaldia mayor 
and kingdom, of the head settlement of the dis 
trict of Tecocuitlan, with the surname of Alto. 
It contains 30 families of Indians, all weavers 
by trade ; and is 12 leagues n. of its capital. 

TIZNADOS, a river of the province and 
government of Venezuela in the Nuevo Reyno 
de Granada ; which rises from a lake of its 
name s. of the town of S. Sebastian, runs s. and 
enters an arm of the river Portugueza, which 
forms the Saco de Santa Maria. 

[TIZON, a river in the n. w. part of S. Ame 
rica, 600 miles from Nueva Espana. In a jour- 
nev made thus far, in 1606, the Spaniards tb ind 
some large edifices, and met with some Indians 
who spoke the Mexican language, and who told 
them, that a few days journey from that river, 
towards the n. was the kingdom of Tolian, and 
many other inhabited places whence the Mexicans 
migrated. It is, indeed, confirmed by Mr. Stewart 
4 D 



570 



TLA 



in his late travels, that there are civilized Indians 
in the interior parts of America. Beyond the 
Missouri, he met with powerful nations, who 
were courteous and hospitable, and appeared to 
be a polished and civilized people, having regu 
larly built towns, and enjoying a state of society 
not far removed from the European ; and in 
deed to be perfectly equal wanted only iron and 
steel.] 

TIZONAZO, a settlement of the missions 
which were held by the Jesuits in the province 
of Tepeguana and kingdom of Nueva Vizcaya ; 
45 leagues from the capital, Guadiana. 

TLACAMA, a settlement of the head settle 
ment of the district of Pinotepa and alcaldia 
mayor of Xicayan in Nueva Espana: it con 
tains 43 families of Indians, employed in the culti 
vation of cochineal and cotton, and is 10 leagues 
w. of its head settlement. 

TLACATELCO, SAN JUAN DE, a settlement 
of the alcaldia mayor of Teotiguacan in Nueva 
Espana. It is a ward united to the settlement 
of Tequiszitlan. 

TLACAXLILLA, a settlement of the alcaldia 
mayor of San Luis de Potosi in the same kingdom, 
and of the bishopric of Mechoacan : it contains 
107 families of Indians, and a convent of San 
Francisco ; and near it are many orchards 
crowded with fruit-trees : n. \ n. e. and very 
near to its capital. 

TLACHICHILCO, a settlement of the alcaldia 
mayor of Otupan in Nueva Espana. 

TLACHICHILPA, SAN MATEO DE, a head 
settlement of the district of the alcaldia mayor 
of Metepec in the same kingdom : it contains 
1140 families of Indians. 

TLACOAZAPAN, a settlement of the head 
settlement and district of Mizquiahuala and 
alcaldia mayor of Tepetango : it contains 300 
families of Indians, and some of Spaniards, 
Mustees, and Mulattoes. 

TLACOCHAGUAYA, SAN GERONIMO DE, 
a head settlement of the district of the alcaldia 
mayor of Antequera in the province and bishopric 
of Oaxaca: it contains a convent of the religious 
of St. Domingo, and 370 families of Indians 
given to the cultivation of different seeds, and 
of maguei/es for making pulque : three leagues 
e. of its capital. 

TLACOLTEPEC, a head settlement of the 
district of the alcaldia mayor of Juxtlahuaca in 
the same kingdom : it contains 148 families of 
Indians. 

TLACOLULA, a head settlement of the dis 
trict of the alcaldia mayor of Teutitlan : it is of 



TLA 

a mild temperature, and contains 262 families 
of Indians. In its church is venerated, with 
particular devotion, the image of Christ cruci 
fied, of exquisite sculpture, although no one 
can determine of what substance it is composed. 
The Indians here have a tradition, that whilst a 
certain number of them were standing assembled, 
there appeared amongst them two handsome 
youths with the said image, and proffering it for 
sale; that the youths, being asked for how much, 
answered that theirs was an eminent Town, and 
that the image should go for 30 reals: it is added, 
that the Indians going away to fetch the sum. 
on their return, found nothing but the image 
left in the room, and with it a scroll, on which 
was written, " This is the Lord God of Battles." 
Two leagues e. by s. of its capital. 

TLACOLULA, another, a head settlement of the 
district of the alcaldia mayor of Huamelula ; 
situate in a plain surrounded by the river which 
flows down from the snowy sierra ; and on the 
shores of which are various fruit trees and two 
estates of large cattle. It contains 116 families 
of Indians, who occupy themselves in the cultiva 
tion of cochineal : 12 leagues from the capital. 

TLACOLULA, another, a head settlement of 
the district of the alcaldia mayor of Xalapa ; 
situate in a rough and craggy territory, between 
two very lofty mountains. It is of a cold and dry 
temperature; the natives speak the Totonaque 
idiom ; and its name signifies the place of writing ; 
inasmuch as it was here that the Indians were 
accustomed to write their histories in the different 
characters and figures in use amongst them. Its 
population is composed of 22 families of Indians, 
who trade in maize, tobacco, and some purgative 
roots. In its district are gathered annually fine 
crops of the root called medicinal, in great esteem 
both within and without the jurisdiction, and in 
which a considerable traffic is carried on : five 
leagues n. w. of its capital. 

TLACOLULA, another, of the head settle 
ment of the district of Tepehuacan and alcaldia 
mayor of Meztitlan : it has a convent of the 
religious of San Agustin, and contains 270 In 
dian families. 

TLACOMALTEPEC, a settlement of the 
head settlement of the district and alcaldia mayor 
of Teutila. It is of a cold temperature, inha 
bited by 100 families of Indians, who cultivate 
maize, the only fruit it yields, and is seven 
leagues w. of its capital. 

TLACOMILCO, SAN ANTONIO DE, a settle 
ment of the head settlement of the district of 
Nopaluca and alcaldia mayor of Tepeaea : it 



TLA 

contains 66 families of Indians, and is one league 
from its head settlement. 

TLACOTALPAN, SAN CHRISTOVAL DE, a 
head settlement of the district of the alcaldia 
mayor of Cozamaloapan : it is of a hot and 
moist temperature, situate on the shore of the 
river Alvarado ; contains 81 Indian families, and 
is seven leao-ues e. of its capital. 

TLACOTEPEC, a settlement of the head 
settlement of the district of Tetelzingo and 
alcaldia mayor of Coautla in Nueva Espana : it 
contains six families of Spaniards, eight of Mus- 
teesj and 60 of Indians, and has a convent of 
Augustins. Through this settlement passes the 
abundant river Amazinaque, the waters of which 
serve to fertilize many estates abounding in fruit 
trees : six leagues e. % n. e. of its head settle 
ment. 

TLACOTEPEC, another, in the head settlement 
of the district of Totela and alcaldia mayor of 
Azuchitlan ; s. of its head settlement, at the dis 
tance of 27 leagues, over a rugged road, con 
sisting entirely of serrania. In its vicinity is a 
fountain of very sweet water, and so abundant 
as to supply not only all the domestic purposes 
of the settlement, but the agricultural of the 
contiguous gardens and crops. It is inhabited 
by 93 families of Indians, and eight of Spaniards 
and Mustees. By the w. and s. part it has some 
large, unpeopled, desert tracts of barren serra- 
nias, Avhich could never be penetrated. 

TLACOTEPEC, another, a head settlement of 
the district of the alcaldia mayor of Metepec, 
containing 265 families of Indians. 

TLACOTEPEC, another, with the dedicatory 
title of Santa Cruz, the head settlement of the 
district of the alcaldia mayor of Tepeaca; situate 
at the foot of some stony and barren mountains. 
It is of a hot and dry temperature, suffers much 
from drought, and profiting chiefly of the rain 
waters caught in a large cistern, and distributing 
it with the utmost care to the inhabitants. Its 
population is composed of 18 families of Spa 
niards, 27 of Mustees and Mulattoes, and 162 
of Indians, who speak the Chocan and Mexican 
language, and maintain themselves by the breed 
ing of large and small cattle, and by raising 
very considerable crops of grain. Seven leagues 
e. s. e. of its capital. 

TLACOTEPEQUE, SAN MARTIN DE, a set 
tlement of the head settlement of the district of 
Tlaxicoya and alcaldia mayor of Mizantla in 
Nueva Espana : it contains 46 families of In 
dians. 

TLACOTLA, a settlement of the head set- 



T L A 



571 



tlement of the district of San Luis de la Costa, 
of the alcaldia mayor of Tlapa : it contains 1 1 
families of Indians employed in the cultivation 
of cotton : of which they make very beautiful 
woven stuffs. Two leagues s. of the capital. 
[TLACOTLALPAN: See TLACOTALPAN.] 
TLACUILOTEPEC, a settlement of the 
head settlement of the district and alcaldia mayor 
of Guauchinango : it contains 101 families of 
Totonacos Indians, in which are included those 
of the wards of its district. It yields some to 
bacco, little prized, the inhabitants not knowing 
how to prepare it. 

TLACUILTEPEC, a settlement of the head 
settlement of the district of Olinala and alcaldia 
mayor of Tlapa : it contains 15 families of In 
dians, who maintain themselves by sowing maize, 
the only fruit it yields, and is three leagues w. 
of its head settlement. 

TLAHUAC, a head settlement of the district 
of the alcaldia mayor of Chalco ; situate within 
the lake : it contains 400 families of Indians , 
dispersed in several small villages, and a con 
vent of Dominicans : five leagues w. of its ca 
pital. 

TLAHUALPA, a small settlement or ward 
of the alcaldia mayor of Guauchinango ; annexed 
to the curacy of the settlement of Chiconcuatla. 
TLAHUILOTEPEC, a settlement of the 
head settlement of the district of Ayutla and 
alcaldia mayor of Villalta : it contains 129 fami 
lies of Indians, and is 11 leagues from its ca 
pital. 

TLAJOMULCO, a jurisdiction and alcaldia 
mayor of Nueva Espafia, in the kingdom of 
Nueva Galicia- and bishopric of Guadalaxara : 
it is much reduced, and produces a few fruits as 
well in the valley in which it stands, as upon 
the n. shore of the great lake, or Sea of Chapala. 
The settlements of which it is composed are : 
Jocotepec, Tizapan, 

Saqualco, Santa Cruz, 

Atotonilco, Santa Ana. 

Colula, 

TLAJOMULCO. The capital is the settlement of 
the same name ; it contains a convent of the reli- 

fious of S. Francisco, and a population of some 
paniards, Mustees^ and Mulattoes, and many 
Mexican Indians. Nine leagues s. of Guada- 

I o ^v Q T*fl 

TLAILOTLACAN, SANTA MARIA DE, a 
head settlement of the district of the alcaldia 
mayor of Tezcoco : in its vicinity are two wards, 
containing 412 families of Indians : a quarter of 
a league e. of its capital. 
4 D 2 



572 



T L A 



TLALANCALECA, SAN MATIAS DE, a set 
tlement of the head settlement of the district and 
alcaldia mayor of Guejozingo, containing six fa 
milies of Indians. 

TLALOPA, a settlement of the head settle 
ment of the district and alcaldia mayor of Tlapa, 
containing 66 families of Indians dedicated to 
agriculture : two leagues n. n, w. of its head 
settlement. 

TLACHICUAUTLA, a small settlement of 
the jurisdiction and alcaldia mayor of Valles, 
between two deep ravines which are covered 
with fruit and other trees ; it is of a mild tem 
perature, produces maize, cotton, wax, and ho 
ney, these affording the branches of its trade ; 
contains 22 families of Indians, and is annexed 
to the curacy of the settlement of Tamazunchale, 
from whence it is 10 leagues, and being 30 from 
its capital. 

TLALCHICOMULA, SAN ANDRES DE, a 
head settlement of the district of the alcaldia 
mayor of Tepeaca ; situate on a plain or out 
stretched skirt of the volcano of Orizava ; of a 
cold and dry temperature, and well supplied 
with water distilled from the volcano, and con 
ducted by a strong aqueduct. In the e. front is 
the parish church. 

Its population consists of 248 families of Spa 
niards, 74 of Mustecs, 34 of Mulattoes, and 345 
of Indians, whose trade is in cutting wood which 
abounds on the mountains, whilst the trade of 
the Spaniards is the fattening of pigs, which they 
sell to the other jurisdictions. In this are 64 
estates, and in some they grow wheat, though, 
in the most, barley, beans, and French beans : 
10 leagues e. of its capital. 

TLALIXCOYA, SANTA MARIA DE, a set 
tlement of the head settlement of the district 
and alcaldia mayor of Mizantla : it contains 65 
families of Indians in the ranches and estates of 
its district, and 130 families of Spaniards and 
other casts. . 

TLALMILILOPAN, SAN RAFAEL DE, a 
settlement of the head settlement of the district 
of Texmelucan and alcaldia mayor of Guejo 
zingo : it contains 28 families of Indians. 

TLALNEHUALOYON, SAN ANDRES DE, 
a settlement of the head settlement of the dis 
trict of Tlacoluca and alcaldia mayor of Xalapa. 
It has this name, signifying, in the Mexican 
idiom, a place of many roots, from the abun 
dance of zarzaparilla, and of a certain purgative 
root found here, for the which there is a ready 
sale, and particularly on the arrival of the fleets. 
The natives, however, are so lazy and indolent, 



T L A 

that, although they might derive great profit 
from the cultivation of maize and other grain, 
grow only just enough for their own consump 
tion. It contains 1 18 families of Indians, and is 
four leagues s. s. e. of its head settlement, and 
one w. n. w. of the capitaj. 

TLALNEPLANTA, a large settlement of 
the alcaldia mayor of Tacuba ; situate near the 
river of its name, and just before this unites it 
self with the Guadalupe to enter the lake : it 
contains 850 families of Indians, without count 
ing those of Spaniards and Mustees, and a con 
vent of Franciscans, and is two leagues n. | n. w. 
of its capital. 

TLALPUJAGUA, a jurisdiction and alcaldia 
mayor of the province and bishopric of Mcchoa- 
can. It is of a cold temperature ; the greater 
part consisting of serrania, in which are many 
mines of silver with a mixture of gold, and 
which are the principal sources of its commerce, 
although it has in its estates considerable breeds 
of large and small cattle, and crops of wheat 
and maize, as also very good mills, both for 
grinding the corn and the metals. Its popula 
tion consists of the following settlements : 
Ucareo, Zinapequaro, Taimeo. 

TLALPUJAGUA. The capital is the settle 
ment and real of mines of the same name ; of a 
cold temperature ; situate between some rough 
sierras, inhabited by 500 families of Spaniards, 
MustecS) and Mulattoes, with many families of 
Indians, who serve as labourers in the mines. 
It has, besides the parish church, an hospital of 
San Francisco, and at the entrance, towards the 
n. an hermitage of Nuestra Sefiora del Carmen, 
where, although the image be painted on the 
wall, and the hermitage itself almost decayed, 
the painting is still fresh and uninjured : [77 
miles w. of Mexico.] 

TLALQUIZALA, a settlement of the head 
settlement of the district of Ixteapan and alcal 
dia mayor of Cholula : it contains 60 families of 
Indians, and is three quarters of a league n. of 
its capital. 

TLALQUIZALA, a settlement of the head set 
tlement of the district of the alcaldia mayor of 
Colotlan: it has a tolerable population, though the 
greater number is dispersed in 10 estates, situate 
in the zo. part, where they breed cattle and sow 
seeds, the soil being well irrigated by the river 
San Pedro, which, in distinct arms, runs through 
the whole of the district : 34 leagues n. n. w. of 
Guadalaxara. 

TLALTEPEC, a settlement of the head set 
tlement of the district and alcaldia mayor of Xi- 



T L A 

cayan : it contains 29 families of Indians, and is 
12 leagues w. by n. of its capital. 

TLALTEPEC, another, in the head settlement 
of the district of Chicahuaztla and alcaldia mayor 
of Tepozcolula in the province and bishopric of 
Oaxaca : it contains 64 families of Indians, who 
barter cotton stuffs for salt found on the coasts 
of Xicayan. 

TLALTIZAPAN, a settlement of the head 
settlement of the district of Yautepec and alcaldia 
mayor of Cuernavaca : it contains a convent of 
Dominicans, and 150 families of Indians, who 
have no trade, and exist by manual labour, and 
bv raising a little maize. One league s. of the 
settlement of Ticoman. 

TLAMACO, a settlement of the head settle 
ment of the district and alcaldia mayor of Tlasco : 
it contains 90 families of Indians, and is five 
leagues e. of its capital. 

TLAMANALCO, a head settlement of the 
district of the alcaldia mayor of Chalco : it con 
tains 1360 families of Indians, and has a mag 
nificent convent of Franciscans and an hospital 
of Bethlemites, for the subsistence of which a 
fund was provided by the licentiate Don Miguel 
del Moral : e. of Chalco, at two leagues distance, 
and on the skirt of the sierra Nevada (snowy), 
therefore of a cold temperature. 

TLAMAXAC, SAN MIGUEL DE, a settlement 
of the head settlement of the district and alcaldia 
mayor of Teotihuacan : of a cold temperature, 
and three leagues n. e. of its capital. 

TLAMIMILULPA, a settlement of the head 
settlement of the district of Tetelzingo and al 
caldia mayor of Coautla ; annexed to the curacy 
of Ocuituco : it contains 12 families of In 
dians, and is eight leagues n. e. \ e. of its head 
settlement. 

TLANAPA, S. MIGUEL DE, a settlement of 
the head settlement of Santa Isabel and alcaldia 
mayor of Cholula : it contains 34 families of 
Indians, and is a little more than three leagues 
s. of its capital. 

TLANCHINOL, a settlement of the alcald ta 
mayor of Meztitlan in Nueva Espafia. It con 
tains a convent of Augustins and 970 families of 
Indians, and is 14 leagues n. e. of its capital. 

TLANECHICO, SAN LUCAS DE, a settlement 
of the head settlement of the district of Cuilapa 
and alcaldia mayor of Las quatro Villas in Nu 
eva Espana : it contains 37 families of Indians, 
who cultivate cochineal, seeds, and fruit, in 
which they trade, as well as in coal and wood : 
two leagues and a half w. by s. of its head set 
tlement. 



TLA 



573 



TLANICOTLA, SAN SIMON DE, a settle 
ment of the head settlement of the district and 
alcaldia mayor of Guejozingo, containing 30 fa 
milies of Indians. 

TLAOLA, a settlement of the head settle 
ment of the district and alcaldia mayor of Gu- 
auchinango : it contains a convent of Augustins, 
and 407 families of Indians, with those who 
dwell in seven small settlements of its district ; 
who maintain themselves by cultivating seeds 
and cotton, and cutting wood : five leagues s. of 
the capital. 

TLAOLAN, S. PEDRO DE, a settlement of 
the head settlement of the district of Olintla 
and alcaldia mayor of Zacatlan, situate in a de 
lightful vale fertilized by various rivers : seven 
leagues from its head settlement. 

TLAPA, a jurisdiction and alcaldia mayor of 
Nueva Espana, and one of the most extensive 
and populous : it is also fertile in maize, French 
beans, and sugar-canes, of which it manufactures 
loaf-sugar, the principal branch of its commerce; 
and this it carries on with the other jurisdictions, 
though not without some other articles. The 
temperature is hot, and the soil produces some 
cochineal and cotton, both of the best quality. 

TLAPA. The capital is the settlement of the 
same name, containing six families of Spaniards, 
150 ofMustees and Mulattoes, and 181 of In 
dians of the Mixtecan nation, and a convent of 
Augustins : [138 miles s. with a slight inclina 
tion to the e~. of Mexico, in lat. 17 12 n.~\ The 
other settlements are : 

Caulaque, Cuiztlahuaca, 

Tenango, Xochiuehuetlan. 

Chepetlan, Huayalulco, 

Tlalapa, Temalazingo, 

Chuazingo, Petlacala, 

Olinala, Cuachimalco, 

Quizicapa, Huahutzotla, 

Zapotitlan, Coloatpa, 

Huizapula, Ahuacatlan, 

Acantepec, Chitepec, 

S. Luis de la Costa, Teocuclapa, 
Quanaxtitlan, Huicatenango, 

Quauzoquitengo, Chalvivilungo, 

Malinaltepec, Ostozingo, 

Cuiyaclazala, Zoyacatlan, 

Atlamaxaczingo, Xalpatlahuaca, 

Huehuetepeque, Alaclatzala, 

Zitlaltepeque, Tlacotla, 

Iguala, Xalazala, 

Zapostlahuaca, Anenecuilco, 

Xonacatlan. Xilacotlotitlan, 

Amapilcan, S. Miguel, 



574 



TLA 



Alcozauca, 
Chimaltepec, 
Tolimplentaloya, 
Ixcateopan, 
Alpoyeca, 
Cacalutla, 
Tepetlapa, 
Ahuezitla, 
Ocotitlan, 
Amatinchan, 
Tepetlazingo, 
Acuilpa, 
Ayozinapa, 
Ocotequila, 
% Capanatoyaque, 
Pactlichan, 
Potinchan, 
Ahuacazalca, 
Zoyatlan, 
Mistecapa, 
Zacotipa, 
Cochoapa, 
Alpoyecazingo, 
Cuautipac, 
Petlalcalzingo, 
Ixquinatoyac, 
Atzompa, 
Ixcatepan, 



Tlalquizala, 

Xilotepec, 

X ilmitlipa, 

Tlacuiltepec, 

Atlistac, 

Atlamajazingo, 

Tlaquizalapa, 

Cucuitolotitlan, 

Texocotla, 

Cuapala, 

Clanapa, 

Totoinislahuaca, 

Tlaxcatlistahuaca, 

Totomilahuaca, 

Alzovi, 

Coapa, 

Moyotepec, 

Quezuapa, 

Quavilotlazala, 

Mctlatongo, 

Santa Maria, 

Atlamaxuque, 

Totomochoapa, 

Tlaquiltepec, 

Huamostitlan, 

Huehuetlan, 

Xocotla, 

Camitlipe. 



Ayectipac, 

TLAPAYOCA, a town and head settlement 
of the district of the alcaldia mayor of Quatro 
Villas ; one of those which compose the Mar- 
quisate del Valle de Oaxaca : it contains 180 
families of Indians, who employ themselves in 
the cultivation and commerce of seeds, cotton, 
some cochineal, and fruit, and in cutting of 
wood, with which the district abounds. Its dis 
trict is composed of 14 settlements, to which 
belong 12 cultivated estates and six corn-mills, 
which supply with flour both this town and the 
neighbouring jurisdictions. Seven leagues s. of 
its capital. 

TLAPAYOCA, another settlement, in the head 
settlement of the district and alcaldia mayor of 
Mizantla : it contains 65 families of Indians in 
the ranchos of its district, and in the same 130 
families of Spaniards and of people of colour. 

TLAPALZINGO, a head settlement of the 
district of the alcaldia mayor of Gualapa in 
Nueva Espana. 

TLAPANALA, a head settlement of the dis 
trict of the alcaldia mayor of Guayacotla, con 
taining 33 families of Indians. 

TLAPANALA, a head settlement of the district 
of the alcaldia mayor of Gualapa. 



TLA 

TLAPECUILA, a settlement of the head set- 
tlement of the district Guimeo and alcaldia mayor 
of Cirandaro : it contains 77 families of Indians, 
and its district is bounded by that of Tetela del 
Rio by the s. 

TLAQUAZINTEPEC, a settlement of the 
head settlement of the district and alcaldia mayor 
of Teutila. It is of a warm and moist tempera 
ture, annexed to the curacy of the settlement of 
Ixcatlan, contains 80 families of Indians, whose 
trades consist alone in their beautiful cotton 
manufactures; six leagues s. of its capital. 

TLAQUILPA, a head settlement of the dis 
trict and alcaldia mayor of Zempoala, containing 
58 families of Indians. 

TLAQUILTENANGO, a settlement of the 
head settlement of the district of Xoxutla and 
alcaldia mayor of Iguala. It contains a convent 
of Dominicans, and its inhabitants trade in 
maize, cotton, fruit and garden herbs, peculiar to 
the country. 

TLAQUILTEPEC, a settlement of the head 
settlement of the district of Huamostitlan and 
alcaldia mayor of Tlapa. It contains 134 families 
of Indians, and is one league e. s. e. of its head 
settlement. 

TLAQUILZINGO, a settlement of the head 
settlement of the district of Atistlac and alcaldia 
mayor of Tlapa. It is of a mild temperature, 
contains 70 families of Indians, who gather abun 
dant crops through the fertility of the soil, and is 
four leagues w. s. w. of its head settlement. 

[TLASCALA, or Los ANGELOS, a province 
of Nueva Espana. See TLAXCALA.] 

TLASPANALOYA, a small settlement of the 
alcaldia mayor of Guauchinango, annexed to the 
curacy of the settlement of Chiconcuautla. 

TLATATILA, SAN ESTEV AN DE, a settlement 
of the head settlement of the district of Tlaco- 
lula and alcaldia mayor of Xalapa, which name, 
in the Mexican idiom, signifies, where one sees 
the sun late. It is of a cold and moist tem 
perature, situate in a deep ravine, and inhabited 
by 42 families of Totonaques Indians, who trade 
in maize, French beans and chile, and also cut 
wood, with which the mountains of the vicinity 
are covered. It has a copper mine, which has 
not been worked for some time, and is three 
leagues e. of its head settlement. 

TLATENCHI, NATIVDAD DE, a settlement 
of the head settlement of the distriptof Mazatepec 
and alcaldia mayor of Cuernavaca, on the shore of 
a river. It contains 74 families of Indians who 
live by trading in rnaize, fruit, and cotton, and is 
five leagues from its head settlement, and very 



T L A 

close to the settlements of Tetelca and Panchi- 
milco. 

TLATENCO, SAN ANTONIO DE, a settlement 
ofthe head settlement of the district and alcaldia 
mayor of Guejozingo, containing 40 families of 
Indians. 

TLATLAUQUIPEQUE, a head settlement 
ofthe district of the alcaldia mayor of San Juan 
de los Llanos: it contains 238 families of Indians, 
in which are included those inhabiting the wards 
of its district, and is six leagues n. e. of its ca 
pital. 

TLAUZINGO, SAN LORENZO DE, a settle 
ment ofthe head settlement of the district and 
alcaldia mayor of Guejozingo; containing 86 fa 
milies of Indians. 

TLAXCALA, or TLASCALA, a province and 
alcaldia mayor of Nueva Espana, extending from 
the N. Sea to the S. Sea, forming a curvilinear 
triangle, of the which one side being; 60 leagues 
long, occupies the coast of the N.Sea, and the 
other side being much contracted extends along 
the coast ofthe S.Sea. It is bounded by the pro 
vinces of Mexico and Goaxaca. It is for the 
most part fertile and of good temperature, 
abounding in fruit, herbs, birds, and animals 
ofthe chase, and covered with cultivated estates 
and ranchos, wherein many head of cattle are 
bred. This province is crossed by the great 
sierra of its name, which, in that idiom, signifies 
house of bread ; and it vies in height with the 
most lofty sierra of that kingdom, and is con 
stantly covered with snow. Before the arrival 
ofthe Spaniards the inhabitants of this province 
were in the grossest state of idolatry, and many 
are the remains of idols and altars found in dif 
ferent caverns and recesses ; it being also be 
lieved that in the same sierra the caziques have 
deposited great treasures, with the view of re 
turning to take possession of them. 

This province was in those times very popu 
lous, and a republic, governed by a tribunal ; and 
its natives were so valorous that they lived by 
force of arms, maintaining themselves indepen 
dent ofthe Mexican emperors ; these never hav 
ing been able to subdue them. 

The Spaniards, on their entrance, found their 
way disputed by theTlaxcaltecas, and with these 
they had several conflicts ; but the same people 
who had been such bitter enemies, afterwards 
proved themselves the most faithful allies to the 
Spaniards, and it was altogether owing to the 
assistance they gave by their exertion and cun 
ning, that this chief succeeded at length in the 



TLA 



575 



conquest of Nueva Espana. These Indians have 
in consequence, and very justly, maintained 
many privileges, the one of which is their indem 
nification from all tribute, save a very trifling 
one, which is a mere acknowledgment of their 
vassalage : their numbers is so considerable as to 
amount to 11,000 families. Its population con 
sists of several wards and estates. 

TLAXCALA, the capital, is the city ofthe same 
name, founded by the emperor Chichi meco. It 
was formerly very populous and rich, and plea 
santly situate on the shore of a river which runs 
into the S. Sea ; and is now chiefly inhabited by 
Indians, who, as they pay no tribute, are very 
rich, and have some good churches and convents. 
The author Thomas Grage, asserts, that at his time 
the jurisdiction of this city consisted of 28 towns 
and settlements, containing 150,000 families. 
Heylin says, that, upon the arrival of the Spa 
niards it contained 300,000 inhabitants, and Fa 
ther Acosta asserts, that it had a market-place 
in which 30,000 persons might assemble, and 
that in the shambles there were scarcely ever less 
than 1500 sheep, and 4000 cows ; but the case 
was very different in the time of Gemeli, who 
was here in 1698 ; for he asserts, that the city 
was but of a moderate size, with one parish 
church, in which there was a picture of the ship 
in which Hernan Cortes arrived at Vera Cruz. 
[Humboldt asserts its present population to 
amount to 3400 souls, among whom there are 
not more than 900 Indians of pure extraction.] 

In this city was the senate, or tribunal, which, 
according to defined laws, governed the republic, 
and one ofthe members of the same, whose ta 
lents have rendered him the most memorable, 
was Xicontencai and Magistcatzin. It has a 
convent of the religious of S. Francisco ; and 
the aforesaid parish church was erected into a 
cathedral and bishopric in 1526, and remained 
so until 1550, when it was translated to La 
Puebla de los Angeles. This city is inhabited 
by 500 families of Spaniards, Mustecs, and Mu- 
lattoes, who, for the most part, are employed in 
the manufacture of cloths, baizes, mantles, and 
other cotton articles, the same being the princi 
pal branches of its commerce. [Sixty-four miles 
e. of Mexico, in lat. 19 19 30" n. long. 98 w. 
See ANGELES, PUEBLA DE LOS.] 

TLAXCALA, a settlement in the province and 
government of the Nuevo Reyno de Leon. 
Seven leagues n. zo. ofthe capital. 

TLAXCALZINGO, SAX BERNARDO DE, a 
settlement of the head settlement of the district 



576 



TLA 



of that of San Andres de Cholula, and alcaldia 
mayor of this name. It contains 191 families of 
Indians, and is half a league e. of the capital. 

TLAXCATLIXTAHUACA, a settlement of 
the head settlement of the district of Clanapa, and 
alcaldia mayor of Tlapa. It contains 31 families 
of Indians, who live by the trade of seeds and 
fruit. A little more than seven leagues from its 
head settlement. 

TLAXCO, a small settlement, or ward of the 
alcaldia mayor of Guauchinango ; annexed to the 
curacy of the settlement of Chiconcuautla. 

TLAXIACO, SANTA MARIA DE LA ASUN 
CION DE, a head settlement of the district of the 
alcaldia mayor of Tepozcolula. It is a very 
large and pleasant settlement, situate in a cold 
temperature, and surrounded by several small 
settlements. Its population is composed of 104 
families of Spaniards, Mustees^ and Mulattoes, 
and 888 Indians, and a convent of the religious 
of St. Domingo. 

TLAXMALAC, SANTA ANA DE, a settle 
ment of the head settlement of the district and 
alcaldia mayor of Iguala, containing 58 families 
of Indians. 

TLAYOHUALCO, a settlement of the head 
settlement of Xoxutla and alcaldia mayor of 
Cuernavaca. 

TLAZASALCA, a jurisdiction and alcaldia 
mayor of the province and bishopric of Mechoa- 
can, called also La Piedad. Its district is so 
small, as to consist of only seven moderate set 
tlements ; for the inhabitants prefer generally to 
live in their estates, in order to superintend 
their lands, and to keep the Indians to their la 
bour. It is very fertile in maize, and has good 
breeds of large cattle, with which it carries on a 
considerable trade. 

TLAZASALCA. The capital is of the same 
name. Its population consists of 65 families of 
Indians, and 111 of Spaniards, Mustees, and 
Mulattoes ; who, one and the other, breed and 
trade in large and small cattle, sow maize and 
dress hides, of which they make shoes, boots, 
and saddles, for the other jurisdictions ; culti 
vating also many fruits in their gardens. Seventy 
leagues w. by n. of Mexico. 

The other settlements are : 
Penjamillo, S. Pedro Tahuen- 

La Piedad, quato, 

Sta. Maria Ture- Los Santos Reyes, 

quaro, Atacheo. 

TLAZINTLA, a head settlement of the dis 
trict of the jurisdiction and alcaldia mayor of 



T O 13 

Ixmiquilpan, in the which, and in the wards of 
its vicinity, there are 940 families of Otomies 
Indians, and about 50 of Spaniards, Mustees, and 
Mulattoes. It is of a mild temperature, being 
fertilized by an abundant stream flowing from 
the sierra of Mextitlan, and which runs to 
nearly all its wards, so that its territory is very 
pleasant, and abounding in fruit and garden 
herbs : add to this, it has a good trade in coal 
found in the neighbouring mountain, as also in 
some seeds, which they sow, though in small 
quantities : two leagues and a half n. e. of its 
capital. 

TLAZOYALTEPEC, SANTIAGO DE, a set 
tlement of the head settlement of the district of 
Huitepec and alcaldia mayor of Ixquintepec. It 
contains 72 families of Indians, and is four 
leagues e. by n. of its capital. 

TO A, a river of the island and government 
of San Juan de Puertorico, one of the Antilles : 
it rises in the mountains of Guyame, in the s. of 
the island, at 16 leagues from the capital, and 
running n. in a very wide stream, as far as the 
mountain Curvas, divides itself into two arms to 
enter the sea at the port. 

TOACASO. See CHISAHALO, 

TOACHI, a river of the province and go 
vernment of Esmeraldas in the kingdom of Quito. 
It rises in the province of Tacunga in the w. 
part, runs n. w. leaving the territory of Sichos. 
and, collecting the waters of the San Lorenzo, 
Yamboya, Figua, and Meme, enters the Blanco 
in lat. 8 w. 

[TOAHOUTU, one of the two small islands 
to the n. e. of the s. end of Otaha Island, one of 
the Society Islands, in the S. Pacific Ocean.] 

[TOAMENSING, two townships of Penn 
sylvania ; the one in Montgomery County, the 
other in that of Northampton.] 

TOAPE, a settlement of the province and 
government of Sonora in N. America. 

TOBACO, a settlement in the province of 
Maryland, in the United States, belonging to 
Charles County, and situate near the river Po- 
towrnac, and at its mouth. 

[TOBAGO, an island in the W. Indies, which, 
when in the hands of the D.ntch, was called New 
Valcheren, is about 17 miles to the n. n. e. of 
Trinidad, and 152 s. of Barb idoes. Its length 
is about 26 miles, but its breadth only about six, 
and its circumference about 70 miles. The cli 
mate is not so hot as might be expected so near 
the equator ; and it is said, that it lies out of the 
course of those hurricanes that have sometimes 



T O B 



T O B 



577 



proved so fatal to the other W. India islands. It 
has a fruitful soil, capable of producing sugar, 
and indeed every thing else that is raised in the 
W. India islands, with the addition (if we may 
believe the Dutch) of the cinnamon, nutmeg, and 
gum copal. It is well watered with numerous 
springs, and its bays and rivers are so disposed 
as to be very commodious for all kinds of ship 
ping. The value and importance of this island 
appears from the extensive and formidable ar 
maments sent thither in support of their different 
claims. It seems to have been chiefly possessed 
by the Dutch, who defended their pretensions 
against both England and France with the most 
obstinate perseverance. By the Treaty of Aix 
la Chapelle, in 1748, it was declared neutral; 



though, by the treaty of 1763, it was yielded up 
to Great Britain; but in June, 1781, it was taken 
by the French, and ceded to them by the treaty 
of 1783: and captured by the British in 1793, in 
whose hands it still remains. 

In the report of the privy council on the 
Slave Trade, in 1788, the British property vested 
here is estimated at 28,000 taxed acres} of pa 
tented estates ; and the Negroes are computed 
at 14,883, at .50 each Negro. 

By return to House of Commons, 1806, the 
hogsheads of sugar, of 13 cwt. exported, were as 
follow : 

In 1789 - - - 5,800 
1799 - - - 8,800 
1805 - - - 15,327 



The official value of the Imports and Exports of Tobago were, in 



1809 
1810 



Imports. 

.226,824 
.201,169 



Exports. 

.70,585 
.70,787 



And the quantities of the principal articles imported into Great Britain was, in 



Coffee. 


Sugar. 


Rum. 


Cotton Wool. 


British Plant. 


Foreign Plant. 


British Plant. 


Foreign Plant. 






Cwt. 

1809, 3 
1810, 9 


Cwt. 


Cwt. 

130,122 
124,208 


Cwt. 

21 


Gallons. 

525,327 
337,433 


Ibs. 

48,791 
11,818 



By report of privy council in 1788, and by a 
subsequent return to House of Commons, the 
population of Tobago amounted to 



n. long. 60 40 .] 



1787 
1805 


Whites. 


People of 
Colour. 


Slaves. 


1397 
900 


1050 
700 


10,539 

14,883 



The Import of Slaves into Tobago, by report 
of privy council, 1788, at a medium of four 
years, and by a return to House of Commons, in 
1805, at a medium of two years to 1803, was 



Average of 


Imports. 


Re-exports. 


Retained. 


4 years to 1787 


1400 


__ 


1400 


2 years to 1803 


172 





172 



VOL. iv. 



Tobago lies in lat. 11 

[TOBAGO Island, LITTLE, near the n. e. ex 
tremity of Tobago Island, in the W. Indies. It 
is about two miles long, and one broad.] 

TOBAR, a settlement of the province and 
government of Venezuela in the Nuevo Reyno 
de Granada ; between the rivers Cocuisas and 
Salinas. 

TOBAS, a settlement of the province and 
viceroyship of Buenos Ayres. 

TOfeASIA, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Tunja in the Nuevo Reyno de 
Granada. It is of a moderately cold tempera 
ture, situate in a pleasant plain; produces wheat, 
maize, barley, and other fruits ; but is very poor, 
and its population is composed of only 50 fami 
lies of Indians and a few whites : eight leagues 
n. of Tunja. 

TOBATI, a settlement of Indians of the pro 
vince and government of Paraguay, situate in a 
plain about 30 miles e. from Asuncion. Lat. 25 
W 16" s. and long. 57 &amp; 59" w. 

TOBATI-GUAZU, a small river of the pro- 
4 F. 



578 



T O C 



vince and government of Paraguay ; which runs 
n. n. w. and enters the river of this name near 
the Iboig. 

TOBATI-MINI, a river of the same province 
and government as the former, which runs n. 
and enters the river Grande. 

[TOBAYARES, Indians of Brazil, of whom 
we have already given a full description in the 
additional matter respecting the history, &amp;c. of 
this kingdom : which see.] 

[TOBY s Creek, an eastern branch of Alleg- 
hany river, in Pennsylvania ; its .9. head water 
is called Little Toby s Creek. It runs about 65 
miles in a to. s. w. and w. course, and enters the 
Allegheny about 18 miles below Fort Franklin. 
It is deep enough for batteaux for a considerable 
way up, thence by a short passage to the w. 
branch of Susquehannah, by which a good com 
munication is formed between Ohio and the e. 
part* of Pennsylvania.] 

TOCA, a settlement of the province and cor- 
regimiento of Tunja in the Nuevo Reyno de 
Granada : it is of a cold but healthy tempera 
ture ; situate in a very beautiful tlanura, and 
abounding in barley, maize, papas, and other 
productions of its climate. It has large breeds 
of cattle ; and of the wools of these they make, 
besides the commoner manufactures of blankets 
and rugs, shirts, hats, serges, and baizes. It 
contains about 100 housekeepers, and as many 
Indians : in the time of the gentilism of the latter 
it was a large and rich city, and the court of the 
Fourth Elector of the Zaque, or King of Tunja ; 
but nothing of its ancient grandeur has remained : 
two leagues and a half s. from Tunja. 

TOCABELA, a settlement of the head set 
tlement of the district Teotalzingo and alcaldia 
mayor of Villalta in Nueva Espana. It contains 
19 families of Indians, and is 20 leagues from its 
capital. 

TOCACHI, a settlement of the province and 
kingdom of Quito, in the district of the corre- 
gimiento of Las Cinco Leguas de la Capital, to 
the e. of the settlement of Malchingui, and to the 
w. of the settlement of Cayambe. It is situate 
in a pleasant plain, surrounded with fertile hills, 
but of a somewhat cold temperature. It is wa 
tered by a small river of its name, which runs s, 
and enters the Pisque : in lat. 3 n. 

TOCAIMA, or TOCAYMA, a city of the go 
vernment of Mariquita in the new kingdom of 
Granada ; founded by Hernando Venegas Car- 
rillo de Manos-albas in 1544, near the river 
Pati, which is the same which, higher up, is called 
Bogota, and enters the Magdalena very near 



this city. It is of an extremely hot temperature, 
and situate in the midst of a small mountain co 
vered with brambles, which it is necessary to cut 
down every six months. It suffers from drought, 
the river being at some distance, and as the water 
of a pit which is near, is ill tasted and never 
drank, although it affords advantageous bathing 
to such as are afflicted with the itch. Besides 
the inconvenience of the heat, its inhabitants are 
afflicted with the shingles, which they call carate, 
and which produces a very frightful appearance ; 
also with cotosj or swellings in the throat, and 
buboes. It is much infested by venomous crea 
tures, such as spiders, snakes of various kinds, 
vipers, tat/as, corales, rattlesnakes, and mosqui 
toes, ticks, and other insects, and above all by 
the coya, which, although it does not sting, is 
of so venomous a nature, that if it be crushed 
so that its blood touch the skin of any one, it 
immediately causes death with violent struggles. 
[This account is, however, known to be fa 
bulous.] 

The woods abound in exquisite sorts of tim 
ber, cedars, walnuts, pomegranates, tamarinds, 
buos, and guayacanes of two sorts, which arc 
often found petrified. It produces also much 
cocoa and tobacco, which is too strong to be 
smoked ; an infinite variety of sugar-canes, of 
which they make many sweets and sugar ; also 
maize, yucas, plantains, potatoes, yams, and a 
great quantity of other fruits. It abounds no 
less in fish in the rivers of Bogota and Fusaga- 
suga, and in these there are likewise many alli 
gators. Here grow some pine-apples, the seeds 
of which serve as cathartics and emetics. The 
inhabitants, who amount to about 700, are very 
poor and weak, and much addicted to idleness, 
though they take the trouble of breeding some 
swine, which they carry for sale, by the river, 
to Honda, and alive, by land, to Santa Fe. In 
the district of this city are found mines of the 
finest copper, which are not worked, and of load 
stone ; and formerly there were some of gold, so 
rich, that they say here, that there was a certain 
inhabitant, called Juan Diaz Xararnillo, who be 
came so wealthy as to measure his riches by the 
peck, and that he built a palace of such magni 
ficence, that he brought from Spain, at immense 
cost, the window-frames, the balconies, the tiles 
for the roof, and all other things necessary for 
its ornament. But this edifice was destroyed, (in 
punishment, as they say, of a dreadful blasphemy 
which its master had uttered,) together with the 
city, from the river having overflowed its bed in 
1673, and at a considerable distance from the 



T O C 

spot where the town stood there was found float 
ing upon a plank an image of Jacinthus, which 
had belonged to the town, and which is now pre 
served in the convent of the Franciscans, which 
building was raised upon the ruins of the palace 
above mentioned ; the new city being built upon 
the top of the mountain, at the skirts of which 
runs the said river. The city is small, and of 
little commerce ; it has a good parish church. 
It is in the ancient province of Los Panches ; 
[56 miles s. w. of Santa Fe, and 58 s. of Mari- 
quita, in the high road leading down to Honda, 
Mariquita, Neiva, and Popayan, in lat. 4 16 n. 
and long. 74 59 w. ] 

TOCALON, a settlement of the province and 
government of Cartagena in the Nuevo Reyno de 
Granada ; situate on the shore of the river 
Grande de la Magdalena. 

TOCAMA, a settlement of the province and 
government of Tucuman in Peru, of the juris 
diction of the city of Santiago del Estero. It 
has in its district six chapels annexed to its 
curacy. 

TOCANA, a river of the province and corrc- 
gimiento of Tunja in the Nuevo Reyno de Gra 
nada. It rises e. of this city, unites with the 
Cravo, and enters the Meta. 

TOCANCIPA, a settlement of the province 
and corregimiento of Zipaquira in the Nuevo 
Reyno de Granada. It is situate in a llanura, 
of a mild and healthy temperature, produces 
plenty of wheat, maize, and papas, and manu 
factures pitchers, jars, and other articles of 
earthen-ware, which are carried for sale to Santa 
Fe and other parts. The number of white in 
habitants is so small, as scarcely to amount to 
20 ; but the Indians exceed 200 : seven leagues 
n. of Santa Fe, in the high road leading to 
Tunja. 

TOCANCIPAES, a barbarous nation of In 
dians of the Nuevo Reyno de Granada, descend 
ants of the Guatavitas. The country they in 
habit is pleasant and fertile : they are warlike, 
robust, and faithful in their dealings, but are 
much reduced, and live in settlements of which 
that mentioned in the former article is one. 

TOCANGUAZU, a rugged and mountainous 
province, now comprehended in that of Paraguay, 
towards the e. s. c. inhabited by the warlike In 
dian nation of the Guaranies. 

TOCANTINES, a barbarous nation of In 
dians of the kingdom of Brazil, inhabiting to the 
s. w. of the province and captainship of Para, 
near the river of its name. They are furious 
and irreconcileable enemies of the Portuguese, 



T O C 



579 



from whom they have retired, flying to the 
mountains and woods to the s. They are very 
numerous. 

T&amp;lt; CANTINES, the aforesaid river, which takes 
its name from the above nation, is large and 
copious : the lands it irrigates are fertile and 
pleasant; and the Portuguese have made dif 
ferent excursions through them. This river, 
after having run many leagues in a w. direction, 
and collected the waters of the Araguaya, enters 
the river Para (which is an arm of the Maranon, 
or Amazon) by the s. side: [in lat. l45 s.] 

TOCAREMA, a settlement of the jurisdic 
tion of Tocaima and government of Mariquita 
in the Nuevo Reyno de Granada. It is situate 
in the antient province of the Panches to the w. 
of Santa Fe, in a mountainous and craggy dis 
trict. It is of a hot temperature, abounding in 
sugar-canes, maize, yucas, and plantains, and is 
annexed to the curacy of the settlement of Ano- 
laima. It is celebrated for two battles fought 
near it, between the Spaniards commanded by 
Gonzalo Ximinez de Quesada, aided by the 
Moscas Indians, and the Panches, commanded by 
Zaquizazlpa, the last king of Tunja, in 1538 : 
in the first of which engagements the latter were 
victorious, though in the second they were com 
pletely routed by the Spaniards. It is ten leagues 
from Santa Fe. 

TOCARIA, a river of the province and go 
vernment of Guayana, which runs into the Meta. 

TOCARIGUA, or TARIGUA, an extensive 
and pleasant flanura, or plain, of the province of 
Coro in the Nuevo Reyno de Granada, to the 
s. w. terminating to the n. by the mountains of 
Carora. Its climate is hot, but it abounds in ex 
cellent pastures, though uncultivated, from want 
of population. 

TOCATIC, a settlement of the head settle 
ment of the district of Tlaltenango and akaldia 
mayor of Colotlan in Nueva Espaiia ; nearly a 
league to the n. of its head settlement. 

TOCAWNI, a river of the province of Penn 
sylvania in the United States. 

[TOCAYA, the principal village of Minas 
Novas, in the province and government of Rio 
de Janevro, in Brazil. It is 35 leagues distant 
from Tejuco, in a /?. e. direction. The road thi 
ther is parallel with the river Jigitonhonha, 
which runs from two to five leagues w. of it. 
On this road there are numerous farm-houses, 
which afford sufficient accommodation for a tra 
veller to pass a night : they in general belong to 
persons resident in Tejuco, where their produce 
is sold. Numerous rivulets flow into the Jiffi-] 
4F.2 



580 



T O C 



[tonhonha in this direction, in some of which are 
found white topazes, more commonly known 
here by the name of minus novas : they are pretty 
pellucid pebbles, generally rounded, though 
sometimes they occur perfectly crystallized, in 
the same form as the yellow topaz. Blue topazes 
and agua-marinas are also found here ; some of 
the former are of a singular variety, being in 
one part blue, and in the other clear and pellucid. 
This neighbourhood is also noted for producing 
the beautiful chryso-beryl, which is much 
esteemed by the higher orders of society in 
Brazil, and in great request among the jewellers 
of Rio de Janeiro. These gems rarely occur 
crystallized ; they sell at considerable prices in 
their rough state, and are much more valued in 
America than in England, where, indeed, they 
are little known, or they would be more highly 
appreciated, being, when polished, of great bril 
liancy and very beautiful. 

To the w. of the river Jigitonhonha, and op 
posite the village of Bom Successo, is the Cerro 
of Sant Antonio, a place much famed for dia 
monds, which are said to be of an indifferent 
quality. There are also other parts, well known 
to many of the inhabitants of the district as being 
rich in these treasures. 

The country is very fertile, and produces a 
great variety of the finest woods for cabinet 
works ; also numerous fruits, and most exquisite 
vaynilla, which grows spontaneously. The land, 
being less elevated than Cerro do Frio, is said to 
be much warmer, and is highly favourable to 
the growth of sugar and coffee. The plantations 
are chiefly of cotton, which is reputed to be equal 
in colour and quality to that of Pernambuco. 

Minas Novas is under the jurisdiction of the 
Ouvidor of Villa do Principe, who goes thither 
once a year to settle disputes, administer justice, 
and discharge other duties belonging to his 
office. 

At Tocaya the Jigitonhonha flows into a larger 
river, called Rio Grande, which, taking an e. 
direction, enters the sea in lat. 16 20 s. near 
Porto Seguro. The current to the sea is very 
rapid, and the navigation from Tocaya is per 
formed in six days. It cannot be too much re 
commended to the government of Brazil, imme 
diately to order a survey of this river, which 
might be performed in one of their launches in 
two months at little or no expense, and were it 
found necessary, a chain of connection might be 
established from its mouth to Tocaya. 

The population of Minas Novas is thin, com 
pared with its extent, but is daily increasing. It 



T O C 

does not appear that mining is the object which 
attracts settlers, though there is a considerable 
quantity of stones exported, which are found 
only here, as has been before observed. 

Where the rivers are deep it is very difficult 
to raise the cascalhao from their beds, in order 
to wash it for gold, &amp;c. ; for this purpose" various 
trivial and ineffectual methods are practised : it 
would be highly conducive to the interest of the 
proprietor, as well as of the state, to have rafts 
or boats constructed, and to adopt the machinery 
used by the ballast-heavers on the river Thames, 
by means of which the cascalhao might be raised, 
even from a depth of twenty feet, however rapid 
were the current. This machinery is highly to 
be recommended, not only in this district, but 
throughout the mining country. Were a model 
of it made by order of government, and the re 
quisite iron-work prepared in Rio de Janeiro 
(if necessary), and admitted into the mining- 
country, free of duty, there would probably be 
such an increase of gold obtained by it, that the 
proportionate augmentation of the royal fifths 
would amply repay the expense of introducing 
the improvement. Mawe s Travds.l 

[TOCAYMA, a city of Tierra Firme, and in 
New Granada. See Toe AIM A.] 

TOCHIMILCO, a jurisdiction and alcaldla 
mayor of Nueva Espana. It is four leagues 
from e. to w. and three in breadth from n. to s. 
and its population consists of nine settlements. 
It is of a soft and mild temperature, fertile, and 
abounding in fruit, maize, and French-beans, 
and has many fig-trees contributing chiefly to its 
commerce. 

TOCHIMILCO, the capital is the settlement of 
the same name, in which dwell 419 families of 
Mexican Indians, 50 of Spaniards, 82 of Mustees, 
and 44 of Mulattoes. It has a convent of Fran 
ciscans, and is 20 leagues to the s. e. of Mexico, 
in lat. 19 10 s. and long. 274 45 w. The other 
settlements are 

Huilango, Santa Cruz, 

San Lucas, San Martin, 

Santiago, San Antonio Alponeca, 

San Miguel, 

TOCKAVA, an Indian village of the province 
and colony of South Carolina, at the head of the 
river Chunakanti. 

TOCLA, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Chichas and Tarija in Peru, and 
of the district of the former ; annexed to the cu 
racy of its capital. 

TOCLLACURI, a settlement of the province 
and corregimiento of Huanta in the same king- 



T O C 

dom as the former; annexed to the curacy of the 
settlement of Colcabamba. 

TOCO, a settlement of the province and go 
vernment of Santa Marta in the New Kingdom 
of Granada, and of the division and district of 
the Rio del Hacha ; situate in the road leading 
to Maracaibo, and to the s. s. e. of the city of the 
Rio del Hacha. 

TOCOLUTA, a river of the jurisdiction and 
alcaldia mayor of Tampico in Nueva Espana, 
which enters the sea at the river of that name, 
and by the point of Delgada. 

TOCOME, a river of the province and go 
vernment of Guayana, or New Andalucia, which 
rises in the country of the savage Caribe Indians, 
runs n. and joins itself with the Hacha to enter 
the Orinoco, changing its name to the Yoby. 

TOCOMOCHA, a settlement of the province 
xndcorregimiento of Caxamarca in Peru ; annexed 
to the curacy of the settlement of Huambos. 

TOCONAO, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Atacamo in the same kingdom as 
the former, belonging to the district of the arch 
bishopric of Charcas ; annexed to the curacy of 
the settlement of its capital. 

TOCONOCK, a fall of the river Henebeck 
in the province of Continent, one of the four of 
.New England, in the United States of America. 

TOCOTA, a river of the province and coun 
try of the Amazonas, in the part possessed by 
the Portuguese. It runs s. turning its course to 
w. and enters with a large body into the Parime. 

TOCOTAI, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Camana in Peru ; annexed to 
the curacy of the settlement of Chala. 

TOCUYO, a town of the province and go 
vernment of Venezuela in the new kingdom of 
Granada ; situate between two mountains in the 
valley of this name, and on the shore of a river 
near the sea-coast, by the point of Chiburiche. 
[Its atmosphere is cloudy, and its climate, though 
rather cold, is wholesome. It has a convent of 
Franciscans, and another of Dominicans. It 
is governed by a cabildo. The soil is adapted 
to every sort of production, and the wheat is 
reckoned the best of the province. From eight 
to ten thousand quintals are annually exported 
to Baraquisimeto, Guanou, San Philipi, and 
Caracas. The inhabitants manufacture here 
blankets and other clothes, and they have a tan 
nery ; but their lucrative trade is in salt, which 
they procure from the salt-pits of Coro. The po 
pulation is computed at 10,200 souls. Suicide is 
remarkably common amongst them. Tocuyo is 



TOD 



581 



183 miles w. s. w. of Caraccas, and 58 n. n. e. of 
Truxillo, in lat. 9 25 5. and long. 69 51 o&amp;gt;.] 

[Tocuyo, a river of the same province and 
government as the former. It discharges itself 
into the sea 57 miles to the s. s. e. of the river 
Guayeu, or Guigues, and 80 e. s. e. of Coro. Its 
source is about 43 miles s. of Carora, and more 
than 152 miles from the sea. It is navigable as 
far as Banagna, which is more than 40 leagues 
from its junction with the sea. It fertilizes the 
neighbouring country, the soil of which is natu 
rally good, and it also affords means of trans 
porting produce : but the indolence of the Spa 
niards is so great, that none of the adjoining lands 
are cultivated.] 

TOCUYO, another settlement, in the province 
of Barcelona and government of Cumane. situate 
on the coast, to the re. of the river Unare. 

TODOS SANTOS, a large, handsome, and 
convenient bay of the province and captainship 
of the same name, or San Salvador, in the king 
dom of Brazil. It is 37 miles long from n. to 
s. ; its greatest width from e. to zo. 27 miles, 
and its circumference is 36. Its entrance is about 
eight miles from the point of Tagapipe to that 
of San Antonio, its two extremities. In it are 
many bays for careening vessels, and many fer 
tile islands, but on the w. side are two shoals 
laying on the left as you enter, which are, how 
ever, not dangerous, since, there being so large 
a distance between the two aforesaid points, a 
sufficient chasm is left for the passage of vessels. 
Several riv ers enter this bay ; the principal of 
which are six, called the Paraguasu, Serzipe, 
Jaguaripe, Matuim. Paranamerin, and Piraja. 

The first who discovered this bay was Chris- 
toval Jacques, and it began to be peopled by 
Francisco Pereira Cowtino, by order of King 
Don Juan III. of Portugal, he taking with him 
from that kingdom several persons of distinction 
for the purpose : but these were all obliged to 
retire upon an insurrection of the Topinambes 
Indians, and again returning to their settlement, 
they had the misfortune to encounter shipwreck 
on the coast of Itaparica, where they all perished 
by the hands of the infidels ; on which account 
the right and proprietorship of the settlers fell 
upon the crown, who commanded it to be re- 
peopled, and declared it the capital of the state 
of Brazil ; as such there leaves it yearly a fleet, 
besides many other vessels bound for Lisbon, 
laden with gold, diamonds, topazes, sugar, to 
bacco, and other productions of immense profit. 
The Dutch gained possession of it in 1623, it 



TODOS SANTOS. 



having then belonged to the crown of Spain, as 
well as the kingdom of Portugal itself, through the 
inheritance of Philip II.; but which was reco 
vered the following year, 1624, by a powerful 
armament under the command of Don Fredrique 
of Toledo. 

[A description of this bay has been already 
given by Alcedo, under article Santos. We have 
not thought right to suppress this account, it 
being, although containing some repetition, per 
haps the better one of the two. We shall take 
this advantage of adding some particulars not 
contained in either, which we have collected 
subsequently to the publication of the former ar 
ticle, and which will not, we believe, be unim 
portant. 

Some useful observations were made several 
years ago, respecting the different kinds of tim 
ber employed at this bay for ship-building, by 
Colonels de Brito and Weinholtz. The follow 
ing table, drawn up by them, shows the gravity 
of a cubic foot of each, and to what purposes 
they may be most advantageously appropriated. 

Sucupira merim, useful in the construc 
tion of every part of a vessel - - - 
Poo de arcoy serves for keels, stern- 
posts, ribs, and gunwales - 
Pao roxa, for the same purposes - - 
Peguim, for deck-beams, &amp;c. - 
Sapocaya, for keels, ribs, &amp;c. - - - 
Jetahy amarello, for gunwales, &amp;c. - - 
Vinhatico, for planks above and below 
water, floors, &amp;c. ------ 

Putumifju, for planks, floors, &amp;c. - 
Louro, for yards, masts, &amp;c. - - - 
Jequitiba, for masts, top-masts, yards, 

&amp;c. 

Pao de olio do vermilho, for the same 
purposes --------- 

Massaranduba, for beams, posts, &amp;c. - 
Olandim, for bowsprits, top-masts, 
cheeks, gunwales, and planks - - 57 9 

These are only a very few of the trees which 
might be advantageously employed, not only in 
the construction of ships and houses, but for va 
rious other purposes; and it is much to be lamented 
that so many of the valuable productions of this 
country are still unknown to botanists. On ac 
count of the difficulty of transporting timber, 
many large woods in the interior of the country 
are burnt down by the inhabitants, in order that 
they may form plantations of maize and manioc ; 




46 0| 

48 

37 3 

44 4 

56 If 

68 6 



and, like the back-settlers in North America, they 
forsake these plantations in a few years, and pro 
ceeding still farther into the interior, continue to 
reduce the woods in the same manner, by which 
means a vast number of trees is destroyed that 
might be converted to purposes of utility. 

The surrounding country is in general well 
cultivated, and abounds with many large planta 
tions, the owners of which employ from two to 
three hundred slaves, with a proportionate num 
ber of horses in their sugar works. Many of 
these planters have realized large fortunes, and 
built for themselves elegant mansions, with cha 
pels adjoining. Here they reside with their fami 
lies, except during the rainy season, when they 
repair to the city, San Salvador. 

The natural productions and animals in the 
province of Todos Santos are similar to those in 
the other captainships. Nitre (nitrum nativum) 
is found in great abundance towards the s. w. 
of the province ; it is said to be of the best quality, 
and, if properly attended to, might furnish a 
profitable article of commerce. In Caxeira, 
another district of Todos Santos, a piece of native 
copper, weighing 2666 pounds, was found several 
years ago. It was transmitted to the Royal 
Museum at Lisbon, and far exceeds in size the 
specimens contained in any other European 
cabinet. From Bahia there was also brought, 
nearly about the same period, a specimen of glo 
bular iron mineral, ( Mineraferri sub-aquosa glo- 
bosa, Wall-Min.) with balls of various sizes, from 
two lines to half an inch. From this mine, 
besides the iron, ready formed balls for muskets 
and ordnance might be extracted. 

In this province there are several little trading 
towns besides the capital; the chief of these are 
Jagoaripe, Amor Jacobina, Do Sitio, St. Fran 
cisco, and Cachoeira. The last of these places 
is pleasantly situated on the banks of a small 
river, about fourteen leagues from Bahai. It is 
here that the produce of the gold mines of the 
north centres, and for the space of about ninety 
leagues round the country, is highly cultivated 
and planted with tobacco. Though most of the 
captainships furnish a small quantity of this plant, 
it is in the province of Bahia alone that it is be 
come of consequence as an article of commerce. 

About forty years ago the stagnation of the 
exportation of tobacco, on account of the enor 
mous duties imposed upon it in Portugal, was 
severely felt in this province, when the govern 
ment found it necessary to lighten them, on which 
this trade recovered its former vigour. Besides] 



TODOS SANTOS. 



583 



[that, which, previous to the recent changes, used 
to be exported to the mother-country ; a consi 
derable quantity of inferior tobacco is annually 
sent to the African coast, for which they receive 
various articles in return. 

Tobacco, Brazil wood, and the produce of the 
gold and diamond mines were wholly monopolized 
by the crown ; and from the probable estimates 
given by different writers on the subject of Portu 
guese finance, the revenue they derived from 
these articles was very considerable. So care 
fully, however, was this subject guarded from all 
inquiry that it was impossible to attain a know 
ledge of the exact amount. 

Though the trade of Todos Santos is not equal 
to that of Rio de Janeiro, it is nevertheless con 
siderable; which, however, is rather imputable 
to its local advantages than to the industry of the 
inhabitants. Before the irruption of the French 
into Portugal, its principal trade was carried on 
directly with Lisbon and Oporto. Above fifty 
large vessels were employed in this trade, which 
supplied the colony with European manufactures, 
as well as various other commodities, such as 
wine, flour, butter, cheese, &amp;c. In return they were 
freighted with tobacco, lignum vitae, mahogany, 
and various other woods, both for useful and or 
namental works ; coffee, sugar, cotton, a variety 
of medicinal roots, gums, and balsams, dyeing- 
woods, and an ardent spirit distilled from the 
juice of the cane mixed with molasses, but different 
in flavour from rum. The shops in Rio de Janeyro 
are filled with Manchester fabrics of different 
kinds : several of these are likewise to be found 
at St. Salvador ; but the printed cottons most 
commonly in use here are extremely coarse, and 
and chiefly of Lisbon manufacture. 

The colonial trade of Todos Santos is alsoverv 
considerable. A great number of vessels of about 
two hundred and fifty tons burden are employed 
in it. They are loaded at Bahia with rum, sugar, 
earthenware, British, and German goods, salt, 
&amp;c. These cargoes are mostly disposed of in a 
contraband traffic with the Spaniards of Maldo- 
nado and Montevideo, and for which they are 
paid in silver. They bring home with them salt 
beef and hides. The beef, on their return, is 
sold by retail at about two vintims a pound to 
the poorer class of the inhabitants, as well as for 
the use of the slaves, and for victualling the 
shipping. 

The inland trade, notwithstanding the indo 
lence of the colonists, is also very considerable. 
Near a thousand launches, as Alcedo observes, 
and other small craft, are constantly arriving in 



the bay with the various productions of the inte 
rior of their own and the adjoining captainships. 
These chiefly consist of tobacco, cotton, and 
drugs of various kinds, from Cachoiera, rum and 
oil from Itaporica, wood of different kinds from 
the province of Ilheos, salt fish from Porto 
Seguro ; cotton, maize, sugar, fire-wood, &amp;c. 
from the adjacent woods and rivers : and vege 
tables from the more immediate confines of the bay. 
The cotton, which here forms an important 
staple of trade, after being landed, is deposited 
in a warehouse appropriated to the purpose, 
where it is sorted, weighed, and made up into 
bales for exportation. The different qualities 
are marked on the outside of these packages ; and 
they remain in the warehouse till they are dis- 

1 C 

posed or. 

Foreigners of all nations were expressly pro 
hibited from any kind of participation in the 
trade of Brazil : they were not even allowed to 
ship colonial produce in Portuguese bottoms. 
Such unjust and impolitic restrictions and mo 
nopolies, while they deadened industry, and 
shackled the fair trader, opened a wide field for 
smuggling. Hence a great quantity of British 
commodities were poured into Bahia and the 
other parts of Brazil by the Lisbon traders ; which 
even the severe laws, inflicting a heavy fine upon 
the captain engaged in such trade, and transpor 
tation to Africa for three years, could not wholly 
prevent. 

Notwithstanding the large quantity of specie 
in circulation, a great part of their commerce is 
conducted by barter. The people of Todos San 
tos are accused by some writers of practising a 
mean and knavish cunning in their mercantile 
dealings, especially with strangers, from whom, 
it is affirmed, they frequently ask double the price 
they will take: while, on the other hand, they 
endeavour to undervalue, by every artifice in 
their power, the articles offered to them in ex 
change. In a word, they are represented as be 
ing, with a few exceptions, wholly devoid of the 
feelings of honour, and destitute of that common 
sense of rectitude which ouffht to regulate every 
transaction between man and man. 

Except tanning of leather, manufactures of 
every kind were expressly prohibited : and so 
strictly was this absurd law en breed, that a f w 
years ago a cotton-spinner, who lately attempted 
to establish one near St. Salvador, was sent to 
Europe, and his machinery destroyed. 

The coast round Todos Santos abounds with 
whales ; only a few large boats are, however, 
employed in this fishery; and the oil procured] 



584 



T O J 



[from those which are thus caught is by no means 
equal to the consumption ; consequently it bears 
a high price. 

The military establishment in this province is 
on the same footing as in Rio de Janeyro, and 
the other captainships of Brazil. The govern 
ment is particularly strict, especially in St. Sal 
vador and the other cities, in having all the 
young men enrolled either to serve in the regu 
lars or in the militia. No rank, however high, 
is deemed sufficient to exempt them ; even the 
Portuguese, as soon as they land, are liable to 
the same law while they remain in the colony, 
though they may be already enrolled to serve in 
the mother-country. Being a member of the 
holy office does not even appear to atFord a suf 
ficient protection. The capital of the bay and 
captainship of Todos Santos is San Salvador, 
which see. The bay lies in lat. 12 42 s. and 
long. 38 42 a?.] 

TODOS SANTOS, a settlement of the same name, 
of the province and corregimiento of Carangas in 
Peru, belonging to the archbishopric of Char- 
cas, and annexed to the curacy of the settlement 
of Huachacalla. 

TODOS SANTOS, another, of the head settle 
ment of the district of Tlacotepec and alcaldia 
mayor of Tepeaca in Nueva Espaiia. containing 
16 families of Spaniards and Mtistecs, and G7 of 
Indians : two leagues from its head settlement. 

TODOS SANTOS, another, of the province and 
corregimiento of Angaraes in Peru, annexed to 
the curacy of the settlement of Acobamba. 

TODOS SANTOS, another, of the head settle 
ment of the district and alcaldia mayor of Cho- 
lula in Nueva Espana. It contains 17 families 
of Indians, and lies half a league to the n. of its 
capital. 

TOES, a settlement of the province and go 
vernment of Popayan in the new kingdom of 
Granada. 

TOGOBATCHE, a settlement of the pro 
vince and colony of S. Carolina, situate on the 
shore and at the source of the river Albama. 

TOGOSAHATCHEE, a small river of the 
province and government of Georgia in the 
United States of America, which runs s. e. and 
enters the Ocmulgi. 

TOHIKON, an Indian settlement of Pennsyl 
vania, on an arm of the Susquehannah. 

TOICA, a settlement of the province and cor 
regimiento of Huanta in Peru; annexed to the 
curacy of the settlement of Julcarmarca in the 
province of Angaraes. 
TOJOQUA, a bay on the coast of the king- 



T O L 

dom of Brazil, in the province and captainship of 
the Rio Janeyro. 

TOJUCAS, a settlement of the province and 
captainship of Rey in the same kingdom as the 
former bay ; situate on the shore of the river 
Tebiquari, near the coast. 

TOLA, a settlement and port of the province 
and government of Esmeraldas in the kingdom 
of Quito ; situate in an island on the shore of 
the river Bogota. 

TOLCAYUCA, a settlement of the jurisdiction 
and alcaldia mayor of Pachuca in Nueva Espana : 
annexed to the curacy of the settlement of Texa- 
yuca. It contains 105 families of Indians. 

TOLD, a settlement of the island of Barba- 
does, in the district of the parish of St. George. 
TOLEDO, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Paria and archbishopric of 
Charcas in Peru. It has a sanctuary of our Lady 
of Candelaria, much frequented by the Indians. 

TOLIMAN, a settlement of the head settle 
ment of the district and alcaldia mayor of Chi- 
lapa in Nueva Espana, belonging to the bishopric 
of Puebla de los Angeles. It contains no fa 
milies of Indians, and is seven leagues to the w. 
of its capital. 

TOLIMAN, another settlement, with the dedi 
catory title of San Pedro, in the head settlement 
of the district of Tuzcacuezco and alcaldia mayor 
ofAmula in the same kingdom. It contains 38 
families of Indians, who cultivate melons, which 
they sell to the other settlements. It is two 
leagues s. of its head settlement. 

TOLIMANEJO, a settlement of the head 
settlement of the district of Ixcateopan and al 
caldia mayor of Tlapa in the same kingdom as 
the former. It is of a hot temperature, and con 
tains only 1 1 families of Indians : two leagues 
n. e. of its capital. 

[TOLLAND, a county of Connecticut, bounded 
n. by the state of Massachusetts, s. by New Lon 
don county, e. by Windham, and w. by Hartford 
county. It is subdivided into nine townships, 
and contains 13,106 inhabitants, including 47 
slaves. A great proportion of the county is 
hilly, but the soil is generally strong, and good 
for grazing.] 

[TOLLAND, the chief town of the above 
county, was incorporated in 1715, and is about 
12 miles n. e. of Hartford. It has a Congrega 
tional church, court-house, gaol, and 20 or 30 
houses, compactly built, in the centre of the 
town.] 

TOLONTA, a mountain of the kingdom of 
Quito to the w. n. w. of the city ; where there is 



T O L 

nn excellent quarry of marble resembling the 
Grecian, which was worked for some time, but 
is now abandoned. 

TOLOUROU, islands in the ,N. Sea, and 
near the coast of the county of the Amazonas, 
at the entrance of the river of this name. 

TOLOUSE, or To LOS A, a sea-port formerly 
called St. Peter, in the Royal Island, or Cape 
Breton, in N. America, at the entrance of the 
Strait of Fronsac. It lies in a kind of gulf called 
Little St. Peter, and the island of this name is 
in front of that of Maurepas. 

TOLOUSE, a fort built by the French in the 
province and colony of S. Carolina ; situate on 
the shore of the river Albania, which name it 
also has. It is just at the confluence of the Al 
bania with the Cousa, and is 50 miles from La 
Movila, and, by the navigation of the river, 180. 

TOLPAN, a river of the island of Laxa, in 
the kingdom of Chile, which runs w. and enters 
the Vergara. 

TOLTEN, a river of the kingdom of Chile, 
which rises from the lake Mallabauquen, laves 
Villa-Rica, runs n. and enters the Pacific Sea, 
after collecting the waters of several other ri 
vers, seven leagues to the w. of the port of Im 
perial, and forms a bay in lat. 39 1 V s. 

TOLTEN, some lakes of the same kingdom, 
forming an arm, or waste-water, of the former 
river. 

TOLU, SANTIAGO DE, a tow r n of the province 
and government of Cartagena in the new king 
dom of Granada, founded by Pedro de Heredia 
in 1534. It is of a very hot temperature, but 
healthy, and abounding and fertile in grain, espe 
cially maize, and some trees, from which is ex 
tracted the celebrated balsam of Tolu, so re 
nowned for curing of wounds, and on which ac 
count it is a considerable branch of commerce. 
This town has been several times pillaged by- 
English and French pirates. [It is very near 
the sea-coast, 55 miles s. of Cartagena, in lat. 
32 n. and long. 75 30 a\] 

TOLU, another settlement, with the additional 
title of Viejo (Old), of the province and go 
vernment of the former town ; situate 12 miles 
e. from the former, on the shore of the river 
Pechelin. 

TOLUCA, a jurisdiction and akaldia mayor 
of Nueva Espafia. Its district is limited, and 
its temperature cold ; but it is very fertile, and 
abounding in fruits of this climate, such as 
maize, and beans, and barley, of which they 
gather large crops in a certain valley, and carry 

VOL. IV. 



T O M 



585 



on a thriving commerce. But the most lucrative 
of all are its breeds of swine, which are fatted 
for the supply of Mexico and other provinces. 
Its population is composed of 17 settlements, so 
close to each other, that none of them are more 
than a league and a half apart. 

TOLUCA, the capital, is the city of the same 
name, nicely constructed, with streets well dis 
posed, and handsome squares and buildings. It 
belongs to the estate of the Marquis of V r alle, 
and contains 412 families of Indians, 618 of 
Spaniards, Mustees, and Mulattoes, and has four 
convents of religious, namely, of S. Francisco, 
La Merced, of bare-footed Carmelites, and S. 
Juan de Dios, w r ith an hospital. In its parish- 
church is venerated an image of Christ crucified, 
which was brought some few years after it was 
made to be disposed of by two youths, who de 
manded for it 53 dollars, and which, whilst the 
purchaser was gone to fetch the money to pay 
for it, was left by the said youths, who suddenly 
disappeared. This circumstance soon reached 
the ears of the priest, who determined to give 
it a place in the church, and it is honoured yearly 
with a grand feast and procession ; and it ap 
pears that the faith of the inhabitants has been 
frequently rewarded by miracles of the Divine 
mercy, as appears by authenticated testimonies, as 
related by Don Joseph Villasenor, and Sanchez 
in his Teatro Americano. 

[Humboldt describes this city as standing at the 
foot of the porphyry mountain of San Miguel de 
Tutucuitlalpilco, in a valley abounding with 
maize and maguey (agave). He calculates its 
height at 2687 metres, or 88 13 feet. 

It is 19 miles w. s. w. of Mexico, in lat. 19 16 
n. and long. 99 21 30" a&amp;gt;.] 

The other settlements of its district are the 
following : 

Santa Ana, San Francisco, 

San Juan, San Pablo, 

San Geronimo, San Christoval, 

San Pedro, San Andres, 

San Mateo, Tecaxic, 

San Lorenzo, S. Buenaventura, 

San Bartolome, San Antonio, 

Capultitlan, Ostotitlan, 

Santa Cruz, Cacamoloatlan. 

[TOM s Creek, in New Jersey, which sepa 
rates the towns of Dover and Shrewsbury.] 

[TOMACO, a large river of Popayan, and 
Tierra Firme, S. America, about nine miles n. e. 
of Galla Isle. About a league and a half within 
the river is an Indian town of the same name, 



580 



T O M 



TOM 



and but small, the inhabitants of which commonly 
supply small vessels with provisions, when they 
put in here for refreshment.] 

TOMAHAVE, a settlement of the province 
and corregimiento of Porco in Peru. 

[TOM AH 1WK Island, on the e. coast of Pa- 
tagonin, is 24 miles n. e. of Seal s Bay.] 

TO MA LA, a settlement of the district of Ixtla- 
huaca and alcaldia mayor of Colima in Nueva 
Espaiia. It is of a hot temperature, situate at 
the skirt of a mountain, and inhabited by 30 fa 
milies of Indians : one league to the s. of its 
head settlement. 

TOMALTEPEC, SANTO DOMINGO DE, a set 
tlement of the head settlement of the district of 
Cuilapa and alcaldia mayor of Quatro Villas, in 
the same kingdom as the former. It contains 74 
families of Indians, who live by the cultivation 
and commerce of cochineal, seeds, fruits, and 
coal, and cutting of wood. It is two leagues to 
the e . of its head settlement. 

TOMANGA, a settlement of the province 
and corregimiento of Vilcas Huaman in Peru; 
annexed to the curacy of the settlement of 
Chuschi. 

TOMATLAN, a settlement of the head set 
tlement of the district and alcaldia mayor of the 
town of La Purificacion in Nueva Espana ; situ 
ate four leagues from the coast of the S. Sea and 
port of Chametlan, the population of which is 
occupied in watching vessels that may appear 
off the coast, and are constantly the first to see 
the galleon which comes from the Philippines. 
It is eight leagues to the w. of its capital. 

TOMATLY, a settlement of Indians of the 
province and colony of N. Carolina ; situate on 
the shore and at the source of the river Eu- 
phasee. 

TOMAVELAS, a settlement of the province 
and corregimiento of Chimbo in the kingdom of 
Quito. 

[TOMBA River, on the coast of Peru, is be 
tween the port of Hilo and the river of Xuly or 
Chuly. Tnere is anchorage in this river in 
20 fathoms, and clean ground. Lat. 1750 / 5.] 

[TOMBIGBEE River, is the dividing line 
between the Creeks and Chactaws. Above the 
junction of Alabama and Mobile rivers, the latter 
is called the Tombigbee river, from the fort of 
Tombigbee, situate on the w. side of it, about 
96 miles above the town of Mobile. The source 
of this river is reckoned to be 40 leagues higher 
up, in the country of the Chickasaws. The fort 
of Tombigbee was captured by the British, but 



abandoned by them in 1767. The river is navi 
gable for sloops and schooners about 35 leagues 
above the town of Mobile : ISO American fami 
lies are settled on this river, that have been 
Spanish subjects since 1783.] 

[TOME, S. a settlement of Indians of the 
province and government of Buenos Ayres ; 
situate on the w. bank of the Uruguay, in lat. 
28 32 49" s. and long. 55 57 43" w. \ 
[TOME, S. See ST. THOMAS.! 
TOME, a port of the coast of the kingdom of 
Chile, in the Bay of Concepcion, little frequented 
and insecure. 

TOMEBAMBA, a settlement of the province 
and government of Popayan, in the new kingdom 
of Granada. 

TOMECBE, a settlement of the province and 
colony of S. Carolina in N. America. 

TOMEPAMPA, a small and poor settlement 
of Indians of the kingdom of Quito, in the s. 
part. It was celebrated in former times for the 
sumptuous edifices it had in it belonging to 
the Incas, and especially a magnificent temple 
which they had built and dedicated to the Sun, 
of which the vestiges still remain. 

TOMEPAMPA, another settlement, in the pro 
vince and corregimiento of Condesuyos of Are- 
quipa in Peru. 

TOMEPENDA, a settlement of the province 
and government of Jaen de Bracamoros in the 
kingdom of Quito ; situate in a beautiful, de 
lightful plain at the junction of three large ri 
vers, namely, the Chachapoyas, Chinchipe, and 
Marailon. It is of a warm and moist tempera 
ture, but very fertile, abounding in tobacco, cot 
ton, honey, and wild wax, and is surrounded 
with thick woods. It i* in lat. 5 33 12" s. 

TOMIAN, a settlement of the missions which 
were held by the regular company of the Jesuits 
in the province of Taraumara and kingdom of 
Nueva Vizcaya ; situate 46 leagues to the w. s. w. 
of the real of mines of Chiguagua. 

TOMIDO, a settlement of the province and 
captainship of S. Vicente in Brazil; situate on the 
shore and at the source of the river Pez. 

TOMINA, a province and corregimiento of 
the kingdom of Peru ; bounded n. by the great 
valley of Santa Cruz and the province of Miz- 
que, e. by the territories of the infidel Chirigua- 
nos Indians, s. by the province of Pomabamba, 
and s. w. and w. by that of Yamparaes. It is 24 
leagues in length from n. to ,v. and 70 in circum 
ference. Its temperature is hot, and in some of 
its valleys excessively so. In it are some sugar- 



T O M 

cane estates, the plants of which are accustomed 
to last thirty years. In its lofty parts are bred 
large and small cattle, and some horses. 

The rivers which water this province are 
small, and, united, form one called El Do 
rado, which runs to the e. It is also traversed 
and irrigated in some degree by the river 
Grande, which divides it from the jurisdiction of 
Santa Cruz de la Sierra, at the e. side of which 
it gives a turn so as to incorporate itself with the 
Marmore. In the district of Magocaya are two 
considerable lakes, and in that of the curacy of 
Villar many irruptions have been experienced 
from the Chiriguanos, notwithstanding a bulwark 
formed by many friendly settlements of Indians, 
who are in strict alliance, and who consist, at 
the present time, of Christians to the number of 
100, living dispersed in their small estates, and 
being instructed in their faith by a priest ap 
pointed through the vigilance of the diocesan. 
Before coming to these settlements there is one 
of Chanaes Indians, who, flying from the servi 
tude of the Chiriguanos, sought permission, in 
the year 1746, to establish themselves there, of 
fering themselves to become Christians, but 
which, to the present hour, has never been effected. 

In one of the estates, called Olopo, of the 
district of the town of Tomina, the inhabitants 
are notorious for being of a pigmy race, and all 
of th^ m are afflicted with tumours in the throat, 
which causes them to look hideous. The inha 
bitants of this province amount to 12,000. The 
capital is the town of its name, about 55 miles 
e. from Chusiqusaca, or La Plata, and when 
there was a corregidor, he resided in it, and held 
a repartimiento of 31,067 dollars, paying an alca- 
vala of 248 annually. 

[TOMISCANING, or TOMMISKAMAIN, a lake 
of N. America, which sends its waters s. e. 
through Ottawas river into Lake St. Francis, in 
St. Lawrence river. The line which separates 
Upper from Lower Canada, runs up to this lake 
by a line drawn due . until it strikes the boun 
dary line of Hudson s Bay, or New Britain.] 

T OMOCORO, a settlement of the province 
and government of Maracaibo in the new king 
dom of Granada ; situate within the lake, on the 
. side. 

TOMOLA, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Chichas and Tarija in Peru, of 
the district of the former, and annexed to the 
curacy of the settlement of Calccha. 

TOMONIMES, a barbarous and ferocious na 
tion of Indians of Brazil, who dwell near the 
river Paranayba, and to the w. of the province 



TON 



587 



and captainship of Espiritu Santo. The Portu 
guese, on various occasions, have put them to 
the rout, destroying their villages, but were 
never able to subject them. They are cruel and 
treacherous. The principal settlement is called 
Morogagen. 

[TOMPSONTOWN, a village of Pennsyl 
vania, in Mifflin County, containing about a 
dozen houses. It is 22 miles from Lewistown.J 

TOMULA, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Chichas and Tarija in Peru, an 
nexed to the curacy of the settlement of Calccha. 

TONACATEP&amp;C, a head settlement of the 
district of the alcaldia mayor of Tepozcolula in 
Nueva Espana. It contains 16 families of In 
dians, who occupy themselves in the cultivation 
and commerce of cochineal. 

TONACATEPEC, another settlement, in the 
province and alcaldia mayor of Salvador in the 
kingdom of Guatemala. 

TONACUSTLA, a settlement of the head 
settlement of the district of Huipuxtla and alcal- 
dia mayor of Tepetango in Nueva Espaiia. It 
contains 65 families of Indians. 

TONAGUI, a settlement of the head settle 
ment of the district of Tocontepec and alcaldia 
mayor of Villalta in the same kingdom as the 
former. It is of a cold temperature, contains 
31 families of Indians, and is five leagues to the 
e. of its capital. 

TONALA, a jurisdiction and alcaldia mayor 
of the kingdom of Nueva Galicia and bishopric 
of Guadalaxara. Its jurisdiction is very limited 
and reduced, inasmuch as it comprehends only- 
two head settlements, and it is scantily supplied 
with productions ; these consisting of merely 
some seeds and fruits of the country. The tem 
perature is cold. 

TONALA, the capital, is the settlement of the 
same name, in which is a convent of the religious 
of S. Augustine. Its population is composed of 
25 or 30 families of Mustees and Mulattoes, and 
84 of Indians employed in the cultivation of- 
maize ; but its principal commerce is in the 
making of earthenware, with which it supplies 
other jurisdictions. It is four leagues from 
Guadalaxara. The two aforesaid settlements 
are San Pedro and San Martin. 

TONALA, another settlement, the head settle 
ment of the district of the jurisdiction and al 
caldia mayor of Guajuapa in Nueva Espana. It 
is of a mild temperature, and its population is 
composed of 20 families of Spaniards, Mustces, 
and Mulattoes. It has a convent of the religious 
of S. Domingo. Fifteen settlements of its dis- 
4 F 2 



T O N 



T O N 



trict make their chief commerce by their breeds 
of goats, and cultivating- seeds and some cochi 
neal, the latter of which is found principally in 
the settlements nighest to La Misteca ; but the 
greatest emolument arises from the tallow and 
hides of cattle which are slaughtered. It is 58 
leagues to the e. s. e. of Mexico. 

TON ALA, a river of the province and alcaldia 
mayor of Tabasco, called by others Toneladas, 
which enters the N. Sea. 

TONA LTEPEC, SANTO DOMINGO DE, a head 
settlement of the district of the alcaldia mayor of 
Yanguitlan in the same kingdom as the former. 
It contains 64 families of Indians, who employ 
themselves in making earthenware. It is of a 
cold tern perat ure, and is three leagues to the 
w. of its capital. 

TQNAMECA, SANTA MARIA DE, a settle 
ment of ths alcaldia mayor of Huamelula in Nu- 
eva Espana. It is of an extremely hot and un 
healthy temperature ; its population is composed 
of 36 families of Indians, and in its vicinity are 
two small ports, called Escondido and Santo An 
gel. This settlement is scarce of water, and 
lies three leagues front that of Pochutla. 

TONANCHIN, a settlement of the head set 
tlement of the district and alcaldia mayor of 
Cholula in the same kingdom as the former. It 
contains 26 families of Indians, and lies half a 
league s. of its capital. 

TONATICHE, a settlement of the head set 
tlement of the district of Tlaltenango and al 
caldia mayor of Colotlan in the same kingdom. 
It is seven leagues n. is. of its head settlement. 

TONATICO, a settlement of the head set 
tlement of Escateopan and alcaldia mayor of 
Tecpotitlan in the same kingdom, and of the 
bishopric of Guadalaxara, 1 1 leagues s. w. of its 
capital. 

TONAYA, a settlement of the head settle 
ment of the district of Tuzcacuzco and alcaldia 
mayor- of Amola, or Amula, in Nueva Espana. 
It contains 13 families of Indians and six of Mu- 
lattoes, who gain their livelihood by working at 
the sugar-engines, called San Juan and San An 
tonio. In its district are some estates in which 
they breed horses and cows. It is five leagues 
n. of its head settlement. 

TONAYAN, a settlement of the head settle 
ment of the district of Tlacolula and alcaldia 
mayor of Xalapa in the same kingdom as the 
former ; situate on a declivity surrounded by 
some of the highest mountains in those parts, 
from one of which it takes its name, signifying, 
i:\ the Mexican idiom ? a place where the rays of 



the sun shine early. This is the most ancient 
place of the jurisdiction, although, with the rest, 
it is at present in a great state of decay. It con 
tains 273 families of Indians, in which are in 
cluded those of the three wards annexed to its 
curacy, and they gain their livelihood by spin 
ning pita (thread), and sowing maize, French- 
beans, and some fruits. It is two leagues and a 
half to the n.e. of its head settlement. 

TONAYARIBO, a settlement of the pro 
vince and country of the Amazonas, in the part 
of it possessed by the French ; situate on the 
shore of the river Sinawary. 

[TONDELO, a river at the bottom of the Gulf 
of Campeachy, in the s. w. part of the Gulf of 
Mexico ; 15 miles due w. of St. Amies, and 24 
e. of Guasickwalp. It is navigable for barges 
and other vessels of from 50 to 60 tons.] 

[TONEWANTO, the name of a creek and 
Indian town, in the n. w. part of New- York. 
The creek runs a w. course and enters Niagara 
river opposite Grand Island, eight miles n. of 
Fort Erie. It runs, owing to its winding course, 
about 40 miles, and is navigable 28 miles from 
its mouth. The town stands on its s. side, 18 
miles from Niagara river. Also the Indian name 
of Fishing Bay, on Lake Ontario.] 

[TONGATABOO, one of the Friendly Islands 
in the S. Pacific Ocean, about 60 miles in circuit, 
but rather oblong, and widest at the c. end. It has 
a rocky coast, except to the n. side, which is full 
of shoals and islands, and the shore is low and 
sandy. It furnishes the best harbour or anchor 
age to be found in these islands. The island is 
all laid out in plantations, between which are 
roads and lanes for travelling, drawn in a very 
judicious manner for opening an easy communi 
cation from one part of the island to another. 
In lat. 21 9 s. and long. 174 46 w. Variation 
of the needle, in 1777, was 9 53 e.~\ 

TONGOI, a port of the S. Sea, on the coast 
of the province and corregimiento of Coquimbo 
and kingdom of Chile. It is small and of shal 
low bottom, formed by the river of its name, at 
the entrance of the same into the sea. [It is 22 
miles s. s. zc. of its capital, in lat. 30 17 .?.] 

The above river rises in the mountains of the 
Cordillera, and runs s. to enter the sea. 

TONGORA, a small port, unsheltered and of 
shallow bottom, on the coast of the province 
and corregimiento of Piura and kingdom of Peru, 
and is five leagues from Sechura, towards the 
w. s. to. On the w. is a small island serving as a 
shelter to a few fishermen s craft accustomed to 
anchor there. In its market there are often 



TON 

found quantities of the fish called sea-wolves. 
In lat. 541 / .s. 

TONGORA, a port of the coast of the S. Sea, in 
the province and corregimiento of Pinra and 
kingdom of Peru. 

TONGOS, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Chancay in Peru, annexed to 
the curacy of the settlement of Canchas. 

TONGOS, another, of the province and corre- 
gim lento of Huanta, of the same kingdom. 

TONIATA, a settlement of the Iroques In 
dians, in the province and government of Canada, 
on the shore of the river Catarucky, to the e. of 
Lake Ontario. 

TONIBAI, a dry port of the great sierra of 
Siricagui in the province and government of So- 
nora, being very dangerous and difficult of ac 
cess. The sierra runs for the space of 30 leagues 
to the n. w. of the river Gila, and is 20 leagues 
distant from the same. It is eight leagues wide, 
and on its top there are, according to the testi 
monies of many who have visited it, and lived 
amongst the gentile Indians there, many indi 
cations of rich silver mines. Nature has crowned 
this sierra with frightful crags, which serve as a 
bulwark and defence to the Apaches Indians, 
who rush out from their safe retreat to pillage 
and destroy passengers. It abounds greatly in 
magueies, of which is made a certain mixture, 
being a spirit distilled from the leaves of those 
herbs. It produces also various kinds of seeds 
and wild fruits, which serve as food for those 
barbarians. We are indebted for the accounts 
received of this country to a Spaniard, native of 
Sonora, who was taken by the Apalaches Indians 
in the year 1746, and who had the fortune to 
eifect his escape. 

[TONICAS. See POINT COUPEE.] 
TOXICAS, a river of the province and govern 
ment of Louisiana, which runs &amp;. and enters the 
Mississippi. 

TONICHI, a settlement of the province and 
government of Ostimuri in Nueva Espaila ; situ 
ate on shore and at the source of the river Hia- 
qui. 

TONKTON, a lake of the province and 
country of the Iroques Indians in Canada. It 
is formed by many small ones of the river Se- 
necas to the s. of the great Lake Ontario. 

TONLI, a small island of the Lake Ontario in 
the territory and country of the N. Iroques In 
dians ; situate close to the n. coast. 

TONLO, a settlement of coloured Indians 
in the province and corregimiento of Tacunga 
and kingdom of Quito, situate in the mountains 



T O N 



589 



inhabited by the same nation, from whom the 
settlement take its name. 

TONNAGANE, or NOXTAUXAGAXE, a ri 
ver of the province and government of Canada, 
which runs n. and enters Lake Superior, between 
the rivers Sable and Original. 

TONNAUTE, a settlement of Indians in the 
territory and country of the Iroques Indians, 
in the same country and province as the former ; 
situate on the shore of the Lake Ontario, at the 
mouth by which enter the waters of the Lake 
Quento. 

TONNE-GRAND, a river of the province 
and government of Guayana in the part possessed 
by the French. 

TONNELIERS, a small isle of the S. Sea, 
in the bay of the Malvinc or Falkland Isles. 

TONNERRE, some islands of the n. coast of 
Lake Superior in Canada. They are numerous, 
and all small. 

TOXXERRE, a bay of the coast of Lake Huron, 
between the strait of Michilimackinac and the 
Bay of Saguinam. 

TOXXERRE, a large bay on the coast of Lake 
Superior, and in the same province and govern 
ment. 

TONO, a settlement of the district of Chanco 
in the kingdom of Chile ; situate on the shore of 
the Strait of Chimbarongo. 

TONOE, a settlement of the same kingdom 
as the former ; situate on the shore of the river 
Pibinco. 

TONORO, a small river of the province and 
government of Cumana. It rises at the foot of 
the mountains of Bergantin, runs e. and enters 
the Guanipa. 

TONROQUINO, a small river of the pro 
vince and government of Guayana, or Nueva 
Ahdalucia. It rises from Lake Icupa, runs n. 
and enters the Paragua. 

fTONTI, an island at the mouth of Lake 
D Urfe, at the e. extremity of Lake Ontario, is 
within the British territories; 11 miles n. c. of 
Point au Goelans, and 12 w. of Grand Island, 
having several isles between it and the latter.] 

[Toxxi, or TONTY, a river which empties 
through the n. shore of Lake Erie ; 22 miles w. 
by n. of Riviere a la Barbue.J 
j [TONTORAL, Cape, on the coast of Chile in 
S. America, 64 miles to the n. of Guasca or 
Huasco, and in lat. 27 27 / s.] 

TONUA, a settlement of the nation of the 
Panataguas Indians, to the n. of the city of Gua- 
nuco in Peru; founded in 1631 by the Jesuits, 
with the dedicatory title of Nuestra Seiiora de- 



590 



T O P 



la Conception. It is the principal settlement of 
such as are formed in these parts of converted 
Indians. 

TONUSCO, a river of the province and go 
vernment of Antioquia, in the new kingdom of 
Granada. It rises in the valley of Guaca, and 
runs in the shape of an S to the c. to enter the 
Cauca, opposite the capital of the province. 

[TOOBAUAI, one of the Society Islands, in 
the S. Pacific Ocean, not more than five or six 
miles across in any part. In lat. 23 25 s. and 
long. 149 23 &amp;gt;.] 

[TOOSCHCONDOLCH, an Indian village 
on the n. w. coast of N. America, of considerable 
importance in the fur-trade ; situated on a point 
of land between two deep sounds, opposite Queen 
Charlotte s Island.] 

[TOOTOOCH, a small low island in Nootka 
Sound, on the n. w. coast of N. America, on the 
e. side of which is a considerable Indian village; 
the inhabitants of which wear a garment appa 
rently composed of wool and hair, mostly white, 
well fabricated, and probably by themselves/] 

TOPACURO, a small river of the province 
and captainship of Seara in Brasil, which runs n. 
and enters the sea between the Josari and the 
Iguarasu. 

TOPAGA, a settlement of the province and 
corregimicnto of Tunja in the new kingdom of 
Granada ; situate in the ancient territory of So- 
gamoso. It is of an extremely cold temperature, 
and subject to bleak winds, being situate on the 
side of a hill, but it is very fertile and abundant 
in wheat, maize, papas, and other fruits of a cold 
climate, as also in cattle, of the wool of which 
the inhabitants, who amount to 150, make va 
rious sorts of clothings: the Indians also amount 
to 150. This settlement is surrounded with 
mountains and woods ; it was large and rich, but 
has now fallen into great decay and poverty. It 
is eight leagues to the n. of Tunja, and very close 
to tHe settlements of Mongni and Togamoso. 

TOPAIPA, a settlement of the jurisdiction 
and district of the city of La Palma, in the same 
province and kingdom as the former. It is very 
reduced and poor, of a hot temperature, and 
yields only some productions peculiar to such a 
climate. 

TOPANA, a river of the province and cor- 
regimiento of Canete in Peru, which runs w. and 
enters the sea close to that of Herbal. 

TOPANAS, a barbarous nation of Indians, 
but little known, who live in the woods bordering 
upon the river Yetau of the country of the 
Amazonas. 



TOP 

TOAPAYOS, a barbarous nation of Indians 
of the province and country of the Amazonas, 
who dwell to the s. of the river of this name 
amongst the missions of the Portuguese Carme 
lite fathers, between the river Madeira and that 
of Topayos, to which they give the name, to 
wards the w. and between the river Topayos, and 
the Xingu to the e.. This nation was formerly 
very numerous, but the constant wars with the Por 
tuguese have contributed greatly to its diminu 
tion : it was most warlike, and maintained itself 
solely by fishing and the chase. [We have already 
given a copious description of these Indians un 
der the article TAPUYES, which see.] 

TOPAYOS, a settlement or village of the Por 
tuguese in the province and captainship of Para 
and kingdom of Brazil, on the shore of the river 
of its name, and near the mouth, where it enters 
the Maranon. 

TAPAYOS, the aforesaid river, is one of the 
most abundant of that kingdom ; it has its source 
in the mountains and mines of the surrounding 
territory, runs w. and enters the Maranon on the 
s. side, in lat. 2 56 s. being one of the largest 
streams by which that river is replenished. [See 
TAPOYAES.] 

TOPI! HUE, a settlement of the missions 
which were held by the Jesuits, in the province 
and government of Sinaloa and kingdom of Nu- 
eva Espana. 

TOPIA, SIERRA DE, a cordillera of very high 
mountains in Nueva Espana. It runs from n. to 
s. more than 150 leagues from New Mexico to 
the city of Guadalaxara, and is more than thirty 
broad. Its elevation is such as to be comparable 
only with the sierra of the Andes in Peru, and 
in it are to be seen many chasms which cannot 
be looked at without horror. The whole of this 
sierra is covered with pines of an amazing height 
and bulk, and so thick as to be impenetrable to 
the rays of the sun. It enjoys different tempe 
ratures, for in its higher parts the cold is into 
lerable, getting more mild in proportion as you 
descend the skirts of the mountains. From the 
same heights fall down many rivers, which, 
united, run towards the w. and enter the S. Sea, 
others falling by the e. into the N. Sea. These 
rivers become amazingly swelled at the melt 
ing of the snows on the sierra, where it often 
lays, upwards of a month, more than two yards 
deep. The largest of these rivers are the Na- 
sas, the Papasquiaro, and the Ahorcados, the 
which form a great lake. The rains fall here 
continually from the month of June to Septem 
ber, and then they exhibit a grand and alarming 



TOP 

sight, for they spread themselves with excessive 
rapidity over a space of two or three leagues, 
causing a distressing inundation, to which is 
added the plague of an intolerable number of 
mosquitoes. 

There are sevei al trees in its woods producing 
wild fruit, and there are breeds of guacamayas, 
very beautiful through their vari -coloured plu 
mage ; carpenter-birds, who are fond of boring- 
holes in the firs, in which they deposit their food 
so as to prevent it from corrupting : and it is 
curious to observe what extreme pains are re 
quired by any one to dislodge it from its place of 
security. Here also are great flocks of pea 
hens, besides a multitude of other birds, with 
some royal eagles. No less are there found 
some wild beasts, such as bears, lions, and tigers, 
which with difficulty are killed by the Indians 
for their hides,with which to adorn themselves ; and 
besides these, there are a great variety of squirrels. 

This sierra has some very rich silver-mines, 
which at first yielded at the average of one mark 
of silver for every quintal of earth. It was this, 
indeed, that allured the Spaniards to ewter these 
terrific wilds, and it is pretty certain, that no other 
inducement could have had any effect, for, accord 
ing to all that have seen them, their horrors are 
such as to beggar all description. They were 
nevertheless inhabited by several barbarous na 
tions of Indians, the principal of which is that of 
the name of the sierra itself, amongst whom the 
Jesuits entered in the year 1590, with a view of 
bringing them within the pale of the church. 
The chief of these missionaries was the father 
Andres de Tapia, who succeeded in converting 
many, and reducing them to a civilized settle 
ment ; and it was by such means that the Spa 
niards first began to establish themselves, and 
to work the mines, the which have been subse 
quently abandoned through the excessive cost of 
carrying materials to so great a distance. So 

freat was the spiritual fruit that rewarded the 
ibours of the missionaries, that in the year 
1640, they had converted more than 50,000 souls, 
according to father Andres de Rivas, who dwelt 
there for many years, and wrote the history of 
the country. 

TOPILTEPEC, SAN PABLO DE, a settlement 
of the head settlement of the district of Tepal- 
caltepec and alcaldia mayor of Nexapa in Nueva 
Espaiia ; situate at the skirt of a mountain, at a 
short distance from its head settlement by the s. 
part. It contains 34 Indian families. 

TOPILTEPEC, another, with the dedicatory 
title of San Pedro, in the alcaldia mayor of Yan- 



T O P 



591 



guitlan in the same kingdom. It contains 104 
families of Indians, with those in the wards of 
its district, where there are many farms, in which 
they cultivate maize and other seeds. It is of a 
cold temperature, and two leagues and a half 
from its capital. 

TOPINAMBARANAS, a settlement of the 
province and country of the Amazonas, at the 
mouth of the river of its name. 

TOPINAMBARANAS. This river rises in the 
territory of the Matayas Indians, runs n. and 
enters the Maranon. 

TOPINAMBES, a settlement of the province 
and country of the Amazonas, belonging to the 
Portuguese ; situate in an island in the river 
Maranon, on its left shore, and towards the s. 
where the Portuguese have built a fort for its 
defence. 

TOPINAMBES, or TOPINAMBOS, a barbarous 
nation of Indians of the kingdom of Brazil, in 
the province and captainsltip of Para. They 
dwelt opposite the islands of the river Maranon, 
from its mouth to the Strait of Pauxis, and tra 
vellers have recounted a thousand fables of them. 
The greater part of them have now retired into 
the mountains and woods towards the s. very few 
remaining in the Portuguese territory. They 
w^re formerly very warlike, and laid down the 
law to other nations. 

[These Indians are of a moderate stature, and 
of a lighter complexion than their more northern 
neighbours, who are not, however, so dark as the 
African negroes underthesame degree of latitude. 
The Topinambis resemble them in their flat 
noses, which being esteemed a beauty, are pro 
duced by art, during infancy. The hair of their 
head, which is black, is long and lank : but, like 
the Tapuyers, they have no hair on their faces or 
any part of the body.] 

ToriNAMBHs, one of the islands of the river 
Maranon, inhabited by the nation of Indians of 
the same name. It is one of the largest of those 
islands, being of 60 leagues in length, with a very 
fertile and agreeable territory. 

TOPLIQUILLOS, a river of the province and 
alcaldia mayor of Tabasco in Ni eva Espana; 
it enters the N. Sea in the Bay of Mexico, be 
tween the rivers Tonaia and Santa Ana. 

TOPO, a settlement of the jurisdiction of 
Muzo, in the province and corregimiento of Tunja 
in the new kingdom of Granada. It is celebrated 
for there having been found in it a miraculous 
image of our Lady of Los Dolores, which was 
afterwards carried with great indefatigability by 
a certain priest to Santa Fe, to be placed in the 



592 



T O Q 



cathedral : it is there treated with singular de 
votion, and constantly resorted to by the faithful 
in their necessities. This settlement is annexed 
to the curacy of that of Itoco, and much re 
duced and poor. 

Toro, a river of the province and govern 
ment of Quixos and Macas in the kingdom of 
Quito, which runs 5. and enters by the . part 
into the Pastaga between those of Topillo and 
Verde. 

TOPOCALMA, a large abundant river of 
the kingdom of Chile, in the province and corrc 
gimiento of Santiago : it passes near this city, 
and disembogues itself into the Pacific near Val 
paraiso : in lat. 33 3V s. 

TOPSAN, a settlement of the province of 
Continent, one of those of New England, in the 
United States of America, on the coast near the 
river Amariscoggin. 

TOPSFIELD, a city of the county of Essex 
and province of Massachusetts, in the United 
States of America, in the n. part, pleasantly 
situate halfway between Reading and Rowley. 
fit is eight miles n\ of Ipswich, and 27 n. of 
Boston.] 

[TOPSHAM, a township of Vermont, in 
Orange County, ?. of Newbury, adjoining. It 
is watered by some branches of Wait s river, and 
contains 162 inhabitants.] 

[Topsn AM, a township of the district of Maine, 
in Lincoln County, 32 miles in circumference, 
and more than 25 miles is washed by water. It 
is bounded on the n. w. by Little River ; n. by 
Bowdoin, and Bowdoinham ; e. by Cathance and 
Merry Meeting Bay ; s. and s. w. by Amariscoggin 
River, which separates it from Brunswick in Cum 
berland County. The inhabitants amount to 826 
souls, and they live in such easy circumstances, 
that none have ever been so poor as to solicit 
help from the parish. It was incorporated in 
1764. A few English attempted to settle here in 
the end of the seventeenth or beginning of the 
eighteenth century. These were cut off by the 
natives. Some families ventured to settle in this 
hazardous situation in 1730 ; from which period, 
until the peace of 1763, the inhabitants never 
felt wholly secure from the natives. It is 25 
miles s. by w. of Hallowell.] 

TOQLJA, a settlement of Indians of the pro 
vince and colony of N. Carolina, on the shore of 
the river Tennessee. 

TOQUELLA, a settlement of the province 
and corrcgimiento of Arica in Peru, annexed to 
the curacy of Taena. 

TOQUEPANI, a settlement of the province 



T O R 

and corrcgimiento of Paucarcolla in Peru ; an 
nexed to the curacy of the settlement of Huan- 
cane. 

TOQUERAGUA, a river of the province and 
government of San Juan de los Llanos in the 
new kingdom of Granada : it runs s. s. e. and 
enters the Casanare at the settlement of San 
Ignacio. 

TORACARI, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Chayanta or Charcas in Peru, 
annexed to the curacy of the settlement of So- 
raya. 

TORATA, a settlement of the province and 
corrcgimiento of Moquehua in Peru, in which is 
venerated an image of the blessed Virgin, with 
the dedicatory title of La Purificacion, to whose 
festival the people flock in great numbers from 
the neighbouring provinces. 

TORAYA, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Aimaraes in Peru, annexed to 
the curacy of the settlement of Soraya. 

[TORBAY. a town on the e. coast of Nova 
Scotia ; 22 miles s. w. of Roaring Bull Island, 
and 100 . e. of Halifax.] 

TORBAY, on the coast of the island of New 
foundland, between the points Red and Cocus. 

[TORBEK, a village on the 5. side of the s. 
peninsula of the island of St. Domingo ; three 
leagues n. w. of Avache Island.] 

TORCHES, a smart river of the province and 
government of Guayana, or New Andalucia, in 
the part possessed by the Portuguese, between 
the Macuacuari and the settlement of Vatapi. It 
disembogues itself into the sea. 

TORDILLO, BOSQUE DE, a wood of the pro 
vince and government of Buenos Ayres, on the 
coast lying between the river La Plata and the 
Strait of Magellan. 

TOREPI. See CARAPO. 

TORIN, a settlement of Indians of the pro 
vince of Ostimuri in Nueva Espafia, situate on 
the shore of the river Hiaqui, between the settle 
ments of Bican and Bacun. 

TORIS, a settlement of the missions held by 
the Jesuits in the province and government of 
Cinaloa and kingdom of Nueva Espana. 

TORLICENTA, a small river of the province 
and colony of S. Carolina, which runs s. c. and 
enters the Neus between the rivers Coneghta 
and Little. 

[TORMENTIN Cape, on the w. side of the 
Straits of Northumberland, or Sound, between 
the island of St. John s and the e. coast of Nova 
Scotia, is the n. point of the entrance to Bay 
Vert. It is due w. from Governor s Island, on 



T O R 



T O R 



593 



the s. e. coast of the island of St. John s. In 
some maps this point is called Cape Storm.] 

TORNACUSTLA, a settlement of the juris 
diction and alcaldia mayor of Octupan in Nueva 
Espana. 

TORNO, an arm of the river Orinoco in the 
new kingdom of Granada, one of the channels 
formed by its mouths to enter the sea. It has 
this name, since, although it runs from s. to n. it 
goes in a serpentine course, or with many tornos 
or windings. 

TORO, SAN ANTONIO DEL, a city of the pro 
vince and government of Cartagena in the new 
kingdom of Granada. It is also known by the 
name of Puebla de los Brazos (town of the arms), 
from the circumstance of four rivers uniting 
opposite it. It was founded in 1553, is of a hot 
climate, and very fertile soil, but poor, small, 
and badly built. 

TORO, a settlement of the province and cor 
regimiento of Chumbivilcas in Peru, which was 
thoroughly destroyed in the year 1739, when the 
curate and an Indian were the only people who 
escaped the universal ruin. These two returned 
the following day to search for the blessed sacra 
ment, and found under the altar four copper 
idols with human faces, the pix in the church 
yard, and on a stone, close by it, a solid statue 
of Santa Catalina, the patroness of the place. 

TORO, another, of the province and corregi- 
miento of Maule in the kingdom of Chile, situate 
at the source of the river Rapel. 

TORO, another, of the missions that were held 
by the Jesuits in the province and government of 
Cinaloa and kingdom of Nueva Espana. 

TORO, a very large and capacious bay on the 
coast of the N. Sea, of the province and govern 
ment of Veragua in the kingdom of Tierra 
Firme, called Las Bocas del Toro (the mouths 
of the bull). It was discovered by Admiral 
Christopher Columbus in his fourth voyage ; is 
useless to vessels, on account of its entrance 
being surrounded by a line of islets, so as to 
leave only some narrow channels, and the same 
difficulties occurring even in the widest part of 
its interior. It is to the &amp;. of the bay of Almi- 
rante. 

TORO A, a settlement of the province and go 
vernment of Santa Marta in the new kingdom 
of Granada, of the division and district of the 
Rio del Hacha, situate in the road leading to the 
capital. 

TOROCOS, SANTIAGO DE, a settlement of 
the province and government of Jaen de Braca- 
moros in the kingdom of Quito. 

VOL. IV. 



TORONDI, a river of the province and go 
vernment of Maracaibo, which rises near the 
settlement of Timotes, between Truxillo and 
Merida, runs n. and afterwards turning to the 
w. enters by the e. into the lake Maracaibo. 

TORONDI, a lake of the province and govern 
ment of the Iroques Indians in Canada, formed 
by an arm of the lake Huron, and having an out 
let into lake Ontario. 

TORONDI, a fort of the French in the same 
county as the former lake, on the shore of the 
river Ontario. 

[TORONTO, a British settlement on the n.w. 
bank of lake Ontario, 38 miles n. by w. of fort 
Niagara.] 

TOROPALCA, a settlement of the province 
and corregimiento of Porco in Peru, in the dis 
trict of which is the valley of Cinti, irrigated 
by the river Grande, so that it is rendered very 
fertile in vines of the best quality. It is 19 
leagues from Potosi. 

TOROPI, a small river of the province and 
republic of San Pablo in Brazil, which rises in the 
mountains of the Guaranies Indians, runs s. w. 
and enters the Ibicui. 

TORQUILLA, a river of the province and 
government of Darien and kingdom of Tierra 
Firme, which rises in the mountains of the e. 
coast, runs to this rhumb, and enters the Tarena 
just before the latter disembogues into the sea. 

TORRE, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Pilaya and Pashpaya in Peru, 
annexed to the curacy of the settlement of Pas- 
collo. 

TORRES, a settlement of the province and 
captainship of Rey in Brazil, situate at the point 
of Itapeba. 

TORRES, a river of the province of Gaira, in 
the government of Paraguay, which runs w. and 
enters the Parana : according to the accounts of 
the Jesuits it is the true Itazu. 

TORRIBIO, a settlement of the province and 
government of Popayan in the new kingdom of 
Granada. 

[TORRINGTON, or BEDFORD S BAY, on 
the s. coast of Nova Scotia, and its entrance is 
at America Point, about three mile*? n. of the 
town of Halifax. It has from 10 to 13 fathoms 
at its mouth : but the bay is almost circular, and 
has from 14 to 50 fathoms water in it. A pro 
digious sea sets into it in winter.] 

[TORRINGTON, a township of Connecticut, in 
Litchfield County, eight miles n. of Litchfield.] 

[TORTOISES, the River of, lies 10 miles 
above a lake 20 miles long, and eight or ten 
4 G 



504 



TOR 



TOR 



broad, which is formed by the Mississippi in 
Louisiana and Florida. It is a large fine river, 
which runs into the country a good way to the 
n. e. and is navigable 40 miles by the largest 
boats.] 

TORTOLA, an island of the N. Sea, the 
principal of the Virgins, near that of Puerto 
Rico, and on which are dependent those of Jost 
Van Dyckes, Little Van Dyckes, Iguana, Vaca, 
and Tatatch. This, of which we treat, is the 
principal, arid almost the only one which carries 
on any commerce. It is \\\ miles long, and 31 
wide, and suffers much from want of water, being 
also of an unhealthy climate. It is, however, 



cultivated, and produces considerable crops of 
fine cotton, much esteemed in the manufactories. 
[Tortola formerly belonged to the Dutch, who 
built a strong fort, from which they were ex 
pelled by the English in 1666. It has an har 
bour at its e. end, and in 1802 it was made a free 
port. 

By return to House of Commons, 1806, the 
hogsheads of sugar of 13 cwt. exported from thi 1 - 
island were as follow : 

In 1789 - - - 6100 
1799 - - - 3105 
1805 - - - 2500 



The official value of its Imports and Exports was, in 

Imports. Exports. 

1809 .33,399 . .52,009 

1810 .61,520 . 6,612 

And the quantities of the principal articles imported into Great Britain were, in 



Coffee. 


Sugar. 


Rum. 


Cotton Wool. 


British Plant. 


Foreign Plant. 


British Plant. 


Foreign Plant. 






Cwt. 


Cwt. 


Cwt. 


Cwt. 


Gallons. 


Ibs. 


1809, 
1810, 9 


1,138 
674 


9,257 
31,562 


3,438 
2,438 


16,852 
7,711 


158,167 
250,797 



By report of the privy council in 1788, and by a 
subsequent estimate, the Population of Tortola 
amounted to 





Whites. 


People of 
Colour. 


Slaves. 


In 1787 


1200 


180 


9000 


1805 


1300 


220 


9000 



The Import of Slaves, by the above report, at 
a medium of four years, and by a return to 
House of Commons in 1805, at a medium of two 
years, to 1803, was 



Average of 


Imports. 


Re-exports. 


Retained. 


4 years to 1787 


120 


__ 


120 


2 years to 1803 


438 


259 


179 



Tortola lies in lat. 18 27 w. long. 64 40 a?.] 



TORTOLA, a small isle of the S. Sea, in the 
Bay of Panama, of the province and kingdom of 
Tierra Firme. It is of a round figure, and de 
sert, lying opposite the point of Palo Seco, at 
about 100 toises distance. 

TORTS, a small river of the province and 
colony of Virginia, which runs w. w. and enters 
the Ohio between the Conhaway and the Souffles. 

TORTUE, a river of Canada, which runs s. 
in the territory and country of the Messeguages 
Indians, and enters the lake Huron by the w. 
side. 

TORTUGAS, an island of the N. Sea, one 
of the small Antilles, near the w. coast of St. 
Domingo, formerly the asylum of the buccaniers 
or pirates, opposite the Cape S. Nicholas, 70 
miles w. of Little Gonave, and 65 e. of the island 
of Cuba. It is surrounded by rocks on the . 
and *?. side, and the bottom on the e. is not only 
difficult to find, but dangerous through shoals of 
rock and sands, a circumstance which probably 
first led the said pirates to seek the island as a 
place of refuge. Notwithstanding this, their 
establishments were taken and destroyed by the 
Spaniards in 1638 ; but they afterwards returned 



TOR 

to recover it, and established themselves again 
under Captain Wallis, an Englishman. The 
latter was obliged shortly to abandon it to the 
French, and these were persecuted for many 
years by the Spaniards, till at last they were 
obliged to retreat. So unremitting, however, 
did they continue in their pretensions to recover 
it, that they made one last effort, and, with the 
assistance of the inhabitants of the other islands, 
and being joined by the pirates of all nations, 
they succeeded in making a settlement in Tor- 
tuga, and began to erect some towns and forts 
on the coast to the n. of St. Domingo. [This last 
possession by the French was effected in 1676.] 
Tortuga is 60 miles in circumference, and only 
five miles and a half distant from St. Domingo. 
It has many shoals, especially towards the n. but 
is very fertile and abundant in tobacco, palms, 
sandal wood, guayacan, resin, China root, aloes, 
sugar, indigo, cotton, ginger, oranges, lemons, 
apricots, bananas, and many-other fruits peculiar 
to the W. Indies, such as certain pease, yucas^ 
&amp;c. ; but it is very scarce of water, so that the 
inhabitants are obliged to catch the rain-water in 
cisterns. It abounds greatly in wild boars, the 
hunting of which is prohibited, as they serve for 
provision in case of invasion, and when the 

Eeople are obliged to retreat to the mountains. 
11 these are found parrots, starlings, and other 
birds, and some wild pigeons, which, in the pro 
per season, are very good ; but the rest of the 
year are flabby and bitter. The land-snails and 
sea-crabs, which abound greatly, cause vertigoes 
and shortness of sight. 

The n. part of this island is desert, through 
the unhealthy air that prevails there, and through 
the coast being rough and difficult of access ; but 
the 5. part is well inhabited, the soundings on 
this part of the coast are good, and fish is caught 
in great quantities, and of all sorts. It has only 
one convenient port, the entrance of which forms 
two channels : the same is fit for large vessels, 
and lies at the end of a deep bay called Basse 
Terre. The capital, which is the city of Cayona, 
is defended by fort D Ogeron, a name it took 
from the governor by whose orders it was built, 
and who was the founder of this colony. Tor 
tuga is in lat. 20 4 n. and long. 72 44 w. 

TORTUGA, another island, also in the N. Sea; 
about 48 miles to the w. of Margarita, with the 
surname of Sal, to distinguish it from the former. 
It is moderately large, about 30 miles in circum 
ference, and abounds greatly in salt, but is other 
wise desert and uncultivated. Its e. extremity is 
full of rough and barren rocks standing out of 



595 



the sea : on the s. e. is a road of some advantage 
to vessels, and much frequented by merchant 
men in time of peace, in the months of May and 
August, when they come to take in cargoes of 
salt. It has in it a large pool of salt-water at 
200 paces from the sea, and on the s. a small 
port, and some fresh water, although very little. 
In this part the island is well covered with trees, 
but to the e. it is naked, and without any herbage^ 
notwithstanding it has some goats, and many 
tortoises, which come upon the strand to deposit 
their eggs. [This island is uninhabited, and lies 
in lat. 10 53 n. long. 65 18 w. It is about 95 
miles e. n. e. from the port of Guayra on the 
main. There are many islands of this name in 
on the n. coast of S. America.] 

TORTUGA, another small island of the N. Sea, 
near the coast of the province and government 
of Honduras, on the w. side of Cape Camaron. 

TORTUGA, another, a small island on the coast 
of the province and government of Cartagena, 
in the new kingdom of Granada, on the side of 
the entrance of the mouth of the river San Juan. 
TORTUGA, another, a small island of the Gulf 
of California, or Mar Roxo de Cortes, lying in 
the centre of the same, at an equal distance from 
the coast of California and Nueva Espaiia. 

TORTUGA, a port, with the surname De los 
Chisnos, on the coast of the province and corre- 
gimiento of Santa in Peru. 

[TORTUGAS, DRY, shoals to the ro. a little 
s. from Cape Florida, or the s. point of Florida, 
in S. America. They are 134 leagues from the 
bar of Pensacola, and in lat. 2431 / w. and long. 
82 56 ZL\ They consist of 10 small islands or 
keys, and extend e. n. e. and w. s. w. 16 or 17 
miles ; most of them are covered with bushes, 
and may be seen at the distance of four leagues. 
The s. w. key is one of the smallest, but the most 
material to be known, is one of the easternmost. 
From the s. K. part of this key, a reef of coral 
rocks extends about a quarter of a mile ; the 
water upon it is visibly discoloured.] 

[TORTUGAS Harbour, TURTLE S Harbour, or 
BARRACO DE TORTUGAS, on the coast of Brazil, 
in S. America, is 60 leagues at e. s. e. from the 
point or cape of Arbrasec, or Des Arbres Sec, 
and the shore is flat all the way from the Gulf of 
Maranhao. 

[TORTUGAS Point, on the coast of Chile, and 
in the S. Pacific Ocean, is the s. point of the port 
of Coquimbo, and seven or eight leagues from 
the Pajaros Islands. Tortugas road is round 
the point of the same name, where ships may 
ride in from six to ten fathoms, over a bottom of 



596 



TOT 



black sand, near a rock called the Tortugas. 
The road is well sheltered, but will not contain 
above 20 or 30 ships safely. Ships not more 
than 200 tons burden may careen on the Tortugas 
rock.l 

TORTUGUITAS, some small islands of the 
Gulf of California, or Mar Roxo de Cortes. 
They are four, situate, one at the entrance of the 
Bay of Concepcion, and the rest within the 



same. 



TORTUI, a small river of the province and 
colony of N. Carolina, which runs n. w. and en 
ters the river Powells. 

TOSAGUA, a small but abundant river of the 
province of Cara, the which is united to the pro 
vince of E.smeraldas in the kingdom of Quito. 
It rises in the serrania, runs s. s. w. and unites 
itself with the Chonos in lat. 3230 / s. 

TOSAGUA, a settlement of the same province 
and government ; situate on the shore of the for 
mer river, from which it takes its name. 

TOSIGUERACHI, a settlement of the mis 
sions that were held by the Jesuits in the pro 
vince of Taraumara and kingdom of Nueva Viz- 
caya. It is 24 leagues between the s. a&amp;gt;. and w. s. w. 
of the real of mines and town of San Felipe de 
Chiquagua. 

TOSO, a river of the province and govern 
ment of Esmeraldas in the kingdom of Quito. 
It flows down from the mountain of Canzacoto, 
runs n. w. and enters the Juli in lat. 13 s. 

[TOSQUIATOSSY Creek, a n. head-water of 
Allegheny River, whose mouth is e. of Squeaughta 
Creek, and 17 miles n. w. of the Ichua Town ; 
which see.] 

TOSTA, a river of the province and govern 
ment of Nicaragua, in the kingdom of Guate 
mala, which runs s. s. w. and enters the sea at 
Port Posesion. 

TOSTOS, a settlement of the province and 
government of Maracaibo in the new kingdom 
of Granada; situate to the s. of the city of 
Truxillo. 

TOTA, a settlement of the province and cor- 
regimiento of Tunja in the kingdom of Granada. 
It is of a very cold temperature, but has large 
breeds of neat cattle and sheep, of the hides and 
wool of which they make many fabrics, espe 
cially coarse sackcloth, with which they supply 
the whole kingdom, as also good coarse woollens. 
It contains more than 300 housekeepers and 200 
Indians, and is eight leagues between n. and n. e. 
of Tunja. 

TOTA, a lake of the same province and king 
dom, on the top of a mountain desert : it is six 



TOT 

leagues in circumference, and of a nearly circular 
figure : its waters, which, although of a green 
cast, are clear, are as much affected by the wind 
as those of the sea, and so cold, that no fish can 
live in them ; neither do its shores produce any 
thing. Its depth is so great, that its bottom 
could never yet be found. The natives of the 
province say, that there may be seen in it, from 
time to time, a large black fish, with a head re 
sembling that of a bull. 

TOTA, a settlement of the province and go 
vernment of Sonora, situate in the country of the 
Cocomaricopas Indians, on the shore of the great 
river Gila, opposite the mouth of the Salado. 

TOTAN, a settlement of the head settlement 
of the district and alcaldia mayor of La Barca, 
in the kingdom of Nueva Galicia. 

TOTAVIMANCHA, a small river of the pro 
vince and captainship of Pernambuco in Brazil. 
It rises near the coast, runs e. and enters the sea 
between the point of Las Piedras and the river 
Camarigibi. 

TOTEOLMALOYA, SAN MIGUEL DE, a set 
tlement of the head settlement of the district of 
Santa Ana and alcaldia mayor of Zultepec in 
Nueva Espana ; situate on the plain bordering 
on a ravine. It is of a hot temperature, and 
contains 128 families of Indians, who employ 
themselves in working in the mines of Zaqualpa; 
for its district yields no fruit, being very stony 
and barren. It is 14 leagues from the settlement 
of Huiztlan. 

TOTOLAPA, SAN MIGUEL DE, a settlement 
of the head settlement of the district and alcaldia 
mayor of Aguchetlan in Nueva Espana. It is of 
a hot and dry temperature, situate in an exten 
sive plain on the shore of the river Las Balzas, 
contains 138 families of Indians, and 25 of Mu- 
lattoes, who trade in cochineal, seeds, &amp;c. It is 
three leagues w. of its capital. 

TOTOLAPA, another settlement, with the de 
dicatory title of Santa Maria, of the alcaldia 
mayor of Nexapa of the same kingdom ; situate 
opposite two small hills. It contains 40 families 
of Indians, lies in the direct road of the traffic 
to the kingdom of Guatemala, and it affords re 
lays of horses and fresh provisions to travellers, 
at the same time that its inhabitants procure 
their livelihood by officiating as guides. 

TOTOLAPA, another, of the province and alcal 
dia mayor of Chiapa in the kingdom of Guata- 
mala. 

TOTOLMALOYAN, a settlement of the head 
settlement of the district of Ixtlahuaca and al 
caldia mayor of Colima in Nueva Espana. It is 



T O T 



TOT 



5,97 



very small and poor, containing- only 32 persons, 
who, at the proper season, mount guard as cen- 
tinels in the bay of Salvagua, to give notice of 
the approach off that coast of the galleon of 
Manilla bound to Acapulco. At a spot called 
Miraflores, close to the hill where the centinel 
is stationed, is a watch-house, where also some 
few Spaniards reside, with some Mustees^ Ne 
groes, and Mulattoes : 38 leagues w. of its ca 
pital. 

TOTOLTEPEC, SAN SIMON DE, a settle 
ment of the head settlement of the district of 
Escateopan and alcaldia mayor of Zaqualpa in 
Nueva Espana. It contains 233 families of In 
dians. 

TOTOLZINGO, a settlement of the alcaldia 
mayor of Teotihuacan in the same kingdom as 
the former, It contains 33 families of Indians, 
who live by the trade of making pulque drink : 
two leagues s. of its head settlement, which is 
Teqniszitlan. 

TOTOLZINTLA, a settlement of the head 
settlement of the district and alcaldia mayor of 
Tixtlan in the same kingdom. It contains 120 
families of Indians, and is situate in a very fertile 
glen on the shore of the large river Las Balzas, 
eight leagues from Apanco. 

^TOTOMACHAPA, SAN PEDRO DE, a settle 
ment of the head settlement of the district of 
Huitepec and alcald ia mayor of Ixquintepec in 
the same kingdom. It contains 44 families of 
Indians, including the wards of its district : six 
leagues to the e. with an inclination to the s. of 
its capital. 

TOTOMEHUACAN, a head settlement of 
the district of the alcald ia mayor of La Puebla 
de los Angeles in the same kingdom. It con 
tains, besides the parish church, a convent of the 
religious of S; Francis, 460 families of Indians, 
and 60 of Spaniards, Mustees, and Mulattoes, 
who trade by supplying its capital with seeds, 
fruit, woods, cotton, and other effects. It lies 
one league and a half to the s. of its capital. 

TOTOMIXTLAHUACA, a settlement of the 
head settlement of the district of Clapan and 
alcaldia mayor of Tlapa in the same kingdom. 
It contains 39 families of Indians, and four of 
Mustees, who live by cultivating seeds and 
fruits : one league a?, of its head settlement. 

TOTOMOCHOAPA, a settlement of the 
same alcaldia mayor and kingdom as the former : 
it contains 31 families of Indians, and lies a 
little more than one league to the e, of its ca 
pital. 



TOTONICAPAN, a jurisdiction and alcaldia 
mayor of the kingdom of Guatemala. 

TOTONTEPEC, a head settlement of the 
district of the alcaldia mayor of Villalta in the 
same kingdom : it is of a cold temperature, con 
tains 29 families of Indians, and is six leagues e. 
of its capital. 

TOTORA, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Carangas in Peru, and of the 
archbishopric of Charcas. 

TOTORA, another, in the province and corregi 
miento of Cochabamba in the same kingdom, an 
nexed to the curacy of the capital. 

TOTORA, another, of the province and corre 
gimiento of Chumbivilcas in the same kingdom ; 
annexed to the curacy of the settlement of Li- 
bitaca. 

TOTORA, another, of the province and corregi 
miento of Aimaraes in the same kingdom ; an 
nexed to the curacy of the settlement of Oro- 
pesa. 

TOTORA, another, of the province and govern 
ment of Mizque,. in the same kingdom. 

TOTORAL, a settlement of the province and 
government of Tucuman in Peru, of the district 
and jurisdiction of the city of Cordoba ; situate 
on the shore of the lake of Los Porongos. 

TOTORAL, a lake of the llano or plain of Ru- 
mipampa, towards Cotocollao, in the kingdom of 
Quito, formed by the waters flowing down from 
the mountain of iPichinche, and which stagnating 
produce large beds of rushes. On the left side 
of the lake is a small rock, called Batan ; it en 
ters the river Machangara below the settlement 
Guapulo : in it are found a quantity of ducks and 
other water-fowl. The Indians of the neigh 
bouring settlements make mats of the rushes, 
and carry them for sale to Quito. 

TOTORAL, an island near the coast of the pro 
vince and corregimiento of Coquimbo in the 
kingdom of Chile, on the side of port Yerba- 
buena. 

TOTORAL, a port on the coast of the province 
and corregimiento of Copiapo, and of the same 
kingdom as the former island. 

TOTORALILLO, a settlement of .the same 
province and kingdom as the former port, near 
the coast and on the shore of a small river that 
enters the sea. In its vicinity are some moun 
tains abounding in mines and Turkey-stones. 

TOTORHUAILAS, a settlement of the pro 
vince and corregimiento of Cochabamba in Peru, 
annexed to the curacy of the settlement of Pal 
caro* 



TOTORO, a settlement of the province and 
government of Popayan in the new kingdom of 
Granada. 

TOTOS, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Vilcas Huaman in Peru. 

TOTOTEPEC, a settlement of the head set 
tlement of the district of San Luis, of the coast 
and alcaldia mayor of Tlapa in Nucva Espaiia. 
It is of a mild temperature, and contains 204 fa 
milies of Indians, who gain their livelihood by 
making cotton fabrics : three leagues s. of its 
capital. 

[TOTOWA, a place or village at the Great 
Falls in Passaik river, New Jersey.] 

[TOTTERY, a river which empties through 
the s. e. bank of the Ohio, and is navigable with 
batteaux to the Ouasiato Mountains. It is a 
long river, and has few branches, and interlocks 
with Red Creek, or Clinche s river, a branch of 
the Tennessee. It has below the mountains, 
especially for 15 miles from its mouth, very good 
landj 

TOTULA, a settlement of the head settle 
ment of the district of Huatuzco and alcaldia 
mayor of Cordoba in Nueva Espaiia. It con 
tains 54 families of Indians, and is 13 leagues 
n. e. of its capital. 

TOVAS, a barbarous nation of Indians of the 
province and government of Tucuman,30 leagues 
distant from the city of Salta. It was first re 
duced to the faith and a civilized mode of life, and 
to settlements, by the father Pedro Andres, of 
the abolished order of the Jesuits. These In 
dians were very warlike, and in former times 
committed great depredations in the province. 

TOUCHE, a small river of the island of Mar 
tinique, which runs w. and enters the sea in the 
bay of its name. 

TOUCHE, the above bay, is on the w. coast be 
tween that of Co3ur and the settlement of Mou- 
illage. 

TOULIGET, a small island of the N. Sea, 
situate near the e. coast of the island Newfound 
land, between the same and the island of Pingovin. 
[TOULON, a township of New York, in 
Ontario County. In 1796, 93 of the inhabitants 
were electors.] 

TOUR, a port of Nova Scotia, or Acadia, in 
N.America. 

TOURMENTE Cape, on the n. coast of the 
river St. Lawrence in Canada. 

TOURMENTIN Cape, on the e. coast of 
Nova Scotia, or Acadia, and in the strait formed 
by the island of St. John. 



T R A 

[TOWERHILL, a village in the township of 
S. Kingstown, Rhode Island, where a post-office 
is kept. It is 10 miles w. of Newport.] 

[TOWNSHEND, a township of Windham 
County, Vermont, w. of Westminster and Put 
ney, containing 676 inhabitants.] 

[TOWNSHEND, a township of Middlesex Coun 
ty, Massachusetts, containing 993 inhabitants. 
It was incorporated in 1732, and lies 38 miles 
n. w. of Boston.] 

[TOWNSHEND, a harbour on the coast of the 
district of Maine, where is a bold harbour, having 
nine fathoms water, sheltered from all winds. 
High water, at full and change, 45 minutes after 
10 o clock.] 

TOXO, a settlement of the province and cor 
regimiento of Chichas and Tarija in Peru, an 
nexed to the curacy of the settlement of Talina. 
In its vicinity, towards the n. are the ruins of the 
ancient town of Tarija. 

TOXTEPEC, SANTA MARIA DE, a head set 
tlement of the district of the alcaldia mayor of 
Tecali in Nueva Espaiia, containing 135 families 
of Indians. 

TOYAGUA, a head settlement of the district 
and alcaldia mayor of Cuquio in Nueva Espana, 
situate two leagues to the e. of its capital. 

TOZIN, a settlement of the head settlement 
of the district of Tuzcacuezco and alcaldia mayor 
of Amola, or Amula, in the same kingdom as the 
former, containing 10 families of Indians, who 
employ themselves in the cultivation of seeds 
and fruits, and in breeding cattle : nine leagues 
w. of its head settlement. 

TRACADI, a small river of Nova Scotia, 
which runs e. and enters the sea in the Gulf of 
St. Lawrence, opposite the island Miscon, be 
tween the rivers Poquemouche and Taboquin- 
quet. 

[TRACADUCHE, now Carleton, on the n. 
side of Chaleur Bay, is about five leagues from 
the great river Casquipibiac in a s. w. direction, 
and is a place of considerable trade in cod-fish, 
&amp;c. Between the township and the river Cas 
quipibiac, is the small village of Maria.] 

TRAM AN DAI, a settlement of the province 
and captainship of Rey in Brazil, on the coast 
and at the point of Itapeba. 

TRANCAS, SAN JOAQUIN DE LOS, a settle 
ment of the province and government of Tucu- 
man in Peru, on the shore of a stream, 21 leagues 
from the capital, and having also the title of 
Pozo del Pescado. 

[TRANQUILLITY, a place in Sussex 



T R E 

County, New Jersey, eight miles s. of New- 
town. J 

[TRAP, a village in Talbot County, Mary 
land, about six miles s. e. of Oxford.] 

[TRAP, The, a village of Pennsylvania, in 
Montgomery County, having about a dozen 
houses, and a German, Lutheran, and Calvinist 
church united. It is nine miles from Morris- 
town, 11 from Pottsgrove, and 26 from Phila 
delphia.] 

[TRAP, a village of Maryland in Somerset 
County, situate at the head of Wicomico Creek, 
a branch of the river Wicomico, seven miles s. w. 
of Salisbury, and six n. of Princess Ann.] 

[TRAPt OWN, a village of Maryland, in 
Frederick County, situate on Cotoctin Creek, 
between the South and Cotoctin Mountains, and 
seven miles s. ZD. of Fredericktown.] 

TRASLASIERRA, a settlement of the pro 
vince and goverment of Tucuman in Peru, in 
the district and jurisdiction of the city of Cor 
doba 

[TRAVERSE Bay, GREAT, lies on the n. e. 
corner of Lake Michigan : it has a narrow en 
trance, and sets up into the land s. e. and receives 
Traverse river from the e.] 

TRAVERSE Point, on the e. coast of the Lake 
Ontario in Canada. 

TRAVESIA, a river of the province and go 
vernment of Moxos in the kingdom of Quito. 
It is an arm of the Cavieres, which is first called 
San Xavier, and then crossing and communi 
cating itself with the Mato, runs n. with an in 
clination to n. e. 

[TREADHAVEN Creek, a small branch of 
Choptank river.] 

[TREASURY Islands, form a part of Mr. 
Shortland s New Georgia (Surville s Archipelago 
of the Arsacides), lying in lat. 5 50 s. and long. 
155 15 e. from Greenwich. See ARSACIDES, 
&amp;e.j 

TREBLE River. [See TROIS RIVIERES.] 

[TRECOTHIC, a township in Grafton County, 
New Hampshire, incorporated in 1769.] 

TREMBADE, an island of the N. Sea, near 
the coast of Nova Scotia, situate to the s. e. of 
Escatari. It is four cables length from e. to E&amp;gt;. 
and forms a small port where two vessels of 100 
tons or more may lie ; but the entrance is dan 
gerous. 7.! it are some other creeks, in which 
some fishermen have established themselves; but 
who can, at certain seasons, with difficulty find 
shelter for their barks. 

TREMUDA, SIERRAS, some very lofty and 



T R E 



599 



steep mountains of the province and government 
of Honduras in the kingdom of Guatemala. 

TREMUDA, a river of the same province and 
kingdom, which runs n. and enters the sea op 
posite the island of Roatan. 

[TRENCHE MONT River, a small river of 
the island of St. John s, in the Gulf of St. Law 
rence : it empties into the sea three or four 
leagues to the w. of the e. extremity of the 
island.] 

TRENCHES, a small island near the coast of 
the province and colony of Georgia ; one of those 
called the Georgian, at the mouth of Port Royal. 

TRENT, a small river of the province and 
colony of S. Carolina, which runs s. and enters 
the Neus, near where this disembogues itself 
into the sea. [It is navigable for sea vessels, 
12 miles above the town, and for boats 20. See 
NEUS.] 

TRENTE-MILES, a small river of the same 
province and government as the former, which 
runs s. e. and afterwards changes its name to the 
Congari. 

[TRENTON, is one of the largest towns in 
New Jersey, and the metropolis of the state : 
situate in Hunterdon County, on the c. side of 
Delaware river, opposite the Falls, and nearly 
in the centre of the state from n. to s. The river 
is not navigable above these Falls, except for 
boats, which will carry from 500 to 700 bushels 
of wheat. This town, with Lamberton, which 
joins it on the 5. contains between 200 and 300 
houses, and about 2000 inhabitants. Here the 
legislature statedly meets, the supreme court sits, 
and most of the public offices are kept. The 
inhabitants have lately erected a handsome court 
house, 100 feet by 30, with a semi-hexagon at 
each end, over which is a balustrade. Here are 
also a church for Episcopalians, one for Presby 
terians, one for Methodists, and a Quaker meet 
ing-house. In the neighbourhood of this plea 
sant town are a great many gentlemen s seats, 
finely situate on the banks of the Delaware, and 
ornamented with taste and elegance. Here 
is a flourishing academy. It is 10 miles s. w. of 
Princeton, 24 from Brunswick, and 34 n. e. of 
Philadelphia. In lat. 40 W n. long. 74 49 a&amp;gt;.] 

[TRENTON, a small post-town of the district 
of Maine, Hancock County, nine miles w. by s. 
of Sullivan, 17 n. e. by e. of Penobscot. This 
town is near Desert Island, and in a part of it, 
called the Narrows, were about 40 families in 
1796.] 

[TRENTON, the chief town of Jones s County, 



600 



T R I 



N. Carolina, situate on the s. side of Trent ri 
ver. It contains but few houses besides the 
court-house and gaol.] 

[TREPASSI Bay, or TRESPASSES Bay, and 
Harbour, on the s. side of Newfoundland island, 
near the s. e. part, and about 21 miles to the 
n. w. of Cape Race, the s. e. point of the island. 
The harbour is large, well secured, and the 
ground good to anchor in.] 

[TRES-MONTES, a peninsula of the w. coast 
of S. America, in the kingdom of Chile ; joined 
to the main land by the narrow isthmus of Ofqui ; 
situate between the lat. of 45 40 and 47 s.] 

[TRES-MONTES, a cape of the above peninsula, 
which forms its most s. extremity : lat. 47 s.] 

TRES PIES, small islands of the S. Sea; thus 
called from their number (Three). They are 
barren and desert, abounding only in marine 
wolves : in lat. 20 47 s. 

TRES-ISLAS, other small islands of the At 
lantic, near the coast of the Caribes Indians, and 
opposite the entrance of the river Essequibo. 
They serve to cover the bay, for the defence of 
which the Dutch have built a fort, and where 
they have some small settlements : in about lat. 
6 50 n. 

TREVAMAN, a settlement of the island of 
Barbadoes, in the district of the parish of St. 
John. 

TRIANA, SANTA CRUZ DE, a town and ca 
pital of the province and corregimienlo of lian- 
cagua in the kingdom of Chile, founded in 1740 
by Don Joseph Manso de Velasco, Count of Su- 
perunda, and formerly president of that king 
dom. It has a parish church, two chapels of 
case, an hospital of the religious of S. trancis, 
and another of La Merced ; 53 miles s. of the 
city of Santiago, in lat. 34 19 s. 

TRIANGULO, a small island of the N. Sea, 
one of the Lucayas, of a triangular figure. 

TRIANGLE Shoals lie to the w. of the penin 
sula of Yucatan, near the e. shore of the Bay of 
Campechy, nearly w. of Cape Condecedo. Lat. 
175 / w. long. 111 59 x a).] 

TRIBUTARIOS, Los, an isle of the N. Sea, 
situate near the n. coast of Cuba. 

TRIBUTOS, a settlement of the province and 
captainship of San Vicente in Brazil, near the 
river Uruguay. 

([TRIESTE Gulf, in Caracas. See TRISTE.] 

[TRIESTE Island, a small island at the bottom 
of the Gulf of Campechy, w. of Port Royal 
Island, about three leagues from e. to w. The 
creek which separates it from Port Royal Island 



T R I 

is scarcely broad enough to admit a canoe. Good 
fresh water will be got by digging- five or six feet 
deep in the salt sand; at a less depth it is 
brackish and salt, and at a greater depth than six 
feet it is salt again.] 

TRINIDAD, an island of the N. Sea, opposite 
the coast of Tierra Firme, 10 leagues distant 
from it and from the mouths of the Toro and 
the river Orinoco; discovered by Admiral Co 
lumbus in his fourth voyage, in the year 1498, 
and conquered by Governor Antonio Berrio in 
1592. Some make it 50 leagues long from e. to 
w. and 30 wide from n. to s. following the chro- 
nologer Antonio de Herrera ; whilst others, with 
greater probability, agree with Gonzalo Fer 
nandez de Oviedo, who allow it to be only from 
25 to 30 : [but according to the latest surveys 
its longest lines are from Cape Galera on the 
n. e. to Cape Ycacos, or Icaqui, on the s. w. 79 
miles ; and from Cape Galeota on the s. e. to 
Cape Blanca on the n. 56 miles.] 

It is the largest, most fertile, and most beau 
tiful of all the Leeward Islands, and was thus 
compared by its discoverer to a paradise. It is 
full of forests of exquisite kinds of wood, such 
as cedars, walnuts, guayacanes^ and many others. 
It abounds also in palms, in cocos (which 
grow spontaneously), and, as its temperature is 
hot, it is found well adapted for the cultivation 
of the sugar-cane, which is one of its principal 
productions, yielding the greatest profit. Indigo 
grows on the sides of the roads naturally, and 
in the same abundance as briars in other parts. 
Here are vines yielding very good grapes, china 
oranges, lemons, and citrons, in such abundance 
as to be esteemed of little value. The crops of 
maize are so large, that quantities of this article 
are carried for sale to Margarita ; but the pro 
duction of the greatest value in this island is the 
cacao, which, from its fine quality, is every 
where in request, in preference to that of Ca 
racas ; and the crops were even bought up before 
they were gathered, so that the persons to whom 
they belonged refused to pay their tenths to the 
clergy, and strange to say, that, as it should 
seem, Heaven in chastisement of their covetous- 
ness, had entirely deprived them of this means of 
emolument, inasmuch as, since the year 1727, the 
whole of their crops have turned out fruitless 
and barren, with the exception of one that be 
longed to a certain person, by name Rabelo, 
who had continued to pay his tythes, and whose 
estate is the only one in which that production 
is now furnished. 



TRINIDAD. 



601 



The opinions of writers concerning the quality 
of the land of this island is very various. Walter 
Raleigh, the Englishman, who visited it in 1593, 
says, that the n. part is mountainous; but that 
the soil is well adapted to the cultivation of su 
gar-cane and tobacco. It abounds in wild hogs, 
in fish, birds, and animals ; and the Spaniards 
confessed to the said Raleigh, that there was 
some gold in the rivers. In the reign of Charles III. 
great pains were taken for increasing the culti 
vation, population, and commerce of this island, 
and there were planted in it coffee, cotton, and 
many other productions ; at the same time a 
regiment of infantry was established for its de 
fence in the capital, which is S. Joseph de 
Oruiia. 

[This island was, as Alcedo has observed, dis 
covered by Columbus, in his fourth voyage, hav 
ing entered, or rather been forced through the 
passage, called, at present, the Serpent s Mouth, 
Boca del Sierpe, by the force of the currents. It 
is said, that here he imagined all his labours 
were lost, or had ceased, and in consequence 
named the gulf he got into the Golfo Triste, as 
it was some time before he perceived the outlets 
now known by the name of Bocas del Drago, or 
Dragon s Mouths, and through which he sailed. 
It also received the name of Golfo de la Balena, 
from the vast quantities of whales which he then 
saw, and which now resort thither at certain pe 
riods of the year. 

The island is nearly of a square form, having 
two points stretching to the w. from its n. and s. 
corners. Point Icaque, which has been men 
tioned above, is about 10 4 / of n. lat. and is dis 
tant from the Macareo channel of the great ri 
ver Orinoco, between five and six leagues, but 
from the nearest land of the American main 10 
miles. 

The gulf is now known by that of the Gulf of 
Paria, from the opposite part of the continent, 
which runs to the w. and is perhaps one of the 
most beautiful sheets of water to be conceived, 
always placid, and having the best of anchorage 
throughout. The usual entrances for vessels 
coming from the n. e. or n. are by the Bocas del 
Drago. The first from the e. called the Boca 
de Monas, or Ape s Mouth, is only made use of by 
small vessels. The second, Boca de Huivos, 
Egg Mouth, or Parasol Mouth, so called from 
the resemblance which a tree on the rock on the 
n. side of it has to a parasol, is the common pas 
sage for square-rigged vessels, provided the wind 
is strong enough to insure it. The third, Boca 
de Navios, Ship s Mouth, is seldom used, except 

VOL. IV. 



in going out. The Boca Grande is the best and 
surest, as all danger is avoided from the caprice 
of the currents. The breadth of the channel 
here to Point Moro on the Main is between two 
and three leagues. La Isla del Pato, or Duck 
Island, is situated within the gulf, about two 
leagues to the s. e. of the Grand Bocas, and five 
miles from the Spanish main. Ships coming into 
the gulf are obliged, generally, to pass to s. of 
this island, the strength of the current, as also 
certain shoals which lie between it and the main, 
frequently making it dangerous to attempt to 
weather it. The Serpent s Mouth, Boca del 
Sierpe, on the s. side, can only be made use of, 
as a channel of entrance, by vessels from the c. 
running down the coast of Guayana, the streams 
of the river Orinoco invariably rushing into the 
gulf with such vast strength, as to render it next 
to impossibility for vessels to stem it, and conse 
quently to go out of the gulf by that channel. 

Properly speaking, there is no harbour within 
the gulf, except Chaguarama, and even it can 
only be classed as a roads ted, rendered disagree 
able by a tendency of the currents to pass through 
it ; yet the island of Chiccachiccanea, the west 
ernmost of the Bocas, furnishes one of the finest 
in the whole W. Indies, and where ships of the 
largest rate may anchor, and lie with safety close 
to the sides, and the importance of this station 
is such, as to controul and command the whole 
Gulf of Paria, the proper course being close to 
this island ; but the gulf itself is not to be sur 
passed for anchorage throughout, and free from 
danger. 

Trinidad is happily situated out of the parallel 
of hurricanes, which have never as yet shifted 
so far to the s.; although, on the 12th of August, 
1810, a very violent indication happened; it 
luckily lasted only a few hours, blowing only 
from the s. w. Shocks of earthquakes have been 
felt, but very slight, and not of such consequence 
as to cause alarm. 

The n. side of the island is a continued ridge 
of hilly mountains, which end at Toco, or Point 
Galera, and seem formerly to have been the 
continuation of the Parian Mountains, before the 
great convulsion, which, no doubt, has insulated 
Trinidad, and forced the passages of the Bocas. 
From the ridges or summits of the above hills, 
abundance of the finest and clear streams issue 
on both sides, and contribute on the s. side to 
form the river Caroni, which is considerable, and 
can be navigated by flats and canoes some dis 
tance into the interior of the island. Another 
ridge of hills commences at L Ebranche on the] 
4 H 



602 



TRINIDAD. 



[e. side, and run in a s. w. course, and are called 
the Monserrat Hills ; the. rivers or streams from 
which are distinguished by a yellow clayish co 
lour. A canal has been traced by order of go 
vernment by Lieutenant-Colonel Rutherford, then 
surveyor-general, from the mouth of the Caroni 
to L Ebranche, across the island, and passing 
through the valley which lies between these two 
ridges, which, if ever completed, must infallibly 
produce incalculable advantages to the colony, 
equally in a commercial as in an agricultural 
view, as its entrance on the e. side at once af 
fords the easiest and most direct communication 
with the river Orinoco, and is therefore peculi 
arly adapted for trade with Spanish Guayana, 
and even with Santa Fe, Quito, and Lima. 

The gulf and coasts of the island abound with 
fish of various kinds, and fisheries in time might 
be established sufficient to furnish salted food for 
the Negroes ; even at present more appears at 
the market than is required for the poorer 
classes of the free inhabitants. Oysters are to be 
had in abundance, particularly the class called 
mangroves, which fasten and breed on the 
branches of trees so named. Off Point Galera 
there are banks, which furnish them of a supe 
rior quality. Various sorts of shell-fish are also 
to be found, including the finest lobsters, crabs, 
&amp;c. as well as shrimps and prawns. The whole 
fishery might likewise be carried on with safety 
to great advantage at certain times of the year. 

The mornings and evenings in Trinidad are 
delightful, and the nights invariably cool and re 
freshing, although the heat is great during the 
day. Upon the whole, the island is undoubtedly 
full as healthy as any part of the new world, 
and many are the instances of people arriving at 
extreme old age. 

The population is of a very mixed nature, 
composed of no less than 17 different nations, 
according to the latest returns of the commissary 
of that department, and is enumerated at the 
bottom of this article. 

The introduction of the Chinese as colonists 
has been attempted without success, a conse 
quence which might have been foreseen, as they 
were not accompanied by women of their own na 
tion, a matter probably not easily to be accom 
plished : as it, was, however, it has been found 
that no class would intermix with them ; indeed, 
with respect to the coloured part of the commu 
nity, they would think themselves dishonoured, 
nay disgraced, by such a connection, as they re 
spect and regard their rank and situation with 
extreme jealousy. The event, of course, has 



been, that very few now exist in the island; 
some have died, but by far the greater proportion 
have returned to Europe with the intention of 
getting back to India, or their own country, their 
stipulation with government having provided for 
that object, should they not be satisfied with 
their situation in Trinidad. The few who re 
main are, in some measure, useful as pork 
butchers, or fishermen ; but for purposes of agri 
culture, none of them evinced the smallest dis 
position. 

It is scarcely to be doubted, but that Trinidad 
has already reached to its greatest state of po 
pulation, unless the distraction of its neighbour 
ing provinces on the continent may furnish yet 
some emigrant inhabitants. 

The island is divided into several districts un 
der the superintendance of commandants and 
ad joints, who preserve the peace by adjusting 
small differences or complaints, and, if necessary, 
refer them either to the governor or the tri 
bunals. 

Trinidad is capable of producing every article 
for the W. India market, equally, if not superior 
in many, to any other of the Windward Islands. 
Its sugar is excellent, and there is more land 
applicable for its culture than in Jamaica itself: 
at present, from the want of capital, the estates 
are small, and consequently not so productive as 
the larger properties of the same in the other 
islands. Cocoa, from not being subject to the 
demand of great capitals, bids fair to be the 
principal staple, and it is only lately that the 
advantages to be reaped from, provided any sale 
could be got for, it, have been noticed, and which 
will very soon be felt. The greatest part of the 
island is excellently adapted for this tree, and it 
has been found that it will bear its fruit, or pod, 
much sooner than generally was believed. Na 
ture has furnished for it a tree, called the bois 
immortelle, or, by the Spaniards, la madre del 
cacao, in English, mother of the cocoa : it is 
planted at equal distances amongst the cocoa, 
and in the driest weather collects the dews, 
moistens, shades, and nourishes it. The cocoa 
once bearing continues to do so for many 
years. Cofrce is excellent in its quality, but 
only planted on small properties, and does not 
add much to the revenue. The indigo is equal 
to the Guatemala plant, from which probably it 
was originally brought, as it is not aboriginal. 
The culture of it is by no means to be recom 
mended, from its poisonous and pestilential 
smell, without a process could be introduced of 
effecting its manufacture by means of boiling,] 



TRINIDAD. 



603 



[which is said to be the case in India and Africa. 
Tobacco grows here, and is of a superior quality, 
but it is only planted for immediate use by the 
inferior class of inhabitants : what is used by 
the estates for the Negroes is imported. The 
want of this article, at times, is of a most se 
rious nature, as the Negroes esteem it equally 
as necessary for their subsistence as food itself. 
The grape vines which have been brought from 
the s. of France, or from Spain, equal in flavour 
their parent stocks, and are delicious ; of course, 
at this period, they are only planted for the 
luxury of the table. All other fruits, or vege 
tables, congenial to the tropics, exist here, and 
even some European ones. 

In many quarters of the island large quarries 
of lime-stone, resembling, in some degree, mar 
ble, abound. Bricks and articles of pottery are 
likewise burnt, the clay having been found of a 
superior quality : of late tanneries have been 
established, and a substitute for hemp in making 
white rope has been discovered, and proved of 
use to the planters. 

The island is benefited with extensive wild 
savannahs, on which quantities of cattle, horses, 
and mules, are fed in common, but might be ex 
tended to exportation. The woods abound with 
game of different sorts, amongst which are deer, 
the lap or laba, the cuenca, a species of wild 
hog of exquisite flavour, and a variety of others 
of the same description. Among the feathered 
are the wild turkey, the ramier, the parrot, 
&amp;c. with which the markets are daily supplied. 

The Lake Brea, or of pitch, is a most won 
derful phenomenon ; it is of considerable size, 
about 150 acres, and capable of supplying all 
the naval dock-yards of England, if not Eu 
rope. The Spanish government had shortly 
previously to the British conquest of the island 
found out its value, and intended to have made 
use of no other for their naval yards ; even at 
this day, the neighbours carry off, whenever they 
can, quantities for pitching their vessels and 
launches. It is of a bituminous quality, and 
most efficacious against worms, which are so 
destructive to shipping upon all the coast of 
Guayana. Its process is very simple, requiring 
only tallow to melt and refine it, which can be 
had at a very small price from the main, where 
such innumerable flocks of cattle are bred, and 
daily slaughtered for their hides only ; and as to 
fuel, it is at hand, and enough for centuries to 
come. 

Abundance of the finest timber, woods for con 
struction, are to be found all over the island, 



many of which are fit for the royal navy ; the 
best of them are as follows : 



Quarters within the Gulf, 
including Cuva. 

Red cedar, 

Crapaud, 

Acajou, 

Walaker, 

Bois rouge, 

Angelin, 

Mangrove, 

White calabas, 

Bulata, 

Yook, 

Pouy, 

Quarters of Naparime 
and Oropuche. 

Red cedar, 

Acajou, 

Bois lizard, 

Gomier, 

Agouma piquanti, 

Noyer noir, 

Savonette grise, 

Courbary (locust) 

Pouy, 

Balata, 

Boi d orange, 

Roble, 

Angeline palmiste, 

Mora. 

Quarters of Brea, Cedre, 
Guapo, and Irvis. 

Acajou, 

And a variety of the palm class, from the impe 
rial cabbage-tree to the cavaat, the leaves of 
which furnish covering for the roofs of houses, 
and which will last for a length of time, and are 
exceedingly light. Many trees brought from 
India and Otaheite also flourish here. Cinnamon 
is becoming abundant, and is already sold in the 
markets, and the clove is likewise found to 
thrive. 

The capital of the island, properly speaking, 
is St. Joseph de Oruna ; for all public acts were 
dated from thence by the Spaniards. It is a 
small village of plastered houses. Above, on a 
small eminence, are the remains of an old Spa 
nish work, in which Sir Walter Raleigh sur 
prised the Spanish governor, having previously J 



Courbary, 
Balata, 
Mora, 
Cypre. 

Quarters of the South. 

Acajou, 

Courbary, 

Balata, 

Cypre, 

Agouma, 

Noyer, 

Pouy. 

Quarters of the East. 

Courbary, 

Acajou, 

Cedar, 

Balata, 

Agouma, 

Noyer, 

Pouy, 

Galba. 

Quarters of the North, 

Balata, 

Coubary, 

Agouma, 

Cedar, 

Pouy, 

(jromier. 



604 



TRINIDAD. 



[anchored his vessels at Point a Brea, and 
ascended the river Caroni, into which the branch 
of the St. Joseph s empties itself. Since the 
capture, Port of Spain has supplanted St. Jo 
seph s, and is the residence of the governor, and 
where all the courts are held. This tovvn was 
lately burnt down, but is fast rebuilding with 
stone, and bids fair to surpass all others in that 
part of the world in size and handsome build 
ings, being regularly laid out at right angles, 
and blessed with the best of water from nume 
rous wells : indeed, every valley throughout the 
island has a stream, larger or smaller, running 
through it. New towns have been laid out at St. 
Joseph s, St. Juan, St. Fernando, and Guayqua- 
yaro, but are yet in their infancy. 

The Spaniards and French enjoy the full ex 
tent of their religion, and have their churches 
accordingly, and their clergy are paid by go 
vernment. The few Indians that remained on 
the island had been distributed into several 
missions by the Spaniards, and supplied with 
resident priests : the chief of them is Arima, 
which is a charming and healthy village, nearly 
in the middle of the road which goes across the 
island. These people are a docile quiet race, 
and are useful in cutting down lands for clear 
ing ; so are the Peons, who are a mixture of 
them and Spaniards. It has been with some 
trouble that the use of the stiletto has been re 
stricted among them. The English chapel was 
burnt in the great fire ; but a new church is 
about to be erected. The Missionary Society 
have built one lately. 

It had been the intention of the Spanish go 
vernment to have constituted Chaguarama Har 
bour and the peninsula of Point Gourde their 
naval and military stations for the Windward 
Islands. The late Captain Columbine, of the 
navy, ascertained the uselessness of the first, 
and the incapability of the second, after a long- 
discussion and struggle, was fully proved, and 
the strong hold has been removed to the hill, 
now called Fort George, a position which bids 
fair to preserve the sovereignty of the island, 
having every necessary qualification for a gar 
rison. 

Trinidad, although discovered in 1498, was 
not taken possession of by the Spaniards till 
about 1592: its importance was not noticed until 
the peace of Paris, when every measure was 
adopted for its rapid settlement. Encourage 
ment was held out to all nations to colonize it 
(so unusual to the Spanish policy) : lands were 
liberally granted: utensils for agriculture pro 



vided ; and Negroes were imported at greaf ex 
pense by the King of Spain, and afterwards 
sold to the new settlers at a very long credit, 
and comparatively at a small price. Induced 
by this, numbers of debtors and unfortunate 
people flocked thither from all the other colonies 
of the Antilles. The convulsions of France 
helped to increase the population ; both royalists 
and regicides successively emigrating there with 
the property each had been enabled to saVe. 
The island assumed the most rapid and flourish 
ing appearance, and had the happiness, during 
that period, to have for its governor Don Chacon, 
a man of the most unbounded liberality, and 
who, if he had a bias, it was in favour of the 
British. The island was taken in 1797, without 
any resistance, by the late General Sir Ralph 
Abercromby ; indeed, the want of troops for its 
defence, and the state of the colony from such a 
congregate mixture of inhabitants, rendered it a 
sure and easy conquest. The Spanish squadron, 
consisting of some sail of the line and a few fri 
gates, fell at the same time, and which had been 
anchored in the harbour of Chaguarama. 

The island is by far the finest of the W. 
India cluster; the soil throughout being fit for 
every kind of culture, and the e. and s. coasts 
are not to be surpassed in the disposition of the 
land, the undulations of which are beautiful in 
the extreme ; and the position commands a safe 
and short passage to the several mouths of the 
river Orinoco, a river, the importance of which 
is very little known or understood at present. 
On the e. side is the extensive coco walk, and 
which gives its name to the bay ; it is self- 
planted, the original nuts, as it is said, having 
been drifted ashore from some vessel which had 
been lost or wrecked off the coast. This walk 
now occupies a very long space or skirting, from 
the nuts of which abundance of oil may be ex 
tracted sufficient for consumption, and even ex 
portation. Jn short, Trinidad can furnish va 
rious materials for a navy, such as timbers, 
plank, pitch, &amp;c. and finally is capable of com 
manding, by the shortest route, the most ample 
share of the commerce of Lima and of Quito. 

In the report of the privy council on the 
Slave Trade, in 1788, the Negroes are computed 
at 19,709, of the value of .50 each Negro. 

By return to House of Commons, 1806, the 
hogsheads of sugar, of 13 cwt. were exported, as. 
follows : 

In 1789 - - - 

1799 - - - 4,500 
1805 - - - 12,000] 



T R I T R I 

[The official value of the Imports and Exports of Trinidad was, in 

Imports. Exports. 

1809 .328,512 .579,719 

1810 .300,999 .357,073 

And the quantities of the principal articles imported into Great Britain were, in 



605 



Coffee 


Sugar. 


Rum. 


Cotton Wool. 


British Plant. 


Foreign Plant. 


British Plant. 


Foreign Plant. 






Cwt. 

1809, 3,696 
1810, 2,713 


Cwt. 

2 


Cwt. 

157,866 
166,627 


Cwt. 


Gallons. 

208.677 
87,741 


Ibs 

1,171,506 

88^.384 



By report of the privy council in 1788, and 
by a subsequent estimate, the population of Tri 
nidad amounted to 





Whites. 


People of 
Colour. 


Slaves. 


1787 





_ 


__ 


1805 


2261 


3275 


19,709 



The Import of Slaves, by the same report, at 
a medium of four years, and by a return to 
House of Commons, in 1805, at a medium of 
two years to 1803, was 



Average of 

4 years to 1787 
2 years to 1803 


Imports. 


Re-exports. 


Retained. 


4516 


33 


4483 



The n. e. point of Trinidad is in lat. 10 51 n. 
long. 60 55 25" o&amp;gt;.] 

TRINIDAD, an island of the Strait of Magel 
lan, near the island Santa Cruz. On the w. side 
of it the sea is very boisterous, but on the e. 
quiet and tranquil. It is low and desert, but 
covered with trees. [See TRINITY Isle.] 

TRINIDAD, a city of the island of Cuba, situate 
on the s. side of the island, and on the shore of a 
river of the same name, with a celebrated port, 
at which is carried on the traffic in sugar and 
tobacco, both of excellent quality. Its natives, 
who are much given to seafaring, are good ma 
riners. The English pillaged it in 1704. [A 



very severe hurricane was felt here on the 14th 
of October, 1812; the damage sustained was in 
calculable; the houses which had fallen, and 
were reduced to a tottering condition, amounted 
to 500. In the country it was more severely 
felt, some breeding pens had lost upwards of 
500 head of cattle ; many of the vessels which 
were at anchor in the harbour of Casilda were 
driven on shore, and others sunk. The convents 
of the Popa, with its hospital, viz. Francisca de 
Paula and Santa Anna, were all materially in 
jured.] This city lies in lat. 21 42 n. long. 
80 6 X w. 

TRINIDAD, another city, of the kingdom of 
Guatemala, on the shore of the river Belen, in 
the province of Costarica, three leagues distant 
from the sea, but by an intransitable rout. It 
is 82 miles e. s. e. from Guatemala, in lat. 13 46 
n. long. 90 15 KJ. 

TRINIDAD, another, of the island Martinique, 
one of the Caribes, in a large bay, formed on 
the s. e. by the point of Caravela, which is two 
leagues long, and on the opposite side by a very 
high mountain united to the main by an isthmus 
of 200 feet wide. The e. part of this bay, which 
looks to its interior, is surrounded by a chain of 
rocks flush with the water, but appearing very visi 
bly at the ebb. The population is very flourishing, 
it being the residence of the governor of Cabes- 
terre, besides many rich merchants, through the 
numerous trading vessels arriving here, especially 
from Nantes, as being sure of finding a ready 
dispatch of their cargoes, inasmuch as the inha 
bitants of the district are ready to avail them 
selves of a supply at first hand, instead of buying 
on retail at Basseterre, not to mention that all 
vessels are here safe from hurricanes : and an 
other advantage, that, for their return to Eu= 



606 



T R I 



rope, they start to the leeward of all the other 
islands, and escape a voyage of 300 leagues, 
which they would make were they to proceed by St. 
Domingo, or Puerto Rico. Although the parish 
and curacy of this city extends over the whole of 
Cabesterre, the church is built of wood. It 
yields much cacao, cotton, and sugar, which are 
the staples of its commerce. 

TRINIDAD, a town and capital of the province 
and akaldia mayor of Sonsonate in the kingdom 
of Guatemala, situate near a bay on the coast 
of the S. Sea, four leagues from Acaxatla, 65 
miles s. e. of Petapa, and 162 from Guatemala. 
It contains 450 families of Spaniards, exclusive 
of Mulattoes, Indians, and people of colour, five 
churches, and a monastery of nuns. It is the 
place of export for all the merchandise of Mexico 
and Peru, is three leagues from the bay ; and 
for this reason is considered the most desirable 
entrepot to those two kingdoms, although it is 
without defence. Notwithstanding the coast is 
too low for the shelter of vessels, the achorage 
is very good. 

TRINIDAD, a settlement of the head settlement 
of the district and alcaldia mayor of Tecali in 
Nueva Espana, containing 38 Indian families. 

TRINIDAD, another, a parish of the French in 
the island of Martinique, on the n. e. coast, with 
a very large, secure, and convenient port, de 
fended by a castle of the same name at its en 
trance. It is a curacy of the religious of St. 
Domingo. 

TRINIDAD, another, with the surname of Rio 
DE JESUS, in the province and government of 
Veragua, and kingdom of Tierra Firme, which 
was formerly an hermitage, where many people 
used to assemble. It has a good parish church, 
dedicated to St. Francis of Paul, and is three 
leagues from its capital. 

TRINIDAD, another, of the missions that were 
held by the Jesuits in the province and govern 
ment of Paraguay, on the shore of the river 
Parana, on a peninsula formed by two small 
rivers. [This settlement consists entirely of In 
dians, and is situate, according to the description 
of Azara, who lately visited these parts, a little 
from the w. bank of the Parana, about 19 miles 
n. from Candelaria; in lat. 27 T 35" s. and 
long. 55 44 59" o&amp;gt;.] 

TRINIDAD, another, of the province and go 
vernment of Venezuela in the new kingdom of 
Granada, situate on the shore of the river Guarico. 

TRINIDAD, a river of the province and king 
dom of Tierra Firme, which rises in the moun- 



T R I 

tains of Capira, of the jurisdiction of Nata, and 
enters the Chagre, forming-, between both, a 
point of land, in which a fort is built of a very 
commanding situation, and which is furnished by 
a detachment of troops from Panama to defend 
the entrance of both rivers. 

TRINIDAD, another, of the province and cap 
tainship of San Vicente in Brazil, on the shore of 
the bay of the same name as the province , and to 
the s. of the town of San Amaro. 

TRINIDAD, another, of the province and go 
vernment of Nicaragua in the kingdom of Gua 
temala. 

TRINIDAD, another, of the province and go 
vernment of Moxos in the kingdom of Quito, a 
reduction of the missionaries of the Jesuits, on 
the shore of the river Mar more. 

TRINIDAD, another of the province and go 
vernment of Texas in Nueva Espana, which runs 
s. from the territory of the Cenis Indians, where 
it rises, and enters with a very abundant stream 
into the sea, between the bay of S. Bernardo and 
the river Magdalena. 

TRINIDAD, another, of the province and go 
vernment of Veragua in the kingdom of Tierra 
Firme, which rises at the skirt of the mountain 
of Tabaraba, and runs s. till it enters the large 
river Martin, near its disemboguement into the 
sea% 

TRINIDAD, another, of the province and 
corregimiento of Patoz, in Peru, which runs 
nearly due w. and enters the Guallaga at its 
source.. 

TRINIDAD, another, an arm of the Orinoco, 
forming a channel with the island of Trinidad. 

TRINITY, a French settlement in the island 
of Newfoundland, situate on the e. coast, on the 
shore of the bay of Borchaps. 

TRINITY, a small river of New Breton, or 
land of Labrador, which runs s. e. and enters the 
St. Lawrence. 

TRINITY, a large bay on the n. coast of the 
river St. Lawrence in Canada, between port 
S. Nicholas and Egg Island, or Des CEufs. 

TRINITY, another, very large and handsome, 
on the e. coast of Newfoundland Island. 

[TRINITY Port, in the large bay of Martinique 
Island, in the W. Indies, formed on the s. e. by 
Point Caravelle.] 

[TRINITY Isle, lies near the coast of Patago 
nia, in S. America, e. of York Islands. In Fat. 
5037 s.] 

[TRINITY Isle, the north-easternmost of the 
small islands on the s. e. coast of the peninsula 



T R O 



T R O 



60? 



of Alaska, on the n. w. coast of N. America, n. e. 
of Foggy Islands.] 

[TRIO, a cape on the coast of Brazil, S. 
A merica.] 

TRIS Island, on the coast of the province and 
alcaldia mayor of Tabasco. See CARMEN. 

TRISTE, a gulf in the N. Sea, in the pro 
vince and government of Caracas and new king 
dom of Granada : its entrance is 16 leagues 
wide from the point of Carvalleda to the s. s. e. 
as far as Cape Muerto to n. n. e. and being nine 
leagues in depth. It was discovered and thus 
named by Admiral Christopher Columbus, in his 
fourth voyage, in 1498, in memory of the mis 
fortunes he suffered here. Some rivers, flowing 
down from the mountain of San Pedro, empty 
themselves into this bay. 

TRISTE, an island of the N. Sea, near the 
coast of the province and government of Cam- 
peche, to the w. of, but in a line with, that of 
Puerto Real, the two shutting up the entrance of 
a bay, and having between them a very narrow 
channel. It is three leagues long, abounds in 
delicious water ; but is full of lizards and other 
reptiles, and is desert. 

TRIUNFO, a bay on the coast of the pro 
vince and government of Honduras, of the 
kingdom of Guatemala, close to Triunfo de la 
Cruz, from whence it takes its name. 

[TRIVIGILLO Bay, in the Gulf of Hondu 
ras, or s. shore of the Gulf of Mexico, is within 
the island of Pines. Dulce River lies a little to 
the w. ] 

[TROCADIE, a small island on the n. coast 
of the island of St. John s, lying off the mouth 
of Shimene Port, and in the Gulf of St. Law 
rence.] 

TROCAMANA, a small river of the province 
and government of Mainas in the kingdom of 
Quito, which runs from n. to s. with many wind 
ings, and enters the Tigre, or Piquena, just 
where this joins the Maranon. 

[TROGA Point, or Cape, on the w. coast of 
New Mexico, is a rough headland, eight leagues 
from the valley of Colima.] 

TROIS RIVIERES, THREE RIVERS, or 
TREBLE RIVER, a city of the province and go 
vernment of Canada, thus called from three ri 
vers, which unite themselves at a quarter of a 
mile from it, and enter the great river St. Law 
rence. It was formerly the capital of the coun 
try, when the same belonged to the French, and 
was very much frequented by different na 
tions of Indians, who used to come down these 
rivers to commerce in skins. It was the resi 



dence of the governor, who had under him a 
mayor, and in it was a convent of religious Fran 
ciscans, to whose care it belonged. This city 
was looked upon as the general emporium for 
merchandise, where all the natives of the coun 
try flocked to sell their skins, and other articles 
of traffic, previously to its being taken by the 
English, together with the establishment of Mon 
treal ; but it was delivered up in 1635, and re 
visited by the above religious order in 1673 ; 
though, in 1760, it was retaken, as well as Que 
bec, Montreal, and all the rest of Canada, by 
the English generals, Wolf, Murray, and Am- 
herst, and belongs to that crown at the present 
day. The population of the city is small, though 
the inhabitants are rich, and have large houses 
splendidly furnished. The country in the vi 
cinity is barren in grain and fruits, but very 
pleasant. Its valleys, which are very delightful, 
lie about a gun-shot from each other. The river 
is always covered with fishermen s boats, and 
affords an abundant supply, especially of large 
eels, which are driven down by the force of the 
tides from the sea. They catch them in baskets, 
and, when salted down in barrels, they are pre 
served for a long time good. This city is 55 
miles s. w. of Quebec, and 62 n. e. of Montreal ; 
the navigation from one to the other is extremely 
delightful. 

[Three Rivers is very small, compared with 
Montreal and Quebec ; but in size it ranks as the 
third town in Lower Canada. It is, however, 
scarcely larger than some English villages. Mr. 
Lambert, (whose account of this place is the 
latest and the best) was not able to ascertain the 
exact number of houses and inhabitants; but the 
former, he believes, not to exceed 250, nor the 
latter 1500. There are very few respectable 
looking houses in the place ; the rest are paltry 
wooden houses, containing a few rooms on the 
ground floor, and a garret above. Some of them 
are in better condition than others ; but, for the 
most part, they appear to be falling to decay, 
from neglect. It is very seldom that the houses 
in Canada have any paint bestowed upon them ; 
but they are often whitewashed : yet few in Three 
Rivers have even this decoration to recommend 
them. 

The houses are mostly built with small inter 
vals between them ; apparently to prevent acci 
dents from fire. The streets are narrow, and un- 
paved, and on a dry windy day, the sand and 
dust fly about in clouds. The foot-paths are 
badly kept up, by pieces of timber placed about 
three feet from the houses. Notwithstanding the] 



608 



T R O 1 S RIVIERES. 



[inconveniences of the arid soil of Three Rivers, 
it has its advantages, inasmuch as you may walk 
out immediately after the heaviest rain, without 
soiling your shoes. 

The woods being almost close at the back of 
the town, favour the retreat of innumerable mus- 
quitoes and sand-flies. These with the multitude 
of common flies which inhabit the town, are ex 
tremely troublesome in sultry weather. 

The public buildings of Three Rivers, at the 
present day, are the convent of St. Ursule, the 
Roman Catholic church, the barracks, and the old 
monastery of the Recollets, or Franciscan friars ; 
which latter is now converted into a gaol, a court 
of justice, offices for the sheriff and prothonotary, 
a billiard-room, and an episcopalian chapel. The 
convent of St. Ursule was founded in 1677, by M. 
de St. Valier, bishop of Quebec, for the educa 
tion of female children, and as an asylum for the 
poor, the sick, and those who were tired of the 
world. The number of nuns, at present, does 
not amount to more than twenty ; they are, for 
the most part, elderly women, and are governed 
by a superior. This nunnery was burnt down, 
for the second time, in 1806, and is not yet com 
pletely rebuilt. In consequence of the fire, the 
nuns were distributed in the convents of Quebec 
and Montreal ; and subscriptions were set on 
foot throughout the country, for the purpose of 
building a new one. The funds of the Ursulines 
were very poor, and the British inhabitants, 
much to their honour, contributed, in common 
with the French people, in aid of the institution ; 
a convincing proof of the unanimity of Catholics 
and Protestants in that country. The new con 
vent was opened early in 1808, for the reception 
of the nuns, though then not more than half fin 
ished. The house is very long, and built in the 
form of a cross : the chapel, for the performance 
of mass, is in the centre on the ground-floor ; 
together with the refectory ; the hall, and kitchen ; 
the rooms for educating the children ; and the 
apartments of the cure, or minister, who resides 
in the convent, and performs the religious duties 
of the house and chapel. The present resident 
is the Abbe de Calonne, brother to the celebrated 
prime minister of Louis XVI. He was allowed 
by the English government to retire to Canada, 
and arrived in the autumn of 1807. He is said to 
be a very amiable and accomplished man, and ap 
pears about sixty years of age. 

The French church, in which service is per 
formed by the grand vicar, and his assistants, is a 
plain stone building, roofed with shingles painted 
red, and ornamented with a small belfry and 



spire, covered with sheets of tin. In the interior 
is a handsome altar piece, adorned with gilt orna 
ments, silver candlesticks, flagons, wax tapers, 
crucifixes, &amp;c. The church is generally well 
attended, and in summer is often very crowded ; 
during that season, a great many people sit or 
kneel in the open air, close by the doors, or under 
the windows of the church ; the mass being sung 
loud enough for them to hear without. 

The English church is very small, being part 
of the chapel formerly occupied by the Franciscan 
friars, who resided in the adjoining building. 
The other part is appropriated to a court of jus 
tice, and is divided from the place of worship by 
a slight partition. It is only of late years, that 
an English minister has resided in the town ; and, 
from appearances, there indeed seems very little 
occasion for him even now, since it is not unusual 
to see the French church overflowing, morning 
and afternoon, on Sundays, and open every day 
in the week besides ; while the English church, 
not a fourth of the size, is shut up all the week, 
except for two hours on Sunday morning, and 
then never half filled. The Protestant inhabi 
tants are nevertheless sufficiently numerous to 
crowd it to excess. 

The Recollet building is of stone, and much 
dilapidated. Next to the church and court-house, 
are the offices of the prothonotary, adjoining 
which, on the ground floor, are the rooms that 
are at present converted into a goal. Above 
them are the sheriff s office, and the subscription 
billiard-room. There are several small taverns 
or public-houses in Three Rivers, kept by French 
Canadians ; but only one decent house for the 
accommodation of respectable travellers. The 
building now occupied by the soldiers of the 
Canadian Fencibles for barracks, was formerly 
the residence of the French governor. It is built 
of stone, and compared to the houses in the town 
is of considerable magnitude. It is situated on 
the most elevated part of the town, and has a 
court-yard in front, inclosed by a wall and gates ; 
an old stone building near it, is turned into a 
guard-house. On the right side of the barracks 
is an excellent garden, and on the left is a small 
lawn, where the soldiers are drilled and exer 
cised. 

The Canadian fencible regiment is commanded 
by Colonel Shank, who resides at Three Rivers. 
It was formerly raised in Scotland, and consisted 
of a thousand men, but in consequence of some 
misunderstanding, the soldiers, who were all 
married men with large families, refused to em 
bark for Canada ; upon which the regiment was] 



TROIS RIVIERES. 



609 



[disbanded, and the officers, together with some of 
the non-commissioned officers, were sent out to 
Canada, to recruit in that country. They have 
been out upwards of three years, and have pro 
cured about 500 men, the majority of whom are 
Frencli Canadians ; there are also many Ameri 
cans from the United States among them. Most 
of the officers are Scotchmen, and were employed 
in the American war; for their services on that 
occasion they had grants of land in the country. 
Colonel Shank particularly distinguished himself 
in some engagements during that contest. He 
afterwards commanded the Queen s Rangers, and 
received from government a large tract of land in 
Upper Canada. The French Canadians make to 
lerable steady soldiers; but the Europeans that 
are picked up in different parts of the country, 
are generally a drunken dissolute set, and give 
the officers a great deal of trouble by their fre 
quent desertion. The province, of late years, 
has paid the inhabitants .10 or .12 for every 
deserter they apprehend, and this has made the 
people very alert, so that few now can escape out 
of the country. 

The remains of two redoubts, or fortifications, 
thrown up by the English army in the American 
war, are still visible on the common, and upon 
the hill at the back of the town. The latter 
commands the whole of Three Rivers, and is 
furnished with a well in the centre, for supplying 
the soldiers with water. A large cross is erected 
near the spot, adorned with the instruments used at 
the crucifixion of our Saviour,and other ornaments. 

The trade of Three Rivers is confined chiefly 
to the supplying of the inhabitants of the town 
and surrounding country, with European manu 
factured goods and W. Indian produce. The 
family of the Harts, who are Jews, carry on nearly 
all the business that is transacted in the town. 
There are four brothers, three of whom reside in 
Three Rivers, and have separate stores. The 
other, Alexander Hart, resides at Montreal. 
They are said to be possessed of considerable 
property, and besides the stores which they keep, 
deal largely in furs, potash, &amp;c. one of them is a 
manufacturer of pot and pearl ash, and a brewer 
of ale and spruce beer. They purchase most of 
the furs, brought down from the interior by a small 
party of Indians, who pay an annual visit to 
Three Rivers. This trade, which a century and 
a half ago was the total support of the town, is 
now greatly diminished. The agents of the N. 
W. Company are scattered over every part of the 
interior, and much money has been sunk in order 
to monoptlise the whole of the fur trade. But a 

VOL. IV. 



few of the Indians, from the back country, choose 
to bring their furs to the Harts, at Three Rivers, 
and receive European goods and money in ex 
change, very often to a considerable amount. 
An Indian once gave Mr. E. Hart, 60 guineas 
for a clock, and five guineas for a brilliant ring to 
decorate the finger of his squaw. Another has 
been known to pay four or five guineas for a 
little cannisterof gunpowder tea, which he carried 
away with him under his dirty blanket. Many of 
the Indians, who are fond of dress, will go to a 
great expense in the purchase of silver orna 
ments, and superfine scarlet or blue cloth, co 
loured silk, &amp;c. with which they decorate them 
selves in a costly manner. During their stay, 
they encamp about a mile from the town, and are 
generally in a state of intoxication the whole 
time, so that when they return in the autumn to 
their hunting grounds, they have most commonly 
spent all their money. They are then obliged 
to go in debt to the Harts, sometimes to the 
amount of several hundred dollars, which they 
punctually repay in furs the following year. But 
if they die in the mean time, the money is lost. 

There are but few. other stores of any consider 
ation in Three Rivers, and they are kept chiefly 
by French people. These stores contain almost 
every description of goods that can be named, 
and exhibit a motley collection of woollen- 
drapery, haberdashery, hosiery, linen-drapery, 
grocery, cheesemonger^, stationery, ironmongery, 
and the contents of the oil shop, the gin shop, 
and the wine vaults. The store-keepers charge 
from 50 to 100 per cent, profit upon most of their 
goods, and sometimes a great deal more. The 
Harts import a considerable portion of their 
goods from England, the rest they purchase at 
the Quebec auctions ; they also deal largely in 
pot and pearl ashes and furs, which they remit to 
England. 

A store belong-in;}; to Messrs. Munro and Bell, 
of Quebec, is established at Three Rivers, for the 
sale of the cast-iron stoves, potash kettles, and 
bar-iron, manufactured at the St. Maurice forges 
which belong to those gentlemen. The store is 
superintended by Mr. Graves, and the forges by 
Mr. M Cauley. " They make about 1000 stoves 
per annum ; the small single stoves sell for 3. 
and the larger sort for 6. each. The double 
stoves, which have an oven at the top, are sold 
for 10 or 12. according to the size. Potash 
kettles sell from .20 to ^25 each. Fresh veins 
of ore are daily discovered, and purchased of the 
people in whose land it is found, at a trifling 
price.] 



610 



T R O 



[Most of the large bark canoes for the N. W. 
Company are made at Three Rivers; and several 
women in the town make a variety of handsome 
toys, pocket-books, purses, work baskets, pin 
cushions, &amp;c. of bark, curiously ornamented with 
flowers worked on the bark with elk hair, dyed of 
various colours. The Indians make a few bark 
works of an inferior description. 

At a short distance from the town there is a 
brick-maker, and, it is thought, the only one in 
Canada. The bricks are nearly of the same size 
as those in England, but not quite so thick : they 
are of a deep red, and are made in a peculiar 
manner. Instead of throwing the clay in a mould, 
it is spread out to a great extent on a smooth 
piece of ground, of the thickness of one brick, 
the clay is then cut into parallelograms, each of 
which are afterwards subdivided into nine bricks ; 
they are then left to dry, and when sufficiently 
hard, are taken up and piled in stacks, after which, 
they are formed into a kiln and burnt as in Eng 
land. 

The genteel society of Three Rivers is very 
small, and consists of the officers of the Cana 
dian regiment, the provincial judge, sheriff, Eng 
lish and French advocates ; the Protestant and 
Catholic clergy ; the grand voyer of the district ; 
the colonel of militia; and the family of the 
Harts, who are the only merchants or store 
keepers that are classed among the gentry of 
Three Rivers. 

The market is held twice a week, on the post 
days : and in general the supplies are scarcely 
sufficient for the consumption of the town. The 
country people come from Champlain across the 
St. Maurice river, and from Becancour on the 
opposite shore of the St. Lawrence. They arrive 
at Three Rivers in the summer, as early as five 
o clock in the morning, and most of the inhabit 
ants are in the market place frequently an hour 
before their arrival, in order to have their choice 
of the provisions. By eight o clock the market 
is generally over. 

Many of the females at Three Rivers are trou 
bled with wens, swelled necks, and other disor 
ders of the throat, as mumps, swelling of the 
glands, &amp;c. In other parts of Canada, there are 
but few who are afflicted with those complaints ; 
but in Three Rivers they seem to be more gene 
ral, particularly among the women. Some are 
of opinion, that they are occasioned by the well- 
water of the town ; others, that they are caused 
by the water of the St. Lawrence, which is im 
pregnated with snow and ice upwards of six 
months in the year. But if swelled necks were 



T R O 

occasioned by snow water, why should they not 
prevail equally at Quebec and Montreal, where 
the river water is used in abundance ? It is cer 
tain, however, that in some of the mountainous 
pal ts of Switzerland and Styria, the women have 
large wens and swellings on their necks, called 
by the Styrians bronchoceles^ which are supposed 
to arise from the frequent use of snow water. It 
is possible, therefore, that the same disease in 
Canada may arise, in some measure, from a simi 
lar cause. 

In other respects Three Rivers is favourable 
to health, and possesses a more steady climate 
than Quebec, which being situated in the neigh 
bourhood of so many lofty mountains, is oftener 
subject to rain, and frequent variations of the 
weather. 

Small as the town of Three Rivers is, the num 
ber of foundlings, who are placed under the care 
of a poor person to bring up, are equal, in pro 
portion to its population, to the number of chil 
dren at the Foundling Hospital in London. It 
would be creditable to the inhabitants of Three 
Rivers, were they as well taken care of as in 
London ; but the contrary is the case : for in 
consequence of the scanty allowance for their 
support, little attention is paid to them, and we 
are told that few live to maturity. 

Three Rivers is in lat. 46 24 n. and long 1 
72 27 o&amp;gt;.] 

[TROIS RIVIERES, a bay at the e. end of 
the island of St. John s, and w. of Cape Breton 
Island. Three streams fall into it from different 
directions ; hence its name. Lat. 46 5 n. and 
long. 62 15 o&amp;gt;.] 

TROJLOCACHI, a settlement of the missions 
that were held by the Jesuits in the province of 
Taraumara, near the settlement of Matachique 

[TROMPEUR Cape, DEL ENGANNA, or 
FALSE Cape, is the easternmost point of the 
island of St. Domingo. Lat. 18 35 n. Ions 
68 19 KJ.] 

TROMPETAS. See TURMEQUE. 

TROMPETAS, a large and abundant river of 
the province and country of Las Amazonas, in 
the territory of Curupa, towards the e. part. 
It runs s. and enters the Maranon on the n. 
shore, near the Strait of Pauxis, in lat. 1 50 * 

TROPIC-KEYS, small islands or shoals to 
the n. of the island of Cangrejos, or Crabs, and 
to the e. of the coast of Puerto Rico. They are 
thus named from their abounding in birds called 
tropicos, never showing themselves there but in 
the tropics. 

[TROQUOES, a bay at the s. extremity of the 



T R U 

c. part of Lake Huron, separated from Matchu- 
dock Bay on the n. e, by a broad promontory.] 

[TROQUQUA, an island on the n. coast of 
S. America, in the mouth of a small bay near 
Cape Seco, a short way s. e. from the e. point of 
the bay or river Taratura.] 

[TROU JACOB, on the s. side of the island 
of St. Domingo. From this to Cape Beate, or 
Cape a Foux, the shore is rocky.] 

[TROU, LE, a settlement in the n. part of the 
French division of the island of St. Domingo. 
It is five leagues and a half e. of Ouanaminthe, 
and two s. e. of Limonade.] 

TROU-PETIT, a port of the island St. Do 
mingo, in the part possessed by the French, 
on the n. coast, between the points Roche and 
Isabelica. 

TROU-PETIT, another port in the same island, 
above the w. coast, and at the w. head, between 
the Bay of Baradero and the great river Nipe. 

TROU-PETIT, a bay of the same island on the 
5. coast, near Cape or Point Beata, between 
Point Mongon and the Bay of Neiva. 

TROU-PETIT, a parish of the French in the 
same island, on the n. coast and on the shore of 
Port Delfin. 

TROU-PETIT, another parish of the French in 
the part they possess of the island St. Domingo, 
on the n. coast, and at the w. head, being depen 
dent upon port Principe. 

TROWEL, a settlement of the island Barba- 
does, in the s. part. 

[TROY, a post-Jtown of New York, Rensse- 
laer County, six miles n. n. e. of Albany, three s. 
of Lansinburgh city. The township of Troy is 
bounded e. by Petersburgh, and was taken from 
Rensselaerwyck township, and incorporated in 
1791. In 1796, 550 of the inhabitants were 
electors. Very few years ago, the scite of the 
flourishing village of Troy was covered witli 
flocks and herds, and the spot on which a school, 
containing 160 scholars, is now erected, was 
then probably a sheepfolcf. The school is under 
the direction of three schoolmasters, and is a very 
promising seminarv.J 

TRUCUYA, a river of the kingdom of Bra 
zil ; it rises to the w. of Lake Parapituiga, runs 
many leagues to the n. and then, taking a n. n. e. 
direction, enters by two branches the great lake 
of St. Francis. 

[TRURO, a town of Nova Scotia, situate in 
Halifax County, at the head of the Basin of Minas, 
opposite to, and three miles s. of, Onslow ; 40 
miles n. by w. of Halifax, and 40 from Pictou. 
It was settled by the North-Irish, some Scotch, 



T R U 



611 



and the descendants of North-Irish. Through 
this town runs the river called by the Indians 
Shubbenacadie, navigable for boats to within nine 
miles of Fort Sackville.] 

[TRURO, a township of Massachusetts, situate 
in Barnstable County. It is on the easternmost 
part of the peninsula of Cape Cod, 47 miles s. e. 
of Boston, in a straight line, but as the road runs 
it is 110, and 40 from the court-house of Barnsta- 
ple. It is the Pamet of the Indians, and after its 
settlement in 1700 was some time called Danger- 
field ; it was incorporated under its present name 
in 1709, and contains 1193 inhabitants. Only 
one family of Indians remained a few years since, 
and lived on Pamet Point. In the valley 
called Great Hollow, a creek sets up from the 
bay, at the mouth of which is a tide harbour. 
The other landing places are of small note. 
Pamet Harbour is about 100 yards wide at the 
mouth, but is wider within ; and if repaired 
would be of public utility. It lies above eight 
miles s. e. of Cape Cod Harbour. The hill on 
which the meeting-house stands branches from 
the high land of Cape Cod, well known to seamen. 
The mountain of clay in Truro, in the midst of 
sandy hills, seems to have been placed there by 
the God of Nature, to serve as a foundation fora 
light-house, which if erected might save the lives 
of thousands, and millions of property. The soil 
of Truro is, in most places, sandy, like Province- 
town ; and the inhabitants derive their principal 
subsistence from the sea, which here abounds 
with vast variety of fish. Great part of their corn 
and vegetables are procured from Boston and the 
neighbouring towns. Two inhabitants of Truro, 
Captains David Smith and Gamaliel Ceilings, 
were the first who adventured to Falkland Islands 
in pursuit of whales. This voyage, which was 
crowned with success, was undertaken in 1774, 
by the advice of Admiral Montague of the British 
navy. The whalemen of Truro now visit the 
coast of Guayana and Brazil. Many of the mas 
ters of ships employed from Boston and other 
ports, are natives of Truro. The elderly men 
and small boys remain at home to cultivate the 
ground : the rest are at sea two-thirds of the 
year. The women are generally employed in 
spinning, weaving, knitting. &amp;c.] 

TRUXILLO, a province and corregimiento 
of the kingdom of Peru, bounded on the n. e. by 
the province of Caxamarca, on the n. by that 
of Sana, on the e. by that of Guamachuco, on 
the s. e. by that of Santa, and having for its 
limits on the s. the river Sana, and the royal 
road leading to Lima, from whence it extends 
4 i2 



612 



T R U X 1 L L O. 



24 leagues ; and being bounded on the s. w. 
and w. by the S. Sea, the coast of which runs 
5. e. and n. w. It is composed of three valleys, 
namely, of Chiraru, Viru, and Chicama, in 
which it rains only in the months of June, July, 
and August, a sort of dew called there garnet. 
It is 27 leagues long and 10 broad, and has in 
its jurisdiction three ports, Malabrigo, Guaiiape, 
and Guanchaco ; it is of a very fine tempera 
ture although rather cold, very healthy, and 
the ground agreeable and fertile. Several rivers 
water and fertilize it, especially that of Moche, 
which is a source of great wealth. It produces 
a great deal of wheat, maize, wine, olives, su 
gar-canes, and all sorts of grain, flowers, limes, 
esculent plants, and fruits, such as plantains, 
pines, lucmat, granadillas, guai/abas, mameyes, 
palillos, cucumbers, tumbos, and cfiirimoi/as, which 
are esteemed the most delicate of all Peru. For 
merly the corn they reaped was so abundant, that 
the earth yielded regularly in the harvest two 
hundred fold, and the produce of the valley of 
Chicama alone amounted to 160,000 bushels; but 
since the great earthquake, which happened on 
the 20th of October, 1687, the soil has been so 
sterile, that hardly any thing yielded fruit for 
more than 30 years ; but it now begins to recover 
by degrees its ancient fertility. Almost the whole 
province is filled with plantations, which yield a 
great quantity of sugar and other productions, 
in which they carry on a great trade. 

TRUXILLO, the capital, is the city of the same 
name, suffragan of Lima, erected by Paul V. 
in 1609. It was founded by Don Francis Pizarro, 
Marquis of Charcas and Atavillos, conqueror of 
Peru, in 1535, and named by him in memory of 
his native place in Estramadura. It is situate 
in an agreeable and fine plain, called De Chimu, 
from originally possessing the land of a chief of 
that name, which signifies a powerful lord : it is 
abundant in corn and sugar, with which they 
make exquisite sweetmeats, that constitute the 
principal article of their commerce; its climate 
is cold and dry, but very mild and wholesome ; 
the soil is sandy, and consequently inconvenient 
for walking, and for the inhabitants. It is of an 
oval figure, and surrounded with a wall of 
bricks unbaked, built by the viceroy, the Duke 
of Palata, having 15 bastions, and as many cur 
tains ; the streets are 45 feet broad, and run n. e. 
and s. w. ; the houses are very pleasant, and mag 
nificently ornamented : it has, besides the cathe 
dral, three parishes, St. Ann s, St. Sebastian s, 
and St. Stephen s ; convents of monks of the or 
ders of St. Francis, St. Domingo, La Merced, 



and St. Austin, a college which was of the Je 
suits, and an hospital of the Bethlemitcs ; mo 
nasteries of the nuns of St. Clare, and of the 
barefooted Carmelites, and a seminary. 

It has suffered much from several earthquakes; 
first, on the 14th of February, 1619, in memory 
of which the city voted St. Valentine for its pa 
tron ; next, on the 6th of January, 1625; then 
on the 20th October, 1759, and 2d September, 
1759. Great riches have been discovered in 
this district, which were hidden by the Indians 
on the invasion of the Spaniards ; John Guti 
errez de Toledo, in particular, discovered a 
quantity in 1576 ; the king s share, being one- 
fifth, amounted to 58,527 casteUanos of gold. 

At the distance of one league runs the river 
Mocha, which fertilizes the district, and from 
which they draw, through conduits, water, as well 
for the consumption of the people as for the ir 
rigating the orchards and gardens. The inha 
bitants, who amount to more than 9000, and 
amongst whom are many illustrious families de 
scended from the conquerors, are docile, affable, 
liberal, and of sharp intellects. The arms are a 
shield azure, bearing a griffon, and in the centre 
two columns, white and blue, over water, in 
which is placed a crown of gold crossed with 
two sticks, and at the bottom the letter K. It 
lies three quarters of a league from the sea. 

[The intendancy of Truxillo contained, ac 
cording to the official accounts in the Guia del 
Peru, in the year 1797, 87 doctrinal curacies, 
five cities, two towns, and 142 settlements an 
nexed to the same, containing 230,967 souls, 
viz. 460 clergy, 160 monks, 162 nuns, 19.098 
Spaniards, 115,647 Indians, 76,949 Mustees, 
13,757 free Mulattoes, and 4725 slaves. 

There are two districts belonging to this in 
tendancy, called Cescado de Truxillo and Lam- 
bayeque. The former contained, in the year 
1797, 10 doctrinal curacies, and six settlements 
annexed, inhabited by 12,032 souls, viz. 144 
clergy, 60 monks, 129 nuns, 1431 Spaniards, 
4577 Indians, 1549 Mustees, 2357 free Mulat 
toes, and 1582 slaves ; and the latter (Lambaye- 
que) contained 20 doctrinal curacies and seven set 
tlements annexed, inhabited bv 35,192 souls, viz. 
62 clergy, 27 monks, 2299 "Spaniards, 22,333 
Indians, 5448 Mustees. 3192 free Mulattoes, and 
1831 slaves. 

The city is situate 268 miles n. n. w. from 
Lima, in lat. 8 8 s. and long. 78 53 w.] 

Bishops who have resided in Truxillo. 
1. Don Fr. Alonzo Guzman y Talavera, na- 



T R U X I L L O. 



live of that place, monk of the order of St. Je 
rome, elected the first bishop of that church in 
1577 ; he renounced it immediately he was con 
secrated, for which reason Truxillo does not in 
clude him in the dyptych of its bishops. 

2. Don Luis de Carcamo, native of Mexico, 
and not, as Jerome erroneously calls him, Gil 
Gonzales Davila, was professor of decrees in 
the university of the cathedral in which he 
studied, and treasurer and canon of his church : 
he was consecrated bishop of Truxillo in 1611, 
and was drowned in the S. Sea oft Puerto de 
Paita, in his voyage to his diocese. 

3. Don Fr. Francis Cabrera, of the order of 
St. Domingo, native of Cordoba, collegiate of 
St. Thomas of Seville, lecturer of arts and theo 
logy in his convent of Granada, and master in 
his order, prior of the convents of Osuna and 
Cordoba, elected bishop of Puerto Rico, and 
promoted to the bishopric of Truxillo in 1614 : 
he took possession in 1616, built the church of 
the bishopric, and afterwards transferred the see 
to the settlement of Lambayeque ; the city being- 
ruined by an earthquake in 1619, he died in the 
same settlement, having presided three years, 
one month, and 22 days. 

4. Don Carlos Marcelo Corni, native of Trux 
illo, and of extraordinary virtue and erudition : 
was magisterial canon of Lima, a preacher of 
great celebrity, and bishop of Santiago of Chile, 
from which see he was promoted to that of his 
native town, and commenced his functions in 
1621. He was the son of a metal founder, and 
hearing the bells chime when he was entering 
the city, said, that bell which sounds the most 
joyfully, my father founded. He endowed the 
houses established by the Jesuits with funds for 
two chaplains, drawing the same from the fees 
of marriages ; and he also formed one of the 
parishes. He died in 1629, as appears by the 
archives of his church, and not, as Gil Gonzalez 
Davila relates, in 1620. 

5. Don Fr. Ambrose Vallejo, of the royal and 
military order of Our Lady of Merced, native of 
Madrid, lecturer of arts and theology, prior of 
the convents of Avila, Valladolid, Medina del 
Campo and Madrid, provincial of Castille, and 
attorney-general of the provinces of Spain and 
Portugal, was elected bishop of Popayan, and 
from that promoted to the see of Truxillo in 
16.30, where he died in 1635. 

6. Don Diego de Montoya y Mendoza, native 
of Miajancas, and bishop of Calahorna ; he was 
promoted from the bishopric of Cuzco in 1639, 
and died the following vear, 1640, in the settle 



ment of Cascas, of the province of Caxamarca, 
in making his visit. 

7. Don Fr. Luis de Cordoba y Ronquillo, of 
the order of the most Holy Trinity, native of 
Granada, in the convent of which place he 
taught the arts and theology : he was minister of 
the convent of Malaga, and twice so of that of 
Sevilla ; he was provincial and vicar-general 
of Andalucia ; promoted to the see of Cartha- 
gena in the Indies, from whence he went over 
to Spain, without receiving a licence till eight 
years after, and being promoted to the church of 
Truxillo, died before he could take possession. 

8. Don Pedro de Ortega y Sotomayor, native 
of Lima, studied in that university, and at 19 years 
of age gained the election of a professorship of 
arts, he afterwards gained the chair of the professor 
of theology of vespers and prime: he was magis 
terial canon of Lima, master of the academy, and 
archdeacon of the church of Truxillo, and pre 
sented to the see of that place in 1647, and was 
promoted to that of Arequipa in the same year. 

9. Don John de Zapata Figueroa, promoted 
from the church of Santa Cruz, of the sierra, 
and died before he received the bulls. 

10. Don Fr. Marcos Salmeron, of the order of 
La Merced, native of the town of Buendia in 
the bishopric of Cuenca. He studied the arts in 
his convent of Huete, was collegiate of that of 
the Conception of Alcala, lecturer of arts in that 
of Segovia, and of theology in that of Toledo : 
he was graduate and prelate in Segovia and 
Guadalaxara, dijinidor-genera\, provincial and 
calificador of the council of the inquisition ; twice 
prelate in his convent at Madrid, visitor of the 
provinces of Castilla, Arragon, and Catalonia, 
and general of his order : he was elected to the 
see of Truxillo in 1647, and died before his 
consecration. 

11. Don Andrew Garcia of Zurita, native of 
Seville, collegiate and rector in the royal college 
of St. Philip and St. Marcos, of the university of 
Lima, whence he became doctor of canon laws, 
was curate in the bishopric of Quito, canon and 
dean in the church of Lima, coadjutor of the 
bishop of Guamanga, and presented to the sec of 
Truxillo in 1650. He died there in 1652. 

12. Don Diego, of Castillo and Arteaga, na 
tive of Tudela in Navarra : he studied in the 
university of Alcala, belonged to the college of 
Malaga, was professor of prime, of arts and the 
ology in his university, as well as doctor of it ; 
he was magisterial canon of the church of Avila, 
was presented to the bishopric of Cartagena in 
Indies, but refused the see, accepting afterwards 



(314 



T R U X I L L O. 



of that of Truxillo in 1653, and before being- 
consecrated he was promoted to the metropolitan 
church of Santa Fe of Bogota, in the new king 
dom of Granada. 

13. Don Fr. John de la Calle y Heredia, of the 
order of Our Lady of Mercedes ; he consecrated 
the cathedral church, and governed it until 17th 
October, 1675, when he was translated to the see 
of Arequipa. 

14. Don Antonio de Leon, was bishop of Pa 
nama, and promoted to Truxillo in 1677, and 
afterwards to the church of Arequipa. 

15. Don Francis, of Borja, was bishop of Tu- 
cuman, when he was translated to the see of 
Truxillo, in which he died on 13th April, 1689. 

16. Don Fr. Peter de la Serna, of the order 
of the most Holy Trinity, was made bishop of 
Truxillo, but died at Cadiz, whither he had re 
paired to embark for that place. 

17. Don Peter Diaz, of Cienfuegos, brother of 
the cardinal of that name, was soliciting the 
see of Popayan, when he was promoted to that 
of Truxillo in 1697 : he died 1702, in the settle 
ment of Catacaos, of the province of Piura, on 
a visitation there. 

18. Don Fr. John Victores de Velasco, of the 
order of St. Benedict, died 17th December, 1713. 

19. Don Diego Montero del Aquila, translated 
from the see of la Concepcion of Chile in 1716: 
he died in the city of Sana performing his yearly 
visit, seven months and 14 days after his taking- 
possession. 

20. Don -Fr. James Mimbela, of the order of 
Preachers, translated from the see of Santa 
Cruz del Sierra in 1719 ; he was of most ex 
emplary manners and talents, and enriched his 
cathedral with many ornaments, and rich golden 
and silver furniture ; he constructed the monas 
tery of the Carmelites from the foundation, and 
died 4th July, 1739. 

22. Don Fr. Joseph Cavetano Paravicino, of 
of the order of St. Francis ; a divine, calificador 
of the holy office, preacher-general, difinidor of 
his province of Charcas, and pro-minister of the 
same province : in order to vote at the general 
chanter, he was elected bishop of Paraguay, and 
from that church translated to the see of Trux- 
illo in 1748, where he died in 1750. 

23. Don Bernard de Arviza y Ugarte, native 
of Cuzco in Peru, belonged to the college of 
St. Martin of Lima, where he studied and ob 
tained the degree of doctor in that university : 
he was made judge of the royal audience of Pa 
nama, and the king being informed of his stre- 
nu6us and faithful exertions in the cause of the 



church, presented him to the see of Carthagena 
in the Indies ; from whence, having governed 
with much judgment and discretion, he was 
translated to that of Truxillo, where he died, in 
1756, already destined to the archbishopric of 
Charcas. 

24. Don Francis Xavier de Lima y Victoria, 
born at the city of Panama, was a soldier in his 
youth, then entered into holy orders, and was 
the person the most esteemed in the city for his 
engaging accomplishments and great charity, 
which raised him to the diocese of his country ; 
from which he was promoted to that of Truxillo 
in 1759 : he died 1778, advanced, like his pre 
decessor, to the archbishopric of Charcas. 

25. Don Balthasar Jay me Martinez Compa- 
non was precentor of the holy metropolitan 
church of Lima, when his majesty presented him 
to the bishopric of Truxillo in 1778, and which 
he now actually holds. 

[_N. B. We find by the Guia del Peru, a work 
from which we have quoted above, that the last 
mentioned bishop governed till 1788 ; but it does 
not say whether he died in that year, nor is the 
series continued from that period in any work we 
have been able to discover.] 

TRUXILLO, another city, of the same name as 
the above, in the province and district of Vene 
zuela, and in the new kingdom of Granada : Cap 
tain Diego Garcia de Parades founded it in a place 
called Escuque, on the summit of a mountain 
close to the large river Motatan, where he re 
mained but a short time ; for the youth of the 
place having taken improper liberties with the 
daughters and wives of the neighbouring Indians, 
the latter, being greatly irritated, one night as 
saulted the city and put a number of the offenders 
to death ; and they continued the siege so as to 
oblige the inhabitants to depart in the following 
years, 1557 and 1558. It was, however, resettled 
under Francis Ruiz, who gave it the name of 
Mirabel, which it retained very few days, having 
resumed the original name : but experiencing the 
inconveniences of continual rains, repeated storms, 
and owing to the humidity of the neighbourhood, 
the people were sent to Cabecera, one of the 
valleys on the banks of the river Bocono ; here 
they fomented such discord and dissentions 
among their neighbours, that they were sent 
immediately afterwards to another place, called 
De los Truenos, at the mouth of the river Mo 
tatan, where no grain was produced, from the 
plague of ants, which destroyed the whole of 
it ; nor did the cattle increase, from the voracity 
of the tigers, which are so obnoxious, even to 



TRUXILLO. 



615 



the inhabitants, that they were obliged to decamp 
for a third time ; establishing themselves in 
another place yet more inconvenient, four leagues 
lower down the same river on the centre of a moun 
tain so rugged, wet, and full of mosquitoes, snakes, 
tigers, and insects ; that, persecuted with so many 
calamities, and by the badness of the temperature 
of the neighbourhood, they were sent a fourth time, 
six leagues more to the e. of the valley of Pampa, 
where they were able to remain but a short time, 
on account of the excessive heat and humidity of 
the country ; and they then exclaimed bitterly, but 
in vain, against the uncertainty of climate, since 
they were doomed from the above cause, to 
transmigrate, until the city might be said to be 
portable. They however bore with these evils 
until 1570, when, obliged to remove, they fixed 
their fifth and last foundation, in the present 
site ; in a valley of a wholesome and more mo 
derate climate, which extends about a league 
. and 5. ; but is so confined, that one half the 
city admits of but two streets : and the other 
half, so much more confined, that it admits of 
only one. It appears, that the climate converted 
the fractious and quarrelsome tempers of the 
people, to dispositions more quiet and pacific ; 
since discord and strife are unheard of here. 
And it is sufficient throuo-hout all the kingdoms 



to characterise a man as ingenious, and of a good 
disposition, his being known to be of Truxillo. 

This city became one of the most beautiful and 
opulent by the great trade in its productions, 
especially in cacao, to the improvement of which 
the inhabitants applied themselves ; planting a 
great number of trees in the valleys of Poco, 
which, transported by the lake to Gibraltar, pro 
duced them immense riches: with which they 
erected costly and beautiful houses ; but felicity 
changing to calamity, they have been since so 
dejected, that at present hardly a shadow of their 
greatness remains ; and losing the cacao trees by 
the inundations of the river, scarcely any trade 
or commerce exists. To this misfortune followed 
the sacking of the city, in 1678, by the pirate, 
Francis Peter Gramont, who burnt and destroyed 
the sumptuous edifices. At present there are 
somewhat more than 300 inhabitants, and, be 
sides the parish church, two convents of the 
monks of St. Francis and St. Domingo; one 
hermitage of Our Lady of Chiquinquia, in which 
there is founded an hospital, and two nunneries 
of Dominicans, in which they manufacture beau 
tifully, many curiosities and pieces of needle 
work, which are much esteemed throughout the 
kingdom. 



This district is very abundant in corn, barley, 
maize, cotton, pulse, and similar seeds ; they 
make a great quantity of sugar, which affords 
them exquisite preserves, and have every sort 
of fruit to be found in America, and many of 
those of Europe. They rear an immense number 
of ewes and goats, fowls, turkeys, and other 
birds ; so that they want nothing that can be 
thought necessary for the luxury or convenience 
of life. But these advantages are counterpoised 
by the calamity under which all the inhabitants 
suffer, namely the cotos, or swellings of the 
throat, caused no doubt by the waters of the 
river being impregnated with metals. 

[There is no city in the province of Venezuela, 
that has made such rapid improvenent as Trux 
illo. The salubrity of the air, and the fertility 
of the soil, have attracted many settlers ; which 
has increased the number of its inhabitants to 
7,600 persons. The remains of many superb 
buildings sufficiently attest the magnificence of 
the town before it was destroyed by Gramont. 

Little with regard to its productions can be 
said, in addition to what was related at the time 
Alcedo wrote ; the sheep that are bred here, are 
of an extraordinary size, and the mutton is pre 
ferable to that of any other part of the province. 
The cheeses are also held in high estimation, and 
the inhabitants are famous for the cleansing and 
carding of wool, which they manufacture for 
trade. The women are in a much better condi 
tion than in the other towns, on account of their 
industry in making and disposing of preserves. 

There is a trade from Truxillo to Maracaibo, 
by the lake, which is 42 miles to the w. ; but the 
chief traffic is with Carona, where they send the 
skins of the sheep and goats to be dressed ; but 
the carriage by this rout is very inconvenient, as 
they have to pass over some unwholesome plains. 
This city has a cabildo for its police. It lies 77 
miles to the s. of Coro, 58 to the s. w. of Tucuyo, 
and 42 from the lake of Maracaibo, and 59 n. of 
Varinas. In lat. 8 33 n. long. 70 15 30" w.~] 

TRUXILLO, another city, capital of the pro 
vince and government of Honduras in the king 
dom of Guatemala ; founded by Francis de las 
Casas in 1524. It is situated between two rivers 
of good water, and abounding in fish. The cli 
mate is temperate, fertile in all kinds of grain, 
and there is abundance of cattle, particularly 
black cattle : which is much more fleshy than 
that of Spain. It produces much honey and 
wax, and the vines and wheat yield twice a year. 
The . lemons, oranges, and the other fruits of 
Europe have so multiplied, that they are no 



1)16 



TUB 



TUB 



longer looked upon as any rarity. It produces 
in like manner a quantity of sugar-canes from 
which they make sugar ; also, the cahopotola, or 
purging cassia. In its district it has mines of the 
richest gold. 

It was named Truxillo, from the greater part 
of its founders being of the city of that name in 
Estremadura ; it was the capital of the province, 
and its cathedral was therefore erected into a 
bishopric, continuing so until 1558, when it 
was translated to Valladolid, from whence it is 
60 leagues distant. The parish church is very 
large and good, it has a convent of monks, of 
La Merced, an hospital with the name of Our 
Lady of La Conception, and a good port, which 
is very commodious and celebrated : the princi 
pal one of this coast, and from whence Hernan 
Cortes embarked on his return to Mexico from 
the journey to Ibueras ; the same was pillaged by 
the Dutch at the end of the last century. [It lies 
in lat. 15 51 n. and in long. 86 &amp; w.] 

TRUXILLO, another city of the province and 
government of Popayan, in the new kingdom of 
Granada. 

TRUXILLO, an island or small rock of the coast 
of Peru, in the province and corrcgimtenlo of that 
name ; close to the point of Guanchaco. 

[TRYON MOUNTAINS, in N. Carolina, 
lie n. w. of the town of Salisbury, on the borders 
of the State of Tennessee.] 

[TSCHUGATSCHI, a Russian settlement, 
on the n. w. coast of America ; occupying the 
country between the n. extremity of Cook s inlet, 
and the e. of Prince William s Bay (Tschugat- 
skaia Gulph.)] 

TUAICAS, a barbarous nation of Indians of 
Peru, who dwell to the e. of the Chiquitos. The 
missionaries who were dwelling among them, 
discovered them in 1751 ; but they are not yet 
reduced or known. 

TUANSIQUITI, a river of the province and 

fovernment of Darien, and kingdom of Tierra 
irtne. It rises in the mountains towards the n. 
and falls into the sea opposite the Mulatas 
Islands. 

[TLJAPE, the chief town of the division of 
Senora, in N ew Mexico. 

TUARIQUI, a small settlement of savage 
Indians, of the province and kingdom of Darien, 
situated in the mountains of the n. coast. 

TUBAC, a town and fortress, of the province 
and government of Sonora, founded about the 
middle of the 17th century to restrain the incur 
sions of the disloyal Indians, and to secure the 
communication with New Mexico. 



TUBAGE, a large and deep river, of the pro. 
vince and government of San Juan de los Llanos, 
in the new kingdom of Granada ; it enters the 
Orinoco a little lower than the Meta. On its 
banks were some settlements of Salibas Indians, 
converted to the faith by the missionaries of the 
Jesuits in 1732 ; but they were destroyed and 
burnt by the Caribe Indians. 

TUBAGI, a great and deep river, of the pro 
vince and government of San Pablo, in the 
Brazils. It rises in the mountains by the coast, 
runs n. w. and then changing its direction to the 
n. enters the Parapamena, close to the settlement 
of S. Ignace. 

There is another river of this name, in the 
province and captainship of S. Vicente, in the 
same kingdom. It runs to the n. forming a 
curve, and uniting with the river De Yapo, 
enters into the river of Paranapane. 

[TUBA1, a small island, one of the Society 
Islands, in the S. Pacific Ocean. Is about four 
or five leagues to the n. by w. ; or n. n. w. from 
Bolabola. Lat. 16 12 s. long. 151 W. w. ] 

TUBAPUL, a settlement of the province and 
government of Paraguay, situate on the banks 
of the river of the same name, almost opposite 
the city of La Asuncion. 

TUBARA, a settlement of the province and 
government of Carthagena, in the new kingdom 
of Grenada ; celebrated for having been the 
doctrinal curacy of St. Luis Beltran, who reduced 
the nations to the Catholic faith. Its curacy af 
terwards belonged to the religious of the order 
of Preachers, till, under the authority of bishop 
Don Luis Ronquillo, it was delivered to the 
charge of the regular clergy ; when a consider 
able disturbance having taken place about the 
justice of the case, the King adjudged the pro 
prietorship to the former. 

TUBA RES, a settlement of the missionaries 
belonging to the Jesuits, in the province and 
government of Cinaloa. 

TUBASIS, a barbarous nation of Indians, de- 
scendents of the Chiquitos, in Peru : they are to 
the e. of the river Apare, or that of S. Michael, 
and were formerly very numerous, but are now 
reduced to a few families. 

TUBATI, a settlement of the province and 
government of Paraguay, situate to the e. of 
the lake of Ipacatui. 

TUBUGANTI, a river of the province and 
government of Darien, and the kingdom of Ti 
erra Firme ; its source is in the mountains of 
the n. coast, it runs to the w. and falls into the 
Chucunaqui. 



T U C 

TUBUL, a river of the kingdom of Chile, 
which runs to the n. n. w. ; is salt to the sea, and 
enters the Carampangur, and the promontory of 
Lava. 

TUBUSAMA, or TUBUTANI, a settlement of 
the province and government of Sonora ; situate 
on the banks of a river, between the settlements 
of Addi and Aquimuri. 

TUCACAS, a port of the coast of the pro 
vince and government of Caracas, in the new 
kingdom of Granada, in a cove formed by the 
promontory of San Juan, or Chiribiche. 

TUCAPEL, a fortress of the province and 
corregimiento of La Concepcion, in the kingdom 
of Chile, situated on the banks of the river of 
the same name ; [106 miles e. of Concepcion,] 
on the confines of the Araucanos infidels, with 
the title of S. Philip. [In lat. 36 45 *.] 

TUCAPEL, a settlement of the same province 
and kingdom of this name, with the addition of 
Viejo, in memory of an antient city so called ; 
which was situate about 53 miles s. s. w. of Con 
cepcion, near the sea. This settlement was 
founded by the direction of Don Garcia Hurtado 
de Mendoza, Marquis of Canete ; which led to 
the entire destruction of the Araucanos Indians, 
in 1600. 

TUCAPEL, a river of the same province and 
kingdom, which runs to the 5. and changing then 
its course to the w. is salt to the sea ; and enters 
the rivers of Lleullew and Lobo. The Spa 
niards fought a famous battle with the Araucanos 
on its banks. 

TUCAPEL, a volcano, of the same province 
and kingdom, 

[TUCKABATCHEES, a town of the Creek 
nation of Indians.] 

[TUCK AH OC Creek, in Maryland, Talbot 
County. A branch of Choptank river.] 

[TUCKERTON, the port of entry for the district 
of Little Egg Harbour, in the State of New 
Jersey.] 

TUCKSIGI, a settlement of Indians, of the 
province and colony of s. Carolina ; situate on 
the shore of the river Tennesse. 

TUCOMBIRA, a river of the province and 
captainship of Los Ilheos in Brazil, which rises 
on the confines of the province of Todos los 
Santos ; it runs s. and then changing its courses 
to the e. takes the name of Das Contas ; is salt 
to the sea, and enters the same about 21 miles n. 
of Los Ilheos. 

TUCOPIA. See TAUMACOR. 

TUCSANI, S. SIMON DE, a settlement of the 
province and government of Sonora, in Nueva 

VOL. IV. 



TUG 



617 



Espana ; situate in the territory of the Coco- 
maricopas Indians, on the banks of the great 
river of Gil a. 

TUCTLA, SANTIAGO DE, a settlement of the 
head settlement of the district of Malacatepec, 
and alcaldia mayor of Nexapa in Nueva Espana, 
situate in a plain which is formed by the summits 
of hills where the great level tracts of Alvarado 
are elevated. Its climate is cold, and the mists 
so continued and thick, that very seldom in the 
year do they enjoy the sun. Its neighbourhood 
consists of 44 Indian families, employed in cul 
tivating cotton, which is grown in a plain more 
than two leagues broad ; the crops are so abun 
dant, that they supply the whole jurisdiction. It 
lies 10 n. of its capital. 

TUCTLA, another settlement of this name, 
with the dedicatory title of San Sebastian, in the 
head settlement of the district of Ciulapa and 
alcaldia mayor of Quatro Villas, (four towns.) 
It consists of 75 Indian families, who are em 
ployed in the cultivation of and trade in cochi 
neal, seeds, fruits, and charcoal ; and in felling 
timber. It lies half a league to the 5. e. of its 
capital. 

TUCTLA, another settlement, with the same 
dedicatory title, in the head settlement of the 
district of Zapotitlan, and in the alcaldia mayor 
of Zacatlan ; distant a little more than two 
leagues from the last. 

TUCTLA, another, which is head settlement 
of the district and alcaldia mayor of Guaju- 
apa, which includes in its district 265 families of 
Indians. 

TUCUACA, islands of, situate in the Gulf 
of Triste ; in the province and government of 
Venezuela, and of the new kingdom of Granada. 

TUCUMA, SANTIAGO DE, a settlement of the 
province and corregimiento of Huarta in Peru, 
annexed to the curacy of Paucarbamba. 

TUCUMAN, a province and government of 
Peru, belonging to the viceroyalty of Buenos 
Ayres ; bounded on the n. by the province of 
Chichas and Lipes ; from the n. w. to zo. by that 
of Atacama, and on the w. and s. w. by that of 
Cuyo of the kingdom of Chile. The territory 
from this latter rhumb to the s. e. being a desert, 
and having the plains overrun by savage Indians ; 
namely, the Aucaes, Huarcas or Pampas, Pihu- 
enches, Puelches, Uncos, aud other nations which 
inhabit the serranias or mountains contiguous to 
the cordillera or smaller chain of Chile ; which 
extends to the Straits of Magellan. This pro 
vince is bounded towards the s. e. by the juris 
diction of Santa Fe, belonging to the govern- 
4 K " 



618 



T U C U M A N. 



ment of Buenos Ayres, or the Rio de la Plata ; 
and from the e. point to the w. where it joins the 
province of Chichas: ithas for limits, the delightful 
regions of Chaco Gualamba, an uncultivated and 
mountainous country inhabited by different sa 
vage nations. 

Tucuman, extends from 22 to 33| ; and its 
length is from the rivulet of Quiaca, which di 
vides it from Chichas unto Melingue, towards 
Buenos Ayres, almost 370 leagues ; which they 
travel in carts. The breadth is, at the widest, 
190 from e. to w. 

The first discoverers of this country divided it 
into three provinces, with respect to the three 
nations they found there ; namely, the Juries 
who occupied the eastern part, the Diaguiras the 
western, in many valleys : and the Comichin- 
goncs to the s. where at the present day stands 
the city of Cordova. These latter Indians 
dwelt in caves underneath the earth. Diego de 
Roxas, first discovered and conquered this pro 
vince in 1543, by order of the Licentiate Vaca 
de Castro, governor of Peru ; with some of those 
captains who served against Diego de Alrnagro 
the younger. These, entering the plains, en 
countered some settlements of Indians ; and in 
the v alleys of Salta and Calchaqui, certain tribes 
who were bold enough to face the Spaniards, 
when a serious affray took place, in which Diego 
de Roxas lost his lite. 

After several disturbances in the Spanish ar 
mies about a successor to the command, and the 
conquest of the territory appearing desperate, 
they returned to Peru just at the time that the 
Brigadier General Francis de Carbajal had de 
feated Diego de Centeno, in the battle of Pocona ; 
and who immediately turned his victorious arms 
against the new comers. After Peter de la 
Gasca conquered Gonzalo Pizarro in Xaquixa- 
huana in 1548, he entrusted the conquest of 
Tucuman to John Nunes de Prado, who com 
menced it in 1550, with little more than 80 men. 
Founding near the sierra, a city they called Barco, 
in compliment to Gasca, who was of the settle 
ment of that name, near Avila. 

Francisco de Villagra, passing by the town in 
1551, as he was carrying succours to Peter de 
Valdivia, for the conquest of Chile, subdued the 
city and its founder to his obedience, in the name 
of Valdivia ; pretending that the province was a 
part of that kingdom. And immediately that he 
had attained his object, lie sent thither as his 
lieutenant, Francis de Aguirre, who removed the 
said city of Barco, to the boundary of the Juries 
Indians ; and it was for many years the capital 



of that province, subject to the kingdom of 
Chile. 

Aguirre reduced and registered 47,000 Juries 
and Toconotes Indians at Santiago, the river 
Salado, and La Sierra : distributing them into 
56 parishes. And John de Zuriata, who suc 
ceeded him in the government, founded a city in 
the valley of Calchaqui ; as also another in" the 
valley of Conando, 80 leagues to the.?, s. e. which 
he called London, in compliment to Queen Mary 
of England, who had espoused Philip II. These 
cities were afterwards destroyed by the Indians, 
during the government of Castaneda. 

The climate of this province is hot, in propor 
tion to its distance from the torrid zone ; and it 
is observed that those places nearest the equator, 
are cold in the degree, as the country becomes 
more elevated : until it joins the mountainous 
tracts, or cordillera of Peru. The seasons are 
regular, and the fertility general throughout ; as 
the soil is fat and porous to a certain depth. It pro 
duces all sorts of seeds, esculent plants, and fruits 
in abundance ; with plenty of excellent pasture 
for the immense breeds of mules, horses, marcs, 
and other sorts of cattle. And, what might ap 
pear incredible is, that if the earth does not yield 
more produce, it is merely because there are not 
a proportionate number of inhabitants for the 
consumption. The average amount of these may 
be taken at 100,000, whereas the extent and fer 
tility of the country is equivalent to the support 
of four millions. In some places they have wine, 
of which they make brandy ; they have abundance 
of cotton, and of a very fine quality ; excellent 
timber for building, with which they do not 
neglect to trade : especially in boards, which are 
carried in carts drawn by oxen, from the city of 
St. Michael to Salta, &amp;anta Fe, and Buenos 
Ayres. 

It also supplies the timber which is necessary 
at Potosi, for the engines of the miners : re 
ceiving for each axletree, which by the bye is 
made of the very strongest and best wood, from 
1800 to 2000 dollars, on account of the labour 
of transporting such bulky articles over rugged 
and difficult roads. It has also gu(tyacanes, box 
trees, laurels, pines, dragon trees, walnut trees, 
very high palm trees, and many others. They 
gather here a quantity of honey, of which they 
have twelve different kinds ; also an acid, which 
is made by a species of bee under the earth. A 
great quantity of white wax, of the smooth podded 
tare of which they make mead ; cochineal, in 
digo, and flax, but which are productions of little 
use : since they do not benefit by them. They 



T U C U M A N. 



019 



abound in every species of game, which they do 
not destroy, such as tigers, and small lions that 
they call pumas, hogs, deer, elks, quiriquinchos, 
hares, vizcachas, ant-eaters, huanacos, vicunas , 
ostriches, and many insects ; various species of 
snakes, amongst which is that they call ampolaba, 
which appears like the trunk of a large tree, and 
which feeds on small animals that it attracts with 
its breath, the same being tame and unwieldy : 
here are also a multitude of large spiders webs, 
which might supply the place of silk. 

In the rivers and lakes of this province is 
found abundance of fish, sparus aurata, (Linn.) 
dentadoS) eels, and many other sorts. 

Many rivers water this province, all which, 
with the exception of two, after having run 
many leagues, disappear, forming lakes, or losing 
themselves in the earth : the principal rivers are 
the Salado, the Xuxuy, the Dulce, and the 
Quarto. There is no dearth of mines in this 
province : for, although the greater part is level, 
there are high lands where Nature has deposited 
her treasures ; for instance, in the serranias, 
which, on the zo. run towards Peru, and are 
branches of the cordillera, as is that of Aconca 
gua : there are tracts always covered with snow, 
in which there are mines of silver, several veins 
of which were worked at the end of the last 
century (the 17th), but which were abandoned, 
on account of Avars and disturbances with the 
Indians of Chaco. There have been lately dis 
covered the entrances of many mines worked by 
the Indians before the conquest, the metal of 
which, it appears, they worked by fusion. Simi 
lar mouths have also been discovered in a place 
called Pulares, in the valley of Chalcaqui, and 
in two other places of the mountains, called 
Tampatamba and Paeta, and in that of Acui, 
near which are also mines of copper, and to 
wards the confines that divide this province from 
Atacama, are the gold mines of Incahuasi, and 
of Olaros ; and in La Oufia are others, the 
working of which is assisted by some Indians of 
the settlements of Casivinco and Cochinoca, be 
longing to the estate of the Marquis of Valle 
del Toxo (the only title that nobleman enjoys), 
and others likewise of gold, though of base al 
loy, were discovered and worked in 1757, in 
the serranias of Cordoba; others also in the 
mountain of the district of Rioxa, but which 
have not been worked for want of hands. 

The principal trade of this province is that in 
mules, which they bring from the jurisdictions of 
Cordova, Santa Fe ? and Buenos Ayres, buying 



them for two, three, or four dollars. These ani 
mals are suffered to winter in the confines of 
Salta, in order to fatten and give them fresh 
vigour, (for many of them are often much injured 
in travelling), whence those fit for service are 
taken and sold every year to the number of from 
30,000 to 50,000. The purchasers immediately 
drive them to the provinces of Peru, where they 
are worth from 12 to 17 dollars each. They 
also often drive with them from 14,000 to 16.000 
cows for the miners, the original price of which 
is from 12 to 14 reals, and one for the hide, of 
which they make very good sandals. This pro 
vince also trades in soap, which it sends in trunk? 
covered with hides to Peru, paying a duty to the 
king of 11 reals for each cargo, besides a toll of 
three for each cow, and six for a mule, according 
to the decree of 1740, by which the produce was 
destined for the defence of the frontier against 
the unsubjected Indians, and for the pay of the 
troops, and support of the forts constructed for 
that purpo- c. The mules are subject to a dis 
ease in their hoofs, which is here badly named 
del bazo (of the milt), and the drivers assert, 
that it is contagious, and is communicated to 
those that are healthy, by passing over the 
ground on which the diseased have trodden ; but 
in reality it is nothing but the feet being bruised 
by the great distance they travel, especially if 
they have tender feet, and therefore those who 
are experienced will take care, during the win 
ter, which they generally pass near Salta, to 
procure pastures that are dry, and not liable to 
be overflowed, whereby the hoof may be predis 
posed to the above disease, by being rendered 
spongy and porous. 

There is scarcely a province the population of 
which has experienced so many changes, by the 
continual irruptions of the Indians, as this ; for 
they surround it on the e. and s. and formerly 
by the w. and have assaulted and annoyed the 
people, so as to drive them from their fields, re 
tiring immediately that they had committed the 
first hostility ; when, although they might leave 
many killed, they invariably would return loaded 
with spoil ; for which reason the province has 
been always in arms, and has not increased its 
population in proportion to its extent, climate, 
and fertility. It is moreover obliged, in order 
to check the same infidel Indians, to maintain, as 
a defence, several garrisons and fortresses in the 
places most exposed to their invasions, and there 
the number of inhabitants is frequently very 
considerable : these garrisons are at present 
4x2 



020 



T U C U M A N. 



Rio Negro, 
Ledesma, 
Santa Barbara, 
El Piquete, 
San Fernando, 
Piquete Segundo, 
Tunillar, 



SanLuis de losPitos, 

Estancia del Rey, 

Balbuena, 

San Estevan de Mi- 

raflores, 
El Sauce, 
El Fuerte del Tio. 



The monks of the extinguished order of the Je 
suits established some missions where various 
settlements were founded, containing 2-4,000 per 
sons reduced to social life, who have served at 
times as militia to the governors when they have 
attempted to invade Chaco ; and they were very 
Joxterous in the use of arrows, darts, and lances. 
They are very inimical to the Indians of Chaco, 
and particularly to the Mataguayos, which is the 
most numerous, unfaithful, and traitorous nation 
of all. The above subjected people are employed 
in agricultural occupations, and raise abundant 
crops of maize, zapai/os, and other seeds and 
fruits : they cultivate tobacco, cotton, and agi- 
pam, for their trade with the neighbouring cities, 
and their time is distributed with the greatest 
regularity between their labour and instructions ; 
and thus they acquire many commodities which 
they had not before. They are at present under 
the care of the monks of St. Francis. 

There is a tradition here, of the province hav 
ing been inhabited by giants ; some of the bones 
of whom have been discovered washed up by 
torrents out of the beds of deep ravines, and 
some little time back there were found in the 
curacy of La Punilla, of the jurisdiction of Cor 
doba, a human skull four fingers thick. The 
number of inhabitants amounts, as we have al 
ready observed, to 100,000, and the capital, 

TUCUMAN, is the city of the same name, with 
the dedicatory title of St. Michael, founded in 1564 
by Don Diego de Villarroel, and translated in 
1685 by the governor Don Fernando de Men- 
doza Mate de Luna, on account of an inundation 
in 1680, which swept away the church and a 
street of houses. It is 12 leagues from the place 
where it first stood, in a pleasant field, though 
without water, and the inhabitants can hardly 
procure any, except what they draw from some 
wells, and from a trench which has been made 
from the river, running at a league s distance, 
by the first founders, and lately repaired by the 
governor Don Geronimo Matorras. It is of a 
mild temperature, and very abundant in fruits ; 
it is the head of a bishopric erected in 1570, 
and contains, besides the cathedral church, de 
dicated to St. Michael, patron of the city, a con 



vent of monks of St. Francis, another of La 
Merced, and a college which belonged to the 
Jesuits. It has some trade, although very trifling, 
in the breed and sale of mules, but the principal 
traffic consists in taming oxen for the carts. [It is 
1170 geographical miles in a direct line, crossing 
part of the Peruvian Sea, by the said direct line, 
from Lima, 462 to the s. of La Plata, and lies in 
lat. 26 49 *. and long. 64 36 w.~\ 

The cities and settlements of the above pro 
vince, besides the capital, are as follow : 

Cities. Tocama, 

Cordoba, Huafiagasta, 

Rioxa, Matara, 

San Salvador, Marapa, 

Santiago, Chiquiligusta. 

Londres (or Lon- San Joaquin, 

don), Chiquiana, 

San Miguel. Calchaqui, 

Salta, Atapsi, 

Balbuena, Cafayate, 

Talavera, Pulares Grande. 

Tarija. Laracachi, 

Poyogasta, 

Towns and Settlements. Bombolan, 

Rio de Cordoba, Quilme, 

Altaboyano, Sicha. 

Saldan. 

Lagumilla, Settlements of Missions. 

Rio Segundo, S. Francisco de 

Rio Tercero, Pampas, 

Rio Quarto, Concepcion de Abi- 

Samampa, pones, 

Tulumba, San Ignacio de To- 

Ischillin, bas, 

Punilla, Saldan, 

Calamuchita, S. Estevan de Mi- 

Traslasierra, raflores, 

Humahuaca, Nuestra Senora del 

Cochinoca, Buen Consejo, 

Santa Catalina, S. Joaquin de Umo- 

Iruya, ampas, 

Casivindo, S. Juan Baptista de 

San Francisco de Balbuena, 

Yavi, Nuestra Senora del 

San Juan de los PilardeMecapillo, 

Cerillos, S. Joseph dePetacas. 

Bishops who have held the see of Tucuman. 

1. Don Jr. Gerome, of Villa Carrello, of the 
order of St. Francis, commissary-general of the 
provinces of Peru, first bishop of Tucuman, ap 
pointed in 1570, but not admitted. 

2. Don Fr. Jerome de Albornoz, of the same 



T U C U M A N. 



621 



order as the former, and likewise commissary- 
general ; he was created on the resignation of 
the first bishop in the same year, 1570. 

3. Don Fr. Francis de Victoria, of the order 
of St. Domingo, a Portuguese, master and presi 
dent of his religion, elected for his virtue and 
learning in 1576. He invited the Jesuits to come 
and convert the Indians, and, accordingly, five 
of that body entered with that view the kingdom 
of Brazil, and four that of Peru, when many 
thousands of Indians were brought into the bosom 
of the church. He went with permission into 
Spain, and died in his convent of Atocha in 
Madrid in 1592. 

4. Don Fr. Fernando Trexo de Sanabria, of 
the order of St. Francis, native of Lima, a cele 
brated preacher in Potosi, elected provincial, 
and was the first Creole who attained to that 
dignity ; he was created bishop of Tucuman in 
1592, was consecrated in Quito, and died at his 
church in 1614. 

5. Don Fr. Thomas de Torres, of the order 
of St. Domingo, native of Madrid, of the col 
lege of St. Gregory of Valladolid, of which he 

r* i 

was president and master : after having many 
years read theology in its convents, he followed 
the same course with great applause in that of 
Lovain eight years, and returning to Spain, be 
came prior in the convents of Atocha and Za- 
inora. Don Philip III. created him bishop of 
Paraguay, and he was translated from that see 
to Tucuman in 1629. He died at Chuquisaca of 
a fit of frenzy going to Lima, to attend the 
council celebrated there. 

6. Don Fr. Melchor de Maldanado and Saa- 
vedra, of the order of St. Augustine, native of 
the city of the Rio del Hacha, in the new king 
dom of Granada. He went to Spain, and took 
up his residence in Seville, studied in Salamanca, 
and was created bishop of Tucuman in 1632. 
He devoted himself with the greatest attention 
to the conversion of the infidel Indians, on which 
he wrote with much zeal to his holiness and the 
king. He governed his church with great ap 
plause and prudence 30 years, and died in 1662. 

7. Don Fr. Nicholas de Ulloa, of the order of 
St. Augustin, native of Lima ; he studied in the 
college of that city, was provincial and founder 
of the college and university of St. Augustin, 
created bishop of Tucuman in 1663, governed 
his diocese with great prudence, and was a watch 
ful promoter of the conversion of the infidel 
Indians, lending his assistance to the exertions 
of the Jesuits, and died full of virtues in 1682. 

8. Don Francis de Borja, who was elected 



bishop of this church in the aforementioned year 
1682, and promoted in the same year to the see 
of Truxillo. 

9. Don Fr. Alonso Pacheco, of the order of 
St. Augustin, native of Lima, provincial of his 
province, founder of the pontifical college and 
university of St. Augustin, elected bishop of 
Tucuman. 

10. Don Fr. Manuel de Mercadillo, of whom 
no notice is made, excepting in the history of 
Chaco by Father Peter Luzano, who records his 
being bishop of Tucuman in 1710. 

11. Don Juan de Laiseca Alvarada, elected 
bishop of that church in 1711 ; translated from 
thence to the see of Popayan before he took pos 
session. 

12. Don Alonzo del Pozo and Silva, dean of 
the church of La Concepcion of Chile, the place 
of his birth, collegiate of the convent of St. Fran 
cis Xavier of that city, rector, magisterial canon, 
archdeacon, and finally dean in his church ; was 
presented to the bishopric of Tucuman in 1711, 
in which he lived with the fame of great charity 
and virtue, and was translated to that of Santiago 
of Chile in 1723. 

13. Don Juan de Sarricolea y Olea, born at 
the city of Leon de Guaunco in Peru, a man of 
such rare talents that at 1 1 years of age he de 
fended publicly grammatical and rhetorical the- 
sises in Lima : he was of the royal college of St. 
Martin, took the degree of doctor of divinity in 
the university of St. Mark, obtained three con 
tested cures, was synodical examiner of the arch 
bishopric, and in the election for a penitentiary 
of that metropolitan church the king promoted 
him to that office without his proposing himself: 
he put up for many professorships, and gained 
those of none and prime in the above university, 
was nominated bishop of Tucuman in 1724, and 
promoted to the see of Santiago of Chile in 1730. 

14. Don Joseph Garcia Gutierrez deCevallos, 
knight of the order of Santiago, of the royal col 
lege of Salamanca, was made Inquisitor of Lima, 
created bishop of Tucuman in 1730, and from 
that church translated to the metropolitan arch 
bishopric of Lima in 1742. 

15. Don Ferdinand de la Sota, made bishop in 
1742, and died two years after in 1744. 

16. Don Pedro de Argandona, elected in 1745, 
and translated to the archbishopric of Charcas in 
1761. 

17. Don Manuel de Abad and Illana, chosen 
in 1763, and afterwards promoted to the bishopric 
of Arequipa in 1770. 

18. Don Juan Manuel de Moscoso y Peralta, 



622 



T U C 



TUG 



native of Aroquipa, of the royal college of S. 
Marcos, ordained with the title of curate of the 
town of Moquchua, was provisor and vicar-gene 
ral of that bishopric, visitor general of the same, 
commissary and apostolic judge of the holy cross 
and of the Inquisition, as well as qualifier of it ; 
synodical examiner, magisterial canon of the 
church of his country, and afterwards treasurer, 
schoolmaster, and archdeacon, and under this 
name, being auxiliary bishop with the additional 
title of Tricomi : he was translated to the see of 
Tucuman in 1770, assisted as suffragan in the 
council of Plata, and was then promotel to Cuzco 
in 1778. 

19. Don jFr. Joseph Antonio de San Alberto, 
of the order of the barefooted Carmelites, created 
bishop of Tucuman in 1778, and promoted arch 
bishop of Charcas in 1784. 

20. Don Angel Mariano Moscoso, Perez y 
Oblitas, native of Arequipa : he studied in the 
royal college of S. Bernardo, of the city of 
Cuzco, philosophy and theology, in which he 
obtained the degree of doctor : he went to Santa 
Cruz de la Sierra, as secretary to the bishop Don 
Ferdinand Oblitas, where he was ordained and 
destined to the curacy of Tarata, in which he 
served more than 20 years ; he rebuilt the pa 
rochial church, and erected another in a place 
called the Paredon : he undertook the conquest 
and reduction of the Juracarees Indians, of 
whom he formed two settlements, opening a re 
gular communication with them. He assisted 
most zealously with his person, people, arms, 
and succours, the royal army raised to restore 
the tranquillity of the provinces, that had been 
put into agitation by the rebel Tupamaro. These 
services were represented by the secular audience 
and the cabildo of Charcas to his majesty, who 
ordered, in two royal edicts sent to the chamber 
of the Indies, that he should be consulted in 
the election of the prebends of the church of 
Charcas, and in the year 1784 he was presented 
to that bishopric, where he governed with the 
greatest prudence and popularity. 

TUCUMAN, with the dedicatory title of Santa 
Maria, a large settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Mexico in Ntieva Espana, in 
which there is a beautiful stone bridge on the 
road which leads to that city. 

TUCUMAN, a river of the province and go 
vernment of Tucuman, which takes a course s.s. e. 
and runs beyond the capital. 

TUCUMANILLA, a settlement of the same 
province and government as the former river, 
situate near the capital towards the n. n. w. 



TUCUMARE, a river of the province and 
country of the Amazonas : it is small, runs to 
the w. and falls into that of Madera between the 
rivers Yamari and Macacipe. 

TUCLME, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Canes and Canches in Peru, an 
nexed to the curacy of Muchumi. 

TUCUME, a river of the same name, in the 
province and kingdom of Tierra Firme : it rises 
in the mountains of Pacora, and enters the sea 
in the Bay of Panama. 

TtJCUPA, a river of the province and go 
vernment of Guayana, which rises to the jo. of 
Lake Icupa, runs to the n. and falls into the river 
Paraguay. 

TUCUPIO, a river of the province and go 
vernment of Venezuela in the new kingdom of 
Granada ; it takes its rise in a plain w. of the 
city of Guanare, and runs forming a curve to 
the e . in order to fall into the river Guanarito. 

TUCUPIO, a small river of the province and 
government of Cuniana; which rises in the heights 
of Imatica, runs to the s. and then unites with 
the river Curuma, to fall into that of Cuyuni. 

TUCURA, a large and deep river of the new 
kingdom of Granada, called also Bejucos, from 
a bridge that had been built of twigs by the Spa 
niards, for a passage in the time of the conquest 
of that kingdom. 

TUCURAI, a deep river of the province and 
government of Mainas in the kingdom of Quito ; 
it rises in the chain of mountains, and falls into 
the river Guallage. 

TUCURU, a settlement of the province and 
alcaldia mayor of Vera Paz, in the kingdom of 
Guatemala. 

TUCUTI, SAN ANTONIO DE, a settlement of 
the province and government of Darien and king 
dom of Tierra Firme ; situate on the coast of 
the S. Sea, and on the banks of a river. 

TUCUYACHI, a settlement of the province 
and corregimiento of Chilques and Masques in 
Peru, annexed to the curacy of the corregimiento 
of Capi. 

TUCUYO, NUESTRA SENORA DE I,A CON- 
CEPCION DE, a city of the province and govern 
ment of Venezuela, in the new kingdom of Gra 
nada, founded in 1545, bj the captain John de 
Carvajal, in a beautiful valley of the same name, 
1he which it takes from the said river, which 
passes by it fertilizing it, and irrigating other 
parts of the province with its waters, which are 
crystalline, tenuous, and salubrious. The cli 
mate here is moderate, although somewhat in 
clined to be hot ; the soil of the district is fertile 



TUG 



023 



and abundant in grain, maize, sugar-canes, cocoa, 
cotton, and every species of fruit?, as well those 
of America as of Europe, and particularly the 
apple, which is exceedingly fine : the pasture is 
abundant, and maintains an infinite number of 
goats, from the skins of which they procure a 
quantity of good chamois leather, in which the 
neighbourhood, consisting of 130 families, trade : 
it has, besides the parish church, two convents, 
the one of St. Francis, and the other of St. Do 
mingo : in its vicinity are many barbarous and 
cannibal Indians of the Cuicas, Cuibais, and 
Coines nations, who live in the woods and wilds. 
This city is celebrated for the condign punish 
ment it visited upon its founder, whom they 
hanged on a cci/ba-trec, for his disorderly and 
atrocious rule, and the same justice they after 
wards executed on the tyrant Lope de Aguirre. 
[It lies 28 miles from Bariquisimeto, 28 from Ca- 
cora, 182 from Caracas, 120 from the N. Sea, and 
393 from Santa Fe : in lat. 9 27 n. and in long. 
695l / x. } 

TUDELA, a city of the new kingdom of 
Granada, founded in the territory of the Colimas 
Indians by Captain Peter de Lrsua, in 1551, and 
not, as is related by the ex-Jesuit Coleti, in 
1547, in memory of the city of the same name 
in the kingdom of Navarre, w hich was his na 
tive place. It was situate on the banks of the 
river Zarbi, but a short time after its foundation 
it was destroyed by the Indians ; and as the re 
building of it has never since been agitated, it 
still remains but a heap of ruins. 

TUESDAI. See SANTA MONICA. 

TUERTO, River of, in Hispaniola, or St. 
Domingo : it runs to the n. and falls into the sea 
on the n. coast, in the part possessed by the 
French between St. Anne s and the prison of 
Ogeron. 

[TUFT0NBOROUGH, a town of New 
Hampshire, in Strafford County, situate on the 
n. e. side of Lake Winipiseogee, adjoining Wolf- 
borough, containing 109 inhabitants.] 

[TLGELO River, in Georgia, is the main 
branch of Savannah river. The other great 
branch is Keowee, which, joining with the other 
15 miles n. us. of the n. boundary of Wilkes s 
County, forms the Savannah. Some branches of 
the Tugelo rise in the State of Tennessee. A 
respectable traveller relates, that in 10 minutes, 
having walked his horse moderately, he tasted 
of Tugelo, Apalachicola, and Hiwassee rivers.] 

TUGELO, a settlement of the province and 
colony of S. Carolina, situate in the country of 
the Low Cherokee Indians, on the banks of a river 



of tlte same name, in which the English have 
an establishment, and a fort constructed for its 
defence. 

TL HERE, a river of the province and coun 
try of the Amazonas, and part of Portuguese 
Guayan.a : it rises in the territory of the Indians 
of that nation, runs s. s. e. and enters in the 
Marailon, between the rivers Isari and Igarape. 

TUHERE. a settlement of this name in the 
same province, situate on the banks of the last 
named river, near the mouth of the Maranon. 

TUI, a river of the province and government 
of Venezuela and the new kingdom of Granada ; 
it rises in the mountainous tracts of its coasts, 
and runs to the n. e. until it falls into the sea 
about 62 miles s. e. of Caracas. 

TUI, another small river of this name, in the 
province and government of Nueva Andalucia. 
It has its rise in the country of the Armaco- 
tos Indians, and enters the source of the river 
Arui. 

TUICHI, a river of the province and corregi- 
miento of Apolabamba in Peru ; its source is in 
the mountains of the Cordillera, and, receiving 
many streams, it runs more than 40 leagues to 
the n. e. and enters very copiously into the river 
Beni, by the settlement of Reyes, in the province 
and government of Moxos of the kingdom of 
Quito. It contains much fish of various species 
and excellent quality, which the Indians catch in 
abundance. 

[TUICHTENOONA Creek, in the State of 
New York, is 16 miles above Schenectady : e. of 
the creek is a curious Indian inscription.] 

TUIGH, a small river of the island of Bar- 
badoes. 

TUINAITA, a small river of the government 
and province of Paraguay ; it runs to the e. and 
enters another of this name close to the settle 
ment of San Ignacio. 

TUINAMANES, a nation of barbarous In 
dians, who inhabit the ancient province of Cate- 
pararo, in the thickets to the s. of the river Ca- 
queta ; it extends to the source of the river Ne 
gro, but little is known of its customs. 

TUIRA, a river of the province and govern 
ment of Darien and kingdom of Tierra Firme, 
irt the mountains of which it takes its rise by 
the coast of the N. Sea, and traversing almost 
all the isthmus which divides the two seas, after 
a very irregular course in different directions, it 
discharges itself into the Gulf of St. Michael of 
the S. Sea, forming the Bay of Garachine : [in 
lat. 8 18 n.] 

TULA, a province and alcaldia mayor of Nu- 



624 



T U L 



eva Espaiia. It is very fertile in productions, 
with which it supplies Mexico : and particularly 
with burnt lime for all its works, that article 
being the best that is made throughout the king 
dom. Its population consists of many hamlets. 
This province was, according to the tradition of 
the Indians, inhabited by giants ; who shew 
huge bones and teeth. And in 1738, Fr. Louis 
cle Vergara, doctrinal curate of the settlement of 
Huejutla, discovered an entire skeleton fixed 
across a water-course, made by some violent 
rains ; but which had left the skeleton with the 
legs and head buried in either bank, so as to 
form from its size and bulk as it were a small 
bridge. This acaldia mayor belongs to the 
Duke of Alisco, who enjoys it as an estate granted 
to his family. 

TULA, the capital, is the city of the same 
name, which is of a good climate ; fertile and 
abundant in fruits, grains, and seeds. It consists 
of a convent of St. Francis, and 280 Indian fa 
milies ; besides many others, inhabited by Spa 
niards, Mulattoes, and Mustees. The settlement 
is more ancient than New Spain, and was founded 
by the Tuldecas. [It is 14 miles n. n. w. of 
Mexico, in lat. 19 57 n. long. 99 21 .] 

The other settlements of this jurisdiction are 
the following: 

Michimaloya, Axuchitlan, 

Tepexi del Rio, Iztlapa, 

Tepetitlan, Tultengo, 

Nextlalpan, Xicapotla. 

TULA, another settlement, with the tutelary 
appellation of San Antonio, in the alcaldia mayor 
of Guadalcazar, in the same kingdom. It is one 
of the missions which the Franciscan monks 
have there ; it consists of 1000 families of Chi- 
chimecas Indians, reduced to the Catholic faith ; 
and of these there is a body of 100 armed men 
mounted on horseback, with their chief to protect 
the missionaries, and check the wild Indians, who 
make frequent irruptions : and who dwell in the 
woods and caverns, of which there are many in 
this district. It is 25 leagues e. of its head set 
tlement and capital. 

TULANZINGO, a jurisdiction and alcaldia 
mayor of Nueva Espana, the district of which 
alone comprehends seven head settlements, and 
many suburbs or villages ; all of which are sur 
rounded with gardens, abundantly fertile in 
fruits, flowers, seeds, and vegetables. Here also 
the quantity of cattle is so great, that the inha 
bitants have no necessity to resort to other pro 
vinces for them ; or, indeed, for a supply of any 
thing- requisite for convenience or luxury. 



T U L 

TULANZINGO, the capital, is the settlement of 
this name, one of the best of all, for its size, 
situation, and beauty : as well as for the prospect 
it enjoys of a verdant country. It consists of 
710 families of Indians, 100 of Spaniards, Mulat- 
toes and Mustees ; and has a very fine convent of 
the Franciscan monks. [It is 51 miles n. e. of 
Mexico, in lat. 19 58 n. long. 98 22 w.~\ Its 
other settlements are, 

Atotonilco, Acaxuchitlin, 

Zonguiluca, Tutotepec, 

Guazcazaloya, Tenango. 

Acatlan, 

TULANZINGO, another settlement of this name, 
with the tutelary appellation of San Miguel, of 
the head settlement of the district of Mamalte- 
pec, and alcaldia mayor of Tepozcolula, in the 
same kingdom. It consists of 96 Indian families. 

TULCAN, a settlement of the province and 
corrcgimiento of Pasto, in the kingdom of Quito ; 
situated on the road leading to the province of 
Popayan. 

TULIALCO, a settlement of the jurisdiction 
and alcaldia mayor of Chalco, in Nueva Espana ; 
with a large stone causeway passing entirely over 
the lake, by the side of which it is situate. 

TULIAN, a settlement of the province and 
government of Tucuman, in the district and 
jurisdiction of the city of Cordova; on the banks 
of the former river. 

TULIASTLOACAN, a settlement of the head 
settlement of the district of Atoyaque, and the 
alcaldia mayor of Xicayan in Nueva Espana. 
It consists of 14 Indian families, who cultivate 
cochineal, tobacco, cotton, and all sorts of seeds. 
It is situate quite close to the alcaldia mayor of 
Ixcapa, and 11 leagues from its capital. 

[TULLY, one of the military townships of 
Onondago County, New York ; having Sempro- 
nius on the w. and Fabius on the e. It is within 
the jurisdiction of Pompey, and lies 23 miles e . 
of the ferry on Cayuga Lake.] 

[TULMERO, a settlement of the province and 
government of Venezuela ; it is situate equally 
in the valleys of Arogoa, two leagues from Ma- 
racav. It has a modern look, is well built, and 
the residence of many planters ; as well as of 
all the persons employed in the superintendance 
of the tobacco, which is cultivated in the environs 
on account of the king. It has a curate, and a 
lieutenant of justice. The population is 8000 
persons.] 

TULPEHOCKEN, a city of the county of 
Lancaster, in the province of Pennsylvania, in 
the United States of America ; situate on the 



T U M 

banks of a branch of the river Schuylkill. Six 
miles w. of Middleton, six n. e. of Lebanon, and 
65 w. w. of Philadelphia. 

TULPEHOCKEN, a small river of the same 
name, in the county of Berks in the same pro 
vince. 

TULPETLAC, SANTA MARIA DE, a settle 
ment of the alcaldia mayor of Ecatepec, in Nu- 
eva Espana ; it comprises 54 Indian families. 

TULTENGO, a settlement of the alcaldia 
mayor of Tula, in the same kingdom as the last ; 
distant a quarter of a league e. of its capital. 
It comprises 79 Indian families. 

TULTEPEC, a settlement of the alcaldia 
mayor of Coautitlan, in the same kingdom as 
the former ; annexed to the curacy of the set 
tlement of its capital, from which it is distant 
2 leagues e. n. e. It comprises 378 Indian fa 
milies. 

TULTEPEC, another settlement of the same 
name ; the head settlement of the alcaldia mayor 
of Metepec, in the same kingdom. It comprises 
62 Indian families. 

TULTITLAN, SAN LORENZO DE, a large 
settlement of the jurisdiction and alcaldia mayor 
of Tucuba, in the same kingdom as (he last ; 
situate five leagues from its capital, towards the 
n. and beyond the port of Barrientos. It con 
tains 332 Indian families, and a convent of Fran 
ciscan monks ; in the church of which, they 
worship an effigy of St. Anthony of Padua, for 
which the inhabitants have a singular devotion. 
In the plains of this settlement it was, that Her 
man Cortez halted with his army, to recover them 
from the fatigues of war, on his celebrated re 
treat from Mexico, on the sad night after the 
death of Moctezuma. 

TULUA, a settlement of the province and 
government of Popayan, in the new kingdom of 
Granada. 

TULULU1, a river of the province and go 
vernment of Esmeraldas, in the kingdom of 
Quito ; which runs to the w. and after it has re 
ceived the waters of the rivers Patari and Aqua- 
sucia, enters by the n. into the river Bogota, in 
lat. 58 n. 

TULUMBA, a river of the province and 
settlement of Tucuman in Peru, of the district 
and jurisdiction of the city of Cordova. 

TUMACO, an island of the Pacific Ocean or 
South Sea ; called also Gorgona. It belongs to 
the government and province of Esmeraldas, in 
the kingdom of Quito. It is from s. e. to n. w. 
two miles long : and one broad from n. e. to s. w. ; 
distant one mile and a half from the continent of 

VOL. IV. 



T U M 



625 



Tierra Firme, opposite the mouth or entrance of 
the river Mira, called also Aqua-Clara. It is 
surrounded by other small islands, called La 
Viuda, El Viudo, Placer de Poilas, and El 
Morro. It has a snug commodious port, con 
sisting of a small settlement of the same name ; 
with good anchoring ground for small vessels. 
The climate is hot : it has the name of Tumaco, 
and is also called Gorgonilla, for this was the 
name of the chief, or elder cacique of the island, 
when the Spaniards conquered it. fit is in lat. 
1 46 n. and long. 78- 43 a&amp;gt;.j 

TUMACO, a settlement of the same province 
and government as the former. 

TtJMBACO, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Quito. 

TUMBADEN, SAN Luis DE, a settlement of 
the province and corregimiento of Caxamarca in 
Peru, annexed to the curacy of the corregimiento 
of Chalique. 

TUMBADO, an island of the N. Sea, one of 
the Lucayas : and the last of those forming the 
Bahama channel to the n. of the island of this 
name. It is inhabited by the English. 

TUMBAVIRO, a settlement of the province 
and corregimiento of Ibarra in the kingdom of 
Quito, situate on the e. part of Mount Yana- 
Urcu, and to the s. of Caguasqui. To the n. n. e. 
it has another settlement called Las Salinas, in 
which district they discovered a fossil salt, of 
which, though of bad quality, the consumption 
is very great. It is of a moderate climate, se 
rene and healthy, and very fertile in cotton and 
sugar-canes. It is in lat. 26 7" n. 

TUMBEZ, a settlement of the corregimiento 
of Piura in Peru, founded on the banks of 
a river of the same name, and near the coast 
of the S. Sea ;. famous for Francis Pizarro 
disembarking here in 1526, when on his way to 
the conquest of Peru ; as also, for the peculiar 
circumstance attending the landing of Peter of 
Candia, one of his soldiers, and a native of the 
island of that name : for he was the first who 
put his foot on earth ; and to whom occurred the 
prodigy of a furious lion, which had been set 
upon him by the Indians to tear him to pieces, 
crouching to a Cross which he carried in his 
hand ; when they, being overpowered at the 
sight, submitted to the Spaniards, whom they 
afterwards assisted to conquer the Indians of the 
Island of Puna ; between whom, and these, there 
was always an irreconcileable enmity. This set 
tlement is of a warm and dry climate, but benign 
and healthful, very fertile and abundant in pro 
ductions, cotton, tobacco, and cocoa of excellent 

4 L 



626 



TUN 



quality ; it is the end of the viceroy ship of Peru 
on the n. It seldom rains here, but when it does, 
which is after many years, it does not cease the 
whole winter. There are in its district many 
good salt works. On the opposite side of the 
river, on which the settlement stands, are seen 
the ruins of the original town that belonged to 
the Indians ; and which was afterwards deserted 
by the Spaniards for the spot where they now are. 
There also are to be seen the ruins of the temple 
of the sun ; also a fortress, and a stone cause 
way, built by order of the Inca Tupac Yupanqui, 
twelfth Emperor, when he conquered this country 
and united it to the empire. The first bishop of 
Peru, who was Hernan de Luque y Olivera, 
took the title of bishop of Turnbez. [It is in 
lat. 3 26 s. 1 15 miles s. &amp;. from Piura.] 

TUMBEZ, an abundant river of the same pro 
vince and kingdom. It rises in the mountains of 
the Andes, and empties itself in the Gulf of 
Guayaquil in the S. Sea : opposite the island of 
Santa Clara, or Amortajado. By it launches, 
flat-bottomed boats, and other small vessels pass 
as far as the settlement ; but in winter it cannot 
be navigated for the great current arising from 
the extraordinary increase of its waters. Its 
banks are covered with a number of country 
houses, inhabited by Indians ; who, with the 
advantage of irrigation supplied by the river, 
cultivate a quantity of maize and other seeds 
peculiar to hot climates. Also in the more dis 
tant tracts, where the water cannot be procured, 
they raise carobes, with which they feed every 
sort of cattle, who fatten well by it ; acquiring 
great strength, and procuring to their flesh a 
very delicate flavour. 

TUMBEZ, a large bay or gulf, in the S. Sea, 
and of the same province and correghniento, 
formed on that coast by Cape Blanco, and the 
Point Cannero ; distant from each other eight 
leagues, which is the breadth of the bay : its 
length being nearly equal, or somewhat longer. 
It was the first Peruvian land discovered by its 
conqueror, Don Francis Pizarro, Marquis de 
los Charcas and Atav illos. 

TUMBIA, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Pasca, in the new kingdom of 
Granada : its climate is hot, and it produces 
much maize, sugar-canes, yucas, and some black- 
cattle : for the breed of which it has excellent 
pastures. Its inhabitants are 100 housekeepers, 
and SO Indians ; it is 24 leagues from Santa Fe. 

TUMBIQUI, SANTA BARBARA DE, a set 
tlement of the province and government of 
Chpco, in the same kingdom as the last : and of 



the division and district of Barbacoas ; situate 
in one of the islands formed by the abundant 
river of Patio at its entrance into the S. Sea. 

[TUMBLING Dam, on Delaware river, is 
about 22 miles above Trenton, in the United 
States.] 

TUMBO, Dr. ORELLUDOS, a river of the pro 
vince and government of San Juan delos Llanos^ 
in the new kingdom of Granada ; which runs to 
the e. and falls into the Orinoco. 

TUMIPAMPA, a settlement of the province 
and kingdom of Quito, during the paganism of 
the Indians ; situate towards thes. It was very 
large and populous, and was conquered by the 
Inca Tupac Yupanqui, twelfth Emperor. 

TUMUCURAQUE, SIERRAS DE, great and 
very rugged mountains, of the province and 
country of the Amazonas, in the part possessed 
by the Portuguese. They run from n.n.w.tos. s.e. 

TUMUPOSA, TRINIDAD DE, called also Ya- 
riapu, a settlement of the province and corre 
gimiento of Pomabamba in Peru, situate on the 
banks of the river Tequieri. 

TUNA, a settlement of the island of Porto 
Rico, situate on the n. w. coast and by Point 
Boriquen. 

TUNA, a small river of the same name, in the 
province and captainship of Pernambuco in Bra 
zil ; it rises rear the coast, runs e. and falls into 
the sea, between the rivers Ilheos and Piratu- 
ninga. 

TUNA, another settlement, with the appel 
lation of Santiago, of the province and corregi 
miento of Huarochiri in Peru ; annexed to the 
curacy of the settlements of San Corme and 
San Damian. 

TUNAL, a settlement of Indians of the Te- 
peguana nation, in the province and government 
of Nueva Vizcaya ; it is two leagues s. c. of its. 
capital. 

TUNAQUI, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Caxamarquilla in the same king 
dom as the preceding. 

TUNAR, a settlement of the island of Mar 
garita, situate on the n. coast, close by Cape de 
Robledo. 

[TUNBRIDGE, a township of Vermont, 
Orange County, 12 miles w. of Thetford. It 
contains 487 inhabitants.] 

TUNCACAS, a settlement of the province 
and government of Venezuela, in the new king 
dom of Granada ; it has an indifferent port, 
which is very much resorted to by the foreign 
traders, who carry on here an illegal commerce. 
It lies between La Guayra and Cape San Roman, 



T U N 



TUN 



627 



TUNEBOS, a barbarous nation of Indians, 
in the new kingdom of Granada, who inhabit 
the mountains of the e. part ; these Indians are 
inconstant, and given to superstition ; they re 
late that the devil appears to them in the form 
of a horrible serpent, in the environs of Lake 
Sache, where they consult him as a prophet. 
The missionaries of the abolished society of the 
Jesuits of Santa Fe, commenced the conversion 
of these deluded creatures in 1661. 

TUNGA, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Pasto, in the kingdom of Quito; 
situate close to a mountain in which there is a 
volcano. 

TUNGAREO, a settlement of the head set 
tlement and alcaldia mat/or of Maravatio in Nu- 
eva Espana : it contains 60 families of Indians, 
and is two leagues w. of its capital. 

TUNGAZUCA, a settlement of the province 
and corregimiento of Canes y Candies, or Tinta 
in Peru ; in the vicinity of which there is a cele 
brated sanctuary, in which they venerate an 
effigy of our Redeemer. The sanctuary bears 
the appellation of the settlement. 

TUNGURAGUA, a very high mountain, of 
the district of the asiento of Ambato, in the pro 
vince and corregimiento of Riobamba, and king 
dom of Quito. It is of a conical figure, and the 
top is always covered with snow, and regularly 
sloped on all sides. It is situate in the deep 
valley of the Bafios de Potate, and is 2,623 Paris 
perches above the level of the sea ; having its 
skirts covered with a thick wood, and being in 
consequence supposed to be inhabited by some 
wild Indians. In these woods there is a foun 
tain of mineral water, which issues out boiling. 
It is seven leagues from Riobamba, in lat. P 29 s, 

TUNGURAGUA, an abundant river of the same 
name, which has its source in the above moun 
tain and wilderness, below the province of 
Mainas of the same kingdom, and enters into 
the Mararlon on the n. side ; being a league 
broad, and at the distance of 80 leagues from 
Cararai, when such is the volume of its waters, 
as to stay the whole stream of that formidable 
river from its usual course for some leagues. 
The Tunguragua thus procuring itself a space in 
the native bed of the Amazonas for more than 
a league, supplies that river with a great variety 
of fish, which are not otherwise found in it, even 
from its mouth. 

TUNIA, a settlement of the province and go 
vernment of Popayan, in the new kingdom of 
Granada. 

[TUNICAS, Indians of N. America, who lived 



formerly on the Bayau Tunica, above Point Cou- 
pee, on the Mississippi, e. side. They now live 
at Avoyall, and do not at present exceed 25 men. 
Their native language is peculiar to themselves, 
but they speak Mobilian ; are employed occa 
sionally by the inhabitants as boatmen, &amp;c. 
They are in amity with all other people, but their 
number is gradually diminishing.] 

TUNILLAA, a fortress of the province and 
government of Tucuman in Peru, constructed to 
repress the incursions of the infidel Indians. 

TUNJA, a province and corregimiento of the 
new kingdom of Granada, bounded on the w. by 
the jurisdiction of Santa Fe and corregimiento 
of Bogota ; on the e. by the province and govern 
ment of San Juan de los Llanos ; on the w. zv. 
by the government of Mariquita, the great 
river of Magdalena serving as the limit ; on the 
n. by the government of Cartagena, and on the 
n. e. by the corregimiento of Muzo. It is in 
general of a cold and dry climate, though in 
some places they enjoy a very moderate tempera 
ture, extremely abundant and fertile in grain, 
vegetables, and delicate fruits ; and especially in 
tobacco of an excellent quality, of which they 
had manufactories, until they were put a stop to 
for the royal revenue. This article was held in 
very particular estimation throughout all America 
and Europe, so that it was a property of the 
greatest value ; and it appears that it was im 
possible to grow in this province alone, sufficient 
to supply the demand from every quarter. This 
province abounds in saltpetre, from the aridity of 
the soil ; and they have therefore established 
here, the only manufactories for powder, which 
are to be found throughout the new kingdom. 
It has mines of gold, and is celebrated for those 
of emeralds, of which there have been so many 
taken away, that their scarcity is very apparent ; 
whilst the working of the gold mines has also 
fallen into decay. 

This province was, during the time of the pa 
ganism of the Indians, a kingdom separate from 
that of Bogota, whose kings were called Zaques, 
and waged sanguinary wars with the Zipas. It 
was then called in the idiom of the country Hun- 
zusta. It ruled the nations of the Chibataes, 
Soracaes, Tibaquiraes, Soras, Cucaitas, Susas, 
Furaquiras, Boyacaes, Icabucos, Tibanaes, Ten- 
zas, Garagoas, Matabitas, and the cacique Fur- 
meque, a chief powerful in vassals, and who 
resided on the frontiers of the states of Zipa 
and Bogota- 
Tins province was formerly much esteemed 
and sought after on account of its riches ; its 
4L2 



t&amp;gt;28 



TUN 



TUN 



jurisdiction comprehends eight corregimientos of 
Indians, which are 

Turmeque, Paipa, 

Tensa, Sogamoso, 

Duitama, Chita, 

Chibata, Gameza. 

And in these are four cities, two towns, and 
69 settlements, containing in all 20,220 souls, 
according to the census lately made by its cor- 
regidor : by order of the viceroy of that king 
dom, D. Joseph de la Cerda, Count of La Vega 
de Armijo. One of the principal sources of 
trade of this province is in its cattle, which are 
bred in the excellent pasture in which it abounds. 
The afore-mentioned settlements are, 



Turmeque, 

Chirive, 

Tibana, 

Boyaca, 

Lengusaque, 

Guacheta, 

Icabuco, 

Sogamoso, 

Mopsa, 

Chamesa, 

Tibazosa, 

Mongui, 

Cuitiva, 

Isa, 

Tota, 

Guaraquira, 

Firabitoba, 

Tensa, 

Susatensa, 

Guateque, 

Somondoco, 

Garagoa, 

Tequas, 

Lem 



Miraflores, 

Ramiquiri, 

Viracacha, 

Duitama, 

Serinza, 

Sativa, 

Suata, 

Chita, 

Buavita, 

Cocui, 

Panqueva, 

Guicani, 

Chiscas, 

Guacamayas, 

Pueblo de Sal, 

Morcote, 

Tequia, 

Onzaga, 

Susa, 

Santa Rosa de Blan- 



cos, 



Capitanejo, 
Valle de Miel, 

-gupa, Chibata, 

Gameza, Siachoque, 

Tobacia, Toca, 

Busquanza, Saraca, 

Beteitiva, Pesca, 

Tutaza, Paipa, 

Socha, Sotaquira, 

Tasco, Gambita, 

Mongua, Tuta, 

Topaga, Oicata, 

Socota, Cambita, 

Cheva, $. Motavita. 

TUNJA, the capital, is the city of the same 
name, founded in 1539, by the captain Gonzalo 
Suarez Rondon, on a height or small mountain 
in the same valley in which the king used to hold 
bis court. Its climate is dry and cold, being 



continually refreshed with winds, and healthy. It 
is very abundant in cattle, and fertile in all pro 
ductions necessary for the comfort and enjoyment 
of life ; but deficient in fuel and water, since it 
has not more than what enters by an aqueduct, 
from a height commanding the city. It had a 
great trade in tobacco, of a peculiar sort, and 
much esteemed in Europe until it was suppressed 
in favour of the royal revenue. This city was 
very rich and opulent at its first establishment, 
from the greater part of the conquerors settling 
here ; from whom have descended many illustri 
ous families, now included in its population ; 
which is reduced to about 400 housekeepers. 
But nevertheless, there are still to be seen speci 
mens of its greatness in the buildings, which are 
magnificent, particularly the parish church of 
Santiago, which might serve as a cathedral any 
where ; besides which, there are two others, 
Santa Barbara, and Las Nieves. It has three 
convents of the orders of St. Domingo and St. 
Austin; two nunneries ; one of Santa Clara, and 
the other of the Conception ; three hermitages ; 
dedicated, the one to St. Lawrence, at the en 
trance of the city, on the way to Santa Fe ; and 
the other to St. Lucia, and the third to Our Lady 
of Chiquinquira, on the top of the lofty plane 
of Los Ahorcados, (the gallows) ; thus named on 
account of its being, in the time of the paganism 
of the Indians, ornamented with bones and 
skulls of persons executed and sacrificed. This 
city has for arms the same as those of Castille 
and Leon, and they were granted it by the empe 
ror Charles V. in 1541. In the centre of the in 
ferior part of them is a grenado, and a black 
eagle with two heads and golden crowns em 
braces the whole shield, having a fleece pendant 
from its wings. [It is 54 miles n. n. e. of Santa 
Fe, in lat. 5 24 n. and long 73 45 w.l 

[TUNKERS. See EPHRATA.] 

[TUNKHANNOCK, a township and creek 
in Luzerne County, Pennsylvania. The creek is 
a water of Susquehannah.J 

TUNQUIRI, a settlement, of the province 
and corregimiento of Carangas, and the archbi 
shopric of Charcas in Peru; annexed to the 
curacy of that of Corquemar. 

TUNU, a small antient province of Peru, in 
the time of the Indians. It was to the e. of Cuz- 
co, in which it is now comprehended. It was 
reduced to the empire by the emperor Inca-Roca, 
the sixth of the Incas. 

TUNUYAN, a large and abundant river of 
the province and corregimiento of Maule, in the 
kingdom of Chile. It rises in the mountains in 



TUP 



T U R 



629 



the s. part, runs inclining to the n. e. more than 
60 leagues, until near the city of San Louis it 
forms a lake, into which it loses itself. 

TUOTONE, a small river of the colony and 
province of Surinam, or part of Guayana pos 
sessed by the Dutch. It unites with various 
others, and enters the river of Cuyuni by the 
5. side. 

TUPA, an abundant spring, in the province 
and corregimiento of Muzo, in the new kingdom 
of Granada. The water is saline, and they ex 
tract from it a very white salt, much in request. 
It is six leagues distant from the city of Muzo, 
and has given continually rise to contests and 
distrusts amongst the inhabitants, who pretend 
to the possession of it, and to the right of taking 
the salt. 

TUPARRO, a river of the province and go 
vernment of San Juan de los Llanos, in the 
new kingdom of Granada ; issuing from four 
lakes in the country of the Chirocoas Indians. 
It runs to the e. and falls into the Orinoco, by 
the settlement of the missions founded by the 
Jesuits, called Santa Teresa de Maipures. 

TUPATARO, a settlement of the head settle 
ment of the district and alcaldia mayor of Mara- 
vatio in Nueva Espana, situate at the foot of a 
delightful mountain ; it consists of 23 Indian fa 
milies, and is distant rather more than five 
leagues from its capital. 

TUPE, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Yauyos in Peru, the inhabitants 
of which are obliged to take care of the bridge 
of ropes which they have here, as a passage over 
the river Canete, in the road going from Guan- 
cavelica to Lima. 

[TUPI, Indians of Brazil, of the manners and 
customs of whom we have given a long account 
under that article. We therefore must refer our 
readers to the additional matter respecting the 
history, &amp;c. of the kingdom of BRAZIL.] 

TUPI, a settlement of the same province and 
corregimiento as the last, annexed to the curacy 
of Pampas. 

TUPICOCHA, a settlement of the province 
and corregimiento of Guarochiri in Peru, an 
nexed to the curacy of San Cosme, and San 
Damian. 

[TUPINAMBES. See TOPINAMBES.] 

[TUPINIQUINS, Indians of Brazil, of whom 
we have given a long description in the new 
matter under that article ; which see.] 

TUPIZA, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Chichas, and Tarija in Peru ; 
and of the division and district of the former. 



TUPIZA, a river of the same neme, in the pro 
vince and government of Darien and kingdom of 
Tierra Firme, which rises in the mountains of 
the interior of that country, runs nearly due w. 
and falls into the river Chucunaqui. 

TUPO, a settlement of the province and go 
vernment of Sonora in Nueva Espana, situate by 
the settlement of Hinares, and by a river. 

TUPUQUEN, a settlement of the province 
and government of Guayana, or Nueva Anda 
lusia ; one of the missions held there by the Ca 
puchin fathers. It is situate on the banks of the 
river Yaruario. 

TUQUAQUE, Islands of, in the N. Sea, 
upon the coast of the province and government 
of Venezuela in the new kingdom of Granada. 
They are numerous, but all small, forming a 
chain from Point Seca to Point Cavello : they 
lie between lat. 10 15 and 10 35 n. 

TUQUARES, a river of the province and 
government of Buenos Ayres ; it runs to the w. 
and enters the river Parana between those of 
Yacare-guazu and Yacau-mini. 

TUQUEQUE, a large and abundant arm of 
the river Apure in the province and government 
of Guayana, or Nueva Andalusia, from whence 
it communicates with the river Portuguesa. 

TUQUERRES, or, according to others, TE- 
QUERRES, a settlement of the province and go 
vernment of Pasto in the kingdom of Quito. 

TURANDEO, a settlement of the head set 
tlement of the district of Tuxpan and alcaldia 
mayor of Maravatio, in the bishopric of Mecho- 
acan. It contains 23 Indian families, and is a 
league from its capital. 

TURAPAMBA, a settlement of the province 
and government of Tucuman, on the banks of the 
river Dulce. 

TURBACO, or CALMARI, a settlement of the 
province and government of Cartagena in the 
new kingdom of Granada, in which there was 
the doctrinal curacy of San Luis Beltram. It is 
one league from the capital, and in the time of 
the pagan Indians it was a very large and popu 
lous city, as it then contained more than 200,000 
souls. It was conquered at great cost and 
trouble, and many battles, by the bold D. Pedro 
de Heredia, and it preserved the name of its 
cacique, or chief lord. It is of a hot climate, 
but very healthy and fertile, especially in maize. 
It is on the s. e. coast near the swamp of Tesca. 
It is celebrated for the battle that Alonzo de 
Ojeda fought with the natives in 1610, in which 
he was put to the rout. Pedro de Heredia was 
also engaged here in some other very bloody 



630 



T U R 



T U R 



battles, but in which he came off victorious, set 
ting fire to the settlement, by way of punishment 
to Ihis antagonists. 

[TURBET, a township of Pennsylvania, on 
SusquehannaU river. See NORTHUMBERLAND 
County.! 

TURBIO, a small river of the province and 
captainship of Rio Janeyro in Brazil : it runs 
w. and enters the Parana between the rivers Pa- 
ranapana and Tiete, or Anembi. 

TURBO, a river of the province and settle 
ment of Choco in the new kingdom of Granada. 
It rises in its mountains, and empties itself into 
the N. Sea, in the cove or gulf of Tucumari. 

TURBO, a lake of the same name, on the coast 
of the province and government of Darien, 
formed by the last-mentioned river. 

TURCAS Islands. [See TURKS Islands.] 
TURCO, a settlement of the province and 
corresimiento of Carangas, and of the bishopric 
of Cnarcas in Peru. 

TUREN, a settlement of the province and 
government of Venezuela in the new kingdom of 
Granada; situate between the rivers Acarigua 
and Guache, to the s. s. e. of the town of Araure. 
TUREQUARO, SANTA MARIA DE, a settle 
ment of the head settlement of the district and 
alcaldia mayor of Piedad in Nueva Espafia : it 
contains 25 Spanish families, with some of the 
mixed breed, and 47 Indian families ; also, in 
two establishments, or congregations, connected 
with these are 40 others : it Is 11 leagues n. zc. 
of its head settlement. 

[TURIAMO, a large bay of the . coast of 
S. America, in the province and government of 
Caracas. It is a league long from n. to s. Few 
vessels are found here, on account of its affording 
no shelter from the n. winds, and the sterility of 
its neighbouring lands. The same was said of 
the neighbouring bays of Patanemo, Burburata, 
and Cienega, there being no inhabitants on the 
shores of any of them, except a body of troops 
in each to prevent smuggling.] 

TURIBASA, a small river of the province 
and captainship of Pani in Brazil ; it rises by the 
coast, runs n. n. e. and falls into the sea between 
the Turirana and the Gururiba. 

TURIBUNE, a large and very rapid river of 
the province and government of Mainas in the 
kingdom of Quito ; it has its source in the ter 
ritory of the Camelos Indians, runs s, s. e. and 
enters by the n. and e. into the Curaray. Some 
wild Indians of the Yetes dwell in the 
bourhood of its source. 

TURICACHI, a settlement of Indians of the 



neigh- 



province and government of Sonora, reduced by 
the missions held there by the Jesuits. 

TURICARO, a settlement of the head set 
tlement of the district of Siguinam and alcaldia 
mayor of Valladolid, in the province and bi 
shopric of Mechoacan : it contains 27 families of 
Indians, and is three leagues from its head set 
tlement. 

TURING, or TURQUINO, a river of the island 
of Cuba, which rises about the s. coast, and runs 
to that point, falling into the sea between the 
Tarquino and Sevilla, forming at its mouth a 
good port. 

TURIRANA, a river of the province and cap 
tainship of Para in Brazil ; it springs from a 
branch of the river Tocantines, and runs almost 
due n. serving as a line of division for the pro 
vince of Para and that of Maranan, and falls 
into the sea, forming a large port opposite the 
island of San Juan. 

[TURKEY, a small town of New Jersey, 
Essex County, 14 miles n. zi\ of Elizabeth Town.] 
[TURKEY Foot, in Youghioganv river, is the 
point of junction of the great S. Branch, Little 
Crossings from the s. c. and N. Branch from the 
n. It is 40 miles from the mouth of the river, 
20 miles s. s. w. of Berlin, in Pennsylvania, and 
29 n. c. of Morgantown. Lat. 39 48 n.] 

[TURKEY Point, a promontory on then, side 
of Lake Erie, lies opposite to Presque Isle, on 
the s. side, about 35 miles across. 

[TURKEY Point, at the head of Chesapeak Bay, 
is a point of land formed by the waters of the bay 
on the n. w. and those of Elk river on the s. e. 
It is about 15 miles s. zc. of Elkton, and 40 n. e. 
of Annapolis. Here the British army landed, in 
August, 1777, before they advanced to Phila 
delphia.] 

[TURKISH Islands, a group of little islands, 
called also Ananas, since they are the islands of 
Don Diego Luengo, thus called by him who dis 
covered them. They are more than 30 leagues 
n. of Point Isabelique, on the n. coast of the 
island of St. Domingo.] 

TURKS Islands, several small islands in the 
W. Indies, about 75 miles n. of the island of St. 
Domingo. The Bermudians frequently come 
hither and make a great quantity of salt, and the 
ships which sail from St. Domingo commonly 
pass within sight of them. 

[These islands, belonging to the British, are 
the most s. e. of all the Bahama Islands ; the 
principal of which is Grand Key, where there is 
established a port of entry. There is an an 
chorage, but no harbour. In 1803, the inhabi- 



T U R 

tants amounted to about 1200 in number, includ 
ing Negroes. But many of these, as before ob 
served, migrate yearly from the Bermudas for 
the purpose of salt-raking, and return to Bermuda 
after the season is over for that purpose, so that 
the number is very fluctuating. There is no 
other produce exported from the Turks Islands. 

The import duties at the port of this island 
amounted, in one quarter, ending 17th Februry, 
1804, to .122 Is. 4rf. and in the quarter ending 
5th April following, vessels entered with cargoes 
to the amount of 8830 tons, the freights being 
from the W. Indies and N. America ; and in the 
same period, vessels cleared outwards to the 
amount of 7201 tons, chiefly to the United States. 
The receipt of duties on the export of salt in the 
above-mentioned period was .333 14s 1 . Id. 
These islands lie in lat. 21 25 n. and long. 7P 
5 . w .l 

TURMEQUE, a settlement and capital of 
the Indian corregimiento of that name, in the 
province of Tunja and new kingdom of Gra 
nada, to which the Spaniards, when they visited 
it the first time, gave the name of Las Trom- 
petas (the Trumpets), because they made some 
of these instruments out of some old caldrons, 
by way of terrifying into submission some other 
Indians who had not acknowledged Gonzalo Xi- 
menes de Quesada in 1537. It is of a moderately 
cold climate, but fertile and abundant in wheat, 
maize, barley, vegetables, and other productions 
of its climate. It has at the entrance a very 
beautiful chapel of Our Lady of Chiquinquira. 
It was, during the time of the paganism of the 
Indians, the court of a very powerful cacique, 
subject to the king of Tunja ; and he had a for 
tress which was a defence against the Zipas, or 
kings of Bogota. It submitted to Gonzalo Xi- 
menes de Quesada in 1537. It contains more 
than 1000 housekeepers and 600 Indians, [and is 
14 miles s. s. a?, of Tunja, and 38 n. e. of Santa 
Fe.] 

TURMERO, a settlement of the province and 
government of Venezuela in the new kingdom of 
Granada, situate between the town of Victoria 
and Lake Tacarigua on the e. part, and in the 
district of the city of Caracas. 

TURN AS, a small river of the province and 
captainship of San Vicente in Brazil ; which runs 
n. n. w. unites with the river Yapo, and then en 
ters the Parana-pane. 

[TURNER, a township of the district of Maine, 
Cumberland County, on the w. bank of Andros- 
coggin river, which divides it from Green in 
Lincoln County. It was incorporated in 1786, 



T U R 



631 



contains 347 inhabitants, and lies 35 miles s. w. 
ofHallowell.] 

TURNUM, a settlement of the Island of Bar- 
badoes in the district of the parish of All Saints, 
or Todos Santos. 

TUROTETAMA, RINCON DE, a peninsula 
of the province and captains/tip of Rey in Bra 
zil, formed by the large lakes of Los Patos 
and Mini, and by the channel that unites them : 
the Portuguese have here, at two different posts, 
two guards mounted for safety. 

TURPAI, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Chancay, of the same kingdom 
as the last, annexed to the curacy of Chancas. 

TURPO, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Andahuailas, in the same king 
dom as the two last-mentioned places, annexed 
to the curacy of Iluancaray. 

TURQUEI, a small river of the province and 
colony of S. Carolina; it runs to the e. and en 
ters the Thirty-mile River. 

TURQUESA, a settlement of the province 
and government of Darien and kingdom of Tierra 
Firme; situate on the coast of the N. Sea. 

TURQUIRIRI, a settlement of the province 
and corregimiento of Carangas, of the archbi 
shopric of Charcas in Peru ; annexed to the cu 
racy of Turco. 

[TURTLE Island, in the S. Pacific Ocean, is 
nearly a league long, and not half so broad. It 
is surrounded by a reef of coral rocks, that have 
no soundings without them. Lat. 19 49 s. long. 
177 57 a&amp;gt;/] 

[TURTLE Creek, in Pennsylvania, a small 
stream w r hich empties through the e. bank of Mo- 
nongahela river, about 12 miles from the mouth 
of that river, at Pittsburg. At the head of this 
creek, General Braddock engaged a party of In 
dians, the 9th of July, 1755, on his way to Fort 
duQuesne,now Pittsburg, where he was repulsed, 
himself killed, his army put to flight, and the re 
mains of the army brought off the field by the 
address and courage of Colonel, afterwards Gene 
ral Washington.] 

[TURTLE River, in Georgia, empties into St. 
Simon s Sound, and its bar has a sufficiency of 
water for the largest vessel that swims. At its 
mouth is the town of Brunswick, which has a no 
ble and capacious harbour. The town is regu 
larly laid out, but not yet built. The lands on 
the banks of this river are said to be excellent. 

TURUBAMBA, or TURUPAMPA, (which sig 
nifies mud-plain,) a beautiful and delightful val 
ley of the province and kingdom of Quito, which 
extends from the environs of that capital three 



632 



T U S 



leagues from . to s. It is covered with country 
houses and plantations, where they feed a great 
number of cattle, on account of the abundance 
of pasture. It has at its entrance a mountain 
called the Panecillo, from its resemblance to a 
sugar-loaf, or perfect cone, from which rise 
many springs, uniting and forming the river M a- 
changara. This mountain is covered with shrubs 
and trees, forming a delightful garden, and is a 
very favourite resort with the inhabitants. The 
Jesuits had a magnificent house on this moun 
tain, which used to serve as a place of reception 
for novices as far back as the year 1746, which 
was the period in which their house at Lata- 
cunga was broke up. The water of the afore 
mentioned streams stagnating in the valley make 
impenetrable mud-pools, from Avhence the valley 
takes its name. 

TURUVISA, a river of the province and go 
vernment of Quixos and Macas, in the kingdom 
of Quito : it runs almost s. and enters the San 
tiago a little before this last river falls into the 
Maranon. 

TURUCHIPA, a settlement of the province 
and corregimiento of Porco in Peru. 

TURUCURI, a river of the province and 
captainship of Para in Brazil, having its source 
in the country of the Guayapis Indians. It runs 
e. and enters the river Xinga by the w. side. 

TURUMBA, a settlement of the province and 
government of Tucuman, in the district and ju 
risdiction of the city of Santiago del Estero. 

TURUMBUSA, a river of the province and 
government of Jaen de Bracamoros in the king 
dom of Quito : it rises e. of the city of Valla- 
dolid, takes its course also to this rhumb, and 
enters the Maranon in the narrow pass of Gua- 
racayo. 

[TURY, a river on the coast of Brazil, in S. 
America, 40 leagues e. s. e. of the river Cayta. 
The Island of St. John lies just off the river s 
mouth, and makes a very good harbour on the in 
side of it. But the passage both in and out is 
difficult, and no pilots are to be had.] 

TUSA, a settlement of the province and cor- 
regimiento of Pasto in the kingdom of Quito, on 
the road leading to the province of Popayan. 

[TUSCALOMSA, a river of W. Florida. See 
PEARL River.] 

TUSCARORA, a city of Pennsylvania, in the 
United States of America; situate on the banks 
and at the e. head of the Susquehannah river. 

TUSCARORA, a chain of mountains with this 
name in the above State, in the county of Cum 
berland, which run many leagues n. n. e. 



T U S 

[TUSCARORA Creek, a small stream of 
Pennsylvania, which empties through the 5. w. 
bank of Juniatta river, 12 miles s. e. of Lewis- 
town.] 

[TUSCARORA Villages, lie a mile from each 
other, four miles from Queenstown, in Upper 
Canada, containing together about 40 decayed 
houses. Vestiges of ancient fortifications are vi 
sible in this neighbourhood. The Indian houses 
are about 12 feet square ; many of them are 
wholly covered with bark, others have the walls 
of logs, in the same manner as the first settlers 
among the white people built their huts, having 
chimnies in which they keep comfortable fires. 
Many of them, however, retain the ancient cus 
tom of having the fire in the centre of the house. 
The lands in the vicinity are of a good quality.] 

TUSCARORAES, a nation of Indians of IN. 
America, in the province of New York, in the 
United States of America. They dwell by the 
river Mohawks. [They migrated from N. Caro 
lina about the year 1712, and were adopted by 
the Oneidas, with whom they have since lived, on 
the supposition that they were originally the 
same tribe, from an affinity which there is in their 
language. They now consist of about 400 souls; 
their village is between Kahnanwolohale and 
New Stockbridge, on Tuscorora or Oneida Creek. 
They receive an annuity of about 400 dollars 
from the United States.] 

TUSCHINJA, a river of the province and 
government of Mainas in the kingdom of Quito: 
it rises in the mountains, and enters the Ma 
ranon. 

TUSKOKOGIR, a settlement of Indians in 
the province of Pennsylvania in the United 
States of America; situate on the shore and at 
the head of Susquehannah river. 

TUSO, a settlement of the corregimiento of 
the Indians of Boza in the new kingdom of Gra 
nada. Its climate is very cold, and produces the 
fruits peculiar to that temperature. They have 
venerated in the parish church a miraculous 
image of Our Lady of the Conception, which is 
a bust, and about a yard high, and of \vhich 
the natives relate, that it having been brought 
to the settlement by a certain knight, who had 
also with him other furniture for saying mass, by 
means of a portable altar, with which his chap 
lain was charged ; and that the latter, having 
produced it for the above purpose, it was found, 
upon endeavouring to return it from its position, 
to be immoveable, so that no one could carry 
it away until the curate arrived, who raised it with 
facility, and carried it to the chief altar of his 



TUT 

church, where its owner left it with feelings of 
deep veneration. By this settlement is the cele 
brated cataract of lequendama, which the river 
Bogota makes from a height so prodigious, that 
the water in falling has the appearance of a 
dense cloud. This settlement has 80 inhabi 
tants, 59 Indians, and is distant four leagues 
from Santa Fe. 

TUSPA, a river of the province and alcaldia 
mayor of Tampico in^Nueva Espana ; it enters 
the N. Sea between the mouth of the river of 
that nan-e and Point Delgada. 

TUSPAN, a head settlement of the district 
of the alcaldia mayor of Zapotlan in Nueva 
Espana : it is large, and has many inhabitants 
of Spaniards, Mustees, Mulattoes, and Indians ; 
also a convent of the monks of St. Francis : at 
seven leagues to s. are those two celebrated vol 
canoes which divide the three jurisdictions of 
Tuzcacuezco, Colima, and Sapotlan, the same 
being the boundaries to the bishoprics of Me- 
choacan and Guadalaxara. It is five leagues s. 
of its capital. 

TUSQUE, Islands of, in the N. Sea, situate 
about the a?, coast of Nova Scotia, or Acadia, 
in the United States of America, between Ca 
nada and the port of Horn. 

TUSTLA, a settlement of the province and 
alcaldia mayor of Chiapa in the kingdom of Gua 
temala, and in the district of the capital. 

TUSUDYA, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Larecaxa in Peru. 

TUT A, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Tunja in the new kingdom of 
Granada. Its climate is excessively cold, and 
its productions those of cold countries, such as 
wheat, maize, and potatoes. It breeds much 
black cattle and ewes, with the wool of which 
they make shirts, blankets, and other cloths. It 
contains 50 housekeepers and 150 Indians. It 
is a little more than two leagues to the n. of 
Tunja. 

fTUTAPAN, a large town on the w. coast 
of New Mexico, in the N. Pacific Ocean. From 
the river Sacatulca the high and rugged land 
extends n. w. 25 leagues.] 

TUTAPISCO, a river of the province and 
government of Quixos and Mac as in the king 
dom of Quito ; it runs s. e. and enters the Paya- 
mino on its e. bank in lat. 36 s. 

TUTAZA, a settlement of the province and 
corregimiento of Tunja in the new kingdom of 
Granada ; annexed to the curacy of Beteitiva, 
to which it lies very close, the river Sogamoso 

VOL. iv. 



TUX 



633 



being the boundary between ; it is very small, 
since it contains hardly 25 Indians, who, besides 
cultivating the land, maintain themselves by 
making pots, jars, and sundry kinds of earthen 
vessels. 

TUTEPEC, a settlement of the head settle 
ment of the district and alcaldia mayor of Xi- 
cayan in Nueva Espaiia : it contains 112 Indian 
families ; its climate is hot, and it is two leagues 
n. of its capital. 

TUTI, a settlement of the province and cor 
regimiento of Collahuas in Peru. 

TUTOMAGOIDAG, SAN MATIAS DE, a set 
tlement of the province and government of So- 
nora in Nueva Espana, in the country of the 
Cocomaricopas Indians, on the shore of the great 
river Gila. 

TUTOTEPEC, a settlement of the province 
and alcaldia mayor of Tulanzingo in Nueva Es 
pana : it contains 952 Indian families, and lies 
in the middle of the ridge of mountains nine 
leagues n. e. of its capital. 

TUTUBEN, a small river of the province 
and corregimiento of Maule in the kingdom of 
Chile ; it runs e. and falls into the river Cau- 
quenes. 

T U T UTEPEC, a head settlement of the district 
and alcaldia mayor of Xicayan in Nueva Espana : 
it contains 11 Spanish families, 73 of Mustees 
and Mulattoes, and 40 Indians. It has contigu 
ous to it a large estate called De los Cortijos, in 
which 120 Mulatto families live : it is seven 
leagues between the s. and e. of its capital. 

TUXPANj a head settlement of the alcaldia 
mayor of Maravatio in the bishopric of Mecho- 
acan ; situate in a pleasant valley surrounded bv 
woody mountains : it has 100 families of Spa 
niards, Mustees, and Mulattoes, and a convent 
of St. Francis, in which they worship, in a mag 
nificent chapel richly adorned, the body of S. 
Victorino Martyr, which was brought from Rome 
by a rich clergyman of this see, who spent his 
wealth in building and adorning this convent. It 
is three leagues from its capital. 

TUXTAX, another settlement of the same name, 
with the appellation of St. Andres, in the head 
settlement and alcaldia mayor of Iguala in the 
same kingdom ; it contains 62 Indian families. 

TUXTEPEC, SAN JUAN BAPTISTA DE. a set 
tlement of the district of Chinantla and alcaldia 
mayor of Cozamaloatpan ; situate in a spacious 
plain on the shore of a very rapid river, which 
flows down from the sierras of Misteca, and join 
ing another of equal depth, which has its source 
4 M 



(&amp;gt;34 



T U Y 



in the mountains of Zongolica, they both unite 
with the Alvarado. They water the territory of 
this settlement, rendering it fertile and pleasant, 
and forming an arm of the sea, emptv themselves 
into it by the bar. This settlement is inhabited 
by 70 families of Mexican Indians, and is 10 
leagues e. \ s. e. of its capital. 

TUXTEPEC, another settlement of the same 
name, in the head settlement of Ayutla and al 
caldia mayor of Villalta, which is peopled by 
22 families of Indians. 

TUXTLA, a jurisdiction and alcaldia mayor 
of Nueva Espana, belonging to the mayoralty 
of the marquisate of Valle, who superintends 
it. Its district is small, but very fertile and 
pleasant, and abounding in cotton, maize, French 
beans, fruits, and swine, with which it supplies 
Vera Cruz, from which it is distant 12 leagues : 
it also produces some caynilla and tamarinds, 
which traders in different times of the year come 
to barter for other things. It is watered by 
many rivers, but the most copious is that being 
the same name, in which they catch abundance 
of fish, such as the pelicanus sula, (Linn.) mo- 
jorras, ant! eels : the greater part of the Indians 
are employed in this fishing, since it yields them 
sufficient profit. Its population consists of two 
head settlements of the district, and of two others 
annexed to them, which are tolerably well peo 
pled. They are by name San Andres, Cotazta, 
Ixcalpan, and Rinconada; besides the capital, 
which contains the same number. The climate 
is hot, and produces the fruits which we have 
mentioned above. Its inhabitants consist of 30 
Spanish families, and 700 Mexican Indians. [It 
is 230 miles e. s. e. of Mexico, in lat. 19 16 s. 
and long. 95 15^.] 

TUXTLA, the afore-mentioned river, has its 
source in the province of Oaxaca. 

TUXTLA, another jurisdiction and alcaldia 
mayor of this name, in the kingdom of Guate 
mala. 

[TUY, a river of the province of Venezuela, 
in S. America ; it falls into the ocean 30 leagues 
e. of Goayre : its source is in the mountains of 
San Pedro 18 miles from Caracas, and it takes its 
course through the valley of Arago, between 
Victoria and Cocuisas, then through the valleys 
of Tacata, Cua, Sabana de Ocumare, St. Lucia, 
and St. Theresa, and, after passing this last, 
is joined by the Goayre, which renders it navi 
gable for small vessels ; by which are transported 
the productions of all the valleys, the chief of 
which is cocoa. It is indisputably the most use- 



T U Z 

ful river for the plantations of any throughout 
the captaimhip-general of Caracas. 

Ju 1803 the consulate of Caracas employed a 
skilful pilot to draw a plan for repairing the bed 
of the river, and to prevent its inundations, 
which have been found so disastrous.] 

TUYU, RINCON DEI,, a point of land and 
ano-le made by Cape San Antonio, one of those 
which form the mouth of the river Plata in the 
province and government of Buenos Ayres. 

TUZANCOA, a settlement of the head set- 
tlement of the district and alcaldia mayor of Zo- 
chicoatlan in Nueva Espafia, situate on the top 
of a rugged mountain of difficult ascent, which 
is only to be made on foot ; it contains 48 Indian 
families, and is seven leagues w. of its capital. 

TUZANTALPA, a settlement of the head 
settlement of the district of Huipaxtla and alcal 
dia mayor of Tepetango, in the same kingdom 
as the former : it has 143 Indian families. 

TUZANTLA, a head settlement of the dis 
trict and alcaldia mayor of Maravatio in the 
same kingdom as the former, in the neighbour 
hood of which it has two pleasant and fertile 
valleys, so extensive that they are more than 
12 leagues long, having in them various culti 
vated lands, agriculture being the occupation of 
its inhabitants : these consist nf 52 families of 
Spaniards, Mustees, and Mulattoes, and 108 of 
Indians. In this district is the great engine of 
San Estevan de Piripitio, two leagues to the /?. 
in the managing and working of which there are 
employed 123 families of black slaves, 49 Spa 
niards and mixed families, and 74 Mulattoes : 
also the royal mines of copper which are abun 
dant in this metal, three leagues to the s. and 
for the labour of which there live together in one 
place 82 families of Spaniards, Mustces^ and Mu 
lattoes, and in various huts in its neighbour 
hood 200 more ; here also is the sugar- mill of 
Los Pinzones, where there reside 68 families of 
Spaniards and 10 of Indians ; in that of Santa 
Ines, distant five leagues to e. there are 26 of 
Spaniards, and 18 of Indians, and in that of 
Santa Maria nine of Spaniards and 13 of Indians. 
Ten leagues to s. w. is the estate of Orocutin, 
in which there are 47 Spanish and mixed fami 
lies, and 25 Indians; in that of Los Laures, 
which is contiguous to it, 51 of Spanish and 
Mulattoes, and 40 of Indians ; and in that of 
Salitre, with two small farms, 57 of Spaniards 
and Mustees, and 43 of Indians. 

TUZCACURZCO, a settlement and the ca 
pital of the alcaldia mayor of Amola, or Amula, 



T Y B 

in the same kingdom as the last ; it is situate on 
the banks of a river of the same name, and 
contains 32 families of Indians, and a convent of 
the monks of St. Francis. It is 150 leagues from 
Mexico. 

TUZI, a settlement of the province and cor- 
regimienio. of Tarmarin in Peru, annexed to the 
curacv of the settlement of Parianchacra. 

[TWELVE MILE Creek, a port in Lake On 
tario of Upper Canada. It was off here that, 
on the 10th August, 1813, the English commo 
dore, Sir James Yeo, was lying becalmed, when 
he was attacked by the American squadron under 
Commodore Chauncey, whom he defeated with 
great loss, taking and destroying four of the 
enemy s schooners/] 

[TWELVE ISLES, or TWELVE APOSTLES, 
isles on the s. side of Lake Superior, and on the s. 
side of the mouth of W. Bay.] 

[TWENTY MILE Creek, an e. branch of 
Tombigbee river, in Georgia, which runs first a 
s. by e. course, then turns to ths. w. Its mouth 
lies in about lat. 33 33 n. and long. 88 a&amp;gt;.] 

[TWENTY-FIVE MILE Pond, a settlement 
in Lincoln County, district of Maine. See TIT- 

COMB.] 

[T WIGHT WEES, a tribe of Indians, in the 
N. W. Territory, inhabiting near Miami river 
and Fort. Warriors 200. See WAWIACHTONOS.] 

TWO, a small river of the province and co 
lony of Virginia ; its course is s. e. and it enters 
the Ohio. 

[TYBEE Island, on the coast of Georgia, lies 
at the mouth of Savannah river, to the s. of the 
bar. It is very pleasant, with a beautiful creek 
to the 20. of it, where a ship of any burden may lie 
safe at anchor. A light -house stands on the island 
80 feet high, and in lat. 32 n. and long. 81 w. 
The light house is 10 miles e. s. e. \ e. from Sa 
vannah, and 22 s. w. | w, from Port Royal.] 

TYBIRITAS, a nation of savage Indians of 
the ancient province of Sulatenza, now com 
prised in that of Tunja; nothing now remains 
of it but the name. 

[TYBOINE, a township of Pennsylvania, in 
Cumberland County.] 



T Z I 



635 



[TYGART S Valley, in Pennsylvania, lies on 
Monongahela river.] 

[TYGER, a small river of S. Carolina, rises in 
the Alleghany Mountains, and, taking a s. e. 
course, nearly parallel to Enoree river, empties 
into Broad river, 5 miles above the Enoree.] 

TYMBIO. See TEMBIO. 

[TYNGSBOROUGH, a township of Massa 
chusetts, Middlesex County, on Merrimack river, 
28 miles n. of Boston.] 

[TYRINGHAM, a township of Massachusetts, 
Berkshire County. It contains 1397 inhabitants, 
and lies 14 miles from the shire town.] 

[TYRONE, two townships of Pennsylvania ; 
the one in York County, the other in that of 
Cumberland.] 

TYRREL, a maritime county of the district 
of Edenton, in the province and colony of S. 
Carolina, situate in an overflowed territory to 
the n. of Albermarle Strait: it lies to the s. of 
Pampticoe, to the e. of the ocean, and to .the w. 
of the county of Bertie : in it is the city of Bath. 

TZICHU, SAN JUAN BAPTISTA DE, a set 
tlement of the alcaldia mayor of San Luis de la 
Paz, and of the bishopric of Mechoacan, in 
Nueva Espana : it contains four Spanish fami 
lies, nine of Mustees, and 539 of Indians, who 
are employed in working the mines; for the 
earth produces nothing except some maize and 
the herb pita for making thread : it is eight 
leagues e. of its capital. 

pTZINTZONTZAN, a town of the inten- 
dancy of Valladolid, or Huitzitzilla, the old ca 
pital of the kingdom of Mechoacan : its present 
population (according to Humboldt) is 2500.] 

TZIRAGUATO, SAN FRANCISCO DE, a set 
tlement of the head settlement of the district of 
Tuxpan and alcaldia mayor of Maravatio in the 
bishopric of Mechoacan ; its climate is tempe 
rate; it contains 115 Indian families, and is two 
leagues e. of its capital. 

TZIROSTO, SANTA ANA DE, a settlement of 
the head settlement of the district of L T ruapan 
and alcaldia mayor of Valladolid, in the province 
and bishopric of Mechoacan : it contains 62 In 
dian families, and is 10 leagues from its capital. 

